<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac004)  [Next](zac006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 5:0</span></span>

Sixth Vision: The Flying Roll, and the Woman in the Ephah - [Zac
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)

These two figures are so closely connected, that they are to be taken as
one vision. The circumstance, that a pause is introduced between the
first and second view, in which both the ecstatic elevation and the
interpreting angel leave the prophet, so that it is stated in [Zac
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005) that "the angel came forth,"
furnishes no sufficient reason for the assumption that there were two
different visions. For the figure of the ephah with the woman sitting in
it is also divided into two views, since the prophet first of all sees
the woman and receives the explanation ([Zac
5:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005)), and the further development of
the vision is then introduced in [Zac
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#009) with a fresh introductory formula,
"And I lifted up my eyes, and saw." And just as this introductory
formula, through which new and different visions are introduced in [Zac
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001) and [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005), by no means warrants us in
dividing what is seen here into two different visions; so there is
nothing in the introduction in [Zac
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005) to compel us to separate the
vision of the flying roll ([Zac 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001))
from the following vision of the ephah, since there is no such
difference in the actual contents of the two as to warrant such a
separation. They neither stand in such a relation to one another, as
that the first sets forth the extermination of sinners out of the holy
land, and the second the extermination of sin itself, as Maurer
supposes; nor does the one treat of the fate of the sinners and the
other of the full measure of the sin; but the vision of the flying roll
prepares the way for, and introduces, what is carried out in the vision
of the ephah ([Zac 5:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005)), and the
connection between the two is indicated formally by the fact that the
suffix in עינם in [Zac 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#006) refers back
to [Zac 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003) and [Zac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004).

[Zechariah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 5:1</span></span>

[Zac 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001). "And I lifted up my eyes
again, and saw, and behold a flying roll. [Zac
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#002). And he said to me, What seest
thou? And I said, I see a flying roll; its length twenty cubits, and its
breadth ten cubits. [Zac 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003). And he
said to me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the whole land: for
every one that stealeth will be cleansed away from this side, according
to it; and every one that sweareth will be cleansed away from that side,
according to it. [Zac 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004). I have
caused it to go forth, is the saying of Jehovah of hosts, and it will
come into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that
sweareth by my name for deceit: and it will pass the night in the midst
of his house, and consume both its beams and its stones." The person
calling the prophet's attention to the vision, and interpreting it, is
the angelus interpres. This is not specially mentioned here, as being
obvious from what goes before. The roll (book-scroll, megillâh =
megillath sēpher, [Eze 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009)) is seen
flying over the earth unrolled, so that its length and breadth can be
seen. The statement as to its size is not to be regarded as "an
approximative estimate," so that the roll would be simply described as
of considerable size (Koehler), but is unquestionably significant. It
corresponds both to the size of the porch of Solomon's temple ([Kg1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003)), and also to the dimensions of
the holy place in the tabernacle, which was twenty cubits long and ten
cubits broad. Hengstenberg, Hofmann, and Umbreit, following the example
of Kimchi, assume that the reference is to the porch of the temple, and
suppose that the roll has the same dimensions as this porch, to indicate
that the judgment is "a consequence of the theocracy" or was to issue
from the sanctuary of Israel, where the people assembled before the
Lord. But the porch of the temple was neither a symbol of the theocracy,
nor the place where the people assembled before the Lord, but a mere
architectural ornament, which had no significance whatever in relation
to the worship. The people assembled before the Lord in the court, to
have reconciliation made for them with God by sacrifice; or they entered
the holy place in the person of their sanctified mediators, the priests,
as cleansed from sin, there to appear before God and engage in His
spotless worship. The dimensions of the roll are taken from the holy
place of the tabernacle, just as in the previous vision the candlestick
was the mosaic candlestick of the tabernacle. Through the similarity of
the dimensions of the roll to those of the holy place in the tabernacle,
there is no intention to indicate that the curse proceeds from the holy
place of the tabernacle or of the temple; for the roll would have issued
from the sanctuary, if it had been intended to indicate this. Moreover,
the curse or judgment does indeed begin at the house of God, but it does
not issue or come from the house of God. Kliefoth has pointed to the
true meaning in the following explanation which he gives: "The fact that
the writing, which brings the curse upon all the sinners of the earth,
has the same dimensions as the tabernacle, signifies that the measure
will be meted out according to the measure of the holy place;" and
again, "the measure by which this curse upon sinners will be meted out,
will be the measure of the holy place." With this measure would all
sinners be measured, that they might be cut off from the congregation of
the Lord, which appeared before God in the holy place.

The flight of the roll symbolized the going forth of the curse over the
whole land. כּל־הארץ is rendered by Hofmann, Neumann, and Kliefoth "the
whole earth," because "it evidently signifies the whole earth in v. [Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010), [Zac
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014), and [Zac
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005)" (Kliefoth). But these passages,
in which the Lord of the whole earth is spoken of, do not prove anything
in relation to our vision, in which כּל־הארץ is unmistakeably limited to
the land of Canaan (Judah) by the antithesis in [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011), "the land of Shinar." If the
sinners who are smitten by the curse proceeding over כּל־הארץ are to be
carried into the land of Sinar, the former must be a definite land, and
not the earth as the sum of all lands. It cannot be argued in opposition
to this, that the sin of the land in which the true house of God and the
true priesthood were, was wiped away by expiation, whereas the sin of
the whole world would be brought into the land of judgment, when its
measure was concluded by God; for this antithesis is foreign not only to
this vision, but to the Scriptures universally. The Scriptures know
nothing of any distribution or punishment of sins according to different
lands, but simply according to the character of the sinners, viz.,
whether they are penitent or hardened. At the same time, the fact that
כּל־הארץ denotes the whole of the land of Israel, by no means proves
that our vision either treats of the "carrying away of Israel into
exile," which had already occurred (Ros.), or "sets before them a fresh
carrying away into exile, and one still in the future" (Hengstenberg),
or that on the coming of the millennial kingdom the sin and the sinners
will be exterminated from the whole of the holy land, and the sin thrown
back upon the rest of the earth, which is still under the power of the
world (Hofmann). The vision certainly refers to the remote future of the
kingdom of God; and therefore "the whole land" cannot be restricted to
the extent and boundaries of Judaea or Palestine, but reaches as far as
the spiritual Israel or church of Christ is spread over the earth; but
there is no allusion in our vision to the millennial kingdom, and its
establishment within the limits of the earthly Canaan. The curse falls
upon all thieves and false swearers. הנּשׁבּע in [Zac
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003) is defined more precisely in [Zac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004), as swearing in the name of
Jehovah for deceit, and therefore refers to perjury in the broadest
sense of the word, or to all abuse of the name of God for false,
deceitful swearing. Thieves are mentioned for the sake of
individualizing, as sinners against the second table of the decalogue;
false swearers, as sinners against the first table. The repetition of
מזּה כּמוה points to this; for mizzeh, repeated in correlative clauses,
signifies hinc et illinc, hence and thence, i.e., on one side and the
other ([Exo 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012); [Num
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#024); [Eze
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#007)), and can only refer here to the
fact that the roll was written upon on both sides, so that it is to be
taken in close connection with כּמוה: "on this side ... and on that,
according to it" (the roll), i.e., according to the curse written upon
this side and that side of the roll. We have therefore to picture the
roll to ourselves as having the curse against the thieves written upon
the one side, and that against the perjurers upon the other. The
supposition that mizzeh refers to כּל־הארץ is precluded most decidedly,
by the fact that mizzeh does not mean "thence," i.e., from the whole
land, but when used adverbially of any place, invariably signifies
"hence," and refers to the place where the speaker himself is standing.
Moreover, the double use of mizzeh is at variance with any allusion to
hâ'ârets, as well as the fact that if it belonged to the verb, it would
stand after כּמוה, whether before or after the verb. Niqqâh, the niphal,
signifies here to be cleaned out, like καθαρίζεσωαι in [Mar
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#019) (cf. [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010); [Deu
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012)). This is explained in [Zac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004) thus: Jehovah causes the curse to
go forth and enter into the house of the thief and perjurer, so that it
will pass the night there, i.e., stay there (lâneh third pers. perf. of
lūn, from lânâh, to be blunted, like zûreh in [Isa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005), and other verbal formations); it
will not remain idle, however, but work therein, destroying both the
house and sinners therein, so that beams and stones will be consumed
(cf. [Kg1 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038)). The suffix in
כּלּתּוּ (for כּלּתהוּ, cf. Ges. 75, Anm. 19) refers to the house, of
course including the inhabitants. The following nouns introduced with
ואת are in explanatory apposition: both its beams and its stones. The
roll therefore symbolizes the curse which will fall upon sinners
throughout the whole land, consuming them with their houses, and thus
sweeping them out of the nation of God.

[Zechariah 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 5:5</span></span>

To this there is appended in [Zac
5:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005) a new view, which exhibits the
further fate of the sinners who have been separated from the
congregation of the saints. [Zac 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005).
"And the angel that talked with me went forth, and said to me, Lift up
now thine eyes, and see, what is this that goeth out there? [Zac
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#006). And I said, What is it? And he
said, This is the ephah going out. And He said, This is their aspect in
all the land. [Zac 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#007). And behold a
disk of lead was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting in the midst
of the ephah. [Zac 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008). And he said,
This is wickedness; and he cast it into the midst of the ephah, and cast
the leaden weight upon its mouth." With the disappearing of the previous
vision, the angelus interpres had also vanished from the eyes of the
prophet. After a short pause he comes out again, calls the prophet's
attention to a new figure which emerges out of the cloud, and so comes
within the range of vision (היּוצאת הזּאת), and informs him with regard
to it: "This is the ephah which goeth out." יצא, to go out, in other
words, to come to view. The ephah was the greatest measure of capacity
which really existed among the Hebrews for dry goods, and was about the
size of a cubic foot; for the chōmer, which contained ten ephahs,
appears to have had only an ideal existence, viz., for the purpose of
calculation. The meaning of this figure is indicated generally in the
words זאת עינם כב, the meaning of which depends upon the interpretation
to be given to עינם. The suffix of this word can only refer to the
sinners mentioned before, viz., the thieves and perjurers; for it is
contrary to the Hebrew usage to suppose that the words refer to the
expression appended, בּכל־הארץ, in the sense of "all those who are in
the whole land" (Koehler). Consequently עין does not mean the eye, but
adspectus, appearance, or shape, as in [Lev
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#055); [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004).; and the words have this meaning:
The ephah (bushel) is the shape, i.e., represents the figure displayed
by the sinners in all the land, after the roll of the curse has gone
forth over the land, i.e., it shows into what condition they have come
through that anathema (Kliefoth). The point of comparison between the
ephah and the state into which sinners have come in consequence of the
curse, does not consist in the fact that the ephah is carried away, and
the sinners likewise (Maurer), nor in the fact that the sin now reaches
its full measure (Hofm., Hengstenberg); for "the carrying away of the
sinners does not come into consideration yet, and there is nothing at
all here about the sin becoming full." It is true that, according to
what follows, sin sits in the ephah as a woman, but there is nothing to
indicate that the ephah is completely filled by it, so that there is no
further room in it; and this thought would be generally out of keeping
here. The point of comparison is rather to be found in the explanation
given by Kliefoth: "Just as in a bushel the separate grains are all
collected together, so will the individual sinners over the whole earth
be brought into a heap, when the curse of the end goes forth over the
whole earth." We have no hesitation in appropriating this explanation,
although we have not rendered הארץ "the earth," inasmuch as at the final
fulfilment of the vision the holy land will extend over all the earth.
Immediately afterwards the prophet is shown still more clearly what is
in the ephah. A covering of lead (kikkâr, a circle, a rounding or a
circular plate) rises up, or is lifted up, and then he sees a woman
sitting in the ephah ('achath does not stand for the indefinite article,
but is a numeral, the sinners brought into a heap appearing as a unity,
i.e., as one living personality, instead of forming an atomistic heap of
individuals). This woman, who had not come into the ephah now for the
first time, but was already sitting there, and was only seen now that
the lid was raised, is described by the angel as mirsha‛ath,
ungodliness, as being wickedness embodied, just as in [Ch2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007) this name is given to godless
Jezebel. Thereupon he throws her into the ephah, out of which she had
risen up, and shuts it with the leaden lid, to carry her away, as the
following vision shows, out of the holy land.

[Zechariah 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 5:9</span></span>

[Zac 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#009). "And I lifted up my eyes,
and saw, and behold there came forth two women, and wind in their wings,
and they had wings like a stork's wings; and they carried the ephah
between earth and heaven. [Zac 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#010).
And I said to the angel that talked with me, Whither are these taking
the ephah? [Zac 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011). And he said to
me, To build it a dwelling in the land of Shinar: and it will be placed
and set up there upon its stand." The meaning of this new scene may
easily be discovered. The ephah with the woman in it is carried away
between earth and heaven, i.e., through the air. Women carry it because
there is a woman inside; and two women, because two persons are required
to carry so large and heavy a measure, that they may lay hold of it on
both sides (תּשּׂנה with the א dropped; cf. Ges. 74, Anm. 4). These
women have wings, because it passes through the air; and a stork's
wings, because these birds have broad pinions, and not because the stork
is a bird of passage or an unclean bird. The wings are filled with wind,
that they may be able to carry their burden with greater velocity
through the air. The women denote the instruments or powers employed by
God to carry away the sinners out of His congregation, without any
special allusion to this or the other historical nation. This is all
that we have to seek for in these features, which only serve to give
distinctness to the picture. But the statement in [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011) is significant: "to build it a
house in the land of Shinar." The pronoun לה with the suffix softened
instead of לּהּ, as in [Exo 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018); [Lev
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#004) (cf. Ewald, 247, d), refers
grammatically to האיפה; but so far as the sense is concerned, it refers
to the woman sitting in the ephah, since a house is not built for a
measure, but only for men to dwell in. This also applies to the feminine
form הנּתחה, and to the suffix in מכנתהּ. The building of a house
indicates that the woman is to dwell there permanently, as is still more
clearly expressed in the second hemistich. הוּכן refers to בּית , and is
not to be taken hypothetically, in the sense of "as soon as the house
shall be restored," but is a perfect with Vav consec.; and hūkhan, the
hophal of kūn, is not to be taken in the sense of restoring, but, in
correspondence with mekhunâh, in the sense of establishing or building
on firm foundations. Mekhunâh: the firmly established house. In this the
woman of sin is brought to rest. The land in which the woman of sin
carried away out of the holy land is permanently to dwell, is the land
of Shinar. This name is not to be identified with Babel, so as to
support the conclusion that it refers to a fresh removal of the people
of Israel into exile; but according to [Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010) and [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002), Shinar is the land in which
Nimrod founded the first empire, and where the human race built the
tower of Babel which was to reach to the sky. The name is not to be
taken geographically here as an epithet applied to Mesopotamia, but is a
notional or real definition, which affirms that the ungodliness carried
away out of the sphere of the people of God will have its permanent
settlement in the sphere of the imperial power that is hostile to God.
The double vision of this chapter, therefore, shows the separation of
the wicked from the congregation of the Lord, and their banishment into
and concentration within the ungodly kingdom of the world. This
distinction and separation commenced with the coming of the Messiah, and
runs through all the ages of the spread and development of the Christian
church, until at the time of the end they will come more and more into
outward manifestation; and the evil, having been sifted out by the
judicial power of God and His Spirit, will form itself into a Babel of
the last days, as Ezekiel 38 and 39 clearly show, and attempt a last
struggle with the kingdom of God, in which it will be overcome and
destroyed by the last judgment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 6](zac006)

</div>
