<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep000)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

Judgment upon All the World, and upon Judah in Particular - Zephaniah 1

The judgment will come upon all the world ([Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002), [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)), and will destroy all the
idolaters and despisers of God in Judah and Jerusalem ([Zep
1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)), and fall heavily upon sinners
of every rank ([Zep 1:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)). The
terrible day of the Lord will burst irresistibly upon all the
inhabitants of the earth ([Zep
1:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)).

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

[Zep 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001) contains the heading, which
has been explained in the introduction. [Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002) and [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003) form the preface. - [Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002). "I will sweep, sweep away
everything from the face of the earth, is the saying of Jehovah. [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003). I will sweep away man and cattle,
sweep away the fowls of heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the
offences with the sinners, and I cut off men from the face of the earth,
is the saying of Jehovah." The announcement of the judgment upon the
whole earth not only serves to sharpen the following threat of judgment
upon Judah and Jerusalem in this sense, "Because Jehovah judges the
whole world, He will punish the apostasy of Judah all the more;" but the
judgment upon the whole world forms an integral part of his prophecy,
which treats more fully of the execution of the judgment in and upon
Judah, simply because Judah forms the kingdom of God, which is to be
purified from its dross by judgment, and led on towards the end of its
divine calling. As Zephaniah here opens the judgment awaiting Judah with
an announcement of a judgment upon the whole world, so does he assign
the reason for his exhortation to repentance in [Zep
2:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001), by showing that all nations
will succumb to the judgment; and then announces in [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)., as the fruit of the judgment,
the conversion of the nations to Jehovah, and the glorification of the
kingdom of God. The way to salvation leads through judgment, not only
for the world with its enmity against God, but for the degenerate
theocracy also. It is only through judgment that the sinful world can be
renewed and glorified. The verb אסף, the hiphil of sūph, is strengthened
by the inf. abs. אסף, which is formed from the verb אסף, a verb of
kindred meaning. Sūph and 'âsaph signify to take away, to sweep away,
hiph. to put an end, to destroy. Kōl, everything, is specified in [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003) : men and cattle, the birds of
heaven, and the fishes of the sea; the verb 'âsēph being repeated before
the two principal members. This specification stands in unmistakeable
relation to the threatening of God: to destroy all creatures for the
wickedness of men, from man to cattle, and to creeping things, and even
to the fowls of the heaven ([Gen 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007)).
By playing upon this threat, Zephaniah intimates that the approaching
judgment will be as general over the earth, and as terrible, as the
judgment of the flood. Through this judgment God will remove or destroy
the offences (stumbling-blocks) together with the sinners. את before
הרשׁעים cannot be the sign of the accusative, but can only be a
preposition, with, together with, since the objects to אסף are all
introduced without the sign of the accusative; and, moreover, if את־הרשׁ
were intended for an accusative, the copula Vv would not be omitted.
Hammakhshēlôth does not mean houses about to fall (Hitzig), which
neither suits the context nor can be grammatically sustained, since even
in [Isa 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006) hammakhshēlâh is not the
fallen house, but the state brought to ruin by the sin of the people;
and makhshēlâh is that against which or through which a person meets
with a fall. Makhshēlōth are all the objects of coarser and more refined
idolatry, not merely the idolatrous images, but all the works of
wickedness, like τὰ σκάνδαλα in [Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041). The judgment, however, applies
chiefly to men, i.e., to sinners, and hence in the last clause the
destruction of men from off the earth is especially mentioned. The
irrational creation is only subject to φθορά, on account of and through
the sin of men ([Rom 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020).).

[Zephaniah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 1:4</span></span>

The judgment coming upon the whole earth with all its inhabitants will
fall especially upon Judah and Jerusalem. [Zep
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004). "And I stretch my hand over
Judah, and over all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and cut off from this
place the remnant of Baal, the name of the consecrated servants,
together with the priests. [Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005).
And those who worship the army of heaven upon the roofs, and the
worshippers who swear to Jehovah, and who swear by their king. [Zep
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006). And those who draw back from
Jehovah, and who did not seek Jehovah, and did not inquire for Him." God
stretches out His hand (יד) or His arm (זרוע) to smite the ungodly with
judgments (compare Zephaniah 6:6, [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034); [Deu
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015), with [Isa
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025); [Isa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011), [Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016), [Isa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020); [Isa
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#004); [Isa
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#026).). Through the judgment upon
Judah and Jerusalem He will cut off שׁאר הבּעל, the remnant of Baal,
i.e., all that remains of Baal and of idolatry; for Baal or the
Baal-worship stands per synecdochen for idolatry of every kind (see at
[Hos 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#010)). The emphasis lies upon
"the remnant," all that still exists of the Baal-worship or idolatry,
even to the very last remnant; so that the emphasis presupposes that the
extermination has already begun, that the worship of Baal no longer
exists in undiminished force and extent. It must not be limited,
however, to the complete abolition of the outward or grosser idolatry,
but includes the utter extermination of the grosser as well as the more
refined Baal-worship. That the words should be so understood is required
by the parallel clause: the name of the consecrated servants together
with the priests. Kemârı̄m are not prophets of Baal, but, as in [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005) and [Hos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005), the priests appointed by the
kings of Judah for the worship of the high places and the idolatrous
worship of Jehovah (for the etymology of the word, see at [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)). The kōhănı̄m, as distinguished
from these, are idolatrous priests in the stricter sense of the word
(i.e., those who conducted the literal idolatry). The names of both the
idolatrous priests of Jehovah and the literal priests of the idols are
to be cut off, so that not only the persons referred to will disappear,
but even their names will be heard no more. Along with the idols and
their priests, the worshippers of idols are also to be destroyed. Just
as in [Zep 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004) two classes of priests
are distinguished, so in [Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005) are
two classes of worshippers, viz., (1) the star-worshippers, and (2)
those who tried to combine the worship of Jehovah and the worship of
idols; and to these a third class is added in [Zep
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006). The worship of the stars was
partly Baal-worship, the sun, moon, and stars being worshipped as the
bearers of the powers of nature worshipped in Baal and Asherah (see at
[Kg2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)); and partly Sabaeism or
pure star-worship, the stars being worshipped as the originators of all
growth and decay in nature, and the leaders and regulators of all
sublunary things (see at [Kg2 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)).
The worship took place upon the roofs, i.e., on altars erected upon the
flat roofs of the houses, chiefly by the burning of incense ([Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)), but also by the offering of
sacrifices ([Kg2 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012); see the comm.
in loc.). "They offered the sacrifices upon the roofs, that they might
be the better able to see the stars in the heavens" (Theodoret). Along
with the star-worshippers as the representatives of literal idolatry,
Zephaniah mentions as a second class the worshippers who swear partly to
Jehovah, and partly by their king, i.e., who go limping on two sides
([Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)), or try to combine the
worship of Jehovah with that of Baal. Malkâm, their king, is Baal, who
is distinctly called king in the inscriptions (see Movers, Phnizier, i.
pp. 171-2), and not the "earthly king of the nation," as Hitzig has
erroneously interpreted the Masoretic text, in consequence of which he
proposes to read milkōm, i.e., Moloch. נשׁבּע with ל signifies to take
an oath to Jehovah, i.e., to bind one's self on oath to His service;
whereas נשׁבּע with ב (to swear by a person) means to call upon Him as
God when taking an oath. The difference between the two expressions
answers exactly to the religious attitude of the men in question, who
pretended to be worshippers of Jehovah, and yet with every asseveration
took the name of Baal into their mouth. In [Zep
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006) we have not two further classes
mentioned, viz., "the vicious and the irreligious," as Hitzig supposes;
but the persons here described form only one single class. Retiring
behind Jehovah, drawing back from Him, turning the back upon God, is
just the same as not seeking Jehovah, or not inquiring after Him. The
persons referred to are the religiously indifferent, those who do not
trouble themselves about God, the despisers of God.

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

This judgment will speedily come. [Zep
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007). "Be silent before the Lord
Jehovah! For the day of Jehovah is near, for Jehovah has prepared a
slaying of sacrifice, He has consecrated His called." The command, "Be
silent before the Lord," which is formed after [Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020), and with which the prophet
summons to humble, silent submission to the judgment of God, serves to
confirm the divine threat in [Zep
1:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002). The reason for the commanding
Hush! (keep silence) is given in the statement that the day of Jehovah
is close at hand (compare [Joe 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015)),
and that God has already appointed the executors of the judgment. The
last two clauses of the verse are formed from reminiscences taken from
Isaiah. The description of the judgment as zebhach, a sacrifice, is
taken from [Isa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006) (cf. [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010) and [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017)). The sacrifice which God has
prepared is the Jewish nation; those who are invited to this sacrificial
meal ("called," [Sa1 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#013)) are not
beasts and birds of prey, as in [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017), but the nations which He has
consecrated to war that they may consume Jacob ([Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)). The extraordinary use of the
verb hiqdiish (consecrated) in this connection may be explained from
[Isa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003), where the nations appointed
to make war against Babel are called mequddâshı̄m, the sanctified of
Jehovah (cf. [Jer 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007)).

[Zephaniah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 1:8</span></span>

The judgment will fall with equal severity upon the idolatrous and
sinners of every rank ([Zep 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)),
and no one in Jerusalem will be able to save himself from it ([Zep
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012), [Zep
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)). In three double verses
Zephaniah brings out three classes of men who differ in their civil
position, and also in their attitude towards God, as those who will be
smitten by the judgment: viz., (1) the princes, i.e., the royal family
and superior servants of the king, who imitate the customs of
foreigners, and oppress the people ([Zep
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008), [Zep
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009)); (2) the merchants, who have
grown rich through trade and usury ([Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010), [Zep
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011)); (3) the irreligious debauchees
([Zep 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012), [Zep
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)). The first of these he threatens
with visitation. [Zep 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008). "And it
will come to pass in the day of Jehovah's sacrifice, that I visit the
princes and the king's sons, and all who clothe themselves in foreign
dress. [Zep 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009). And I visit every one
who leaps over the threshold on that day, those who fill the Lord's
house with violence and deceit." The enumeration of those who are
exposed to the judgment commences with the princes, i.e., the heads of
the tribes and families, who naturally filled the higher offices of
state; and the king's sons, not only the sons of Josiah, who were still
very young (see the Introduction), but also the sons of the deceased
kings, the royal princes generally. The king himself is not named,
because Josiah walked in the ways of the Lord, and on account of his
piety and fear of God was not to lie to see the outburst of the judgment
([Kg2 22:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#019); [Ch2
34:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#027)). The princes and king's sons
are threatened with punishment, not on account of the high position
which they occupied in the state, but on account of the ungodly
disposition which they manifested. For since the clauses which follow
not only mention different classes of men, but also point out the sins
of the different classes, we must also expect this in the case of the
princes and the king's sons, and consequently must refer the dressing in
foreign clothes, which is condemned in the second half of the verse, to
the princes and king's sons also, and understand the word "all" as
relating to those who imitated their manners without being actually
princes or king's sons. Malbūsh nokhrı̄ (foreign dress) does not refer to
the clothes worn by the idolaters in their idolatrous worship (Chald.,
Rashi, Jer.), nor to the dress prohibited in the law, viz., "women
dressing in men's clothes, or men dressing in women's clothes" ([Deu
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005), [Deu
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#011)), as Grotius maintains, nor to
clothes stolen from the poor, or taken from them as pledges; but, as
nokhrı̄ signifies a foreigner, to foreign dress. Drusius has already
pointed this out, and explains the passage as follows: "I think that the
reference is to all those who betrayed the levity of their minds by
wearing foreign dress. For I have no doubt that in that age some copied
the Egyptians in their style of dress, and others the Babylonians,
according as they favoured the one nation or the other. The prophet
therefore says, that even those who adopted foreign habits, and
conformed themselves to the customs of the victorious nation, would not
be exempt." The last allusion is certainly untenable, and it would be
more correct to say with Strauss: "The prophets did not care for
externals of this kind, but it was evident to them that 'as the dress,
so the heart;' that is to say, the clothes were witnesses in their
esteem of the foreign inclinations of the heart." In [Zep
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009) many commentators find a
condemnation of an idolatrous use of foreign customs; regarding the
leaping over the threshold as an imitation of the priests of Dagon, who
adopted the custom, according to [Sa1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#005), of leaping over the threshold
when they entered the temple of that idol. But an imitation of that
custom could only take place in temples of Dagon, and it appears
perfectly inconceivable that it should have been transferred to the
threshold of the king's palace, unless the king was regarded as an
incarnation of Dagon, - a thought which could never enter the minds of
Israelitish idolaters, since even the Philistian kings did not hold
themselves to be incarnations of their idols. If we turn to the second
hemistich, the thing condemned is the filling of their masters' houses
with violence; and this certainly does not stand in any conceivable
relation to that custom of the priests of Dagon; and yet the words "who
fill," etc., are proved to be explanatory of the first half of the
verse, by the fact that the second clause is appended without the copula
Vav, and without the repetition of the preposition על. Now, if a fresh
sin were referred to there, the copula Vav, at all events, could not
have been omitted. We must therefore understand by the leaping over the
threshold a violent and sudden rushing into houses to steal the property
of strangers (Calvin, Ros., Ewald, Strauss, and others), so that the
allusion is to "dishonourable servants of the king, who thought that
they could best serve their master by extorting treasures from their
dependants by violence and fraud" (Ewald). אדניהם, of their lord, i.e.,
of the king, not "of their lords:" the plural is in the pluralis
majestatis, as in [Sa1 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#016); [Sa2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#005), etc.

[Zephaniah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 1:10</span></span>

Even the usurers will not escape the judgment. [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010). "And it will come to pass in
that day, is the saying of Jehovah, voice of the cry from the fish-gate,
and howling from the lower city, and great destruction from the hills.
[Zep 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011). Howl, inhabitants of the
mortar, for all the people of Canaan are destroyed; cut off are all that
are laden with silver." In order to express the thought that the
judgment will not spare any one class of the population, Zephaniah
depicts the lamentation which will arise from all parts of the city. קול
צעקה, voice of the cry, i.e., a loud cry of anguish will arise or
resound. The fish-gate (according to [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039); cf. [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014)) was in the eastern portion of
the wall which bounded the lower city on the north side (for further
details on this point, see at [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003)). המּשׁנה (= העיר משׁנה, [Neh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#009)), the second part or district of
the city, is the lower city upon the hill Acra (see at [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)). Shebher, fragor, does not mean
a cry of murder, but the breaking to pieces of what now exists, not
merely the crashing fall of the buildings, like za‛ăqath shebher in [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005), the cry uttered at the
threatening danger of utter destruction. In order to heighten the
terrors of the judgment, there is added to the crying and howling of the
men the tumult caused by the conquest of the city. "From the hills,"
i.e., "not from Zion and Moriah," but from the ills surrounding the
lower city, viz., Bezetha, Gareb ([Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039)), and others. For Zion, the
citadel of Jerusalem, is evidently thought of as the place where the
howling of the men and the noise of the devastation, caused by the enemy
pressing in from the north and north-west, are heard. Hammakhtēsh, the
mortar ([Pro 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022)), which is the name
given in [Jdg 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#019) to a hollow place
in a rock, is used here to denote a locality in Jerusalem, most probably
the depression which ran down between Acra on the west and Bezetha and
Moriah on the east, as far as the fountain of Siloah, and is called by
Josephus "the cheese-maker's valley," and by the present inhabitants
el-Wâd, i.e., the valley, and also the mill-valley. The name "mortar"
was probably coined by Zephaniah, to point to the fate of the merchants
and men of money who lived there. They who dwell there shall howl,
because "all the people of Canaan" are destroyed. These are not
Canaanitish or Phoenician merchants, but Judaean merchants, who
resembled the Canaanites or Phoenicians in their general business (see
at [Hos 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008)), and had grown rich
through trade and usury. Netı̄l keseph, laden with silver.

[Zephaniah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 1:12</span></span>

The debauchees and rioters generally will also not remain free from
punishment. [Zep 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012). "And at that
time it will come to pass, that I will search Jerusalem with candles,
and visit the men who lie upon their lees, who say in their heart,
Jehovah does no good, and no evil. [Zep
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013). Their goods will become plunder,
and their houses desolation: they will build houses, and not dwell
(therein), and plant vineyards, and not drink their wine." God will
search Jerusalem with candles, to bring out the irreligious debauchees
out of their hiding-places in their houses, and punish them. The
visitation is effected by the enemies who conquer Jerusalem. Jerome
observes on this passage: "Nothing will be allowed to escape unpunished.
If we read the history of Josephus, we shall find it written there, that
princes and priests, and mighty men, were dragged even out of the
sewers, and caves, and pits, and tombs, in which they had hidden
themselves from fear of death." Now, although what is stated here refers
to the conquest of Jerusalem by Titus, there can be no doubt that
similar things occurred at the Chaldaean conquest. The expression to
search with candles (cf. [Luk 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008)) is
a figure denoting the most minute search of the dwellings and
hiding-places of the despisers of God. These are described as men who
sit drawn together upon their lees (קפא, lit., to draw one's self
together, to coagulate). The figure is borrowed from old wine, which has
been left upon its lees and not drawn off, and which, when poured into
other vessels, retains its flavour, and does not alter its odour ([Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011)), and denotes perseverance or
confirmation in moral and religious indifference, "both external quiet,
and carelessness, idleness, and spiritual insensibility in the enjoyment
not only of the power and possessions bestowed upon them, but also of
the pleasures of sin and the worst kinds of lust" (Marck). Good wine,
when it remains for a long time upon its lees, becomes stronger; but bad
wine becomes harsher and thicker. Shemârı̄m, lees, do not denote "sins in
which the ungodly are almost stupefied" (Jerome), or "splendour which so
deprives a man of his senses that there is nothing left either pure or
sincere" (Calvin), but "the impurity of sins, which were associated in
the case of these men with external good" (Marck). In the carnal repose
of their earthly prosperity, they said in their heart, i.e., they
thought within themselves, there is no God who rules and judges the
world; everything takes place by chance, or according to dead natural
laws. They did not deny the existence of God, but in their character and
conduct they denied the working of the living God in the world, placing
Jehovah on the level of the dead idols, who did neither good nor harm
([Isa 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023); [Jer
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005)), whereby they really denied the
being of God.

(Note: "For neither the majesty of God, nor His government or glory,
consists in any imaginary splendour, but in those attributes which so
meet together in Him that they cannot be severed from His essense. It is
the property of God to govern the world, to take care of the human race,
to distinguish between good and evil, to relieve the wretched, to punish
all crimes, to restrain unjust violence. And if any one would deprive
God of these, he would leave nothing but an idol." - Calvin.)

To these God will show Himself as the ruler and judge of the world, by
giving up their goods (chēlâm, opes eorum) to plunder, so that they will
experience the truth of the punishments denounced in His word against
the despisers of His name (compare [Lev
26:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#032); [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030), [Deu
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039), and the similar threats in [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011); [Mic
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015)).

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

This judgment will not be delayed. To terrify the self-secure sinners
out of their careless rest, Zephaniah now carries out still further the
thought only hinted at in [Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007) of
the near approach and terrible character of the judgment. [Zep
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014). "The great day of Jehovah is
near, near and hasting greatly. Hark! the day of Jehovah, bitterly
crieth the hero there. [Zep 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015). A
day of fury is this day, a day of anguish and pressure, a day of
devastation and desert, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of cloud and
cloudy night. [Zep 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016). A day of the
trumpet and battering, over the fortified cities and high battlements."
The day of Jehovah is called "the great day" with reference to its
effects, as in [Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011). The emphasis
lies primarily, however, upon the qârōbh (is near), which is therefore
repeated and strengthened by מהר מאד. מהר is not a piel participle with
the Mem dropped, but an adjective form, which has sprung out of the
adverbial use of the inf. abs. (cf. Ewald, 240, e). In the second
hemistich the terrible character of this day is described. קול before
yōm Yehōvâh (the day of Jehovah), at the head of an interjectional
clause, has almost grown into an interjection (see at [Isa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004)). The hero cries bitterly,
because he cannot save himself, and must succumb to the power of the
foe. Shâm, adv. loci, has not a temporal signification even here, but
may be explained from the fact that in connection with the day the
prophet is thinking of the field of battle, on which the hero perishes
while fighting. In order to depict more fully the terrible character of
this day, Zephaniah crowds together in [Zep
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015) and [Zep
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016) all the words supplied by the
language to describe the terrors of the judgment. He first of all
designates it as yōm ‛ebhrâh, the day of the overflowing wrath of God
(cf. [Zep 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)); then, according to
the effect which the pouring out of the wrath of God produces upon men,
as a day of distress and pressure (cf. [Job
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#024)), of devastation (שׁאה and
משׁואה combined, as in [Job 38:27](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#027);
[Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003)), and of the darkest cloudy
night, after [Joe 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002); and lastly, in
[Zep 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016), indicating still more
closely the nature of the judgment, as a day of the trumpet and the
trumpet-blast, i.e., on which the clangour of the war-trumpets will be
heard over all the fortifications and castles, and the enemy will
attack, take, and destroy the fortified places amidst the blast of
trumpets (cf. [Amo 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002)). Pinnōth are
the corners and battlements of the walls of the fortifications ([Ch2
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#015)).

[Zephaniah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 1:17</span></span>

In the midst of this tribulation the sinners will perish without counsel
or help. [Zep 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017). "And I make it
strait for men, and they will walk like blind men, because they have
sinned against Jehovah; and their blood will be poured out like dust,
and their flesh like dung. [Zep 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018).
Even their silver, even their gold, will not be able to save them on the
day of Jehovah's fury, and in the fire of His wrath will the whole earth
be devoured; for He will make an end, yea a sudden one, to all the
inhabitants of the earth." והצרתי reminds of the threat of Moses in [Deu
28:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#052), to which Zephaniah alluded in
[Zep 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016). And in הלכוּ כּעורים the
allusion to [Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029) is also
unmistakeable. To walk like the blind, i.e., to seek a way out of the
trouble without finding one. This distress God sends, because they have
sinned against Him, by falling away from Him through idolatry and the
transgression of His commandments, as already shown in [Zep
1:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004). But the punishment will be
terrible. Their blood will be poured out like dust. The point of
comparison is not the quantity, as in [Gen
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#016) and others, but the
worthlessness of dust, as in [Kg2 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#007)
and [Isa 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023). The blood is thought
as little of as the dust which is trodden under foot. Lechūm, which
occurs again in [Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023), means
flesh (as in the Arabic), not food. The verb shâphakh, to pour out, is
also to be taken per zeugma in connection with this clause, though
without there being any necessity to associate it with [Sa2
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010), and regard lechūm as referring
to the bowels. For the fact itself, compare [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010) and [Jer
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021). In order to cut off all hope on
deliverance from the rich and distinguished sinners, the prophet adds in
[Zep 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018) : Even with silver and gold
will they not be able to save their lives. The enemy will give no heed
to this (cf. [Isa 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017); [Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030); [Eze
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019)) in the day that the Lord will
pour out His fury upon the ungodly, to destroy the whole earth with the
fire of His wrathful jealousy (cf. [Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)). By kol-hâ'ârets we might
understand the whole of the land of Judah, if we looked at what
immediately precedes it. But if we bear in mind that the threat
commenced with judgment upon the whole earth ([Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002), [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)), and that it here returns to its
starting-point, to round off the picture, there can be no doubt that the
whole earth is intended. The reason assigned for this threat in [Zep
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018) is formed after [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023); but the expression is
strengthened by the use of אך־נבהלה instead of ונחרצה, the word round in
Isaiah. Kâlâh: the finishing stroke, as in Isaiah l.c. (see at [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008)). אך, only, equivalent to "not
otherwise than," i.e., assuredly. נבהלה is used as a substantive, and is
synonymous with behâlâh, sudden destruction, in [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023). The construction with 'ēth
accus. as in [Nah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
