[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tdp05)  [Next](tdp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter V

The Pixie at the Ockerry. Jimmy Townsend and his Sister Race.

<span id="img_18"></span> ![](img/18.jpg)

 

SOMETIMES we hear of the capture of a pixy, and of its being consigned
to a place of security whence it would be imagined impossible for it to
escape; but the little prisoner generally contrives to regain its
liberty, either through its custodian relaxing his vigilance, or in some
totally inexplicable and miraculous manner. The following story of the
capture of one of these little elves is illustrative of this.

THE PIXY AT THE OCKERRY.

One evening a woman who dwelt upon the moor was pursuing her homeward
way, and as the darkness began to gather round her she found herself
nearing the bridge which spans the Blackabrook at the Ockerry, between
Princetown and Two Bridges. When within a few score yards of it a small
figure suddenly bounded into the road, and ran leaping and gambolling in
front of her towards the stream. She was very much startled at first,
and paused, scarce knowing whether it was better to continue on her way
or to turn back. She had almost resolved upon the latter course, deeming
it very probable that unless she avoided the frisky little fellow before
her she would he pixy-led, when the recollection that there were those
at home awaiting her arrival determined her to proceed. To prevent any
such misfortune as being drawn aside from her path by the pixy, she
turned her pockets inside out, and also reversed the shawl she was
wearing, and plucking up her courage, walked boldly on. The pixy had now
reached the bridge, and remained jumping from side to side and
performing a variety of antics upon it, as if to prevent her from
crossing. But the dame's courage did not fail her, and having made up
her mind not to be deterred from pursuing her way, she stepped
fearlessly towards the spot where the pixy was, who continued his
grotesque movements, leaping about with the greatest agility. As the
stout-hearted women gained the bridge, the little fellow hopped towards
her, when suddenly stooping down, she seized the pixy in her hand,
popped him into the basket she was carrying, and secured the cover,
resolving that instead of running any risk of being pixy-led she would
turn the tables, and lead the pixy.

The basket was a large one, but the captive being, as she afterwards
said, fully eighteen inches in height, there was not much room in it for
him to display his agility, so he was forced to lie still. But though
still, he was not silent, for immediately the cover of the basket was
fastened upon him, he commenced talking in a very rapid manner, but in
so strange a jargon that the good dame was utterly unable to comprehend
a word. She, however, with the basket on her arm, continued her way,
determined not to allow the pixy to frighten her by his gibberish. After
a time the little fellow's voice ceased, and his captor imagined he
might possibly be tired of talking, or had grown sulky, or perhaps had
fallen asleep. She felt curious to know what he was doing, and
determined upon taking a peep at her prize. Cautiously raising the cover
of the basket about an inch or so, she looked in, when strange to
relate, she found it to be perfectly empty. How the pixy had effected
his escape was a mystery, and she could only conjecture that it
possessed the power of changing its shape, and had contrived to squeeze
itself out through the wicker-work. Though unable long to retain her
prize in her possession, the good dame was always able to boast that she
had had the courage to capture a pixy.

We not infrequently meet with stories of babes having been removed from
their cradles by the pixies, and one of their own fairy infants left in
its stead. In such cases it is necessary to be careful not to act
unkindly towards the changeling, as the pixies will not fail to mete out
the same treatment to the stolen child as that received by the one they
leave behind them. An instance of the belief in a change of this kind
having been effected, is afforded by the tale of:

JIMMY TOWNSEND AND HIS SISTER GRACE.

In a cottage on the moor lived Jimmy Townsend, a merry fellow, who was
always ready when meeting any of his acquaintances at a sheep-shearing
feast, or at the market town on the borders, to join them in a carouse;
and was never tired of telling them long stories of his various
adventures. Though Jimmy was not particularly fond of labour, he was
perfectly oblivious of the fact himself, and it was no uncommon thing to
hear him make his boast of an evening that he had again "chayted a 'oss
of a day's work." He was always well received wherever he went, and the
party was sure to be of the merriest where he was present. He never
allowed anything to trouble him, and was fond of assuring his friends
that he "ded'n want for nothin' "--in fact, he said he was as happy as a
king, "*although he did live with a pisgie*."

Jimmy Townsend had a sister named Grace--at least everybody spoke of her
as his sister, but Jimmy knew better--who lived with him and kept his
house tidy; and though Jimmy treated her very familiarly, as if she had
been his sister, yet he always maintained that she was "not a Christian
at all, but nothin' but a pisgie."

Jimmy was many years older than Grace, and said he remembered well when
his sister was born, and a "swait little thing her was." "But," said
Jimmy, "her wasn' a twelve-month old avor her was stole away, an' a
pisgie put in her cradle in her plaace. I knaw 'tis so," he averred,"
vor her grawed up sich across tempered little mortal as you ever zeed,
an' whoever's got anything to do wi' her will sure to come to some
harm."

Nothing could shake Jimmy's belief in what he stated.

Every little mishap in the household was attributed by him to the"
pisgie," and while he tolerated the presence of Grace, and even felt
glad to have her to look after his home, he never regarded her in any
other light than as one of that elfin race. "I never cross her," he
would say, "vor I knaw I should be wuss off. I let her do as her minds
to, and doan't never meddle wi' nothin' in the ouze."

Jimmy Townsend made no secret of his belief, but stoutly maintained,
wherever he was, that he "lived wi' a pisgie."

But pixy or not, one thing was certain--the charms of Grace were potent
enough to gain the admiration of one Sam Campin, who, disdainful of the
warnings offered by Jimmy, boldly pleaded his suit, declaring, in his
own way, that Grace was his ideal of perfection, and it she was a pixy,
" it dedn' make no odds!" So it was at last all settled that Sam should
marry Grace, and one bright morning he tripped off with her to the
church, and the parson having performed his office, they returned man
and wife.

Jimmy Townsend vowed that it would not be long ere the bridegroom
discovered that his life was not likely to wear the rosy hue he had
fondly anticipated, for, he said "he's got a pisgie for his wive, an' I
knaw et!" At first, however, things went on pretty well, and Sam Campin
had nothing to complain of, and many there were who jeered at Jimmy,
calling him a false prophet. But he was not to be shaken in his belief
that matters would not turn out well for Sam. "Wait a bit, wait a bit,
an' you'll zee," he said.

Two or three months passed away, and Sam Campin's cow fell sick and
died; a short time after a litter of pigs were found dead one morning,
and a flock of geese had mysteriously disappeared. "Dedn' I tell 'ee
so?" asked Jimmy of those who had been quizzing him about his
prognostications of coming evil. "Her's a pisgie, an' her's sure to
bring harm to whoever's got anything to do wi' her. Bless your saul! I
had to keep from meddlin' when I was with her, or I should have been in
a purty mess o 't avor now. But when a man's got her vor a wive, how can
he help o' cumin' to a squabblin' sometimes?"

Things continued to grow worse, and after a time poor Sam Campin found
himself bereft of all his worldly possessions, and want was staring him
in the face. Casting about him for some means of subsistence, he at
length decided upon adopting the calling of a chimney-sweep, as one that
would not require a great deal of practice in order to be proficient in.
The people in the few farm-houses around were not likely to become
customers, certainly, for the plan in favour with them for keeping their
chimneys free from soot was the very simple one of drawing a bunch of
furze up and down them occasionally--a proceeding perfectly efficacious,
and possessing the great merit of being unattended with expense. But in
the villages on the borders of the moor--Widecombe church-town, and
Holne, and such like--where might be found a few houses of the better
class, Sam considered there would be work enough to keep one sweep
employed, and so he set manfully about preparing himself for his new
avocation.

Jimmy Townsend said nothing--merely shaking his head when the subject
was mentioned in his presence, as if to intimate that he had no faith in
the undertaking.

And now the day arrived on which our sweep was to make his first essay.
Armed with his brushes, he made for the house where his services were
required, and, on arriving, at once set to work. Those were not the days
of brushes with a handle jointed like a fishing-rod and capable of
reaching through any chimney, no matter what its height, and a great
deal of work had to be done by the operator climbing up into the chimney
and sweeping down the soot with a brush whose handle was only a few feet
long. This plan had to be adopted on the occasion we speak of, and Sam
prepared to mount.

It was with some amount of trepidation that he looked up the black and
uninviting cavity, but, shaking this feeling off, up he climbed. Down
came the soot as Sam vigorously wielded his brush, and all seemed to be
going on well. Suddenly his movements ceased. They called to him from
below. There was no answer. They called again, and a faint groan was the
response. Procuring a light, and peering up, it was found that

poor Sam had stuck fast in the chimney!

"I told 'ee so! I told 'ee so!" exclaimed Jimmy Townsend, when the
unfortunate circumstance was made known to him, "I knawed how et would
be. No good 'II ever come to anybody who's got ort to do wi' the
pisgies!"

And so it proved, for though rescued from his uncomfortable position,
Sam was never afterwards able to undertake anything whatever without
meeting with some mishap.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: The Ungrateful Farmer.--The Pixy
Threshers.--Rewarding a Pixy](tdp07)
