[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tiu04)  [Next](tiu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Improvement of Understanding*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE TRUE AND FINAL GOOD

\[12\] (1) I will here only briefly state what I mean by true good, and
also what is the nature of the highest good. (2) In order that this may
be rightly understood, we must bear in mind that the terms good and evil
are only applied relatively, so that the same thing may be called both
good and bad according to the relations in view, in the same way as it
may be called perfect or imperfect. (3) Nothing regarded in its own
nature can be called perfect or imperfect; especially when we are aware
that all things which come to pass, come to pass according to the
eternal order and fixed laws of nature.

\[13\] (1) However, human weakness cannot attain to this order in its
own thoughts, but meanwhile man conceives a human character much more
stable than his own, and sees that there is no reason why he should not
himself acquire such a character. (2) Thus he is led to seek for means
which will bring him to this pitch of perfection, and calls everything
which will serve as such means a true good. (13:3) The chief good is
that he should arrive, together with other individuals if possible, at
the possession of the aforesaid character. (4) What that character is we
shall show in due time, namely, that it is the knowledge of the union
existing being the mind and the whole of nature. \[c\]

\[14\] (1) This, then, is the end for which I strive, to attain to such
a character myself, and to endeavor that many should attain to it with
me. (2) In other words, it is part of my happiness to lend a helping
hand, that many others may understand even as I do, so that their
understanding and desire may entirely agree with my own. (3) In order to
bring this about, it is necessary to understand as much of nature as
will enable us to attain to the aforesaid character, and also to form a
social order such as is most conducive to the attainment of this
character by the greatest number with the least difficulty and danger.

\[15\] (1) We must seek the assistance of Moral Philosophy \[d\] and the
Theory of Education; further, as health is no insignificant means for
attaining our end, we must also include the whole science of Medicine,
and, as many difficult things are by contrivance rendered easy, and we
can in this way gain much time and convenience, the science of Mechanics
must in no way be despised.

\[16\] (1) But before all things, a means must be devised for improving
the understanding and purifying it, as far as may be at the outset, so
that it may apprehend things without error, and in the best possible
way. (2) Thus it is apparent to everyone that I wish to direct all
science to one end \[e\] and aim, so that we may attain to the supreme
human perfection which we have named; and, therefore, whatsoever in the
sciences does not serve to promote our object will have to be rejected
as useless. (3) To sum up the matter in a word, all our actions and
thoughts must be directed to this one end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Certain Rules of Life](tiu06)
