[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tiu10)  [Next](tiu12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Improvement of Understanding*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# First Part of Method

### DISTINCTION OF TRUE IDEAS FROM FICTITIOUS IDEAS

\[50\] (1) Let us then make a beginning with the first part of the
method, which is, as we have said, to distinguish and separate the true
idea from other perceptions, and to keep the mind from confusing with
true ideas those which are false, fictitious, and doubtful. (2) I intend
to dwell on this point at length, partly to keep a distinction so
necessary before the reader's mind, and also because there are some who
doubt of true ideas, through not having attended to the distinction
between a true perception and all others. (3) Such persons are like men
who, while they are awake, doubt not that they are awake, but afterwards
in a dream, as often happens, thinking that they are surely awake, and
then finding that they were in error, become doubtful even of being
awake. (4) This state of mind arises through neglect of the distinction
between sleeping and waking.

\[51\] (1) Meanwhile, I give warning that I shall not here give essence
of every perception, and explain it through its proximate cause. (2)
Such work lies in the province of philosophy. (3) I shall confine myself
to what concerns method—that is, to the character of fictitious, false
and doubtful perceptions, and the means of freeing ourselves therefrom.
(4) Let us then first inquire into the nature of a fictitious idea.

\[52\] (1) Every perception has for its object either a thing considered
as existing, or solely the essence of a thing. (2) Now "fiction" is
chiefly occupied with things considered as existing. (3) I will,
therefore, consider these first—I mean cases where only the existence of
an object is feigned, and the thing thus feigned is understood, or
assumed to be understood. (4) For instance, I feign that Peter, whom I
know to have gone home, is gone to see me, \[r\] or something of that
kind. (5) With what is such an idea concerned? (6) It is concerned with
things possible, and not with things necessary or impossible.

\[53\] (1) I call a thing impossible when its existence would imply a
contradiction; necessary, when its non-existence would imply a
contradiction; possible, when neither its existence nor its
non-existence imply a contradiction, but when the necessity or
impossibility of its nature depends on causes unknown to us, while we
feign that it exists. (2) If the necessity or impossibility of its
existence depending on external causes were known to us, we could not
form any fictitious hypotheses about it;

\[54\] (1) Whence it follows that if there be a God, or omniscient
Being, such an one cannot form fictitious hypotheses. (2) For, as
regards ourselves, when I know that I exist, \[s\] I cannot hypothesize
that I exist or do not exist, any more than I can hypothesize an
elephant that can go through the eye of a needle; nor when I know the
nature of God, can I hypothesize that He or does not exist. \[t\] (54:3)
The same thing must be said of the Chimaera, whereof the nature implies
a contradiction. (4) From these considerations, it is plain, as I have
already stated, that fiction cannot be concerned with eternal truths.
\[u\]

\[55\] (1) But before proceeding further, I must remark, in passing,
that the difference between the essence of one thing and the essence of
another thing is the same as that which exists between the reality or
existence of one thing and the reality or existence of another;
therefore, if we wished to conceive the existence, for example, of Adam,
simply by means of existence in general, it would be the same as if, in
order to conceive his existence, we went back to the nature of being, so
as to define Adam as a being. (2) Thus, the more existence is conceived
generally, the more is it conceived confusedly and the more easily can
it be ascribed to a given object. (55:3) Contrariwise, the more it is
conceived particularly, the more is it understood clearly, and the less
liable is it to be ascribed, through negligence of Nature's order, to
anything save its proper object. (4) This is worthy of remark.

\[56\] (1) We now proceed to consider those cases which are commonly
called fictions, though we clearly understood that the thing is not as
we imagine it. (2) For instance, I know that the earth is round, but
nothing prevents my telling people that it is a hemisphere, and that it
is like a half apple carved in relief on a dish; or, that the sun moves
round the earth, and so on. (56:3) However, examination will show us
that there is nothing here inconsistent with what has been said,
provided we first admit that we may have made mistakes, and be now
conscious of them; and, further, that we can hypothesize, or at least
suppose, that others are under the same mistake as ourselves, or can,
like us, fall under it. (4) We can, I repeat, thus hypothesize so long
as we see no impossibility. (56:5) Thus, when I tell anyone that the
earth is not round, &c., I merely recall the error which I perhaps made
myself, or which I might have fallen into, and afterwards I hypothesize
that the person to whom I tell it, is still, or may still fall under the
same mistake. (6) This I say, I can feign so long as I do not perceive
any impossibility or necessity; if I truly understood either one or the
other I should not be able to feign, and I should be reduced to saying
that I had made the attempt.

\[57\] (1) It remains for us to consider hypotheses made in problems,
which sometimes involve impossibilities. (2) For instance, when we
say—let us assume that this burning candle is not burning, or, let us
assume that it burns in some imaginary space, or where there are no
physical objects. (3) Such assumptions are freely made, though the last
is clearly seen to be impossible. (4) But, though this be so, there is
no fiction in the case. (57:5) For, in the first case, I have merely
recalled to memory, \[x\] another candle not burning, or conceived the
candle before me as without a flame, and then I understand as applying
to the latter, leaving its flame out of the question, all that I think
of the former. (6) In the second case, I have merely to abstract my
thoughts from the objects surrounding the candle, for the mind to devote
itself to the contemplation of the candle singly looked at in itself
only; I can then draw the conclusion that the candle contains in itself
no causes for its own destruction, so that if there were no physical
objects the candle, and even the flame, would remain unchangeable, and
so on. (7) Thus there is here no fiction, but, \[y\] true and bare
assertions.

\[58\] (1) Let us now pass on to the fictions concerned with essences
only, or with some reality or existence simultaneously. (2) Of these we
must specially observe that in proportion as the mind's understanding is
smaller, and its experience multiplex, so will its power of coining
fictions be larger, whereas as its understanding increases, its capacity
for entertaining fictitious ideas becomes less. (58:3) For instance, in
the same way as we are unable, while we are thinking, to feign that we
are thinking or not thinking, so, also, when we know the nature of body
we cannot imagine an infinite fly; or, when we know the nature of the
soul, \[z\] we cannot imagine it as square, though anything may be
expressed verbally. (4) But, as we said above, the less men know of
nature the more easily can they coin fictitious ideas, such as trees
speaking, men instantly changed into stones, or into fountains, ghosts
appearing in mirrors, something issuing from nothing, even gods changed
into beasts and men and infinite other absurdities of the same kind.

\[59\] (1) Some persons think, perhaps, that fiction is limited by
fiction, and not by understanding; in other words, after I have formed
some fictitious idea, and have affirmed of my own free will that it
exists under a certain form in nature, I am thereby precluded from
thinking of it under any other form. (2) For instance, when I have
feigned (to repeat their argument) that the nature of body is of a
certain kind, and have of my own free will desired to convince myself
that it actually exists under this form, I am no longer able to
hypothesize that a fly, for example, is infinite; so, when I have
hypothesized the essence of the soul, I am not able to think of it as
square, &c.

\[60\] (1) But these arguments demand further inquiry. (2) First, their
upholders must either grant or deny that we can understand anything. If
they grant it, then necessarily the same must be said of understanding,
as is said of fiction. (3) If they deny it, let us, who know that we do
know something, see what they mean. (4) They assert that the soul can be
conscious of, and perceive in a variety of ways, not itself nor things
which exist, but only things which are neither in itself nor anywhere
else, in other words, that the soul can, by its unaided power, create
sensations or ideas unconnected with things. (5) In fact, they regard
the soul as a sort of god. (60:6) Further, they assert that we or our
soul have such freedom that we can constrain ourselves, or our soul, or
even our soul's freedom. (7) For, after it has formed a fictitious idea,
and has given its assent thereto, it cannot think or feign it in any
other manner, but is constrained by the first fictitious idea to keep
all its other thoughts in harmony therewith. (8) Our opponents are thus
driven to admit, in support of their fiction, the absurdities which I
have just enumerated; and which are not worthy of rational refutation.

\[61\] (1) While leaving such persons in their error, we will take care
to derive from our argument with them a truth serviceable for our
purpose, namely, \[61a\] that the mind, in paying attention to a thing
hypothetical or false, so as to meditate upon it and understand it, and
derive the proper conclusions in due order therefrom, will readily
discover its falsity; and if the thing hypothetical be in its nature
true, and the mind pays attention to it, so as to understand it, and
deduce the truths which are derivable from it, the mind will proceed
with an uninterrupted series of apt conclusions; in the same way as it
would at once discover (as we showed just now) the absurdity of a false
hypothesis, and of the conclusions drawn from it.

\[62\] (1) We need, therefore, be in no fear of forming hypotheses, so
long as we have a clear and distinct perception of what is involved. (2)
For, if we were to assert, haply, that men are suddenly turned into
beasts, the statement would be extremely general, so general that there
would be no conception, that is, no idea or connection of subject and
predicate, in our mind. (3) If there were such a conception we should at
the same time be aware of the means and the causes whereby the event
took place. (4) Moreover, we pay no attention to the nature of the
subject and the predicate.

\[63\] (1) Now, if the first idea be not fictitious, and if all the
other ideas be deduced therefrom, our hurry to form fictitious ideas
will gradually subside. (2) Further, as a fictitious idea cannot be
clear and distinct, but is necessarily confused, and as all confusion
arises from the fact that the mind has only partial knowledge of a thing
either simple or complex, and does not distinguish between the known and
the unknown, and, again, that it directs its attention promiscuously to
all parts of an object at once without making distinctions, it follows,
first, that if the idea be of something very simple, it must necessarily
be clear and distinct. (3) For a very simple object cannot be known in
part, it must either be known altogether or not at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: And From False Ideas](tiu12)
