[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](chl08)  [Next](chl10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Christian Healing: the science of being*, by Charles Fillmore,
\[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Seven Spirituality or Prayer and Praise 

1\. By the employment of many symbols the Bible describes man in his
wholeness--Spirit, soul, and body. The symbols used are men, places,
tents, temples, and so forth. The name of every person mentioned in the
Bible has a meaning representative of that person's character. The
twelve sons of Jacob represent the twelve foundation faculties of man.
The name of each of these sons, correctly interpreted, gives the
development and office of its particular faculty in triune association;
that is, its relation to consciousness in Spirit, in soul, and in body.
For example, when the sons of Jacob were born, their mothers revealed
the character of the faculty which each represented. This is set forth
in the twenty-ninth and thirtieth chapters of Genesis.

2\. It is written of the birth of Reuben, "Leah conceived, and bare a
son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Because Jehovah hath
looked upon my affliction." The emphasis is upon the word "looked," and
by referring to the concordance we find that the meaning of the word
Reuben is, "One who sees; vision of the son." It is clear that this
refers to the bringing forth of sight.

3\. "And she conceived again, and bare a son: and said, Because Jehovah
hath heard that I am hated." Here the emphasis is upon the word heard,
and we find that Simeon means, "That hears or

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

obeys; that is heard." This is the bringing forth of hearing.

4\. "And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time
will my husband be joined unto me." In this case the emphasis is upon
the word joined. Levi means "unity," which in body is feeling; in soul,
sympathy; and in Spirit, love. So each of the twelve faculties in the
complete man functions in this threefold degree.

5\. What is here described as the birth of the twelve sons of Jacob is
the first, or natural, bringing forth of the faculties. A higher
expression of the faculties is symbolized in the Twelve Apostles of
Jesus Christ. Simon Peter is hearing and faith united. John is feeling
and love joined. When we believe what we hear, there is formed in us the
substance of the word, which is Peter, a rock, a sure foundation.
"Belief cometh of hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ."

6\. The Bible is a very wonderful book; as man develops in spiritual
understanding it reveals itself to him, and he sees why it has been
reverenced and called holy by the people. It is a deep exposition of
mental laws, and it is also a treatise on the true physiological estate
of the body. It shows that the human organism is mind in action, rather
than an aggregation of purely material functions. But above all, the
Bible explains the spiritual character of man and the laws governing his
relation to God. These are symbolically set forth as states of
consciousness,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

illustrated by parables and allegories. Paul says, referring to the
history of Sarah and Abraham, "Which things contain an allegory." It is
written of Jesus, "And without a parable spake he nothing unto them:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the
foundation of the world." Jesus was Himself a parable. His life was an
allegory of the experiences that man passes through in developing from
natural to spiritual consciousness; hence the Bible and the prophets can
be understood only by those who arrive at that place in consciousness
where the writers were when they gave forth their messages. It requires
the same inspiration to read the Scriptures with understanding that it
required originally to receive and write them.

7\. In the 29th chapter of Genesis we read of Jacob's wife, Leah: "And
she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, This time will I
praise Jehovah: therefore she called his name Judah." The Hebrew meaning
of the word Judah is "praise." In Spirit praise, or prayer, the Judah
faculty, accumulates ideas. In sense consciousness this faculty is
called acquisitiveness; it accumulates material things and when self is
dominant, "hath a devil." This is Judas.

8\. Each of the twelve faculties has a center and a definite place of
expression in the body. Physiology has designated these faculty
locations as brain and nerve centers. Spiritual perception reveals them
to

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

be aggregations of ideas, thoughts, and words. Thoughts make cells, and
thoughts of like character are drawn together in the body by the same
law that draws people of kindred ideas into assemblies and communities.
The intellectual man centers in the head; the affectional man lives in
the heart; the sensual man expresses through the abdomen. The activities
of these indicated regions are subdivided into a multitude of functions,
all of which are necessary to the building up of manifest man as he is
idealized in Divine Mind.

9\. At the very apex of the brain is a ganglionic center, which we may
term the throne of reverence or spirituality. It is here that man holds
converse with the knowledge in Divine Mind. This center is the place or
"upper room" of spiritual consciousness, and is designated in Scripture
as Judah. Its office is to pray and praise. The Judah faculty opens the
portal of that mysterious realm called the superconsciousness where
thought is impregnated with an uplifting, transcendent quality. Every
lofty ideal, all the inspiration that elevates and idealizes in
religion, poetry, and art, originates here. It is the kingdom of the
true and real in all things.

10\. The importance of Judah is indicated by his place in the family of
Jacob and Leah. Jacob (supplanter) was betrothed to Rachel (ewe). At the
time of the espousal the father of Rachel substituted his elder daughter
Leah for the covenanted bride. Leah means "weary." The first son of Leah
was

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

"sight"; weariness saw the light of Spirit. The second son was
"hearing"; she was able to receive the word. The third son was "union";
she merged with the limitless. The fourth son was "praise." After the
birth of Judah, Leah "left off bearing." Praise is the complement of
sight, hearing, and unity. It is the redemption of weariness, and from
it issues Messiah, the anointed One, Savior of the world. Instead of a
supplication, prayer should be a jubilant thanksgiving. This method of
prayer quickens the mind miraculously, and, like a mighty magnet, draws
out the spiritual qualities that transform the whole man when they are
given expression in mind, body, and affairs.

11\. Spirituality is one of the foundation faculties of the mind. It is
the consciousness that relates man directly to the Father-Mind. It is
quickened and enlarged through prayer and through other forms of
religious thought and worship. When we pray we look up from within, not
because God is off in the sky, but because this spiritual center in the
top of the head becomes active and our attention is naturally drawn to
it.

12\. Prayer is natural to man, and it should be cultivated in order to
round out his character. Prayer is the language of spirituality; when
developed, it makes man master in the realm of creative ideas. In order
to get results from the use of this faculty, right thinking should be
observed here as well as elsewhere. To pray, believing that the prayer
may or may not be answered at the will of God, is to miss

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the mark. It is a law of mind that every idea is fulfilled as soon as
conceived. This law holds true in the spiritual realm. "All things
whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them." In the light of our knowledge of mind action, the law
expressed in these words is clear. Moreover, the faith implied is
absolutely necessary to the unfailing answer to prayer. If we pray
asking for future fulfillment, we form that kind of thought structure in
consciousness, and our prayers are always waiting for that future
fulfillment which we have idealized. If we pray thinking that we do not
deserve the things for which we ask, these untrue and indefinite
thoughts carry themselves out, and we grow to look upon prayer with
doubt and suspicion. This is called the prayer of blind faith, but it is
not the kind that Jesus used, because His prayers were answered.

13\. It should not be inferred that the will of Divine Mind is to be set
aside in prayer; we are to pray that the will of God enter into us and
become a moving factor in our life. "Not my will, but thine, be done,"
prayed Jesus. The Father does not take our will from us; rather, He
gives us the utmost freedom in the exercise of the will faculty, and He
also imparts an understanding of the law, through the operation of which
we can make any condition that we desire. "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do," becomes our assurance.

14\. One of the offices of spirituality is to aggregate

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

divine ideas. Through this action man draws absolutely true ideas from
the universal Mind. Thus prayer is cumulative. It accumulates spiritual
substance, life, intelligence; it accumulates everything necessary to
man's highest expression. When we pray in spiritual understanding, this
highest realm of man's mind contacts universal, impersonal Mind; the
very mind of God is joined to the mind of man. God answers our prayers
in ideas, thoughts, words; these are translated into the outer realms,
in time and condition. It is therefore important that we pray with
understanding of the law, important that we always give thanks that our
prayers have been answered and fulfilled, regardless of appearances.
When Jesus multiplied the loaves and fishes, He prayed, blessed, and
gave thanks. With understanding and realization of the relation between
the idea and the fulfillment of the idea, He quickened the slow
processes of nature, and the loaves and fishes were increased quickly.
We may not be able to attain at once such speedy operation of the law,
but we shall approximate it, and we shall accelerate natural processes
as we hold our ideas nearer to the perfection of the realm of divine
ideas.

15\. Praise is closely related to prayer; it is one of the avenues
through which spirituality expresses itself. Through an inherent law of
mind, we increase whatever we praise. The whole creation responds to
praise, and is glad. Animal trainers pet and reward their charges with
delicacies for acts of obedience; children glow with joy and gladness
when they are

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

praised. Even vegetation grows best for those who praise it. We can
praise our own abilities, and our very brain cells will expand and
increase in capacity and intelligence when we speak words of
encouragement and appreciation to them.

16\. "What is seen hath not been made out of things which appear." There
is an invisible thought-stuff on which the mind acts, making things
through the operation of a law not yet fully understood by man. Every
thought moves upon this invisible substance in increasing or diminishing
degree. When we praise the richness and opulence of our God, this
thought-stuff is tremendously increased in our mental atmosphere; it
reflects into everything that our minds and our hands touch. When common
things are impregnated with our consciousness of divine substance, they
are transformed according to our ideals. Through persistent application
of the Judah faculty, a failing business proposition can be praised into
a successful one. Even inanimate things seem to receive the word of
praise, responding in orderly obedience when, before, they have seemed
unmanageable. A woman used the law on her sewing machine, which she had
been affirming to be in bad order. It gave her no trouble afterward. A
linotype operator received a certain spiritual treatment given him by a
healer at a certain hour, and his linotype, which had been acting badly,
immediately fell into harmonious ways. A woman living in a country town
had a rag carpet on her parlor floor; she had for

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

years hoped that this carpet might be replaced by a better one. She
heard of the law and began praising the old carpet. Greatly to her
surprise, inside of two weeks she was given a new carpet from an
unexpected source. These are a few simple illustrations of the
possibilities latent in praise. Whether the changes were in the
inanimate things, or in the individuals dealing with them, does not
matter so long as the desired end was attained.

17\. Turn the power of praise upon whatever you wish to increase. Give
thanks that it is now fulfilling your ideal. The faithful law,
faithfully observed, will reward you. You can praise yourself from
weakness to strength, from ignorance to intelligence, from poverty to
affluence, from sickness to health. The little lad with a few loaves and
fishes furnished the seed that, through the prayer and thanksgiving of
Jesus, increased sufficiently to feed five thousand people.

18\. If we do not receive answers to our prayers it is because we have
not fully complied with the law. "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye
ask amiss." This does not mean that we ask of the Lord things that we do
not need; it means that we miss the mark in the method of asking, that
our relation to Divine Mind is not in harmony with the law; the failure
is not in God, but in us. We should therefore never be discouraged, but,
like Elijah praying for rain, we should persevere until our prayers are
answered.

19\. All causes that bring about permanent results originate in Spirit.
Spirituality, faith, and love

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

are God-given faculties, and when we are raised in consciousness to
their plane they act naturally under a spiritual law that we may not
comprehend. There is a law of prayer, which man will eventually
recognize and apply as he now recognizes and applies the laws of
mathematics and of music.

20\. Jesus said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do."
We ask in His name when we pray in the Jesus consciousness of universal
Spirit. He attained unity with Divine Mind, and realized that His
thoughts and words were not from Himself, but from God. When we pray in
His name we enter into His unity with the Father, and attain the same
consciousness that He attained.

21\. God is the always present, indwelling Mind. To realize God we must
quiet our outer thoughts and enter into the stillness, peace, and
harmony of Spirit. "When thou prayest, enter into thine inner chamber,
and having shut thy door \[outer consciousness\], pray to thy Father who
is in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee."
If we make proper connection with Divine Mind in the kingdom of heaven
within us, the Father will surely answer our prayers. No good thing will
He withhold from us if we comply with the law of righteous asking. "Be
still, and know that I am God."

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Living Words To Quicken Spirituality

1\. "It is the spirit that giveth life; the flesh profiteth nothing."

2\. "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life."

3\. "The words that I have spoken unto you are spirit, and are life."

4\. "Ye must be born from above."

5\. "I am the light of the world." "Ye are the light of the world."

6\. "Let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father who is in heaven."

7\. "I am the light" that "lighteth every man, coming into the world."

8\. My understanding is illumined by Spirit. I am the light of my
consciousness.

9\. I acknowledge God at all times as the one source of my
understanding.

10\. "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is
risen upon thee."

11\. The glory of the Lord is risen upon me, and I walk in the light of
life.

12\. My body is the temple of the living God, and the glory of the Lord
fills the temple.

13\. Christ within me is my glory. The brightness of His presence casts
out all the darkness of error, and my whole body is full of light.

14\. "He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is no
occasion of stumbling in him."

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

15\. "Jehovah is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? Jehovah
is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?"

16\. "Then shall Thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health
shall spring forth speedily."

Establishing The Perfect Substance

(To be used in connection with Lesson Seven)

1\. "And God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
he him; male and female created he them."

2\. My perfection is now established in Divine Mind.

3\. "Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect."

4\. By seeing perfection in all things, I help to make it manifest. "I
must be in my Father's house."

5\. The corruptible flesh is changed into incorruption when it is seen
as perfect and pure in Christ.

6\. I see in mind that perfect character which I desire to be, and thus
plant the seed thought that brings forth the perfect man.

7\. "But we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory
of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory,
even as from the Lord the Spirit."

8\. "When Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye
also with him be manifested in glory."

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

9\. My mind is opened anew to the splendor of God's kingdom, and a flood
of rich substance now pours itself into my affairs.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 8](chl10.md)
