[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](chl04)  [Next](chl06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Christian Healing: the science of being*, by Charles Fillmore,
\[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Three Manifestation 

1\. As a rule, religious people are not scientific. They think that
religion and science are separated by a gulf, and that the scientific
mind is spiritually dangerous. Science, to them, is associated with
Darwin, Huxley, and other students of natural law who have been
skeptical about the accuracy of the Bible from the standpoint of natural
science, and whom, because of this skepticism, they brand as infidels.
Hence it has come to be almost heresy for a good Christian to think
about his religion as having a "scientific" side.

2\. By science we mean the systematic and orderly arrangement of
knowledge. This definition does not confine science to the facts of the
material world. There is a science in Christianity, and it is only
through the understanding of this science as a fundamental of
Christianity that the Christ teachings can be fully demonstrated in the
life of man. To fail to understand the science upon which spiritual
understanding rests is to fail in nearly every demonstration of its
power. Paul says: "I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also."

3\. There is a gulf between the high spiritual understanding and the
material manifestation. It is only by bridging this gulf that science
and religion can be reconciled. The bridge needed is the structure that
thought builds. When Christians understand

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the science of thinking, the power of thought to manifest itself, and
how the manifestation of thought is accomplished, they will no longer
fear material science; when material scientists have fathomed the real
nature of the living force that they even now discern as ever active in
all nature's structures, they will have more respect for religion.

4\. Both the religionist and the physicist incorrectly hold that the
Bible is a historical description of man's creation. Beginning with the
very first chapter of Genesis, the Bible is an allegory. It is so
regarded by the majority of Hebrew scholars, and they certainly ought to
know the character of their own Scriptures. Paul was a Hebrew, and
thoroughly versed in the occultism of spiritual writings; he said,
referring to the story of Abraham and Sarah, "Which things contain an
allegory." Hebrews almost universally claim that the story of the Garden
of Eden, Adam, Eve, and the serpent is symbology.

5\. In the face of these facts, it seems strange that orthodox
Christianity should insist that the Bible is a literal history. It is
this literal viewpoint that has stood in the way of true spiritual
understanding. Read in the light of Spirit, the 1st chapter of Genesis
is a description, in symbol, of the creative action of universal Mind in
the realm of ideas. It does not pertain to the manifest universe any
more than the history of the inventor's idea pertains to the machine
that he builds to manifest the idea. First the problem is thought out,
and afterward the structure is

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

produced. So God builds His universe. This is explained in the 2d
chapter of Genesis, which says that God "rested . . . from all his
work," and yet there were no plants of the field, "and there was not a
man to till the ground." "And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
became a living soul."

6\. Only through perception of the mental law by which ideas manifest
from the formless to the formed can we understand and reconcile these
two apparently contradictory chapters. In the light of true
understanding everything is made plain, and we discern just how Divine
Mind is creating man and the universe: first the ideal concept, then the
manifestation.

7\. The six days of creation, as described in the 1st chapter of
Genesis, represent six great ideal projections from Divine Mind, each
more comprehensive than its predecessor. The final climax is reached in
the sixth degree, when that phase of Being called man appears, having
dominion over everything, or every idea, that has gone before. This
ideal man, who is made in the "image" and "likeness" of Elohim, is the
epitome and focal center around which all creation revolves; hence the
one important study of man is the mind of man. In mind is the key to all
mysteries, both religious and material. When we know how mind manifests
from the ideal to the so-called real, we are no longer in the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

dark, but have that Truth which Jesus said would make us free.

8\. There is but one man. On the spiritual side of his being, every man
in the universe has access to that man, eternally existing in Divine
Mind as a perfect-man idea. When man appreciates this mighty truth and
applies it in his conscious thinking, all manifestation becomes
harmonious and orderly to him, and he sees God everywhere.

9\. A right understanding of the divine law of creation reveals man as a
necessary factor in God's great work. Through man, God is forming or
manifesting outwardly that which exists in the ideal. In order, then,
that the creation shall go on and be fulfilled as God has designed, man
must not only understand the law of mind action in his individual
thought, but he must also understand his relation to the universal
thought. Not only must he understand it, but in his every thought he
must consciously cooperate with divine ideals. Jesus understood this law
and repeatedly claimed that He was sent of God to carry out the divine
will in the world. This commission is given to every man, and man will
not have satisfaction in life until he recognizes this universal law;
until he becomes an obedient, willing co-worker with Divine Mind.

10\. Spiritual man is I AM; manifest man is I will. I AM is the Jehovah
God of Scripture, and I will is the Adam. It is the I AM man that forms
and breathes into the I will man the "breath of life."

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

When we are in the realm of the ideal, we are I AM; when we are
expressing ideals in thought or in act, we are I will. When the I will
gets so absorbed in its realm of expression that it loses sight of the
ideal and centers all its attention in the manifest, it is Adam
listening to the serpent and hiding from Jehovah God. This breaks the
connection between Spirit and manifestation, and man loses that
spiritual consciousness which is his under divine law. In this state of
mind the real source of supply is cut off, and there is a drawing upon
the reserve forces of the organism, the tree of life. It is in this
experience that man is described as being driven out of the Garden of
Eden, or the paradise of Being.

11\. Every idea projects form. The physical body is the projection of
man's idea; we carry the body in the mind. The body is the fruit of the
tree of life, which grows in the midst of the garden of mind. If the
body-idea is grounded and rooted in Divine Mind, the body will be filled
with a perpetual life flow that will repair all its imperfect parts and
heal all its diseases.

12\. When man realizes that there is but one body-idea and that the
conditions in his body express the character of his thought, he has the
key to bodily perfection and immortality in the flesh. But "flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God." The "flesh and blood" here
referred to is the corruptible-body idea that men carry in mind. When we
get the right idea of the origin and character of the body,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the corruptible will put on incorruption and our bodies will be raised
from the dead, as was the body of Jesus. "Neither was he left unto
Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption."

13\. The resurrection of our bodies from the dead begins in our minds.
We must change our ideas about the body, and hold to the truth of its
origin and destiny as conceived of God, in whose mind its real being
exists. The spiritual body of man is the conception of Divine Mind, the
creation of Spirit for us. Our work is to make this spiritual body
manifest.

14\. When we have the right understanding of creation, and, with the
help of this understanding, begin the redemption of the body, the Spirit
of God quickens the inner life of the whole organism, and we know that
the promise in Acts 2:17 is being fulfilled in us: "In the last days,
saith God, I will pour forth of my Spirit upon all flesh."

15\. The problem before man in the present race consciousness is how to
get back to the "Father's house," in which is inexhaustible abundance.
As it is by an exercise of the free will inherent in us that we separate
ourselves from the Father, so it must be through that same faculty that
we again make conscious union with Him. We must realize the foolishness
of living in that most external realm where only the husks of things
are, and upon which we would fain satisfy ourselves, but cannot. Then
let us turn our attention within; by traveling for a season in that

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

direction we find the source and substance of life.

16\. This turning within, after one has for a long time been looking
without, is no easy matter. The mind that has been trained to the
standards of the formed universe is often slow to grasp the formless.
But there is a state of consciousness in the soul that has, through ages
of experience, learned about this formless world and is at home in it.
Our dreams, visions, and spiritual experiences, of which we seldom
speak, come from this inner realm. So it is found that we have a
household waiting for us on the subjective side of our being, and its
welcome is worth all the effort of our seeking it. "We seek a country
from which we came forth," Paul said in substance.

17\. Individualize yourself in the highest degree by affirming that in
Spirit and in Truth you are all that God is. This is true of man in his
spiritual nature, and he must claim the supreme inheritance before he
can enter into the mighty mental and spiritual forces that are released
from the kingdom of God within man. No one enters the kingdom of God,
and sits upon the throne and abides there, until he has the courage and
fearlessness to proclaim himself joint heir with Jesus. Then he must
prove his dominion by his purity of motive, an unselfish devotion to
Truth universal, and a steady industry and patience in overcoming the
limitation of his own sense consciousness.

18\. Man's true identity is as the perfect-man idea

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

in Divine Mind. This idea has no mind separate from the one universal
realm of ideas. Man must establish himself in the one and only Mind. He
came forth from it, and his whole existence depends on it; then why
should he not consciously make the mental connection that will establish
in himself the harmony and order on which all existence depends?

19\. Nearly all religious systems aim to bring about this unity between
God and man, and many of them are quite successful in their methods. We
owe much to the church, to the education and the help that we have
received directly and indirectly through the efforts of spiritual-minded
people in all ages. The Truth has pressed upon them, and they have
demonstrated it up to their highest understanding of it. We are now in a
fuller degree of enlightenment concerning the spiritual laws that govern
man and the universe, and consequently we can more definitely and
scientifically apply the methods for spiritual development that, in
religious systems, are usually followed through faith. To your faith you
can now add understanding.

20\. One's getting back into the Garden of Eden, or taking possession of
the Promised Land, is a conscious entering into the subjective part of
one's own being. In divine order the will acts upon the body center from
within; in the average person this action is through reflection from
without. In practice we live outside our body instead of within it. This
gives us a very slender hold upon it, and it is in consequence

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

weak and likely to slip away from us on very slight pretexts.

21\. Man should constantly affirm: I AM, and I will manifest, the
perfection of the Mind within me. The first part of the statement is
abstract Truth; the second part is concrete identification of man with
this Truth. We must learn the law of expression from the abstract to the
concrete--from the formless to the formed. Every idea makes a structure
after its own image and likeness, and all such ideas and structures are
grouped and associated according to their offices.

22\. All ideas pertaining to power group themselves about structures
impregnated with power. Such ideas are not attracted to ideas of love.
Love has its group, and it builds its structures in a place apart. We
have observed certain of the manifest centers in our body; we have
recognized and named them as the seat of emotions, as the expression of
characteristics supposed to exist in the soul. Love is universally
recognized as expressing itself through the heart, and intelligence as
expressing itself through the head.

23\. In the study of Mind and Spirit, these inner centers of
consciousness are concentrated on until they respond to the I will and
become obedient to it. By this method man finds that he can control and
direct every body function and perpetuate it.

24\. This is the "regeneration" of the New Testament, a process of body
refinement to the point of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

physical immortality. Jesus called this estate "the regeneration when
the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory."

"I AM" REALIZATIONS

(To be used in connection with Lesson Three)

1\. "I AM THAT I AM."

2\. I am identity demonstrated.

3\. I AM THAT I AM, and there is no other besides me.

4\. I am one with Almightiness.

5\. I am the substance of Being made manifest.

6\. I am formed in the perfection of the divine-idea man, Christ Jesus.

7\. My body is not material; it is spiritual and perfect in all its
being.

8\. Centered and established in the one Mind, I am not disturbed by the
falsities without me.

9\. My identity is in God, and my work is to establish His kingdom
within me.

10\. I can do nothing of myself, "but the Father abiding in me does his
works."

11\. I am striving in all my thoughts and ways to make the image and
likeness of God manifest in me.

12\. My "life is hid with Christ in God."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 4](chl06.md)
