[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chl06)  [Next](chl08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Christian Healing: the science of being*, by Charles Fillmore,
\[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Five How to Control Thought 

1\. Each thought of mind is an identity that has a central ego. By this
we mean that every thought has a center around which all its elements
revolve and to which it is obedient when no higher power is in evidence.
Thoughts are capable of expressing themselves--they think. Man thinks,
and he thinks into his thoughts all that he is; hence man's thoughts
must be endowed with a secondary power of thought.

2\. There is, however, a difference between the original thinking and
the secondary thought. One has its animating center in Spirit; the
other, in thought. One is Son of God; the other is son of man.

3\. The one essential fact to understand is that there can be no
manifestation without intelligence as a fundamental factor or
constituent part. Every form in the universe, every function, all
action, all substance--all these have a thinking part that is receptive
to and controllable by man. Material science has observed that every
molecule has three things: intelligence, substance, and action. It knows
where it wants to go, it has form, and it moves.

4\. This intelligent principle in all things is the key to the
metaphysician's work. He does not concern himself with the action and
reaction of the chemistry of matter, nor does he need to know all the
intricate laws of electricity and magnetism in order to get the very
highest use of them. They are

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

susceptible to thought through the knowing factor in their construction,
and to this susceptibility he appeals. It is through this all-pervading
intelligence that man exercises his highest dominion. The scriptural
statement of man's power and dominion over all things is true only when
his power and dominion are estimated mentally and spiritually.

5\. It is the testimony of all philosophers that everything is in a
state of construction or destruction. These two states are
all-pervading, and they are apparently essential in building the
universe. The metaphysician discerns the cause of these two movements to
be the "yes" and the "no" of mind. These dual attributes of mind are in
evidence everywhere, but they are not understood by those who observe
only form instead of Spirit. The positive and negative poles of the
magnet are states of mental affirmation and denial. In acid and alkali,
in sour and sweet, chemistry is proclaiming "yes" and "no." Day and
night, heat and cold, sunshine and shadow, intelligence and ignorance,
good and evil, saint and sinner, all are the reflections of mental
affirmations and denials. The constructive or destructive factor in all
manifestation is "yes" or "no."

6\. It is found that, by the use of these mind forces, man can dissolve
things by denying their existence, and that he can build them up by
affirming their presence. This is a simple statement, but when it is
applied in all the intricate thought forms of the universe it becomes
complex. The law of mental

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

denial and affirmation will prove its truth to all those who
persistently make use of it.

7\. The power of the mind to build or destroy is exemplified most
strikingly in the human body. Whatever we affirm as true of us manifests
itself in due season somewhere in the organism. Whatever we deny is
taken away, when the law has had time to work itself out.

8\. The body is made of cells; some in a radiant state, some
crystallized into form. The crystallizing of these radiant thought forms
is the result of affirmations in man's mind that his body is material
instead of spiritual. The affirmative state of mind is a binding,
holding process; it involves all thoughts and all thought manifestations
that come within its scope. If man affirms his unity with the life,
substance, and intelligence of God, he lays hold of these spiritual
qualities; if he affirms the reality of matter and of the physical body
he forms a material picture that works itself out in flesh.

9\. Affirmations do not have to be made in set terms, such as, "I affirm
my body to be spiritual"; the general trend of the mind, the sum total
of thought in all its aspects, aggregates the affirmations that fix and
crystallize thoughts into forms. The universal desire and striving of
men and women for material possessions is the strongest kind of
affirmation, affecting both mind and body in a marked degree. Stomach
troubles and constipation seem to be common complaints with those who
are financially

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

grasping. The tense state of mind that this affirmation sets up extends
throughout the body; all the muscles, nerves, and organs become fixed
and almost immovable. This was forcibly illustrated in a certain banker,
who was so grasping that his right hand closed rigidly, so that he could
not open it. Again, a set ambition and intense desire to excel in some
chosen field of work will produce like results. A dominating will fixed
in any direction is a form of affirmation, and it affects the life
action in the body organism according to its intensity. Congestion,
stiffness, rigidity, may all be traced to excessive affirmation.

10\. The metaphysical remedy for this selfish state of mind is denial.
Jesus said that man must "Deny himself . . . and follow me." The "me"
here referred to is the higher self, the Christ, and the "himself" is
personality. Denial is a putting away of the mental error and an
entering into conscious relaxation of both mind and body. The healer
does not tell the patient that constipation is caused by grasping,
stingy states of mind. Instead, he mentally denies these habits and
holds the patient open and receptive to the great unselfish Mind of the
universe. People do not realize how they are bound by their selfishness,
and it is not wise to tell them openly, until they understand the
difference between their real being and the mortal personality.

11\. Where the "no" phase of mind is too much in evidence, the whole
consciousness is in relaxation. This excessive negation makes the
thought indefinite

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

and vacillating, the body weak and flabby. Prolapsus, dropsy, certain
forms of kidney complaints, nearly all relaxations in body and
functions, are the result of the "I can't" state of mind. For example,
if a businessman who for years had been intent on money-making should
meet with a large loss and mourn over it, he would have kidney trouble
of some kind. He would believe that he had lost his substance, and a
void-thought would begin its dissipation of the voiding cells of his
body. One who has been very ambitious for the attainment of some office
or position, and who has been defeated in that ambition, will usually
let go the positive mental pole and drop to the negative. The result is
bodily weakness somewhere. We speak of such people as having "lost their
grip." This is exactly what they have done--their mental relaxation has
loosened their grasp upon the organism, and it is in a condition of
dissolution. Physicians have marveled that so many public men have
diabetes and heart disease. It is because, through defeat, they have
dropped from success to discouragement. The failure state of mind throws
the whole organism into a panic, and its functions are weakened in their
life action. Instead of the tonic of aspiration and hope, there is the
enervation of discouragement and despair.

12\. These are conditions that come to those who trust in the arm of
flesh. When the mind of man is set on high, he never gives up or allows
defeat to thwart his righteous ambitions. His thought is not

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

set on selfish attainment, consequently he does not develop a mental
vacuum when he meets with loss. To one in spiritual understanding there
is no loss. The going and coming of material and intellectual things are
but changes in the panorama of life. Changes are constantly taking place
and will continue so long as we live in the consciousness of duality,
the "yes" and "no" state of existence, which is mortality.

13\. The object of man's existence is to demonstrate the Truth of Being.
This demonstration takes place through experience; but there are two
ways of working out experience. The first is by knowing the law of every
process, and the second is by blindly testing the process without
understanding the law.

14\. The human race made a choice when a certain stage of discretion was
attained. An illustration of this statement is the allegory of the
Garden of Eden. Adam represents generic man. In his early stages he was
under the law of divine knowing--the Lord God was his guide and
instructor; he made no mistakes, but lived consciously in divine
understanding.

15\. All experience develops personal identity--the consciousness of the
powers of Being in the self. This is the bringing forth of free will,
which is inherent in all. In the course of his demonstrations of Being,
man arrives at the place where he feels his own ability, and he knows
that he can exercise it without restraint. "Satan" is the personal mind
that

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

tempts man to try experience without knowledge. In divine illumination
man does not consciously enter into that dual condition typified by "the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil." Good is all; evil is that which
might be if man forsook his guiding light. In the serene mind of God
there is no duality, no good-and-bad, no understanding-and-ignorance.
The brilliancy of all-knowing Mind dissolves all shadows, all negations.

16\. It is man's privilege to abide in the light, to know how to work
out the problem of existence as accurately as the mathematician who
follows, without deviation, the rules of his science. The Lord
admonishes the unfolding Adam not to "eat"--not to incorporate into his
consciousness the knowledge of duality, good and evil. But, like the
child who refuses to take the advice of one who knows, man falls into
indulgence of the sense of pleasure and excess. The reaction of sense
indulgence is pain. Through these experiences, man comes into a
consciousness of an opposite to the good. The dual mentality naturally
sets up positive and negative forces in his mind, and these opposing
forces are reflected into his body. The commotion is so great that the
soul is forced out of its temple--man is put out of the garden, and in
time forgets his former Edenic state.

17\. Some metaphysicians argue that eating the fruit of the tree of
knowledge was a necessary step in man's evolution; that by experience we
learn all truth, and that without experience we should always

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

remain infants. Herein is the difference between the practical Christian
and other men: the one seeks the guiding light of Spirit in all his
ways, while the other ignores that light and works out his character as
did Adam, in the sweat of his face. Hard experiences come into our lives
because we do not know the law of harmonious thinking. If we think that
evil exists as a power in the world, that it is working in our lives and
in the lives of those about us, we make it an active force, and it
appears to be all that we imagine it. The poet truly discerned that
"there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so."

18\. Some metaphysicians claim that it is not wise to make denials; that
affirmation includes all the mental movement necessary to man's perfect
development. This position would be tenable if we had built up our
consciousness according to divine law. The student who has carried his
mathematical problem forward without making an error does not find it
necessary to erase. But if he sees where he has made a wrong
computation, what then? Nothing but an erasure, followed by a right
computation, will bring the correct answer. We have all fallen short of
divine ideals; we must cross out our errors and insert Truth, until our
character is brought up to the Jesus Christ standard.

19\. Repentance is a form of denial. The forgiveness of sin is an
erasure of mortal thought from consciousness. The joy that comes to the
converted Christian results from the inflow of divine love,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

which occurs after the mind has been cleansed by denial of sin. This is
a real experience, which may be repeated again and again by one who
understands the law of Holy Spirit baptism, until the whole man is
sanctified and freed from sin. Christians think of the joyous exaltation
that marked their conversion as a special sign from the Lord in
recognition of their change of heart. They look back upon it as an
experience that comes but once in a lifetime. But metaphysicians who
have studied the law of mind, who have practiced denials and
affirmations as a science, find that they can throw themselves into this
ecstatic state at will.

20\. The personal self is the ego around which revolve all thoughts that
bind us to error. We cannot cross all out at once, but little by little
we cast out the specific thoughts that have accumulated and built up the
false state of consciousness termed Judas. In the life of Jesus, Judas
represents the false ego that error thought has generated. This "son of
perdition" is so interwoven into the consciousness that to kill him at
one fell swoop would destroy the mental entity, so he must be counted as
one of the twelve, even while we know that he "hath a devil."

21\. In the symbology of Jesus' life, Judas is represented as the
treasurer; he "had the bag." This means that this ego has possession of
the sex, or life, center in the organism and is using it for its own
selfish ends. Judas was a "thief." The selfish use of the life and
vitality of the organism for the gratification

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of sense pleasure robs the higher nature, and the spiritual man is not
built up. This is the betrayal of Christ, and it is constantly taking
place in those who live to fleshly, selfish ends.

22\. A time comes, however, when Judas must be eliminated from
consciousness. The agony of mind and the final crucifixion of Jesus
represent the crossing out wholly of the false ego, Judas.

"I die daily," said Paul. The "I" that dies daily is personal
consciousness, formed of fear, ignorance, disease, the lust for material
possessions, pride, anger, and the legion of demons that cluster about
the personal ego. The only Savior of this one is Christ, the spiritual
ego, the superconsciousness. We cannot, in our own strength, solve the
great, self-purifying problem, but by giving ourselves wholly to Christ
and constantly denying the demands of the personal self, we grow into
the divine image. This is the process by which we "awake, with beholding
thy form."

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Cleansing And Purifying Statements

(To be used in connection with Lesson Five)

1\. God is good, and God is all, therefore I refuse to believe in the
reality of evil in any of its forms.

2\. God is life, and God is all; therefore I refuse to believe in the
reality of loss of life, or death.

3\. God is power and strength, and God is all; therefore I refuse to
believe in inefficiency and weakness.

4\. I am in authority. I say to this thought, "Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh." (Read Mt. 8:5-13.)

5\. God is wisdom, and God is all! therefore I refuse to believe in
ignorance.

6\. God is spiritual substance, and God is all; therefore there is no
reality in the limitations of matter.

7\. God is inexhaustible resource, and God is all; therefore I refuse to
believe in the reality of lack or poverty.

8\. God is love, and God is all; therefore I refuse to believe in hate
or revenge.

9\. "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city."

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 6](chl08)
