[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cab04)  [Next](cab06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135667/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cabala*, by Bernhard Pick, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### THE ZOHAR.

**The Book of Splendor**.--The titles of the Zohar vary. It is called
"Midrash of Rabbi Simon ben Jochaï," from its reputed author: "Midrash,
Let there be Light," from the words in Gen. i. 4; more commonly "*Sepher
ha-Zohar*," from Dan. xii. 3, where the word Zohar is used for "the
brightness of the firmament." The title in full is: *Sepher ha-Zohar al
ha-Torah, me-ish Elohim Kodesh, hu more meod ha-tara R. Simon ben
Jochaï*, etc., i.e., "The Book of Splendor on the Law, by the very holy
and venerable man of God, the Tanaite rabbi Simon ben Jochaï, of blessed
memory."

The *editio princeps* is the one of Mantua (3 vols., 1558-1560) and has
often been reprinted. The best edition of the book of Zohar is that by
Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, with Jewish commentaries (Sulzbach, 1684,
fol.) to which his rare *Kabbala Denudata* (1677-1684) forms an ample
introduction. This edition was reprinted

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

with an additional index (Amsterdam, 1714, 1728, 1772, 1805, 3 vols.).
Recent editions. of the Zohar were published at Breslau (1866, 3 vols.),
Livorno (1877-78, in 7 parts), and Wilna (1882, 3 vols.; 1882-83 in 10
parts, containing many commentaries and additions).

The body of the work takes the form of a commentary of a highly mystic
and allegorical character extending over the entire Pentateuch; but the
Zohar is not considered complete without the addition of certain
appendices attributed to the same author or to some of his personal or
successional disciples.

These supplementary portions are:

1\. *Siphra di Tseniutha*, i.e., "The Book of Secrets" or "Mysteries,"
contained in Vol. II, 176-178. It contains five chapters and is chiefly
occupied with discussing the questions involved in the creation. In the
second and third chapters the prophet Elijah communicates the secret
which he learned in the heavenly school, that before the creation of the
world God was unknown to man, but made known his essence after the
creation of the world. The history of the creation is represented under
the figure of a scale, which adjusts the opposite aspects of God before
and after the creation. This portion has been translated into Latin by
Rosenroth in the second volume of his *Kabbala Denudata*
(Frankfort-on-the-Main,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1684; Englished by
Mathers, *loc. cit.*, pp. 43-108).

2\. *Iddera Rabba*, i.e., "The Great Assembly," referring to the
community or college of Simon's disciples in their conferences for
cabalistic discussion. These discussions are chiefly occupied with a
description of the form and various members of the Deity; a disquisition
on the revelation of the Deity, in his two aspects of the "Aged" and the
"Young," to the creation and the universe; as well as on the diverse
gigantic members of the Deity, such as the head, the beard, the eyes,
the nose, etc., etc.; a dissertion on pneumatology, demonology, etc.,
etc. This part is generally found in Vol. III, pp. 127*b*-145*a*, and
has been translated into Latin by Rosenroth, *loc. cit.*, and Englished
by Mathers, pp. 109-257.

3\. *Iddera Zuta*, i.e., "The Small Assembly," referring to the few
disciples who still assembled for cabalistic discussion towards the end
of their master's life or after his decease. It is to a great extent a
recapitulation of the Iddera Rabba, and concludes with recording the
death of Simon ben Jochaï, the Sacred Light and the medium through whom
God revealed the contents of the Zohar. This part is found in Vol. III,
287*b*-296*b*, and from the Latin of Rosenroth (Vol. II of the *Kabbala
Denudata*) it has been Englished by Mathers, pp. 259-341.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

To these three larger appendices are added fifteen other minor
fragments, viz.:

4\. *Saba*, i.e., "The Aged Man," also called "*Saba demishpatim*," or
"The Discourse of the Aged in Mishpatim," given in II, 94a-114a. "The
Aged" is the prophet Elijah who holds converse with Rabbi Simon about
the doctrine of metempsychosis, and the discussion is attached to the
Sabbatic section called "Mishpatim," i.e., Exod. xxi, l-xxiv. 18.

5\. Midrash Ruth, a fragment.

6\. *Sepher hab-bahir*, i.e., "The Book of Clear Light."

7 and 8. *Tosephta* and *Mattanitan*, i.e., "Small Additional Pieces,"
which are found in the three volumes.

9\. *Raïa mehemna*, i.e., "The Faithful Shepherd," found in the second
and third volumes. The faithful shepherd is Moses who holds a dialogue
with Rabbi Simon, at which not only the prophet Elijah is present, but
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Aaron, David, Solomon, and even God himself make
their appearance.

10\. *Hekaloth*, i.e., "The palaces," found in the first and second
volumes, treats of the topographical structure of paradise and hell.

11\. *Sithre Torah*, i.e., "The Secrets of the Law."

12\. *Midrash han-neelam*, i.e., "The Concealed

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Treatise," in
which passages of Scripture are explained mystically. Thus Lot's two
daughters are the two proclivities in man, good and evil (I, 110). It
also discourses on the properties and destiny of the soul.

13\. *Raze de Razin*, i.e., "Mysteries of Mysteries," contained in II,
70*a*-75*a*, is especially devoted to the physiognomy of the Cabala, and
the connection of the soul with the body.

14\. *Midrash Chazith*, on the Song of Songs.

15\. *Maamar* to *Chazi*, a discourse, so entitled from the first words,
"Come and see."

16\. *Yanuka*, i.e., "The Youth," given in III, 186*a*-192*a*, records
the discourses delivered by a young man who according to R. Simon was of
superhuman origin.

17\. *Pekuda*, i.e., "Illustrations of the Law."

18\. *Chibbura Kadmaah*, i.e., "The Early Work."

The body of the work is sometimes called *Zohar Gadol*, "The Great
Zohar."

**Authorship of the Zohar**.--Who is the author of this remarkable book,
which has continued to be a text-book up to the present day, for all
those who have espoused the doctrines of the Cabala? We have anticipated
the answer, but let us see which reasons were adduced by modern
scholarship to prove that the Zohar is a forgery of the thirteenth
century.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Now the Zohar pretends to be a revelation from God communicated through
Rabbi Simon ben Jochaï to his select disciples, according to the Iddera
Zuta (Zohar III, 287*b*). This declaration and the repeated
representation of Rabbi Simon ben Jochaï, as speaking and teaching
throughout the production fixed the authorship upon Rabbi Simon, an
opinion maintained not only by Jews for centuries, but even by
distinguished Christian scholars. On the other hand it has been clearly
demonstrated by such Jewish scholars as Zunz, Geiger, Jellinek, Graetz,
Steinschneider, and a host of others, that the Zohar is not the
production of Rabbi Simon, but of the thirteenth century, by Moses de
Leon (1250-1305). <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) Simon ben Jochaï
was a pupil of Rabbi Akiba; but the earliest mention of the book's
existence occurs in the year 1290, and the anachronisms of its style and
in the facts referred to, together with the circumstance that it speaks
of the vowel-points and other Masoretic inventions which are clearly

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

posterior to the Talmud, justify J. Morinus (although too often
extravagant in his wilful attempts to depreciate the antiquity of the
latter Jewish writings) in asserting that the author could not have
lived much before the year 1000 of the Christian era (*Exercitationes
Biblicae*, pp. 358-369). This later view of the authorship is sustained
by the following reasons:

1\. The Zohar most fulsomely praises its own author, calls him the
Sacred Light, and exalts him above Moses, "the faithful Shepherd" (Zohar
III, 132*b*; 144*a*), while the disciples deify Rabbi Simon, before whom
all men must appear (II, 38*a*).

2\. The Zohar quotes and mystically explains the Hebrew vowel-points (I,
16*b*, 24*b*; II, 116*a*; III, 65*a*), which were introduced
later. <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md)

3\. The Zohar (II, 32*a*) mentions the Crusades, the temporary taking of
Jerusalem by the Crusaders from the Infidels, and the retaking of it by
the Saracens.

4\. The Zohar (III, 212*b*) records events which transpired A. D. 1264.

5\. The doctrine of *En-Soph* and the *Sephiroth*, as well as the
metempsychosian retribution, were not known before the thirteenth
century.

6\. The very existence of the Zohar, according to the stanch Cabalist
Jehudah Chayoth (about

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1500), was unknown
to such distinguished Cabalists as Nachmanides and Ben-Adereth
(12351310); the first who mentions it is Todros Abulafia (1234-1306).

7\. Isaac of Akko (about 1290) affirms that "The Zohar was put into the
world from the head of a Spaniard."

8\. The Zohar contains passages which Moses de Leon translated into
Aramaic from his works, e.g., the *Sepher ha-Rimmon*, as Jellinek has
demonstrated in his *Moses de Leon and sein Verhältniss zum Sohar*,"
Leipsic, 1851, p. 21-36; (see also Graetz, *Geschichte der Juden*, VII,
498; 2d ed., 1873, p. 477 et seq.).

These are some of the reasons why the Zohar is now regarded as a
pseudograph of the thirteenth century, and that Moses de Leon should
have palmed the Zohar upon Simon ben Jochaï was nothing remarkable,
since this rabbi is regarded by tradition as the embodiment of
mysticism. There was also a financial reason, for from the Book
*Juchasin* (pp. 88, 89, 95, ed. Filipowski, London, 1857) we learn that
when his wife asked him why he published the production of his own
intellect under another man's name, Moses de Leon replied "that if he
were to publish it under his own name nobody would buy it, whereas under
the name of Rabbi Simon ben Jochaï it yielded him a large revenue."

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

With the appearance of the Zohar we find also a Zohar School, which is a
combination and absorption of the different features and doctrines of
all the former methods, without any plan or method; and we must not be
surprised at the wild speculations which we so often find in the
writings of the post-Zohar period. In Spain especially the study of the
Zohar took deep root, and found its way to Italy, Palestine and Poland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[50:1](cab05.htm#fr_34.md) See my article *s.v.* in
McClintock and Strong. Professor Strack, who is entitled to a hearing in
matters of Rabbinic literature, says: "He \[Rabbi Simon\] has long been
regarded as the author of the Zohar; but this main work of the Cabala
was in reality composed in Spain by Moses ben Shem Tob de Leon in the
second half of the thirteenth century, as has been proved especially by
Jacob Emden, in *Mitpahath Sepharim*, Altona, 1768.'--*Einleitung in den
Talmud*, 4th ed., Leipsic, 1908; p. 93.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[51:2](cab05.htm#fr_35.md) See my article
"Vowel-Points" in McClintock and Strong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Cabala in the Post-Zohar Period](cab06.md)
