[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cab03)  [Next](cab05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135667/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cabala*, by Bernhard Pick, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

#### CHAPTER II.

#### THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CABALA IN THE PRE-ZOHAR PERIOD.

**Pre-Zohar Period**.--The history of the Cabala comprises a period of
nearly a thousand years. Its beginning may be traced back to the seventh
century, whereas its last shoots belong to the eighteenth century. For
convenience' sake we can distinguish two periods, the one reaching from
the seventh to the thirteenth century, the other from the fourteenth to
the eighteenth century. The former is the time of gradual growth,
development and progress, the other that of decline and decay. The
origin of the Zohar in the thirteenth century forms the climax in the
history of the Cabala. It became the treasury to the followers of this
theosophy, a text-book for the students of the Cabala, the standard and
code of the cabalistic system, the Bible of the Cabalists.

From the seventh to the ninth century we meet with the representatives
of the mysteries of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the *merkaba*, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) which is expounded in
the so-called *Hekaloth*, i.e., "Palaces." This work, which is ascribed
to Ismaël ben-Elisa, opens with a description of God's throne and his
household consisting of angelic hosts. In this mystical production,
which has been reprinted by Jellinek in *Bet ha-Midrash*, Vol. III, pp.
83-108, the praises of the Almighty God and his chariot throne are
celebrated. We are told that each of the seven heavenly palaces is
guarded by eight angels; a description of the formula is given by virtue
of which these angelic guards are obliged to grant admission into the
celestial palaces; also a description of the peculiar qualifications
necessary for those who desire to enter into these palaces. Some hymns
of praise and a conversation with God, Israel and the angels conclude
this treatise, which like the *Shiur Kama* or the treatise on "the
Dimensions of the Deity," also ascribed to Rabbi Ismaël, knows nothing
of the speculations of the En Soph, the ten Sephiroth and the doctrine
of the Transmigration of Souls.

Another work belonging to this period is the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Othijoth de Rabbi
Akiba*, i.e., "the Alphabet of Rabbi Akiba," which alternately treats
each letter of the Hebrew alphabet "as representing an idea as an
abbreviation for a word, and as the symbol of some sentiment, according
to its peculiar form, in order to attach to those letters moral,
theoanthropic, angelological and mystical notions." This treatise is
also given in Jellinek's work, cited above, Vol. III, pp. 12-49,
Leipsic, 1855. A Latin translation of Akiba's Alphabet is given by
Kircher, in his *Œdipus Ægyptiacus*, <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md)
and in Bartolocci's *Bibliotheca Rabbinica*. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6.md)

Bodenschatz in his *Kirchliche Verfassung der heutigen Juden*,
(Erlangen, 1748) gives in Part III, p. 15, the following specimen: "On
the words: 'The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart' (Ps.
xxxiv, 18) we read: 'All who are of a broken heart are more agreeable
before God than the ministering angels, because the ministering angels
are remote from the divine Majesty 360,000,000 miles, as it is said in
Is. vi. 2: "Above it stood the Seraphim" (*mimaal lo*), where the word
to by way of gematria means 36,000. This teaches us that the body of the
divine Majesty is 2,000,000,336,000 miles long. From his loins upward
are 1,000,000,180,000 miles, and from his loins downward 118 times
10,000 miles. But these miles are not like ours,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

but like his (God's) miles. For his mile is 1,000,000 ells long, and his
ell contains four spans and a hand's breadth, and his span goes from one
end of the world to the other, as is said Is. x. 12: "Who has measured
the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the
span?" Another explanation is that the words "and meted out heaven with
the span" denote that the heaven and the heaven of all heavens is only
one span long, wide and high, and that the earth with all the abysses is
as long as the sole of the foot, and wide as the sole of the foot, etc.,
etc.'"

Another part of Akiba's Alphabet is the so-called "Book of Enoch," <span
id="fr_7"></span>[4](#fn_7.md) which describes the glorification of Enoch
and his transformation into the angel Metatron, regarding him as "the
little God" in contradistinction to "the Great God."

These mystical treatises came into existence in the course of time, and
their teachings rapidly spread. So numerous became the disciples of
mysticism in the twelfth century that Maimonides found it necessary to
denounce the system. "Give no credence to the nonsense of the writers of
charms and amulets, to what they tell you or to what you find in their
foolish writings about the divine names; which they invent without any

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

sense, calling them appellations of the Deity, and affirming that they
require holiness and purity and perform miracles. All these things are
fables; a sensible man will not listen to them, much less believe in
them." <span id="fr_8"></span>[5](#fn_8.md)

A new stage in the development of the Cabala commences with the
publication of *The Book of Creation or Jezirah*, which is the first
work that comprises the philosophical speculations of the age in one
systematic whole. Scholars are now agreed that the Book of Jezirah
belongs to the eighth or ninth centuries, and that it has nothing to do
with the Jezirah-Book mentioned in the Talmud, where we are told that
"Rabbis Hanina and Oshaya studied it every Friday, whereby they produced
a calf three years old and ate it" (*Sanhedrin*, fol. 65, col. 2), and
whereby Rabbi Joshua ben Hananya declared he could take fruit and
instantly produce the trees which belong to them (*Jerusalem Sanhedrin*,
chapt. VII towards the end). <span id="fr_9"></span>[6](#fn_9.md)

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

The Sepher Jezirah as we now have it, is properly a monologue on the
part of Abraham, in which, by the contemplation of all that is around
him, he ultimately arrived at the conviction of the Unity of God. Hence
the remark of the philosopher Jehudah Halevi (born about 1086)--"the
Book of the Creation, which belongs to our father Abraham . . . . . .
demonstrates the existence of the Deity and the Divine Unity, by things
which are on the one hand manifold and multifarious, whilst on the other
hand they converge and harmonize; and this harmony can only proceed from
One who originated it" (*Khozari*, IV, 25).

Referring the reader to the literature on the Sepher Jezirah to
Goldschmidt's book, pp. 35-46, <span id="fr_10"></span>[7](#fn_10.md) we
will state that the Book of Creation consists of six *Perakim* or
chapters, subdivided into thirty-three very brief *Mishnahs* or
sections, as follows: the first chapter has twelve sections, the second
has five, the third five, the fourth four, the fifth three, and the
sixth four sections. The doctrines which the book propounds are
delivered in the style of aphorisms or theorems, and, pretending to be
the dicta of Abraham, are laid down very dogmatically, in a manner
becoming the authority of this patriarch, who, according

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

to Artapanus instructed King Pharethothes of Egypt in astrology
(Eusebius, *Praep. evang.*, IX, 18); fulfilled the whole law, before it
was given (*Apoc. Baruch*, chap. 57; *Kiddushin*, IV, 14 fin.), and
victoriously overcame ten temptations <span
id="fr_11"></span>[8](#fn_11) (*Pirke Aboth*, V, 3.md).

**Theosophical Arithmetic**.--The book opens with the statement that
''by thirty-two paths of secret wisdom, the Eternal, the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel the living God, the King of the Universe, the Merciful
and Gracious, the High and Exalted God, He who inhabits eternity,
Glorious and Holy is His name, bath created the world by means of
number, word and writing (or number, numberer, numbered)" I. 1.--The
book shows why there are just thirty-two of these. By an analysis of
this number it seeks to exhibit, in a peculiar method of theosophical
arithmetic, on the assumption that they are the signs of existence and
thought, the doctrine that God produced all, and is over all, the
universe being a development of original entity, and existence being but
thought become concrete; "in short, that instead of the heathenish or
popular Jewish conception of the world as outward, or co-existent with
Deity,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

it is co-equal in birth, having been brought out of nothing by God, thus
establishing a Pantheistic system of emanation, of which, principally
because it is not anywhere designated by name, one would think the
writer was not himself quite conscious."

The following will illustrate the curious proof of this argumentation:
the number 32 is the sum of 10, the number of the ten fingers (I, 3),
and 22, the number of the Hebrew alphabet, this latter being afterwards
further resolved into 3 + 7 + 12 (I, 2). The first chapter (I, 2-8
treats of the decade and its elements, which are called figures in
contradistinction from the 22 letters. This decade is the sign-manual of
the universe. In the details of this hypothesis the existence of
divinity in the abstract is really ignored, though not formally denied.
Thus the number one is its spirit as an active principle, in which all
worlds and beings are yet enclosed. "One is the spirit of the living
God, blessed and again blessed be the Name of Him, Who liveth for
ever--Voice and Spirit and Word, and this is the Holy Ghost" (I, 9).

Two is the spirit from this spirit, i.e., the active principle in so far
as it has beforehand decided on creating; "in it He engraved the
twenty-two letters" (I, 10).

*Three* is water; *four* is fire; "in it He hewed

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the throne of glory, the Ophanim <span id="fr_12"></span>[9](#fn_12.md) and
Seraphim, the sacred living creatures, and the angels of service, and of
these three He founded His dwelling place, as it is said, He maketh His
angels breaths, and His ministers a flaming fire (I, 11, 12). The six
remaining figures, 5-10, are regarded severally as the sign-manual of
height, depth, east, west, north and south, forming the six sides of a
cube, and representing the idea of form in its geometrical perfection
(I, 13).

In the words of the Book of Creation the hexade is thus described:
"*Five*: Three letters from out the simple ones; He sealed spirit on the
three, and fastened them in His great Name J H V. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[10](#fn_13.md) And He sealed with them six outgoings
(ends, terminations); He turned upwards, and He sealed it with J H V.
*Six*: He sealed below, turned downwards, and sealed it with J V H.
*Seven*: He sealed eastward, He turned in front of Him, and sealed it
with H J V. *Eight*: He sealed westward and turned behind, and sealed it
with H V J. *Nine*: He sealed southward, and turned to His right, and
sealed it with V J H. *Ten*: He sealed northward, and turned to His
left, and sealed it with V H J. These are the Sephiroth: (1) Spirit of
the living God, and (2)

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

wind \[air or spirit?\] <span id="fr_14"></span>[11](#fn_14) (3.md) water,
and (4) fire; and (5) height above and (6) below, (7) east and (8) west,
(9) north and (10) south."

\[*Sephiroth* is the plural of the word *Sephirah*. Azariel derives the
word from *saphar*, "to number"; later Cabalists derive it either from
*saphir*, "Saphir," or from the Greek "spheres," <span
id="fr_15"></span>[12](#fn_15.md) and are not at all certain whether to
regard the Sephiroth as "principles," <span
id="fr_16"></span>[13](#fn_16.md) or as "substances," <span
id="fr_17"></span>[14](#fn_17.md) or as "potencies, powers," <span
id="fr_18"></span>[15](#fn_18.md) or as "intelligent worlds," <span
id="fr_19"></span>[16](#fn_19.md) or as "attributes," or as
"entities," <span id="fr_20"></span>[17](#fn_20.md) or as "organs of the
Deity" (*Kelim*). We might fairly well translate the word *Sephiroth* by
"emanations."\]

We see, however, that this alone establishes

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

nothing real, but merely expounds the idea of possibility or actuality,
at the same time establishing that which is *virtualiter* as really
existing in God, the foundation of all things, from which the whole
universe proceeded. The actual entities are therefore introduced in the
subsequent chapters under the twenty-two letters. The connection between
the two series is evidently the Word, which in the first Sephira
(number) is yet identical in voice and action with the spirit (I, 9);
but afterwards these elements, separating as creator and substance,
together produce the world, the materials of which are represented by
the letters, severally divided into gutturals, labials, palatals,
linguals and dentals (II, 3), since these by their manifold
manifestations, name and describe all that exists.

These twenty-two letters of the alphabet are then divided into three
groups, consisting respectively of:

1\. The three mothers or fundamental letters (ch. III);

2\. Seven double (ch. IV), and

3\. Twelve simple consonants (ch. V).

First are subtracted from the twenty-two letters the three mothers
(Aleph, Mem, Shin), i.e., the universal relations of (1) principle, (2)
contrary principle, and (3) balance (i.e., the intermediate).

|              |                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| In the world | we have air, water, fire. This <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> means, the heavens are from fire, the earth from water, and the air indicates the intermediate between the fire and the water. |
| In the year  | there is fire, and water, and wind. The heat comes from fire, cold from water, and moderation from wind (air) that is intermediate between them.                                              |
| In man       | there is fire, water and wind. The head is from fire, the belly from water, and the body from wind that is intermediate between them,                                                         |

The three mothers or fundamental letters are followed by the seven
duplicate letters--Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Caph, Pe, Resh, Tau <span
id="fr_21"></span>[18](#fn_21.md)--duplicate, because they are opposite as
life and death; peace and evil; wisdom and folly; riches and poverty;
grace and ugliness; fertility and desolation; rule and servitude (IV,
1): These seven duplicate letters correspond to the seven outgoings:
above and below, east and west, north and south, and the holy Temple in
the middle, and it upbears the whole (IV, 2). From them God created:

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

|               |                                                                |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| In the world. | Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon.              |
| In man        | Wisdom, Riches, Dominion, Life, Favor, Progeny, Peace.         |
| In the year   | Sabbath, Thursday, Tuesday, Sunday, Friday, Wednesday, Monday. |

With these seven letters God also formed the seven heavens, the seven
earths or countries, and the seven weeks from the feast of Passover to
Pentecost (IV, 3, 4). These letters also represent the seven gates of
issue in the soul; two eyes, two ears, and a mouth, and the two
nostrils.

Turning finally to the twelve single letters (ch. V), they show the
relations of things so far as they can be apprehended in a universal
category. By means of these twelve letters God created the twelve signs
of the zodiac, viz.:

|               |                                                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| In the world. | Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.                                                                |
| In the year   | the twelve months, viz.: Nisan, Ijar, Sivan, Tamus, Ab, Elul, Tishri, Cheshvan or Marcheshvan, Kislev, Tebet, Shebat, Adar.                                           |
| In man        | the organs of sight, hearing, smelling, talking, taste, copulating, dealing, walking, thinking, <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> anger, laughter, sleeping (ch. V, 1). |

They are so organized by God as to form at once a province, and yet be
ready for battle, i.e., they are as well fitted for harmonious as for
dissentious action. "God has placed in all things one to oppose the
other; good to oppose evil, good to proceed from good, and evil from
evil; good to purify evil, and evil to purify good; the good is in store
for the good, and the evil is reserved for the evil" (VI, 2). "The
twelve are arranged against each other in battle array; three serve
love, three hatred; three engender life, and three death. The three
loving ones are the heart, the ears and the mouth; the three hating
ones: the liver, the gall, and the tongue; but God the faithful King,
rules over all three systems. One (i.e., God) is over the three; the
three are over the seven; the seven are over the twelve, and all are
joined together, the one with the other" (VI, 3).

We also learn that the twenty-two letters, though a small number, by
their power of "combination" and "transposition," yield an endless
number of words and figures, and thus become the types of all the varied
phenomena in the creation. "Just as the twenty-two letters yield two
hundred and thirty-one types by combining Aleph (i.e., the first letter)
with all the letters,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and all the letters with Beth (i e., the second letter), so all the
formations and all that is spoken proceed from one name" (ch. II, 4). To
illustrate how these different types are obtained we will state that by
counting the first letter with the second, the first letter with the
third and so on with all the rest of the alphabet, we obtain 21 types;
by combining the second letter with the third, fourth, etc., we get 20
types; the third letter combined with the fourth, etc., yields 19 types;
finally the twenty-first combined with the last letter yields 1 type. In
this way we get as the Hebrew table shows: 21 + 20 + 19 + 18 + 17  + 16
+ 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 11 + 10 + 9 + 8 + 7  + 6 + 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 =
231; or

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*ab ag ad ah av az a<sup>c</sup>h at ai ah al am an as etc.  
bg bd bh bv bz b<sup>c</sup>h bt bi bk bl bm bn bs etc.  
gd gh gv gz g<sup>c</sup>h gt gi gk gl gm gn gs etc.  
dh dv dz d<sup>c</sup>h dt di dk dl dm dn ds etc.  
hv hz h<sup>c</sup>h ht hi hk hl hm hn hs etc*.

</div>

The infinite variety in creation is still more strikingly exhibited by
permutations, of which the Hebrew alphabet is capable, and through which
an infinite variety of types is obtained. Hence the remark: "Two letters
form two houses, three letters build six houses, four build twenty-four,
five build a hundred and twenty houses, six build seven hundred and
twenty

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

houses; <span id="fr_22"></span>[19](#fn_22.md) and from thenceforward go
out and think what the mouth cannot utter and the ear cannot hear" (IV,
4). A few examples may serve as illustration. Two letters form two
houses, by using the first two letters of the Hebrew alphabet, *a*
*b*, <span id="fr_23"></span>[20](#fn_23.md) in the following manner:

1 = *ab*

2 = *ba*

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Three letters,
*a*, *b*, *g*, <span id="fr_24"></span>[21](#fn_24.md) build six houses,
namely:

1 = *abg*; 2 = *agb*; 3 = *bag*; 4 = *bga*;

5 = *gab*; 6 = *gba*.

Four letters, a, b, g, d, <span id="fr_25"></span>[22](#fn_25.md) build
twenty-four houses, viz.:

<div align="center">

|             |             |
|-------------|-------------|
| 1 = *abgd*  | 13 = *gabd* |
| 2= *abdg*   | 14 = *gadb* |
| 3 = *agbd*  | 15 = *gbad* |
| 4 = *agdb*  | 16 = *gbda* |
| 5 = *adbg*  | 17 = *gdab* |
| 6 = *adgb*  | 18 = *gdba* |
| 7 = *bagd*  | 19 = *dabg* |
| 8 = *badg*  | 20 = *dagb* |
| 9 = *bgad*  | 21 = *dbag* |
| 10 = *bgda* | 22 = *dbga* |
| 11 = *bdag* | 23= *dgab*  |
| 12 = *bdga* | 24 = *dgba* |

</div>

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

The Book of Creation closes with the statement: "And when Abraham our
father had beheld, and considered, and seen, and drawn, and hewn, and
obtained it, then the Lord of all revealed Himself to him, and called
him His friend, and made a covenant with him and with his seed; and he
believed in Jehovah, and it was computed to him for righteousness. He
made with him a covenant between the ten toes, and that is circumcision;
between the ten fingers of his hand, and that is the tongue; and He
bound two-and-twenty letters on his tongue, and showed him their
foundation. He drew them with water, He kindled them with fire, He
breathed them with wind (air); He burnt them in seven; He poured them
forth in the twelve constellations" (ch. VI, 4).

**Romantic Cosmology**.--The examination of the contents of the Book of
Jezirah proves that it has as yet nothing in common with the cardinal
doctrines of the Cabala, as exhibited in later works, especially in the
"Lobar, where speculations about the being and nature of the Deity, the
En Soph <span id="fr_26"></span>[23](#fn_26.md) and the Sephiroth, which
are the essence of the Cabala, are given.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

To the period of the Book of Jezirah belongs the remarkable work which
in the Amsterdam edition of 1601 is entitled: "This is the book of the
first man, which was given to him by the angel Raziel." In this work the
angel Raziel appears as the bearer and mediator of astrological and
astronomical secrets, and shows the influence of the planets upon the
sublunary world. To the same period belongs the Midrash Konen, a kind of
romantic cosmology (newly translated into German by Wünsche in *Israels
Lehrhallen*, III, Leipsic, 1909, pp. 170-201).

With the thirteenth century begins the crystallization of the Cabala,
and Isaac the Blind (flourished 1190-1210) may be regarded as the
originator of this lore. The doctrines of the Sephiroth <span
id="fr_27"></span>[24](#fn_27.md) taught in the Book Jezirah are further
developed by his pupils, especially by Rabbi Azariel (died 1238), in his
"Commentary on the Ten Sephiroth, by Way of Questions and Answers," an
analysis of which is given in Jellinek's *Beiträge zur Geschichte der
Kabbalah*, Leipsic, 1852, Part II, p. 32 f. In this commentary

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Azariel lays down
the following propositions:

1\. The primary cause and governor of the world is the En Soph (i.e., a
being infinite, boundless), who is both immanent and transcendent.

2\. From the En Soph emanated the Sephiroth which are the medium between
the absolute En Soph and the real world.

3\. There are ten intermediate Sephiroth.

4\. They are emanations and not creations.

5\. They are both active and passive.

6\. The first Sephirah is called "Inscrutable Height" (*rum maalah*):
the second, "Wisdom" (*chokma*); the third, "Intelligence" (*binah*);
the fourth, "Love" (*chesed*); the fifth, "Justice" (*pachad*); the
sixth, "Beauty" (*tipheret*); the seventh, "Firmness" (*nezach*); the
eighth, "Splendor" (*hod*); the ninth, "the Righteous in the Foundation
of the World" (*zadik yesod olam*); and the tenth, "Righteousness"
(*zedaka*).

The first three Sephiroth form the world of thought; the second three
the world of the soul; and the four last the world of body--thus
corresponding to the intellectual, moral and natural worlds.

That Isaac the Blind must be regarded as "the Father of the Cabala," is
acknowledged by some of the earliest and most intelligent Cabalists

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

themselves. And the author of the cabalistic work entitled *Maarecheth
haelohuth*, said to be a certain Perez of the second part of the
thirteenth century, frankly declares that "the doctrine of the En Soph
and the Ten Sephiroth is neither to be found in the Law, Prophets, or
Hagiographa, nor in the writings of the Rabbins of blessed memory, but
rests solely upon signs which are scarcely perceptible."

Another remarkable book of this period is the *Sepher Bahir*, or Midrash
of Nehunjah ben-ha-Kanah. According to this work, long before the
creation God caused a metaphysical matter to proceed, which became a
fulness (*melo*) of blessing and salvation for all forms of existence.
The ten divine emanations, which are not yet called Sephiroth, but
*Maamarim* and appear as categories endowed with creative power, are
connected with the attributes (*middoth*) of God as well as with his
fingers and other members.

The doctrine of metempsychosis is already given here in its most
important features. The work itself, though ascribed to Nehunjah is of
much later date, because it speaks of the Hebrew vowels and accents.
Only a part of the Bahir book has been published, first at Amsterdam,
1651; then again at Berlin, 1706. The greater part is still in
manuscript in the libraries at Paris and Leyden.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

The conversion of the famous Talmudist and scholar Moses
Nachmanides <span id="fr_28"></span>[25](#fn_28) (1194-1270.md) to the
newly-born Cabala gave to it an extraordinary importance and rapid
spread amongst his numerous followers. In the division of the synagogues
caused by the writings of Maimonides, Nachmanides took the part of the
latter, probably more on account of the esteem he felt for this great
man than for any sympathy with his opinions. Maimonides intended to give
Judaism a character of unity, but he produced the contrary. His aim was
to harmonize philosophy and religion, but the result was a schism in the
synagogue, which gave birth to this queer kind of philosophy called
Cabala, and to this newly-born Cabala Nachmanides became converted,
though he was at first decidedly adverse to this system.

One day the Cabalist who was most zealous to convert him was caught in a
house of ill-fame, and condemned to death. He requested Nachmanides to
visit him on the Sabbath, the day fixed for his execution. Nachmanides
reproved him for his sins, but the Cabalist declared his innocence, and
that he would partake with him of the Sabbath meal. According to the
story, he did as he promised, as by means of the Cabalistic mysteries he
effected his escape, and an ass was

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

executed in his stead, and he himself was suddenly transported into
Nachmanides's house! From that time Nachmanides became a disciple of the
Cabala, and was initiated into its mysteries, the tenets of which
pervade his numerous writings, especially his commentary on the
Pentateuch.

To the first half of the twelfth century belongs the *Massecheth
Aziluth* or "the Treatise on the Emanations," supposed to have been
written by Rabbi Isaac Nasir. From the analysis given by Jellinek
(*Auswahl kabbalistischer Mystik*, Part I, Leipsic, 1853) we learn that
the prophet Elijah propounded that

1\. "God at first created light and darkness, the one for the pious and
the other for the wicked, darkness having come to pass by the divine
limitation of light.

2\. "God produced and destroyed sundry worlds, which, like ten trees
planted upon a narrow space, contend about the sap of the soil, and
finally perish altogether.

3\. "God manifested himself in four worlds, viz., Azila, Beriah, Jezirah
and Asiah, corresponding to the four letters of his name J H V H. In the
Azilatic luminous world is the divine Majesty, the Shechinah. In the
Beriatic world are the souls of the pious, all the blessings, the throne
of God, who sits on it in the form of Achteriël

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the crown of God,
the first *Sephira Keter*), and the seven different luminous and
splendid regions. In the Jeziratic world are the sacred animals in the
vision of Ezekiel, the ten classes of angels with their princes, who are
presided over by the fiery Metatron, <span
id="fr_29"></span>[26](#fn_29.md) the spirits of men, and the accessory
work of the divine chariot. In the Asilatic world are the Ophanim, the
angels who receive the prayers, who are appointed over the will of man,
who control the action of mortals, who carry on the struggle against
evil, and who are presided over by the angelic prince Synadelphon. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[27](#fn_30.md)

4\. "The world was founded in wisdom and understanding (Prov. iii. 13),
and God in his knowledge originated fifty gates of understanding.

5\. "God created the world--as the book Jezirah already teaches--by
means of the ten Sephiroth, which are both the agencies and qualities

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of the Deity. The ten Sephiroth are called Crown, Wisdom, Intelligence,
Mercy, Fear, Beauty, Victory, Majesty and Kingdom; they are merely ideal
and stand above the concrete world" (pp. 2, 3).

The conversion of Todros ben Joseph Halevi Abulafia (1234-1304) to the
Cabala, gave to this science a great influence, on account of Abulafia's
distinguished position as physician and financier in the court of Sancho
IV, King of Castile. The influence of Abulafia, whose works are still in
manuscript, can be best seen from the fact that four Cabalists of the
first rank ranged themselves under his banner and dedicated their
compositions to him. These four Cabalists were Isaac Ibn Latif or
Allatif, Abraham Abulafia, Joseph Gikatilla, and Moses de Leon, all
Spaniards.

**Mysteries of the Cabala**.--Isaac Ibn Latif (about 1220-1290),
starting with the thought that a philosophical view of Judaism was not
the "right road to the sanctuary," endeavored to combine philosophy with
Cabala. "He laid more stress than his predecessors on the close
connection between the spiritual and the material world--between God and
his creation. For the Godhead is in all, and all is in it. In
soul-inspiring prayers the human.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

spirit is raised to the world-spirit (*sechel hapoe*l), to which it is
united 'in a kiss,' and, so influencing the Deity, it draws down
blessings on the sublunar world. But not every mortal is capable of such
spiritual and efficacious prayer; therefore the prophets, the most
perfect men, were obliged to pray for the people, for they alone knew
the power of prayer. The unfolding and revelation of the Deity in the
world of spirits, spheres and bodies Allatif explained by mathematical
forms. The mutual relation thereof is the same as "that of the point
extending and thickening into a line, the line into the plane, the plane
into the expanded body."

An enthusiastic contemporary of Allatif was Abraham ben Samuel
Abulafia <span id="fr_31"></span>[28](#fn_31.md) (born at Saragossa, 1240;
died 1291) . He was an eccentric personage, full of whims, and fond of
adventures. Not satisfied with philosophy, he gave himself to the
mysteries of the Cabala in their most fantastic extremes, as the
ordinary doctrine of the Sephiroth did not satisfy him. He sought after
something higher, for prophetic inspiration. Through it he discovered a
higher Cabala, which offered the means of coming into spiritual
communion with the Godhead, and of obtaining prophetic insight. To
analyze the words of Holy Writ,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

especially those of the divine name, to use the letters as independent
notions (*Notaricon*), or to transpose the component parts of a word in
all possible permutations, so as to form words from them (*Tsiruf*), or
finally to employ the letters as numbers (*Gematria*), are indeed means
of securing communion with the spirit-world; but this alone is not
sufficient. To be worthy of a prophetic revelation, one must lead an
ascetic life, retire into a quiet closet, banish all earthly cares,
clothe himself in white garments, wrap himself up with *Talith* (i.e.,
the fringed garment) and Phylacteries, and devoutly prepare his soul, as
if for an interview with the Deity. He must pronounce the letters of
God's name at intervals, with modulations of the voice, or write them
down in a certain order under divers energetic movements, turnings and
bendings of the body, till the mind becomes dazed and the heart is
filled with a glow. When one has gone through these practices and is in
such a condition, the fulness of the Godhead is shed abroad in the human
soul: the soul then unites itself with the divine soul in a kiss, and
prophetic revelation follows quite naturally. In this way he laid down
his Cabala, in antithesis to the superficial or baser Cabala, which
occupies itself with the Sephiroth, and, as he gibingly said, erects a
sort of "ten unity" instead of the Christian Trinity.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Abulafia went to Italy, and in Urbino he published (1279) prophetic
writings, in which he records his conversations with God. In 1281 he
undertook to convert the Pope, Martin IV, to Judaism. In Messina he
imagined that it was revealed to him that he was the Messiah, and
announced that the restoration of Israel would take place in 1296. Many
believed in him and prepared themselves for returning to the holy land.
Others, however, raised such a storm of opposition that Abulafia had to
escape to the island of Comino, near Malta (about 1288), where he
remained for some time, and wrote sundry Cabalistic works. Of his many
works Jellinek published his Rejoinder to Solomon ben Adereth, who
attacked his doctrines and pretensions as Messiah and prophet. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[29](#fn_32.md)

A disciple of Abulafia was *Joseph Gikatilla* of Medina-Celi, who died
in Penjafiel after 1305. He, too, occupied himself with the mysticism of
letters and numbers, and with the transposition of letters. His writings
are in reality only an echo of Abulafia's fancies: the same delusion is
apparent in both. Gikatilla's system is laid down in his *Ginnath egos*,
i.e., "Garden of Nuts," published at Hanau, 1615; and *Shaare ora*,
i.e., "the Gate of Light," first published at Mantua, 1561,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

in Cracow, 1600, and translated into Latin by Knorr von Rosenroth in the
first part of his *Kabbala Denudata*, Sulzbach, 1677-78.

But far more influential and more pernicious than Allatif, Abulafia and
Gikatilla was Moses de Leon (born in Leon about 1250, died in Arevalo,
1305), the author of a book which gave the Cabala a firm foundation and
wide circulation; in brief, raised it to the zenith of its power. This
book is known by the name of Zohar or Splendor. At first he published
his productions under his own name (about 1285) . But as his writings
were not sufficiently noticed, and brought him but little fame and
money, he hit upon a much more effective means and commenced the
composition of books under feigned but honored names. If he put the
doctrines of the Cabala into the mouth of an older, highly venerated
authority, he was sure to be successful in every respect. And he
selected for this purpose the Tanaite Simon ben Jochaï, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[30](#fn_33.md) who according to tradition spent thirteen
years in a cave, solitary and buried in profound reflection, and whom
ancient mysticism represented as receiving revelations from the prophet
Elijah. Simon ben Jochaï was assuredly the right authority for the
Cabala. But he must not write or speak Hebrew, but Chaldee, a language
peculiarly fit for secrets, and

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

sounding as if from another world. And thus there came into the world a
book, the "Zohar," which for many centuries was held by the Jews as a
heavenly revelation, and was studied even by Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[17:1](cab04.htm#fr_4.md) *Merkaba*, i.e.,
"Chariot," mentioned in Ezek. i and x, which treat of the Divine Throne,
resting on wheels, and carried by sacred animals. Great mysteries are
attached by the ancient Jews to all details of this description of the
Deity and his surroundings, which in imitation of *Maasey Bereshit*,
i.e., "the work of the hexahemeron" or "cosmogony," is also called
*Maasey Merkaba*, "the Work of the Chariot," a kind of "theosophy."

<span id="fn_5"></span>[18:2](cab04.htm#fr_5.md) Rome, 1652, Vol. II, p.
225 f.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[18:3](cab04.htm#fr_6.md) Vol. IV, pp. 27 f.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[19:4](cab04.htm#fr_7.md) Also reprinted in
Jellinek's *Bet Ha-Midrash*, Vol. II, pp. 114-117.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[20:5](cab04.htm#fr_8.md) More, *Nebuchim* I, 61.
Wünsche thinks that the treatise *De Judaicis süperstitionibus* by
Agobard, bishop of Lyons (died 840), was directed against this mystic
tendency.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[20:6](cab04.htm#fr_9.md) L. Goldschmidt, *Das Buch
der Schöpfung*, Frankfurt a. M., 1894, p. 10, remarks: "I am inclined to
put the time of the composition of the Book Jezirah into the second
century B.C., and assert that it is the same book of the Creation which
is mentioned in the Talmud." He is also inclined to make Palestine the
place of its composition.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[21:7](cab04.htm#fr_10.md) We may add the English
translation of the book by Edersheim, *The Life and Times of Jesus the
Messiah*, Vol. II (1883), pp. 690-695.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[22:8](cab04.htm#fr_11.md) Comp. in general Beer,
*Leben Abraham's nach Auffassung der jüdischen Sag*e, Leipsic, 1859;
Grünbaum, *Neue Beiträge zur semitischen Sagenkunde*; 1893, pp. 89-132;
Bonwetsch, *Die Apokalypse Abrahams*, 1897, pp. 41-55.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[24:9](cab04.htm#fr_12.md) Ophanim (‏אופנים‎,
plural of ‏אופו‎), translated "wheels" in the English version (Ezek. i.
20), is taken by the Jewish Rabbis to denote "a distinct order of
angels," just as Cherubim and Seraphim. Hence the <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> Talmudic explanation of Exod. xx, 20, by "Thou shalt not make
the likeness of those ministering servants who serve before me in
heaven, viz., Ophanim, Seraphim, sacred Chajoth and missive angels,"
(*Rosh ha-Shana*, fol. 24, do. 2). *Ophan*, the prince of this order, is
regarded by the ancient sages as identical with the angel *Sandalphon*,
‏סנדלפון‎ = συνάδελφος, co-brother or fellow-companion of the angel
Metabron.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[24:10](cab04.htm#fr_13.md) <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> These three letters mean Jahu, or Yahveh, now pronounced
Jehovah, of which they are the abbreviation; what follows shows how the
permutation of these three letters marks the varied relationship of God
to creation in time and space, and at the same time, so to speak, the
immanence of His manifestation in it.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[25:11](cab04.htm#fr_14.md) The word *ruach* means
all these.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[25:12](cab04.htm#fr_15.md) σφαῖραι.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[25:13](cab04.htm#fr_16.md) ἀρχαὶ.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[25:14](cab04.htm#fr_17.md) ὑποστάσεις

<span id="fn_18"></span>[25:15](cab04.htm#fr_18.md) δυνάμεις

<span id="fn_19"></span>[25:16](cab04.htm#fr_19.md) κόσμοι νοητικοί.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[25:17](cab04.htm#fr_20.md) *Azamoth*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[27:18](cab04.htm#fr_21.md) These letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet are called double because they have a double
pronunciation, being sometimes aspirated and sometimes not, according to
their being with or without the *dagesh* (i.e., a point in the middle).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[31:19](cab04.htm#fr_22.md) In order to ascertain
how often a certain number of letters can be transposed, the product of
the preceding number must be multiplied with it, thus:

<div align="center">

|        |         |     |           |      |            |
|--------|---------|-----|-----------|------|------------|
| Letter | 2 × 1 = | 2   | 5 × 24 =  | 120  |            |
|        | 3 × 2 = | 6   | 6 × 120 = | 720  |            |
|        | 4 × 6 = | 24  | 7 × 720 = | 5040 | and so on. |

</div>

<span id="fn_23"></span>[31:20](cab04.htm#fr_23.md) ‏א‎ ‏ב‎

<span id="fn_24"></span>[31:21](cab04.htm#fr_24.md) ‏א‎ ‏ב‎ ‏ג‎

<span id="fn_25"></span>[31:22](cab04.htm#fr_25.md) ‏א‎ ‏ב‎ ‏ג‎ ‏ד‎

<span id="fn_26"></span>[32:23](cab04.htm#fr_26.md) <span id="page_33">p.
33</span> En Soph; ‏אין סוף‎ = ἄπειρος, i.e., "Endless," "Boundless," is
the name of the Deity given in the Zohar, where it is said of God (III,
283*b*) that he cannot be comprehended by the intellect, nor described
in words, for there is nothing which can grasp and depict him to us, and
as such he is, in a certain sense, not existent (‏אין‎).

<span id="fn_27"></span>[33:24](cab04.htm#fr_27.md) See above.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[36:25](cab04.htm#fr_28.md) See my article *s.v.*
"Nachmanides" in McClintock and Strong's *Cyclop*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[38:26](cab04.htm#fr_29.md) The angel who stands
behind the throne of God.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[38:27](cab04.htm#fr_30.md) This Synadelphon is no
doubt the same as "Sandalphon," the theme of Longfellow's poem of that
name, which commences thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Have you read in the Talmud of old,  
 In the Legends the Rabbins have told  
 Of the limitless realms of the air,  
 Have you read it,--the marvelous story  
 Of Sandalphon, the Angel of Glory,  
 Sandalphon, the Angel of Prayer?"

</div>

In a note on page 668 (Boston and New York edition, 1893) it is stated
that Longfellow marked certain passages in Stehelin's *The Traditions of
the Jews*, which evidently furnished the material.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[40:28](cab04.htm#fr_31.md) See my article *s.v.*
"Abulafia" (*loc. cit.*, Vol. XI, p. 18); comp. also Günzburg, *Der
Pseudo-Messias Abraham Abulafia, sein Leben and sein Wirken*, Cracow, .
1904.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[42:29](cab04.htm#fr_32.md) *Auswahl
kabbalistischer Mystic*, Part I, pp. 20-25 (German part).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[43:30](cab04.htm#fr_33.md) See my article S. V. in
McClintock and Strong's *Cyclop*., Vol. IX, p. 757.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Zohar](cab05.md)
