[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cab06)  [Next](cab08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135667/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cabala*, by Bernhard Pick, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### THE MOST IMPORTANT DOCTRINES OF THE CABALA.

**God and Creation**.--After having become acquainted in previous
chapters with the principal actors in the cabalistic drama we are now
prepared to examine the tenets of the Cabala.

Different from the system as exhibited in the Book of Creation or
Jezirah is that of the Zohar, because the more difficult, since it
embraces not merely the origin of the world, but likewise speculates on
the essence of God and the properties of man; in other words it treats
of theology, cosmology and anthropology.

Starting from the idea of the Supreme Being as boundless in his
nature--which necessarily implies that he is an absolute unity and
inscrutable, and that there is nothing without him--God is called *En
Soph*, i.e., "endless," "boundless." In this boundlessness God cannot be
comprehended by the intellect, nor described in words; for there is
nothing which can grasp him and depict him

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

to us, <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) and as such he is in a
certain sense not existent (*ayin*); since, as far as our mind is
concerned, that which is incomprehensible does not exist.

The En Soph, not being an object of cognition, made his existence known
in the creation of the world by means of attributes or mediums, the ten
Sephiroth, or intelligences, radiations, emanations, emanating from the
En Soph, and which in their totality represent and are called the *Adam
Kadmon*, the "Primordial or Archetypal Man."

The first Sephirah is called *Kether*, "Crown"; the second *Chochma*,
"Wisdom"; the third *Bina*, "Intelligence"; the fourth *Chesed*,
"Mercy"; the fifth *Dîn*, "Judgment"; the sixth *Tiphereth*, "Beauty";
the seventh *Nezach*, "Splendor"; the eighth *Hôd*, "Majesty"; the ninth
*Jesôd*, "Foundation"; the tenth *Malchûth*, "Kingdom."

Now the first Sephirah, which is called the Crown, the Aged, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md) the Primordial or the Smooth Point, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_47.md) the White Head, the Long Face,
*Macroprosopon*,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the Inscrutable Height, <span id="fr_48"></span>[4](#fn_48.md) contained
the other nine Sephiroth and gave rise to them in the following order:
from the first Sephirah proceeded a masculine or active potency
designated (2) *Chochma*, "Wisdom," and an opposite, i.e., a feminine or
passive potency, called (3) *Bina*, "Intelligence." These two opposite
potencies are joined together by the first potency, and thus yield the
first triad of the Sephiroth. From the junction of the foregoing
opposites, which are also called "Father" (*abba*) and "Mother" (*imma*)
emanated again the masculine or active potency called (4) *Chesed*,
"Mercy or Love," also *Gedulah*, "Greatness," and from this again
emanated the feminine or passive potency called (5) *Din*, "Judgment,"
also *Geburah*, "Judical Power." From this again emanated the uniting
potency (6) *Tiphereth*, "Beauty." We have thus the second trinity of
the Sephiroth. Now Beauty beamed forth the masculine or active potency
(7) *Nezach*, "Splendor," and this again gave rise to (8) the feminine
or passive potency Hod, "Majesty"; from it again emanated (9) *Jesôd*,
"Foundation,"

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

which yields the third trinity. From *Jesôd*, finally emanated (10)
*Malchûth*, "Kingdom," also called Schechinah.

The Cabalists delight in representing the ten Sephiroth under different
forms; now as *Adam Kadmon*, "Primordial or Archetypal Man," now as the
cabalistic tree or the *Ilân*, in which the crown is represented by the
first Sephirah and the root by the last.

**The Divine Man.**--As to the Adam Kadmon which is shown in the
following figure, the Crown represents the head; Wisdom, the brains;
Intelligence which unites the two and produces the first triad, the
heart or the understanding. The fourth and fifth Sephiroth, i.e., Love
and Justice are the two arms, the former the right arm and the latter
the left; one distributing life and the other death. The sixth Sephirah,
Beauty, uniting these two opposites and producing the second triad, is
the chest. Firmness and Splendor of the third triad represent the two
legs, whereas Foundation, the ninth Sephirah, represents the genital
organs, since it denotes the basis and source of all things. Finally
Kingdom, the tenth Sephirah, represents the harmony of the whole
Archetypal Man.

Now in looking at the Sephiroth which constitute the first triad, it
will be seen that they

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

represent the intellect; hence this triad is called by Azariel the
"intellectual world" (*olam muskal* or *olam ha-sechel*). The second
triad which represents

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 1. ADAM
KADMON, THE ARCHETYPAL MAN.](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg.md)  
Fig. 1. ADAM KADMON, THE ARCHETYPAL MAN.  
</span>

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

moral qualities, is called the "moral" or "sensuous world" (*olam
murgash*, also *olam ha-nephesh*); and the third, representing power and
stability, is called the "material world" (*olam* 

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 2. THE
CABALISTIC TREE.](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg.md)  
Fig. 2. THE CABALISTIC TREE.  
</span>

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

*mutba* or *olam ha-teba*).

As concerns the cabalistic tree (the *ilân ha-cabala*), the Sephiroth
are so arranged that the first triad is placed above, the second and
third are

<span id="img_fig03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 3. THE PILLAR
ARRANGEMENT.](tn/fig03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig03.jpg.md)  
Fig. 3. THE PILLAR ARRANGEMENT.  
</span>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

placed below, in such a manner that the three masculine Sephiroth are on
the right, the three feminine on the left, whilst the four uniting
Sephiroth occupy the center, as shown in [Fig 2](#img_fig02.md).

According to another arrangement the Sephiroth are so ordered that they
form three pillars, a right one (*sitra dimina*, also *amuda de-chesed*,
i.e., the pillar of mercy); a left one (*sitra dismola*, also *amuda
de-dina*, i.e., the pillar of judgment), and a middle one (*amuda
de-emzaïta*). In the right pillar to which belong the Sephiroth Wisdom,
Love and Firmness, is life; in the left with the Sephiroth Intelligence,
Judgment, Splendor, is Death. The middle pillar comprises Crown, Beauty,
Foundation. The basis of all three pillars is the Kingdom. [Fig.
3](#img_fig03.md) illustrates this.

So far as the Sephiroth represent the first manifestation of God they
form a world for themselves, an ideal world which has nothing to do with
the real, material world. As such it is now called the primordial, the
Archetypal Man (*Adam Kadmon*), now the Heavenly Man (*Adam Ilaî*). As
for the Adam Kadmon, different views exist in the cabalistic writings.
He is sometimes taken as the totality of the Sephiroth, and he appears
as a pre-Sephirotic first emanation and superior to them, by which God
manifested himself as creator and ruler of the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

world, as it were a prototype (macrocosm) of the entire creation. In
this case it would seem as if the Adam Kadmon were a first
manifestation, inserted between God and the world, so to say a second
God <span id="fr_49"></span>[5](#fn_49.md) or the divine Word. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[6](#fn_50.md)

According to a later theorem four worlds proceed by an emanation in
different gradations. This is expressed by Ibn Latif thus: As the point
extends and thickens into a line, the line into the plane, the plane
into the expanded body, thus God's self-manifestation unfolds itself in
the different worlds.

In each of these four worlds the ten Sephiroth recur. The first Sephirah
gave birth to the *Olam azîla* or "world of emanation," containing the
powers of the divine plan of the world. Its beings have the same nature
as that belonging to the world of the Sephiroth or to the Adam Kadmon.
This world which is also called the *olam ha-sephiroth*, i.e., "the
world of the Sephiroth," is the seat of the Shechinah. From the *olam
azîla* proceeded the *olam beria* or "world of creation," in which
according to Rabbi Isaac Nasir <span id="fr_51"></span>[7](#fn_51.md) are
the souls of the saints, all the blessings, the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

throne of the Deity, and the palaces of all spiritual and moral
perfection. The *olam beria* gave birth to the *olam jezîrah* or "world
of formation," in which dwell the holy angels, whose prince is
Metatron. <span id="fr_52"></span>[8](#fn_52.md) But there are also the
demons, which on account of their grossly sensual nature are called
*Keliphoth*, "shells," and inhabit the planets and other heavenly bodies
or the realm of the ether.

The fourth world is called *olam assiya*, the "world of action." Its
substances consist of matter limited by space and perceptible to the
senses in a multiplicity of forms. It is subject to constant changes,
generations, arid corruptions, and is the abode of the Evil Spirit.

Like the Talmud and the Midrash, the Zohar represents the optimistic
view, that the present world is the best. Thus we read (Zohar, III,
292*b*: "There were old worlds, which perished as soon as they came into
existence; they were formless, and were called sparks. Thus the smith

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

when hammering the iron, lets the sparks fly in all directions. These
sparks are the primordial worlds, which could not continue, because the
Sacred Aged had not as yet assumed his form (of opposite sexes--the King
and Queen), and the Master was not yet at his work." And again we read
(III, 61*b*): "The Holy One, blessed be he, created and destroyed
several worlds before o the present one was made, and when this last
work was nigh completed, all the things of this world, all the creatures
of the universe, in whatever age they were to exist, before they entered
into this world, were present before God in their true form. Thus are
the words of Ecclesiastes to be understood. 'The thing that hath been,
it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be
done.'"

Since the Cabalists viewed all things from the anthropological point of
view, they also transformed to the world of the Sephiroth the difference
of sex. The male principle, called *Abba*, is white and of an active
nature, appearing especially in the Sephirah Love, but also at the
bottom of the three Sephiroth on the right side. The female principle,
on the other hand, which owes its origin to the male principle, is red
and of a receptive nature. It is mainly visible in the Sephira Justice,
but is also at the bottom of the three Sephiroth on the left. The sign
of the male

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

principle is the "Y," that of the female the "H" in the divine name
YHVH. What we learn is this: the Sephiroth teach that everything which
exists is imperishable and like God. As nothing perishes in the world or
is fully annihilated, thus the stamp and seal of divinity is stamped on
all beings. God as the Invisible and Endless (En Soph) became visible
and intelligible by the Sephiroth; the human mind can come to him, can
know and conceive him.

**The Realm of Evil**.--Besides the heavenly realm of the Sephiroth of
light or of the good, there is also a realm of the Sephiroth of darkness
or of evil. Over against the supreme emanation of light, the Adam
Kadmon, stands as opponent the Adam Belial. The same is the case with
every light-sephirah, it is opposed by a Sephirah of darkness. Thus both
are related to one another as the right side to the left; the
light-Sephiroth form the right side, the darkness-Sephiroth the left
side (*sitra achra*). The realm of darkness is figuratively called also
the kingdom of Cain, Esau and Pharaoh (Zohar, I, 55*a*). Like the
kingdom of light that of darkness has ten degrees. As the kingdom of
light is inhabited by good spirits, so the kingdom of darkness is
inhabited by evil spirits (demons, shells). Their prince is called
Samaël (angel of poison or of

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

death); his wife is called the Harlot or the' Woman of Whoredom. Both
are thought of as having intercourse with each other just as in the
realm of light God as king has intercourse with Malchuth as queen.
Through the influence of the evil powers the creation is continually
disturbed. Men are seduced to apostasy from God, and thus the kingdom of
the evil grows and the Keliphoth or shells increase. In the figurative
language of the Zohar this disturbance of the creation is described as
if the king and queen kept aloof from each other and could not work
together for the welfare of the world. But this discord is finally
harmonized by repentance, self-mortification, prayer and strict
observance of the prescribed ceremonies, and the original harmony of
things is again restored. It must be observed however that the teaching
about the opposition of the two kingdoms belongs to the later doctrines
of the Cabala and its development belongs to the thirteenth century.

Closely connected with the doctrine about evil is that of the Messiah.
His coming takes place when the kingdom of the Keliphoth is overcome
through the pious and virtuous life of men here on earth; then also
takes place the restoration of the original state of affairs (*tikkun*).
Since under his rule everything turns to the divine light, all idolatry
ceases, because the Keliphoth no

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

longer seduce men to apostasy. Cabala as mistress, rules then over the
slave philosophy. In the upper world, too, great changes take place at
the coming of the Messiah. The king again has intercourse with the
queen. Through their copulation the divinity regains the destroyed
unity. But Wünsche says that cabalistic literature, especially the
Zohar, often describes this union of the king and the queen in terms
bordering on shamelessness and shocking to decency and morals.

The whole universe, however, was not complete, and did not receive its
finishing stroke till man was formed, who is the acme of creation, and
the microcosm uniting in himself the totality of beings. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[9](#fn_53.md) The lower man is a type of the heavenly
Adam Kadmon. <span id="fr_54"></span>[10](#fn_54.md) Man consists of body
and soul. Though the body is only the raimant or the covering of the
soul, yet it represents the *Merkaba* (the heavenly throne-chariot). All
members have their symbolic meaning. Greater than the body is the soul,
because it emanates from the En Soph and has the power to influence the
intelligible world by means of channels (*zinnoroth*) and to bring
blessings upon the nether world. The soul is called *nephesh*, "life,"
*ruach*, "soul," and *neshâmâ*, "spirit." As *neshama*,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

which is the highest degree of being, it has the power to come into
connection with God and the realm of light; as ruach it is the seat of
good and evil; as nephesh it is immediately connected with the body and
is the direct cause of its lower functions, instincts, and animal life.

**Psychology**.--Like Plato, Origen, etc., the Cabala teaches a
pre-existence of the soul. <span id="fr_55"></span>[11](#fn_55.md) All
souls destined to enter into human bodies existed from the beginning.
Clad in a spiritual garb they dwell in their heavenly abode and enjoy
the view of the divine splendor of the Shechinah. With great reluctance
the soul enters into the body, for as Zohar, II, 96*b*, tells us, the
soul, before assuming a human body, addresses God: "Lord of the
Universe! Happy am I in this world, and do not wish to go into another
where I shall be a bondmaid, and be exposed to all kinds of pollutions."
Here, too, we notice again the influence of Platonic and Philonian
doctrines. In its original state each soul is androgynous, and is
separated into male and female when it descends on earth to be born in a
human body. At the time of marriage both parts are united again as they
were before, and again constitute one soul

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Zohar, I, 91*b*).
This doctrine reminds us of Plato and Philo no less than that other
(viz. of ἀνάμνησις) that the soul carries her knowledge with her to the
earth, so that "every thing which she learns here below she knew
already, before she entered into this world" (Zohar, III, 61*b*). Of
great interest is the metempsychosis of the Cabala. How this doctrine,
already espoused by the Egyptians, Pythagoreans and Plato, came into
Jewish mysticism, is not yet fully explained. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[12](#fn_56.md) But it is interesting to learn of the
destiny of man and the universe according to the Cabalists.

It is an absolute condition of the soul to return to the Infinite Source
from which it emanated, after developing on earth the perfections, the
germs of which are implanted in it. If the soul, after assuming a human
body, fails during its first sojourn on earth to acquire that experience
for which it descends from heaven, and becomes contaminated by sin, it
must re-inhabit a body again and again, till it is able to ascend in a
purified state. This transmigration or *gilgul*, however, is restricted
to three times. "And if two souls in their third residence in human
bodies are still too weak to resist all earthly trammels and to

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

acquire the necessary experience, they are both united and sent into one
body, so that they may be able conjointly to learn that which they were
too feeble to do separately. It sometimes happens, however, that it is
the singleness and isolation of the soul which is the source of the
weakness, and it requires help to pass through its probation. In that
case it chooses for a companion a soul which has more strength and
better fortune. The stronger of the two then becomes as it were the
mother; she carries the sickly one in her bosom, and nurses her from her
own substance, just as a woman nurses her child. Such an association is
therefore called pregnancy (*ibbur*), because the stronger soul gives as
it were life and substance to the weaker companion."

This doctrine of the *Superfoetatio* was especially taught by Isaac
Loria or Luria. It is obvious that this doctrine of the Ibbur naturally
led to wild superstition and fraudulent thaumaturgy. Loria himself
claimed to have the soul of the Messiah ben Joseph. Connected with
Loria's system is the doctrine of the Kawânâ, by which is meant the
absorbed state of the soul in its direction towards God when performing
the ceremonies, in prayer, self-mortification, in the pronunciation of
the divine name and reading of the Zohar, whereby the bounds are broken
and the fulness of blessing from the upper world is

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

brought down upon the lower.

The world, being an expansion of the Deity's own substance, must also
share ultimately that blessedness which it enjoyed in its first
evolution, Even Satan himself, the archangel of wickedness, will be
restored to his angelic nature, since he, too, proceeded from the
Infinite Source of all things. When the last human soul has passed
through probation, then the Messiah will appear and the great jubilee
year will commence, when the whole pleroma of souls (*otzar
ha-neshamoth*), cleansed and purified shall return to the bosom of the
Infinite Source and rest in the "Palace of Love" (Zohar, II, 97*a*).

**Mystic Interpretation**.--The exegetical ingenuity of the Cabala is
interesting to the theologian. The principle of the mystic
interpretation is universal and not peculiar to one or another school,
as every one will perceive in ecclesiastical history, and even in the
history of Greek literature. We find it in Philo, in the New Testament,
in the writings of the fathers, in the Talmud, and in the Zohar; and the
more such an interpretation departed from the spirit of the sacred text,
the more necessary was it to bring the scriptures to its support by
distortions of their meanings. <span id="fr_57"></span>[13](#fn_57.md)

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Passing over all manner of subtleties of the pre-Zoharic times, we will
consider the masterly performances of the Cabalists. According to them
the letters, words and names of the scriptures contain divine mysteries
of wondrous, mystical thoughts and ideas, of significant symbols and
riddles, on which depends the continuance of the world. (Zohar, II,
99*a*). "Is it conceivable," the Zohar makes one of Simon ben Jochaï's
circle exclaim, "that God had no holier matters to communicate than
these common things about Esau and Hagar, Laban and Jacob, Balaam's ass,
Balak's jealousy of Israel, and Zimri's lewdness? Does a collection of
such tales, taken in their ordinary sense, deserve the name of Torah?
And can it be said of such a revelation that it utters the pure truth?
If that is all the Torah contains, we can produce in our time a book as
good as this, aye, perhaps better. No, no! the higher, mystical sense of
the Torah is its true sense. The biblical narratives resemble a
beautiful dress which enraptures fools so that they do not look beneath
it. This robe, however, covers a body, i.e., the precepts of the Law,
and this again a soul, the higher soul. Woe to the guilty, who assert
that the Torah contains only simple stories, and therefore look only
upon the dress. Blessed are the righteous, who seek the real sense of
the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Law. The jar is
not the wine, so stories do not make up the Torah" (*ibid*., III,
152*a*) . Thus the Cabalists attached little importance to the literal
sense; yet not a single iota was to be taken from it and nothing was to
be added to it (*ibid*., II, 99).

In order to elicit the mysteries from the scriptures, the Cabalists
employed certain hermeneutical canons, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[14](#fn_58.md) viz.:

1\. *Gematria*, <span id="fr_59"></span>[15](#fn_59.md) i.e., the art of
discovering the hidden sense of the text by means of the numerical
equivalents of the letters. Thus from the Hebrew words ‏והנה שלשה‎
(vehineh sheloshah) translated "lo! three (men stood by him)" in Gen.
xviii, 2, it is deduced that these three were the angels Michael,
Gabriel and Raphael, because the letters yield the numerical value of
701, viz.

‏ו‎ = 6 + ‏ה‎ = 5 + ‏נ‎ = 50 + ‏ה‎ = 5 + ‏ש‎ = 300 + ‏ל‎ = 30 + ‏ש‎ =
300 + ‏ה‎ = 5 = 701; and the same number [yields](errata.htm#1.md) the
words ‏אלו מיכאל גכריאל ורפאל‎, viz. = ‏א‎ = 1 + ‏ל‎ = 30 + ‏ו‎ = 6 +
‏מ‎ = 40 + ‏י‎ = 10 + ‏כ‎ = 20 + ‏א‎ = 1 + ‏ל‎ = 30 + ‏ג‎ = 3 + ‏כ‎ = 2
+ ‏ר‎ = 200 + ‏י‎ = 10 + ‏א‎ = 1 + ‏ל‎ = 30 + ‏ו‎ = 6 + ‏ר‎ = 200 + ‏פ‎
= 80 + ‏א‎ = 1 + ‏ל‎ = 30 =701.

A like figuring we find in the Epistle of Barnabas, ch, ix, with
reference to the 318 servants

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

of Abraham, mentioned in Gen. xiv. 14. The author lays stress upon the
fact that in the Hebrew the "eighteen" are mentioned first, and the
"three hundred" afterwards. In the eighteen expressed by the Greek
letters Ι = 10 and Η = 8 he sees Jesus (ΙΗΣΟΥΣ), and in the three
hundred he sees by the letter Τ = 300, the cross.

With this canon may be compared the "number-oracle," by means of which
one can tell from the number of the letters of the name and the dates of
the birth important years and days in the life of a man. Thus, for
instance, Emperor William I, was born March 22, 1797; 3 + 22 + 1797 + 7
(number of the letters of the name = 1829, the year of marriage; 1829 +
1 + 8 + 2 + 9 = 1849, campaign to Baden; 1849 + 1 + 8 + 4 + 9 = 1871,
coronation as emperor; 1871 + 1 + 8 + 7 + 1 = 1888, year of death.
Napoleon III, born 4, 20, 1808; 4 + 20 + 1808 + 8 (number of the letters
of the name) = 1840, the *coup* at Boulogne; 1840 + 1 + 8 + 4 + 0 =
1853, first year as emperor; 1853 + 1 + 8 + 5 + 3 = 1870; end of his
rule. <span id="fr_60"></span>[16](#fn_60.md)

2\. *Notarikon* (from the Latin *notarius*, a short-hand writer, one who
among the Romans belonged to that class of writers who abbreviated and
used single letters to signify whole words),

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

is employed when every letter of a word is taken as an initial or
abbreviation of a word. Thus, for instance, every letter of the Hebrew
first word in Genesis, <span id="fr_61"></span>[17](#fn_61.md) is made the
initial of a word, and from "in the beginning" we obtain "in the
beginning God saw that Israel should accept the law"; or the word "Adam"
(ADM) is made "Adam, David, Messiah." Sometimes very curious and
ingenious combinations are derived from this system. For instance the
word *passim* <span id="fr_62"></span>[18](#fn_62.md) used in the passage
"And he made a coat of (*passim*) many colors" (Gen. xxxvii. 3) is made
to indicate the misfortunes which Joseph experienced in being sold by
his brethren to Potiphar, Merchants, Ishmaelites, Midianites. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[19](#fn_63.md)

It appears that the Christian fathers sometimes made use of the same
rule; as for instance Christ has been called by them ΙΧΘΥΣ, "fish,"
because these letters are the initials of the Greek words "Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, the Saviour." <span id="fr_64"></span>[20](#fn_64.md) Thus
St. Augustine tells us (*De civ. Dei*, XVIII, 23) that when they were
speaking about Christ, Flaccianus, a very famous man, of most ready
eloquence, and much learning, produced a Greek manuscript, saying that
it was the prophecies of

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

the Erythrian sibyl. In this he pointed out a certain passage that had
the initial letters of the lines so arranged that those words could be
read in them. Then he went on and gave these verses, of which the
initial letters yield that meaning, and says, "But if you join the
initial letters of these five Greek words, they will make the word
*ichthus*, <span id="fr_65"></span>[21](#fn_65.md) that is 'fish,' in which
word Christ is mystically understood, because he was able to live, that
is, to exist, without sin in the abyss of this mortality as in the depth
of waters." It is worthy of notice that Augustine only gives
twenty-seven lines <span id="fr_66"></span>[22](#fn_66.md) of the
thirty-four, as contained in the *Oracula Sibyllina*, VIII, 217 ff.,
where the acrostic reads: Jesus Christ, Son of God (the) Saviour, (the)
Cross. <span id="fr_67"></span>[23](#fn_67.md) In its full form it is also
given by Eusebius in the *Life of the Blessed Emperor Constantine*. For
the benefit of the reader we subjoin Neale's translation of the acrostic
as given in the *Christian Remembrancer*, October, 1861, p. 287:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Judgment at hand, the earth shall sweat with fear.  
Eternal king, the Judge shall come on high;  
Shall doom all flesh; shall bid the world appear <span id="page_89">p.
89</span>  
Unveiled before his Throne. Him every eye  
Shall, just or unjust, see in majesty.

"Consummate time shall view the Saints assemble  
His own assessors, and the souls of men  
Round the great judgment seat shall wait and tremble  
In fear of sentence, and the green earth then  
Shall turn to desert. They that see that day  
To moles and bats their gods shall cast away.

"Sea, earth, and heaven, and hell's dread gates shall burn;  
Obedient to their call, the dead return;  
Nor shall the judge unfitting doom discern.

"Of chains and darkness to each wicked soul:  
For them that have been good, the starry pole.

"Gnashing of teeth, and woe, and fierce despair  
Of such as hear the righteous Judge declare  
Deeds long forgot, which that last day shall bare.

"Then when each darkened breast He brings to sight,  
Heaven's stars shall fall, and day be changed to night;  
Effaced the sun-ray, and the moon's pale light. <span id="page_90">p.
90</span>

"Surely the valleys He on high shall raise;  
All hills shall cease, all mountains turn to plain;  
Vessels shall no more pass the watery ways;  
In the dread lightning parching earth shall blaze,  
Ogygian rivers seek to flow in vain.  
Unutterable woe the trumpet blast,  
Re-echoing through the ether, shall forecast.

"Then Tartarus shall wrap the world in gloom,  
High chiefs and princes shall receive their doom,  
Eternal fire and brimstone for their tomb.

"Crown of the world, sweet wood, salvation's horn,  
Rearing its beauty, shall for man be born,  
O wood, that Saints adore, and sinners scorn!  
So from twelve fountains shall its light be poured;  
Staff of the Shepherd, and victorious sword."

</div>

We may also state that words of those verses which are regarded as
containing a peculiar recondite meaning are ranged in squares in such a
manner as to be read either vertically or boustrophedonally beginning at
the right or left hand. Again the words of several verses are placed
over each other, and the letters which stand under each other are formed
into new words. This is especially seen in the treatment of three verses
in

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Exod. xiv. 19-21
(each containing 72 letters), which are believed to contain the three
Pillars of the Sephiroth and the Divine Name of seventy-two words. Now,
if these three verses be written out one above the other, the first from
right to left, the second from left to right, and the third from right
to left, they will give 72 columns of three letters each. Then each
column will be a word of three letters, and as there are 72 columns,
there will be 72 words of three letters, each of which will be the 72
names of the Deity. By writing the verses all from right to left,
instead of boustrophedonally, there will be other sets of 72 names
obtainable. The reader who is interested in these niceties will find
ample information in Bartolocci, *Bibliotheca Magna Rabbinicia*, IV, pp.
230 ff.

3\. *Temurah* or permutation.--According to certain rules, one letter is
substituted for another letter preceding or following it in the
alphabet, and thus from one word another word of totally different
orthography may be formed. Thus the alphabet is bent exactly in the
middle, and one half is put over the other; and then by changing
alternately the first letter or the first two letters at the beginning
of the second line, twenty-two permutations are produced. These are
called the "Table of the Combinations of Tziruph."

For example's sake we give the method called Albath, thus:

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| A   | B   | G   | D   | H   | V   | Z   | Ch  | T   | Y   | K   |
| L   | Th  | Sh  | R   | Q   | Tz  | P   | Ay  | S   | N   | M   |

</div>

The method abgath is thus exemplified:

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| A   | G   | D   | H   | V   | Z   | Ch  | T   | Y   | K   | L   |
| B   | Th  | Sh  | R   | Q   | Tz  | P   | Ay  | S   | N   | M   |

</div>

The names of the twenty-two permutations are: Albath, Abgath, Agdath,
Adbag, Ahbad, Avba, Azbav, Achbaz, Atbach, Aibat, Achbi, Albach, Ambal,
Anbam, Asban, Aaybas, Afba, Azbaf, Akbaz, Arbak, Ashbar, Athbash. To
these must be added as (23) Abgad; (24) Albam.

I will only remark that by the system called Athbash, it is found that
the word *Sheshhach* in Jer. xxv. 26 is the same as Babel, and that
Jerome is said to have confidently applied this system. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[24](#fn_68.md)

Besides these canons the Cabala also sees a recondite sense in the form
of the letters, as well as in the ornaments which adorn them. The more
multifarious these trifles, the easier it is to arrive in every given
case at a result, and the less wit or thought is required.

Although the canons mentioned above are already applied in the Talmud
and Midrash, the Cabalists made a more copious use of them. The names of
God became a special object of their fancy. With them they imagined they
could accomplish everything and perform miracles, heal

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the sick, extinguish the fire, etc. The most miraculous effects were
ascribed to the Tetragrammaton. Whoever was in possession of the true
pronunciation of that name could enter in relation with the upper world
and receive revelations. Each letter of the sacred name was considered
as something mysterious. The letter Y (of YHVH) referred to the father
as creator (*abba*) and H to the mother (*imma*). Because the letter H
occurred twice, they distinguished an upper and a lower mother. The
permutation of the letters of the Tetragrammaton brought about a
multitude of new divine names which, either spoken or written,
influenced the course and laws of nature. As was the case with the name
of God consisting of four letters, so it was with that consisting of
twelve, twenty-two, forty-two and seventy-two letters. All were believed
to contain great mysteries. <span id="fr_69"></span>[25](#fn_69.md) The
names of angels were treated in like manner. Thus the Cabalists greatly
misused the Old Testament, especially the Thora. And, as says Professor
Wünsche, by making the Bible a text-book to elicit deeper ideas, the
greatest nonsense and rubbish came to light. The so-called hidden
mysteries and revelations were nothing but fancies whirling in the heads
of the Cabalists. The exegetical

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

literature of the Cabala clearly proves that its representatives had
completely lost the sense for a suitable understanding of the words of
scripture. <span id="fr_70"></span>[26](#fn_70.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[67:1](cab07.htm#fr_45.md) Rabbi Azariel in his
commentary on the ten Sephiroth tells us that "the En Soph can neither
be comprehended by the intellect, nor described in words; for there is
no letter or word which can grasp him." With this compare what Proclus,
the neo-Platonist, says in his *Theology of Plato*, II, 6: "Although the
Divinity is generally called the unity (τὸ ἕν) or the first, it would he
better if no name were given him; for there is no word which can depict
his nature--he is the inexpressible (ἅῤῥητος), the unknown (ἀγνωστός).
Isaac ibn Latif (1220-1290) even says "God is in all, and everything is
in God."

<span id="fn_46"></span>[67:2](cab07.htm#fr_46.md) <span id="page_68">p.
68</span> This must not be confounded with "the Aged of the Aged" as the
En Soph is called.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[67:3](cab07.htm#fr_47.md) When the Concealed of
the Concealed wished to reveal himself, he first made a single point;
the Infinite was entirely unknown, and diffused no light before this
luminous point violently broke through into vision." (Zohar, I, 15e.)

<span id="fn_48"></span>[68:4](cab07.htm#fr_48.md) So called by Rabbi
Azariel.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[74:5](cab07.htm#fr_49.md) δεύτερος θεὸς.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[74:6](cab07.htm#fr_50.md) λόγος.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[74:7](cab07.htm#fr_51.md) He flourished in the
first half of the twelfth century and is the author of a treatise on the
Emanations (*Massecheth Aziluth*) reprinted by Jellinek in his *Auswahl
Kabbalistischer Mystik*, Part I. Leipsic, 1853.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[75:8](cab07.htm#fr_52.md) Graetz, *Gnosticismus
und Judentum*, 1846, p. 44, derives the word from μετὰ θρόνον, because
this angel is immediately under the divine throne. Cassel (Ersch and
Gruber's *Encyklopädie*, section II, vol. XXVII, *s.v.* "Juden," p .40,
note 84) derives it from *metator*, i.e., "messenger, outrider,
pathfinder." Wünsche also connects it with μετάτωρ. According to the
Zohar, I, 126*b*, Metatron is the first creature of God; the middle
pillar (in the essence of God) or the uniting link in the midst,
comprising all grades, from top downwards, and from the bottom upwards
(*ibid*., III, 127*a*); the visibly manifested Deity (*ibid*., III,
231*a*).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[79:9](cab07.htm#fr_53.md) Zohar, III, 48*a*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[79:10](cab07.htm#fr_54.md) Zohar, II, 70*b*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[80:11](cab07.htm#fr_55.md) Compare Book of Wisdom,
VIII, 20; Josephus, Bell. Jud., II, 12, speaks of the Essenes as
believing in a pre-existence of the soul. Philo's views are given in his
*De somniis*, I, 642; *De gigantibus*, I, 263 f.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[81:12](cab07.htm#fr_56.md) According to Josephus
(*Antiq*., XVIII, 13; *Bell. Jud.*, II, 8, 14) it would seem as if the
Pharisees held the doctrine of the metempsychosis, but see Schürer,
*Geschichte des jüdischen Volkes*, vol. II (3d ed., 1898) p. 391; on
Philo's view, see *ibid*., vol. III, p. 561.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[83:13](cab07.htm#fr_57.md) For a strange
interpretation of scripture in modern times, the reader is referred to
Canon Wordsworth's <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> *Commentary on
Genesis and Exodus*, London, 1864, p. 52.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[85:14](cab07.htm#fr_58.md) On the interpretation
of the scriptures among the Jews in general, see my article *s.v.*
Scripture, Interpretation of, Jewish," in McClintock and Strong.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[85:15](cab07.htm#fr_59.md) The word is not like
γεωμετρία, as Levy, *Neuhebr*. *Wörterbuch*, I, 324, thinks, but is
derived from γραμματεία or γράμμα.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[86:16](cab07.htm#fr_60.md) For a somewhat
different mode compare *The Open Court*, Feb. 1909, p. 88.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[87:17](cab07.htm#fr_61.md) ‏בראשית‎

<span id="fn_62"></span>[87:18](cab07.htm#fr_62.md) ‏פסים‎

<span id="fn_63"></span>[87:19](cab07.htm#fr_63.md) ‏פ‎ = Potiphar, ‏ס‎ =
Sochrim (merchants), ‏י‎ = Ishmaelites, ‏ם‎ = Midianites.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[87:20](cab07.htm#fr_64.md) Ἰησοῦς Χριστός, Θεοῦ
Υἱός, Σωτὴρ.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[88:21](cab07.htm#fr_65.md) ἰχθύς.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[88:22](cab07.htm#fr_66.md) English translation by
M. Dodd, *City of God*, Edinburgh, 1871, where the Greek letters at the
beginning of the lines are retained.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[88:23](cab07.htm#fr_67.md) σταυρός.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[92:24](cab07.htm#fr_68.md) Hottinger possessed an
entire Pentateuch explained on the principle of Athbash.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[93:25](cab07.htm#fr_69.md) Compare what we stated
above in connection with Abulafia.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[94:26](cab07.htm#fr_70.md) A somewhat different
view on the cabalistic treatment of scripture is given by the late
Jewish scholar Zunz (died 1886) in his *Gottesdienstliche Vorträge*
(Berlin, 1832), p. 403: For the passage in English see my article
"Scripture Interpretation" in McClintock and Strong, vol. IX, p. 480.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Cabala in Relation to Judaism and
Christianity](cab08.md)
