[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb02)  [Next](ptb04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# PREFACE

OF all sciences, whether true or false, which have at any time engaged
the attention of the world, there is not one of which the real or
assumed principles are less generally known, in the present age, than
those of Astrology. The whole doctrine of this science is commonly
understood to have been completely overturned; and, of late, people seem
to have satisfied themselves with merely knowing the import of its name.
Such contented ignorance, in persons, too, sufficiently informed in
other respects, is the more extraordinary, since Astrology has sustained
a most conspicuous part throughout the history of the world, even until
days comparatively recent. In the East, where it first arose, at a
period of very remote antiquity, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and
whence it

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

came to subjugate the intellect of Europe, it still even now holds sway.
In Europe, and in every part of the world where learning had "impress’d
the human soil," Astrology reigned supreme until the middle of the 17th
century. It entered into the councils of princes, it guided the policy
of nations, and ruled the daily actions of individuals. All this is
attested by the records of every nation which has a history, and

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

by none more fully than by those of England. Yet, with these striking
facts before their eyes, the present generation seem never, until now,
to have inquired on what basis this belief of their forefathers was
established, nor by what authority the delusion (if it was one) could
have been for so many ages supported. Among a thousand persons who now
treat the mention of Astrology with supercilious ridicule, there is
scarcely one who knows distinctly what it is he laughs at, or on what
plea his ancestors should stand excused for having, in their day,
contemplated with respect the unfortunate object of modern derision.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

The general want of information on these points, and the indifference
with which such want has been hitherto regarded, cannot surely be
attributed solely to the modern disrepute of the science; for mankind
have usually, in every successive age, exercised great industry in
tracing all previous customs, however trifling or obsolete, and in
examining all sorts of creeds, however unimportant or erroneous,
whenever there has appeared any striking connection between such matters
and historical facts; and, since astrology is most unquestionably
blended intimately with history, it therefore becomes necessary to seek
for some further hypothesis, by which this ignorance and indifference
may be accounted for.

Perhaps astrology has been conceived to have borne the same relation to
astronomy as alchymy did to chymistry. If such has been the notion, it
has certainly been adopted in error, for a modern chymist is still
almost an alchymist: it is true that he no longer delays his work in
deference to the planets, nor does he now try to make gold, nor to
distil elixir of earthly immortality; but nevertheless he still avails
himself, to a certain degree, of the same rules and the same means as
those of the old alchymist: he is still intent upon the subtle processes
of Nature, and still imitates her as far as he can. He reduces the
diamond to charcoal by an operation analogous to that by which the
alchymist sought to transmute lead into gold; and he mainly differs from
the alchymist only in having assured himself that there is a point
beyond which Nature forbids facsimiles. Not so slightly, however, does
the astronomer differ from the astrologer, but *toto cælo*: the
astrologer considered the heavenly bodies and their motions merely as
the mechanism wherewith he was to weave the tissue of his predictions;
and astronomy is no more an integral part of astrology, than the loom is
of the web which has been woven by it. To have an idea of what alchymy
was, it is sufficient to have an idea of chymistry; but astronomy, in
itself, will never give a notion of astrology, which requires additional
and distinct consideration.

It may be urged, that in the present day a general idea of this by-gone
and disused science is quite sufficient for everybody not professedly
antiquarian. Such an assertion would doubtless never be controverted,
provided the proposed general idea might comprehend the truth. But the
present actual general idea of astrology is by no means so
comprehensive; indeed, nothing can well be more inaccurate, or even more
false: it seems to have been adopted not from the elements of the
science itself, but from trite observations made by writers against the
science; and consequently the world now wonders at the lamentable defect
of understanding that could ever have permitted belief in it--forgetting
that astrology has been consigned to neglect, not in consequence of any
*primâ facie* palpability in its imputed fallacies, nor indeed of any
special skill or acuteness on the part of its professed adversaries, but
rather in consequence of the sudden and astonishing growth of other
undoubted sciences, with which it has been presumed to be

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

incompatible, and which during the thousands of years of the reign of
astrology were either unborn, or still slumbering in continued
infancy. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

The words "professed adversaries," which have just now been used, are of
course not intended to be applied to those mighty explorers of Nature's
laws and man's powers, who, in their lofty career, may have made an
incidental swoop at the pretensions of astrology. Directly engaged in
more exact pursuits, they stopped not to dissect this their casual prey,
which, after having been thus struck by eagles, was left to regale crows
and daws, and these, in their convivial loquacity, accused their
unfortunate victims of crimes incapable of being committed, and of
offences which had never been imagined. Of the real faults of their
victim these garrulous bipeds seem not to have been aware, or, if aware,
they seem to have considered them as not sufficiently prominent. Nor was
this want of candour or information absolutely confined to the mere
vulgar herd of vituperative scribblers, for even the sparkling essay
against astrology, written by Voltaire (in his irrepressible desire to
convince the world that he was *au fait* in everything), proves only
that the writer, though the most generally informed man of his time, had
mistaken the really assailable points of the object of his attack.

The author of the present Translation has no intention now of either
advocating or impugning the doctrines of the science of which his
Translation discourses: his purpose is a different one. He has that sort
of respect for "the dead, which are really dead," which, although it
does not incline him to "praise" them "*more* than the living, which are
yet alive," is still sufficient to incite him to endeavour to avert the
imputation of idiot credulity, to which their faith in astrology seems
now to subject them in the general opinion of the enlightened "living."
And, while he disclaims all idea of presuming to offer any argument on
either side of the question, as to the validity of the science, he must
still, at the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

same time, confess his admiration of the ingenuity and contrivance
manifest in its construction, and avow his readiness to believe that all
its harmonized complications might have easily held dominion over some
of the strongest minds in that darker period when it flourished.

In executing here the desire of attempting to vindicate the ancient
credence in astrology, an elaborate disquisition would surely be not
only unnecessary, but misplaced: it seems sufficient to refer the reader
to the work of which the following is a translation, and to these
undisputed facts--that the science was formerly inculcated by the
highest and most erudite authorities of the period--that it was insisted
on by votaries in all parts of the world, attesting and producing
instances of its truth;--and, moreover, that it was so finely and
beautifully put together, as to cause the only deficiency of one small,
though most important, link in its whole chain of argument, to be
undetected by dull minds, and readily supplied by enthusiastic genius.
For centuries after centuries all branches of learning were either made
subservient to astrology, or carried on in close alliance with it; and
many of the illustrious names which it recalls to our recollection are
gratefully reverenced even by modern science. The genius of Roger Bacon,
although he was the first of that school of natural philosophy which
acknowledges none but experimented truths, was nevertheless bowed to the
doctrines of judicial astrology; and his greater Namesake, who after an
interval of several centuries succeeded to him in giving proper
direction to the mental energy, was still an arguer in favour of
celestial influences: it may be, therefore, fairly inferred, that the
subtle spell which had strength to enthrall "stuff" so "stern," could
have been of no weak or vulgar order, but that it was sufficiently
potent and refined to interest and amuse even the present age <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md).

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

In this little volume will be found the whole of the elements of
astrology, and the entire ground-work of those stupendous tomes in folio
and quarto on the same subject, which were produced in myriads during
the 16th and 17th centuries, for the due mystification of the then
world. The present volume is addressed equally to the general reader, as
well as to the votary of pure astrology, if any such there be; to the
one it offers amusement; for the other, it should contain the most
glowing interest. Even to the speculative metaphysician it will furnish
food for contemplation; for, in addition to its peculiar hypothesis of
cause and effect, it develops many of those apparent incongruities of
character so often united in the same individual; and this development,
even although adapted to the doctrine of the stars, still merits
attention; inasmuch as the phenomena of which it treats (in whatever way
they may be produced or regulated) will ever remain in actual existence.

The only English translation of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos, hitherto
published, appears to have been first set forth in 1701, under the name
of "The Quadripartite." That publication has been long removed from
general sale; and its gross misinterpretation of the author, caused by
the carelessness or ignorance of Whalley and his assistants, by whom it
was produced, has rendered most of its pages unintelligible: its absence
is, therefore, scarcely to be regretted. The second edition of the same
translation, professing to be "revised, corrected, and improved," and
published by Browne and Sibley, in 1786, was not, in any one instance,
purified from the blunders and obscurities which disgraced its
predecessor: it seems, in fact, less excusable than the former edition,
of which it was merely a reprint, without being at all corrected, not
even in certain typographical *errata* which the former printer had been
zealous enough to point out in his final page. Even this second
publication, worthless as it intrinsically is, can rarely now be met
with, and, like the former, only at a very heavy price.

The present Translation has been made from Proclus's Greek Paraphrase of
Ptolemy's original text; the edition followed is that of the Elzevirs,
dated in 1635. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) But, in the course of
translation, continual references have been also had to various editions
of the original text, in order to ascertain the proper acceptation of
doubtful passages. The editions thus inspected were that by Camerarius,
printed at Nuremberg in 1535; that by Melancthon, printed at Basle in
1553; and that by Junctinus, printed, with his own enormous
commentaries, at Lyons, in 1581. Independently of these references, the
present translation has

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

been collated with the Latin of Leo Allatius, and with two other Latin
translations: one printed at Basle, together with a translation of the
Almagest in 1541; the other by itself at Perugio, in 1646. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) The Translator has devoted all this
extreme care and attention to his labours, in the wish to render
Ptolemy's astro-judicial doctrine into English as

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

purely and perfectly as possible; and, with the same view, he has
likewise added, in an Appendix, certain extracts from such parts of the
Almagest as were found to be referred to in his present work. Further
illustration is also given by notes gathered from the "Primum Mobile" of
Placidus, <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) and from a variety of
other sources whence any elucidation of the text might be derived. Even
Whalley's "Annotations" (to use his own grandiloquent designation) have
occasionally yielded information, not altogether unimportant, although
generally incomplete.

It seems improper to close this Preface (notwithstanding the bulk it has
already attained), without annexing the following short notice of the
life and works of the great man from whom the Tetrabiblos has emanated.

Claudius Ptolemy was born at Pelusium, in Ægypt, and became an

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

illustrious disciple of the school of Alexandria, in which city he
flourished during the reign of Adrian and that of Antoninus Pius. The
date of his birth has been commonly assigned to the 10th year of the
Christian æra; but the accuracy of this date seems questionable; for he
has himself noted in one part of his works, that Antoninus reigned
twenty-three years. He must have, therefore, survived that prince; and,
as it is not probable that he continued his scientific labours until
after ninety years of age, which he must have done had he been born
about the year 70, because Antoninus died in the year 161, it seems that
his birth would be more properly ascribed to some later period.
Moreover, it is asserted by the Arabians, that he died in the 78th year
of his age; and a similar statement is also made by Luca Gauricus, in
the dedication of his version of the Almagest <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) to Dominico Palavicini: Gauricus has,
however, placed his death in the year 747, which does not accord with
the fact of his having survived Antoninus.

Ptolemy has recorded that he observed, at Alexandria, an eclipse of the
Moon, in the 9th year of Adrian; and that he made many observations upon
the fixed stars in the and year of Antoninus Pius: whence it may be
concluded, that his observations upon the heavens were principally made
during the period from A.D. 125 to A.D. 140, or thereabouts; and it also
follows, of course, that the supposition, entertained by some authors,
of his identity with the Ptolemy who was always in attendance upon
Galba, as his personal astrologer, and who promised Otho that he should
survive Nero and obtain the empire, is entirely without foundation. To
Gauricus's <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md) version of the Almagest
there is also another dedication, addressed to Pope Sixtus, and composed
by George Trapezuntius, describing Ptolemy as "*regiâ stirpe oriundum*,"
and explaining that he had, "with a truly regal mind," applied himself
to the sciences, because the ancient sceptre of the Ptolemies had
previously passed into the hands of Cleopatra, and because the kingdom
of Ægypt had been since reduced to the state of a Roman province. The
authentic details of the circumstances of Ptolemy's life are, however,
extremely few. It is said that he was distinguished among the Greeks by
the epithets "most wise," and "most divine," on account of his great
learning; and, according to the Preface to Whalley's translation of the
Tetrabiblos, the Arabians report that "he was extremely abstemious, and
rode much on horseback"; adding, that although he was "spruce in
apparel," yet his breath was not remarkable for an agreeable odour.

The errors of the Ptolemaic theory of the universe have now been long
discarded; but there are many points in which modern sciences, and
modern astronomy in particular, have reaped incalculable benefits from
the labours and researches of its great founder. He has preserved

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

and transmitted to us the observations and principal discoveries of
remoter periods, and has enriched and augmented them with his own. He
corrected Hipparchus's catalogue of the fixed stars, and formed tables
for the calculation and regulation of the motions of the Sun, Moon, and
planets. He was, in fact, the first who collected the scattered and
detached observations of Aristotle, Hipparchus, Posidonius, and others
on the economy of the world, and digested them into a system, which he
set forth in his Μεγαλη Συνταξις or Great Construction, divided into
thirteen books, and called, after him, the Ptolemaic System. This and
all his other astronomical works are founded upon the hypothesis, that
the earth is at rest in the centre of the universe, and that the
heavenly bodies, stars, and planets, all move round it in solid orbs,
whose motions are all directed by one *primum mobile*, or first mover,
of which he discourses at large in the "Great Construction." In that
work he also treats of the figure and divisions of the earth, of the
right and oblique ascensions of the heavenly bodies, and of the motions
of the Sun, Moon, and planets; and he gives tables for finding their
situations, latitudes, longitudes, and motions: he treats also of
eclipses, and the methods of computing them; and he discourses of the
fixed stars, of which he furnishes a numerous catalogue, with their
magnitudes, latitudes, and longitudes. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

It has been truly said, that "Ptolemy's order, false as it was, enabled
observers to give a plausible account of the motions of the Sun and
Moon, to foretell eclipses, and to improve geography <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md);" or, in other words, that it represented
the actual phenomena of the heavens as they really appear to a spectator
on the earth. It is therefore clear that Ptolemy's astrology is just as
applicable to modern and improved astronomy as it was to his own. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18.md)

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

In the year 827 <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) the "Great
Construction" was translated by the Arabians into their own language,
and by them communicated to Europe. It is through them that it has been
usually known by the name of the Almagest. In the 13th century, the
Emperor Frederic II caused it to be translated from the Arabic into
Latin, and Sacrobosco <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md) was
consequently enabled to write his famous work upon the sphere. It was
not, however, until about the end of the 15th century that the "Great
Construction" was translated into Latin from the *original* text; and
this important service was rendered to science by Purbach, a professor
of philosophy at Vienna, who learned the Greek tongue at the instigation
of Cardinal Bessarion. By means of this translation, the Ephemerides of
George Müller, surnamed Regiomontanus, a disciple of Purbach's, were
first composed. The Greek text of the Almagest, or Great Construction,
was first published at Basle, by Simon Grynæus, in 1538; and it was
again printed at the same place in 1551, with certain other works of
Ptolemy. <span id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21.md) The rest of Ptolemy's works
connected with astronomy, and now extant, are the Tetrabiblos, or Four
Books of the Influence of the Stars <span id="fr_22"></span>[4](#fn_22.md)
(now translated); the Centiloquy, or Fruit of his Four Books, being a
kind of supplement to the former; and the Significations of the Fixed
Stars. The last is merely a daily calendar,

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

showing the risings and settings of the stars, and the nature of the
weather thereby produced. There are likewise extant his geographical
work (which has rendered important service to modern geographers), and
also his celebrated book on Harmonics, or the Theory of Sound.

Proclus, to whom the world is indebted for the improved text of the
Tetrabiblos, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) was born at
Constantinople, in the year 410. He studied

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

at Alexandria and at Athens, and became very eminent among the later
Platonists. He succeeded Syrianus, a celebrated philosopher, in the
rectorship of the Platonic school at Athens, and died there in
485. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) He was a most voluminous
author, in poetry as well as in prose. Among his works there are Hymns
to the Sun, to Venus, and to the Muses; Commentaries upon several pieces
of Plato, and upon Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md); an Epitome or Commendium of all the
Astronomical Precepts demonstrated in the Almagest; and elements of
Theology and Natural Philosophy. He was in dispute with the Christians
on the question of the eternity of the world, which he undertook to
prove in eighteen elaborate arguments. A late writer in a certain
periodical work has erroneously identified him with another Proclus, who
was in favour with the Emperor Anastasius, and who destroyed the ships
of Vitalianus, when besieging Constantinople in 514, by burning them
with great brazen mirrors, or *specula*.

 

*Signs of the Zodiac*.

<div align="center">

|     |        |     |             |
|-----|--------|-----|-------------|
| ♈   | Aries  | ♎   | Libra       |
| ♉   | Taurus | ♏   | Scorpio     |
| ♊   | Gemini | ♐   | Sagittarius |
| ♋   | Cancer | ♑   | Capricorn   |
| ♌   | Leo    | ♒   | Aquarius    |
| ♍   | Virgo  | ♓   | Pisces      |

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](ptb03.htm#fr_0.md) Sir Isaac Newton has the
following remarks in regard to the origin of Astrology:--"After the
study of Astronomy was set on foot for the use of navigation, and the
Ægyptians, by the heliacal risings and settings of the stars, had
determined the length of the solar year of 365 days, and by other
observations had fixed the solstices, and formed the fixed stars into
asterisms, all which was done in the reigns of Ammon, Sesac, Orus, and
Memnon," (about 1000 years before Christ), "it may be presumed that they
continued to observe the motions of the planets, for they called them
after the names of their gods; and Nechepsos, or Nicepsos, King of
Sais," \[772 B.C.\], "by the assistance of Petosiris, a priest of Ægypt,
invented astrology, grounding it upon the aspects of the planets, and
the qualities of the men and women to whom they were dedicated <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*1](#fn_1.md); and in the beginning of the reign of
Nabonassar, King of Babylon, about which time the Æthiopians, under
Sabacon, invaded Ægypt" \[751 B.C.\], "those Ægyptians who fled from him
to Babylon, carried thither the Ægyptian year of 365 days, and the study
of astronomy and astrology, and founded the a era of Nabonassar, dating
it from the first year of that king's reign" \[747 B.C.\], "and
beginning the year on the same day with the Ægyptians for the sake of
their calculations. So Diodorus: '*they say that the Chaldæan in
Babylon, being colonies of the Ægyptians, became famous for astrology,
having learned it from the priests of Ægypt*.'"--Newton's Chronology,
pp. 251, 252.

Again, in p. 327: "The practice of observing the stars began in Ægypt in
the days of Ammon, as above, and was propagated from thence, in the
reign of his son Sesac, into Afric, Europe, and Asia, by conquest; and
then Atlas formed the sphere of the Libyans" \[956 B.C.\], "and Chiron
that of the Greeks \[939 B.C.\]; and the Chaldæans also made a sphere of
their own. But astrology <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> was invented
in Ægypt by Nichepsos, or Necepsos, one of the Kings of the Lower Ægypt,
and Petosiris his priest, a little before the days of Sabacon, and
propagated thence into Chaldæa, where Zoroaster, the legislator of the
Magi, met with it: so Paulinus;

'*Quique magos docuit mysteria vana Necepsos*.'"

The arcana of Astrology constituted a main feature in the doctrines of
the Persian Magi; and it further appears, by Newton's Chronology, p.
347, that Zoroaster (although the æra of his life has been erroneously
assigned to various remoter periods) lived in the reign of Darius
Hystaspis, about 520 B.C., and assisted Hystaspes, the father of Darius,
in reforming the Magi, of whom the said Hystaspes was Master. Newton
adds, p. 352, that "about the same time with Hystaspes and Zoroaster,
lived also Ostanes, another eminent Magus: Pliny places him under Darius
Hystaspis, and Suidas makes him the follower of Zoroaster: he came into
Greece with Xerxes about 480 B.C., and seems to be the Otanes of
Herodotus. In his book, called the Octateuchus, he taught the same
doctrine of the Deity as Zoroaster."

Having quoted thus far from Newton, it seems proper to subjoin the
following extract from the "Ancient Universal History:"--"In the reign
of Gushtasp" \[the oriental name of Darius Hystaspis\], "King of Persia,
flourished a celebrated astrologer, whose name was Gjamasp, surnamed Al
Hakim, or the wise. The most credible writers say that he was the
brother of King Gushtasp, and his confidant and chief minister. He is
said to have predicted the coming of the Messiah; and some treatises
under his name are yet current in the East. Dr. Thomas Hyde, in speaking
of this philosopher, cites a passage from a very ancient author, having
before told us that this author asserted there had been among the
Persians ten doctors of such consummate wisdom as the whole world could
not boast the like. He then gives the author's words: 'Of these, the
sixth was Gjamasp, an astrologer, who was counsellor to Hystaspis. He is
the author of a book intitled *Judicia Gjamaspis*, in which is contained
his judgment on the planetary conjunctions. And therein he gave notice
that Jesus should appear; that Mohammed should be born; that the Magian
religion should be abolished, etc.; nor did any astrologer ever come up
to him.' \[*E. lib. Mucj. apud Hyde*.\] Of this book there is an Arabic
version, the title of which runs thus: The Book of the Philosopher
Gjamasp, containing Judgments on the Grand Conjunctions of the Planets,
and on the Events produced by them. This version was made by Lali; the
title he gave it in Arabic was Al Keranai, and he published it A.D.
1280. In the preface of his version it is said that, after the times of
Zoroaster, or Zerdusht, reigned Gushtasp, the son of Lohrasp, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*2](#fn_2.md) a very <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>
powerful prince; and that in his reign flourished in the city of Balch,
on the borders of Chorassan, a most excellent philosopher, whose name
was Gjamasp, author of this book; wherein is contained an account of all
the great conjunctions of the planets which had happened before his
time, and which were to happen in succeeding ages; and wherein the
appearances of new religions and the rise of new monarchies were exactly
set down. This author, throughout his whole piece, styles Zerdusht, or
Zoroaster, our Prophet. \[D’Herbelot, Bibl. Orient. Art. Gjamasp.\] The
notion of predicting the rise and progress of religions from the grand
conjunctions of the planets, has been likewise propagated in our western
parts: Cardan was a bold assertor of this doctrine. The modern Persians
are still great votaries of astrology, and although they distinguish
between it and astronomy, they have but one word to express astronomer
and astrologer; viz. *manegjim*, which is exactly equivalent to the
Greek word αστρολογος. Of all the provinces of Persia, Chorassan is the
most famous for producing great men in that art; and in Chorassan there
is a little town called Genabed, and in that town a certain family
which, for 6 or 700 years past, has produced the most famous astrologers
in Persia; and the king's astrologer is always either a native of
Genabed, or one brought up there. Sir John Chardin affirms that the
appointments in his time for these sages amounted to six millions of
French livres per annum.--Albumazar of Balch (scholar of Alkendi, a Jew,
who was professor of judicial astrology at Bagdad, in the Caliphate of
Almamoum <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*3](#fn_3).md) became wonderfully famous.
He wrote expressly from the Persian astrologers, and it may be from the
works of Gjamasp, since he also reports a prediction of the coming of
Christ in the following words: viz. 'In the sphere of Persia, saith Aben
Ezra, there ariseth upon the face of the sign Virgo a beautiful maiden,
she holding two ears of corn in her hand, and a child in her arm: she
feedeth him, and giveth him suck, &c. This maiden,' saith Albumazar, 'we
call Adrenedefa, the pure Virgin. She bringeth up a child in a place
which is called Abrie \[the Hebrew land\], and the child's name is
called Eisi \[Jesus\].' This made Albertus Magnus believe that our
Saviour, Christ, was born in Virgo; and therefore Cardinal Alliac,
erecting our Lord's nativity by his description, casteth this sign into
the horoscope. But the meaning of Albumazar was, saith Friar Bacon, that
the said virgin was born, the Sun being in that sign, and so it is noted
in the calendar; and that she was to bring up her son in the Hebrew
land. \[Mr. John Gregory's Notes on various Passages of
Scripture.\]"--*Ancient Universal History*, *vol*. 5, *pp*. 415 *to*
419.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xi:\*1](ptb03.htm#fr_1.md) It is maintained by
astrologers, that the planets, *having been observed* to produce certain
effects, were consequently dedicated to the several personages whose
names they respectively bear.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:\*2](ptb03.htm#fr_2.md) This seems to be a
mistake of the Arabian author, for Gushtasp was identical with Darius
Hystaspis, and Lohrasp \[otherwise Cyaxares\] was father of Darius the
Mede, who was overcome by Cyrus, 536 B.C.--See Newton.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:\*3](ptb03.htm#fr_3.md) This caliph reigned in
the earlier part of the 9th century, and caused Ptolemy's Great
Construction to be translated into Arabic, as hereafter mentioned.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xv:1](ptb03.htm#fr_4.md) To this view of the case,
the following remarks seem not inapplicable: they are taken from a
periodical work of deserved reputation:--

"The study of astrology itself, as professing to discover, by celestial
phenomena, future mutations in the elements and terrestrial bodies,
ought, perhaps, not to be despised. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md)
The theory of the tides, for example, is altogether an astrological
doctrine, and, long before the days of Sir Isaac Newton, was as well
understood as it is at this moment. The correspondence alleged by the
ancient physicians to exist between the positions of the Moon and the
stages of various diseases, is so far from being rejected by the modern
faculty, that it has been openly maintained." <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6.md) The writer then recounts sundry incidents,
asserted by the astrologers to be dependent on the Moon, and he adds
these words: "The fact of these allegations might be so easily
ascertained, that it is surprising they should still be pronounced
incredible, and *denied* rather than *contradicted*."

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xv:2](ptb03.htm#fr_5.md) "Sir Christopher Heydon's
Defence of Astrology, p. 2, edit. 1603."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xv:3](ptb03.htm#fr_6.md) "Dr. Mead on the Influence
of the Sun and Moon upon Human Bodies. See also Edinb. Rev. vol. 12, p.
36--Balfour on Sol-Lunar Influence." *Blackwood's Magazine for Dec*.,
1821, *Part* 2, *No*. 59.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xvi:1](ptb03.htm#fr_7.md) In the 51st No. of the
Quarterly Review, Art. "*Astrology and Alchymy*," the following
observations are made:

"Certainly, if man may ever found his glory on the achievements of his
wisdom, he may reasonably exult in the discoveries of astronomy; but the
knowledge which avails us has been created solely by the absurdities
which it has extirpated. Delusion became the basis of truth. Horoscopes
and nativities have taught us to place the planet in its sure and silent
path; and the acquirements which, of all others, now testify the might
of the human intellect, derived their origin from weakness and
credulity" (p. 181). Again; "Astrology, like alchymy, derives no
protection from sober reason; yet, with all its vanity and idleness, it
was not a corrupting weakness. Tokens, predictions, prognostics, possess
a psychological reality. All events are but the consummation of
preceding causes, clearly felt, but not distinctly apprehended. When the
strain is sounded, the most untutored listener can tell that it will end
with the key-note, though he cannot explain why each successive bar must
at last lead to the concluding chord. The omen embodies the
presentiment, and receives its consistency from our hopes or fears." (p.
208).

It may, perhaps, be difficult to assent to all of the propositions
involved in these extracts; but there are among them some which are
clearly unquestionable.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xvii:1](ptb03.htm#fr_8.md) This edition was printed
in double columns, one containing Proclus's Greek Paraphrase, the other
the Latin translation of Leo Allatius; and William Lilly (no light
authority in these matters) thus wrote of it in the year 1647: "Indeed
Ptolemy hath been printed in folio, in quarto, in octavo, in sixteens:
that lately printed at Leyden" \[where the Elzevirs were established\]
"I <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> conceive to be most exact; it
was performed by Allatius." To the said edition is prefixed an anonymous
address to the reader, in Latin, and to the following effect:--

"I have reckoned it part of my duty to give you, benevolent reader, some
short information as to the publication of this little work, which,
having hitherto existed only in Greek, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*1](#fn_9.md) is now, in its Latin dress, accessible to
the curiosity of all persons. This Paraphrase of Proclus on the
Tetrabiblos of Ptolemy was translated a few years ago by Leo Allatius, a
Greek by birth, eminently skilled in the learning of his own nation, as
well as in Latin literature, and already celebrated for other writings
in both languages. He lives, I have understood, in Rome, in the family
of Cardinal Biscia, and holds some office in the Vatican Library. He
undertook his present work, however, for his own private gratification,
and that of certain friends; but when writings compiled with this view
have once quitted their author's hands, it will often happen that they
have also, at the same time, escaped his control. So this offspring of
Allatius, having, emerged from Rome, arrived at Venice, from whence it
was forwarded to me by a certain great personage of illustrious rank, in
order that I might cause it to be printed. The names of Ptolemy and
Proclus, so celebrated among mathematicians and philosophers, besides
the subject of the work itself, seemed to me a sufficient warrant for
committing it to the press. Whereupon I delayed not to avail myself of
the advantages I possessed in having access to our excellent and most
accurate typographers, the Elzevirs, and I earnestly solicited them to
publish it: they, in their love for the commonwealth of letters, took
upon themselves the charge of printing it in the form you see. You will
learn from it, inquisitive Reader, how much power the stars have over
the atmosphere and all sublunary things: for the stars, and those
brighter bodies of heaven, must not be imagined to be idle. The whole
doctrine of the stars is not, however, here treated of, but only that
distinct part of it which the Greeks call judicial and prognostic, and
which, while confined within certain limits is as entertaining as it is
useful, and is partly considered to be agreeable to nature.
[But](errata.htm#0.md) should it pretend to subject to the skies such
things as do not depend thereupon, and should it invite us to foresee by
the stars such things as are above the weakness of our apprehension, it
will assuredly deserve to be reprehended as a vain and empty art, which
has been demonstrated in many learned books by <span id="page_xix">p.
xix</span> the great Picus of Mirandola. The Chaldæans, Genethliacs, and
Planetarians, have been always held in disrepute, because they professed
to know not only more than they actually did know, but also more than is
allowed to man to know. Even Ptolemy, while he employs himself in his
present work upon the Doctrine of Nativities, is scarcely free from the
charge of superstition and vanity: perhaps, in a Pagan, this may be
forgiven; but it is hardly to be tolerated, that persons professing
Christianity should be led away by such an empty study, in which there
is no solid utility, and the whole pleasure of which is puerile.
Finally, I warn you that some persons doubt whether this was really
produced by Ptolemy <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*2](#fn_10.md): nevertheless,
it has certainly appeared to Porphyry and Proclus (who were doubtless
great philosophers, although hostile to the Christian faith) to be
worthy of receiving elucidation by their Commentaries upon it. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*3](#fn_11.md) Peruse it, however, friendly reader,
with caution, having first shaken off the weakness of credulity, for the
sinew of wisdom is not to believe rashly. Farewell."

In addition to the remarks made in the foregoing address regarding Leo
Allatius, it may be observed that he was appointed Keeper of the Vatican
Library by Pope Alexander VII, with whom he was in high favour. It is
said of him, that he had a pen with which he had written Greek for forty
years, and that he shed tears on losing it. Another story of him states,
that the Pope had often urged him to take holy orders, that he might be
advanced in the church, and one day asked him why he had not done so:
"Because," said Allatius, "I would be free to marry."--"Why, then, do
you not marry?"--"Because I would be free to take orders."--*Chalmer's
Biographical Dictionary*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xvii:\*1](ptb03.htm#fr_9.md) This assertion is
applicable only to Proclus's Paraphrase. There were several prior
translations of the original Tetrabiblos in Latin and Arabic; and it
appears by an extract from the Bibliotheca Græca of Fabricius \[which
will be found in a subsequent page\], that a Latin version, done from
the Arabic, was printed at Venice as early as the year 1493.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvii:\*2](ptb03.htm#fr_10.md) The reader is again
referred to the extract from Fabricius (inserted in a subsequent page),
containing that learned person's account of this book among the other
works of Ptolemy.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvii:\*3](ptb03.htm#fr_11.md) Their Commentaries
were printed at Basle, in 1559.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xviii:1](ptb03.htm#fr_12.md) This translation from
the Perugio press has been serviceable in presenting certain various
readings; but it does not seem to possess any other peculiar merit. It
professes to be a translation from the original text of Ptolemy; and so
likewise does the translation printed at Basle, as above quoted.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xix:1](ptb03.htm#fr_13.md) It appears by the
printed works of this author, that he was named Didacus Placidus de
Titis. He was a native of Bologna, by profession a monk, and was styled
Mathematician to the Archduke Leopold William of Austria. He wrote in
the earlier part of the 17th century, and his work, now cited, is
considered to contain the most successful application of Ptolemy's
astrological rules to practice. The original is extremely scarce; but a
new English edition, by Cooper, may be had of the Publishers of this
work.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xx:1](ptb03.htm#fr_14.md) Printed at Basle, 1541.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xx:2](ptb03.htm#fr_15.md) Chalmer's Biographical
Dictionary.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxi:1](ptb03.htm#fr_16.md) In France, about the
beginning of the 16th century, Oronce Finé, the Royal Reader, attempted,
under the patronage of Francis I, to produce an astronomical clock, in
which everything moved according to the principles of Ptolemy. It was
kept, about fifty years ago, in the monastery of St. Genevieve, at
Paris. In Lilly's Catalogue of Astrological Authors, Orontius Finæus is
mentioned as the writer of a work on the twelve houses of heaven,
printed in Paris, 1553.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxi:2](ptb03.htm#fr_17.md) *Spectacle de la
Nature*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxi:3](ptb03.htm#fr_18.md) The objection which has
been urged against astrology, that the signs are continually moving from
their positions, cannot invalidate this conclusion. That objection has,
in fact, no real existence; for Ptolemy seems to have been aware of this
motion of the signs, and has fully provided for it in the 25th Chapter
of the 1st Book of the Tetrabiblos. From that chapter it is clear that
the respective influences he ascribes to the twelve signs (or divisions
of the zodiac) were considered by him as appurtenant to the *places*
they occupied, and not to the *stars* of which they were composed. He
has expressly and repeatedly declared that the point of the vernal
equinox is ever the beginning of the zodiac, and that the 30 degrees
following it ever retain the same virtue as that which he has in this
work attributed to Aries, although the stars forming Aries may <span
id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> have quitted those degrees: the next 30
degrees are still be accounted as Taurus, and so of the rest. There is
abundant proof throughout the Tetrabiblos, that Ptolemy considered the
virtues of the *constellations* of the zodiac distinctly from those of
the *spaces* they occupied.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxii:1](ptb03.htm#fr_19.md) The French say 813,
but 827 is the date given by English chronologists.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxii:2](ptb03.htm#fr_20.md) This scientific man
was a Mathurine Friar, and a professor in the University of Paris: he
died in 1256. It is pointed out in the Edinburgh Review, No. 68, that he
was a native of Yorkshire, and his real name John Holywood, euphonized,
in Paris, into Sacrobosco.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxii:3](ptb03.htm#fr_21.md) Chalmers.--The
Tetrabiblos was among these works.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxii:4](ptb03.htm#fr_22.md) To such readers as may
be curious to know in what manner this book was promulgated in Europe,
after the revival of letters, the following extract from the Bibliotheca
Græca of Fabricius will furnish information:--

"Lib. IV. Cap. XIV. §4. *Τετραβιβλος, Συνταξις Μαθηματικη
Quadripartitum, sive quatuor libri de apotelesmatibus et judiciis
astrorum, ad Syrum* (h). Græce primum editi a *Joachimo Camerario*, cum
versione suâ duorum priorum librorum, et præcipuorum e reliquis locorum.
Norimb. 1535, 4to.--Hinc cum versione *Phil*. Melancthonis, qui in
præfat. ad Erasmum Ebnerum Senatorem Norimbergensem testatur se
editionem Camerarii multis mendis purgasse, tum numeros in locis
apheticis tam Græci quam Latini textus emendasse. Basil, 1553,
8vo.--*Latine* pridem verterat *Ægidius Tebaldinus*, sive latino-barbaré
ex Hispanica versione, Alfonsi Castellæ Regis jussu, ex Arabico (i)
confectâ. Vertit et *Antonius Gogava*, Lovan. 1548, 4to; Patavii, 1658,
12mo; Pragæ, 1610, 12mo. Commentario illustravit *Hieron*. *Cardanus*
prioribus duobus libris Camerarii, posterioribus Gogavæ versione
servatâ, Basil, 1554, fol.; 1579, fol.; Lugd. 1555, 8vo, et in Cardani
opp.--*Georgii Vallæ* commentarius, anno 1502 editus, nihil aliud est,
quam Latina versio scholiorum <span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>
Græcorum, sive exegeseos jejunæ *Demophili* in tetrabiblon, quæ cum
*Porphyrii* sive *Antiochi* isagoge, Græce et Latine, addita *Hieron
Wolfii* versione, lucem vidit Basil. 1559, fol. In his scholiis
Dorotheus allegatur, p. 48, Ito, et 139; Cleopatra, p. 88; Porphyrius
Philosophus, p. 169. Meminit et auctor Petosiridis ac Necepso, p.
112:--λεγει δε παλαιον τον Νεχεψω (ita leg. pro χεψω ut p. 112) και
Πετοσιριν, ουτοι γαρ πρωτοι το δἰ ασρολογιας εχηπλωσαν προγνωσικον <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*1](#fn_23.md) Paraphrasin tetrabibli a *Proclo*
concinnatam Græce edidit Melancthon, Basil. 1554, 8vo. Grace et Latine
cum versione suâ *Leo Allatius*, Lugd. Batav. 1654, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*2](#fn_24.md) 8vo. Locum Ptolemæi e codice Græco MS.
in collegio Corporis Christi Oxon, feliciter restituit Seldenus, p. 35
ad Marmora Arundeliana. Haly Heben Rodoan Arabis commentarium laudat
Cardanus, cum Demophilo Latine editum."

"(h) Schol. Græc.--Προσφωνει τω Συρω ο Πτολεμαιος το βιβλιον, προς ον
και τας αλλας αυτου πασασ πραγματειας προσεφωνησεν. Λεγουσι δε τινες ως
πεπλασαι αυτο το του Συρω ονομα. Αλλοι δε οτι ου πεπλασαι, αλλ᾽ ιατρος
νυ ουτος αχθεις και δια τουτων των μαθηματων.

"(i) Selden. Uxor Hebr. p. 342. Cæterum de Alphonsi Regis curâ in
promovenda Arabica Quadripartiti versione, vide, si placet, Nic:
Antonium in Bibl. veteri Hispana, t. 2, p. 55, vel Acta Erud. A. 1697,
p. 302. Latino versio ex Arabico facta lucem vidit Venet, 1493, fol.
Viderit porro Gassendus qui in Philosophia Epicuri, ubi contra
Astrologos disputat. t. 2, p. 501. contendit tetrabiblon indignum esse
Ptolemæi genio et subdititum. Equidem Jo. Pico judice, l. 1, contra
Astrologos, p. 285, Ptolemæus *malorum* sive Apotelesmaticorum est
*optimus*."

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxii:\*1](ptb03.htm#fr_23.md) "Nechepsos and
Petosiris are anciently spoken of, for they first explained
prognostication by Astrology."

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxii:\*2](ptb03.htm#fr_24.md) This was perhaps a
reprint of the edition of 1635, from which the present translation has
been made; unless there may have been an error of the press in stating
1654 instead of 1635, which seems probable, as the edition of 1635 is
unnoticed by Fabricius.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxiii:1](ptb03.htm#fr_25.md) It will be seen by
the preceding note, that Proclus's Paraphrase of the Tetrabiblos should
properly be considered as superior to the other readings of that book;
since it appears, on the authority of Fabricius, that Melancthon, after
having been at the pains of correcting and republishing, in 1553 (with
his own emendations), the edition of Camerarius, containing the reputed
original text, still deemed it advisible, in the following year, to edit
Proclus's Paraphrase. This Paraphrase must, therefore, necessarily have
had claims to his attention not found in the text he had previously
edited <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*1](#fn_26.md).

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxiii:\*1](ptb03.htm#fr_26.md) "Ptolemy addresses
the book to Syrus, to whom he has also addressed all his other
treatises. Some say that this name of Syrus was feigned; others, that it
was not feigned, but that he was a physician, and educated in these
sciences."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxiv:1](ptb03.htm#fr_27.md) Chalmer's Biographical
Dictionary.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxiv:2](ptb03.htm#fr_28.md) It will, of course, be
understood that this Commentary is distinct from his Paraphrase, now
translated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Proem](ptb04.md)
