[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb04)  [Next](ptb06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

### KNOWLEDGE MAY BE ACQUIRED BY ASTRONOMY TO A CERTAIN EXTENT

THAT a certain power, derived from the æthereal nature, is diffused over
and pervades the whole atmosphere of the earth, is clearly evident to
all men. Fire and air, the first of the sublunary elements, are
encompassed and altered by the motions of the æther. These elements in
their turn encompass all inferior matter, and vary it as they themselves
are varied; acting on earth and water, on plants and animals. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The Sun, always acting in connection with the Ambient, contributes to
the regulation of all earthly things: not only by the revolution of the
seasons does he bring to perfection the embryo of animals, the buds of
plants, the spring of waters, and the alteration of bodies, but by his
daily progress also he operates other changes in light, heat, moisture,
dryness and cold; dependent upon his situation with regard to the
zenith.

The Moon, being of all the heavenly bodies the nearest to the Earth,
also dispenses much influence; and things animate and inanimate
sympathize and vary with her. By the changes of her illumination, rivers
swell and are reduced; the tides of the sea are ruled by her risings and
settings; and plants and animals are expanded or collapsed, if not
entirely at least partially, as she waxes or wanes.

The stars likewise (as well the fixed stars as the planets), in
performing their revolutions, <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md)
produce many impressions on the Ambient. They cause heats, winds, and
storms, to the influence of which earthly things are conformably
subjected.

And, further, the mutual configurations of all these heavenly bodies, by
commingling the influence with which each is separately invested,
produce a multiplicity of changes. The power of the Sun however
predominates, because it is more generally distributed; the others
either co-operate with his power or diminish its effect: the Moon more
frequently and more plainly performs this at her conjunction, at her
first and last quarter, and at her opposition: the stars act also to a
similar purpose, but at longer intervals and more obscurely than the
Moon; and their operation principally depends upon the mode of their
visibility, their occultation and their declination.

From these premises it follows not only that all bodies, which may be
already compounded, are subjected to the motion of the stars, but also
that the impregnation and growth of the seeds from which all bodies
proceed, are framed and moulded by the quality existing in the Ambient
at the time of such impregnation and growth. And it is upon this
principle that the more observant husbandmen and shepherds are
accustomed, by drawing their inferences from the particular breezes
which may happen at seed-time and at the impregnation of their cattle,
to form predictions as to the quality of the expected produce. In short,
however unlearned in the philosophy of nature, these men can foretell,
solely by their previous observation, all the more general and

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

usual effects which result from the plainer and more visible
configurations of the Sun, Moon, and stars. It is daily seen that even
most illiterate persons, with no other aid than their own experienced
observation, are capable of predicting events which may be consequent on
the more extended influence of the Sun and the more simple order of the
Ambient, and which may not be open to variation by any complex
configurations of the Moon and stars towards the Sun. There are,
moreover, among the brute creation, animals who evidently form
prognostication, and use this wonderful instinct at the changes of the
several seasons of the year, spring, summer, autumn, and winter; and,
also, at the changes of the wind.

In producing the changes of the seasons, the Sun itself is chiefly the
operating and visible cause. There are, however, other events which,
although they are not indicated in so simple a manner, but dependent on
a slight complication of causes in the Ambient, are also foreknown by
persons who have applied their observation to that end. Of this kind,
are tempests and gales of wind, produced by certain aspects of the Moon,
or the fixed stars, towards the Sun, according to their several courses,
and the approach of which is usually foreseen by mariners. At the same
time, prognostication made by persons of this class must be frequently
fallacious, owing to their deficiency in science and their consequent
inability to give necessary consideration to the time and place, or to
the revolutions of the planets; all which circumstances, when exactly
defined and understood, certainly tend towards accurate foreknowledge.

When, therefore, a thorough knowledge of the motions of the stars, and
of the Sun and Moon, shall have been acquired, and when the situation of
the place, the time, and all the configurations actually existing at
that place and time, shall also be duly known; and such knowledge be yet
further improved by an acquaintance with the natures of the heavenly
bodies--not of what they are composed, but of the effective influences
they possess; as, for instance, that heat is the property of the Sun,
and moisture of the Moon, and that other peculiar properties
respectively appertain to the rest of them;--when all these
qualifications for prescience may be possessed by any individual, there
seems no obstacle to deprive him of the insight, offered at once by
nature and his own judgment, into the effects arising out of the quality
of all the various influences compounded together. So that he will thus
be competent to predict the peculiar constitution of the atmosphere in
every season, as, for instance, with regard to its greater heat or
moisture, or other similar qualities; all which may be foreseen by the
visible position or configuration of the stars and the Moon towards the
Sun.

Since it is thus clearly practicable, by an accurate knowledge of the
points above enumerated, to make predictions concerning the proper
quality of the seasons, there also seems no impediment to the formation
of similar prognostication concerning the destiny and disposition of
every human being. For by the constitution of the Ambient, even at

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the time of any individual's primary conformation, the general quality
of that individual's temperament may be perceived; and the corporeal
shape and mental capacity with which the person will be endowed at birth
may be pronounced; as well as the favourable and unfavourable events
indicated by the state of the Ambient, and liable to attend the
individual at certain future periods; since, for instance, an event
dependent on one disposition of the Ambient will be advantageous to a
particular temperament, and that resulting from another unfavourable and
injurious. From these circumstances, and others of similar import, the
possibility of prescience is certainly evident.

There are, however, some plausible assailants of this doctrine, whose
attacks although greatly misapplied seem yet worthy of the following
observations.

In the first place, the science demands the greatest study and a
constant attention to a multitude of different points; and as all
persons who are but imperfectly practised in it must necessarily commit
frequent mistakes, it has been supposed that even such events as have
been truly predicted have taken place by chance only, and not from any
operative cause in nature. But it should be remembered that these
mistakes arise, not from any deficiency or want of power in the science
itself, but from the incompetency of unqualified persons who pretend to
exercise it. And, besides this, the majority of the persons who set
themselves up as professors of this science, avail themselves of its
name and credit for the sake of passing off some other mode of
divination; by that means defrauding the ignorant, and pretending to
foretell many things which from their nature cannot possibly be
foreknown; and consequently affording opportunities to more intelligent
people to impugn the value even of such predictions as can rationally be
made. The reproach, however, thus brought upon the science is wholly
unmerited; for it would be equally just to condemn all other branches of
philosophy, because each numbers among its professors some mischievous
pretenders.

Secondly, it is not attempted to be denied that any individual, although
he may have attained to the greatest possible accuracy in the science,
must still be liable to frequent error, arising out of the very nature
of his undertaking, and from the weakness of his limited capacity in
comparison with the magnitude of his object. For the whole theory of the
quality of matter is supported by inference rather than by positive and
scientific proof; and this is caused principally by the concretion of
its temperament out of a multitude of dissimilar ingredients. And,
although the former configurations of the planets have been observed to
produce certain consequences (which have been adapted to configurations
now taking place), and are, after long periods, and in a greater or less
degree, resembled by subsequent configurations, yet these subsequent
configurations never become exactly similar to those which have preceded
them. For an entire return of all the heavenly bodies to the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

exact situation in which they have once stood with regard to the earth
will never take place, or at least not in any period determinable by
human calculation, whatever vain attempts may be made to acquire such
unattainable knowledge. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) The examples
referred to for guidance being therefore not exactly similar to the
existing cases to which they are now applied, it must naturally follow
that predictions are sometimes not borne out by the events. Hence arises
the sole difficulty in the consideration of events produced by the
Ambient. For no other concurrent cause has been hitherto combined with
the motion of the heavenly bodies; although the doctrine of nativities,
particularly that part of it relating to peculiar individual
temperament, demands also the consideration of other concomitant causes,
which are neither trifling nor unimportant, but essentially potent in
affecting the individual properties of the creatures born. Thus the
variety in seed has the chief influence in supplying the peculiar
quality of each species; for, under the same disposition of the Ambient
and of the horizon, each various kind of seed prevails in determining
the distinct formation of its own proper species; thus man is born, or
the horse is foaled; and by the same law are brought forth all the other
various creatures and productions of the earth. It is also to be
remembered, that considerable variations are caused in all creatures by
the respective places where they may be brought forth: for although,
under the same disposition of the Ambient, the germs of the future
creatures may be of one species, whether human or of the horse, the
difference in situation, of the places in which they are generated,
produces a dissimilarity in the body and spirit of one from the body and
spirit of another: and in addition to this it must be considered that
different modes of nurture, and the variety of ranks, manners, and
customs, contribute to render the course of life of one individual
greatly different from that of another <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md); consequently,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

unless every one of these varieties be duly blended with the causes
arising in the Ambient, the prejudgment of any event will doubtless be
very incomplete. For, although the greatest multiplicity of power exists
in the Ambient, and although all other things act as concurrent causes
in unison with it, and can never claim it as a concurrent cause in
subservience to them, there will still, nevertheless, be a great
deficiency in predictions attempted to be made by means of the heavenly
motions alone, without regard to the other concurrent causes just now
adverted to.

Under these circumstances, it would seem judicious neither to deny
altogether the practicability of prescience, because prognostications
thus imperfectly derived are sometimes liable to be fallacious; nor, on
the other hand, to admit that all events, whatever, are open to previous
inquiry; as if such inquiry could in all cases be securely conducted
without having recourse to mere inference, and as if it were not limited
by the narrow extent of mere human abilities. The art of navigation, for
instance, is not rejected, although it is in many points incomplete;
therefore the bare fact that predictions are frequently imperfect cannot
authorise the rejection of the art of prescience: the magnitude of its
scope, and the faint resemblance that it bears to a divine attribute,
should rather demand grateful commendations, and receive the utmost
regard and attention. And, since no weakness is imputed to a physician,
because he inquires into the individual habit of his patient, as well as
into the nature of the disease, no imputation can justly attach to the
professor of prognostication, because he combines the consideration of
species, nurture, education and country, with that of the motion of the
heavens: for as the physician acts but reasonably, in thus considering
the proper constitution of the sick person as well as his disease; so,
in forming predictions, it must surely be justifiably allowable to
comprehend in that consideration every other thing connected with the
subject in addition to the motion of the heavens, and to collect and
compare with that motion all other co-operating circumstances arising
elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[2:1](ptb05.htm#fr_30.md) The following extract
from an old geographical work, framed on the rules of Ptolemy, explains
the system on which this action of the æther is made to depend:--

"Chap. 2. The world is divided into two parts, the elemental region and
the æthereal. The elemental region is constantly subject to alteration,
and comprises the four elements; earth, water, air and fire. The
æthereal region, which philosophers call the fifth essence, encompasses,
by its concavity, the elemental; its substance remains always unvaried,
and consists of ten spheres; of which the greater one always spherically
environs the next smaller, and so on in consecutive order. First,
therefore, around the sphere of fire, GOD, the creator of the world,
placed the sphere of the Moon, then that of Mercury, then that of Venus,
then that of the Sun, and afterwards those of Mars, of Jupiter, and of
Saturn. Each of these spheres, however, contains but one star: and these
stars, in passing through the zodiac, always struggle against the
*primum mobile*, or the motion of the tenth sphere; they are also
entirely luminous. In the next place follows the firmament, which is the
eighth or starry sphere, and which trembles or vibrates (*trepidat*) in
two small circles at the beginning of Aries and Libra (as placed in the
ninth sphere); this motion is called by astronomers the motion of the
access and recess of the fixed stars." (Probably in order to account for
the procession of the equinoxes.) "This is surrounded by the ninth
sphere, called the chrystalline or watery heaven, because no star is
discovered in it. Lastly, the *primum mobile*, styled also the tenth
sphere, encompasses all the before-mentioned æthereal spheres, and is
continually turned upon the poles of the world, by one revolution in
twenty-four hours, from the east through the meridian to the west, again
coming round to the east. At the same time, it rolls all the inferior
spheres round with it, by its own force; and there is no star in it.
Against this *primum mobile*, the motion of the other spheres, running
from the west through the meridian to the east, <span id="page_3">p.
3</span> contends. Whatever is beyond this, is fixed and immovable, and
the professors of our orthodox faith affirm it to be the empyrean heaven
which GOD inhabits with the elect."--Cosmographia of Peter Apianus
(named Benewitz), dedicated to the Archbishop of Saltzburg, edited by
Gemma Frisius, and printed at Antwerp 1574.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[3:1](ptb05.htm#fr_31.md) It will be recollected
that the Ptolemaic astronomy attributes motion and a regular course to
those stars which we now call fixed, but which the Greeks merely termed
απλανεις, *undeviating*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[6:1](ptb05.htm#fr_32.md) There seems reason to
suppose that this was a favourite speculation among the ancients. In
Scipio's Dream, as related by Cicero, the phantom of his illustrious
grandfather is made to speak of this entire return of all the celestial
bodies to some original position which they once held, as being the
completion of the revolution of one great universal year: and the
phantom adds, "but I must acquaint you that not one-twentieth part of
that great year has been yet accomplished."

This quotation is from memory, and perhaps may not be verbally correct.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[6:2](ptb05.htm#fr_33.md) In this passage the
author seems to have anticipated, and exposed the absurdity of an
argument now considered very forcible against astrology: viz. that "if
the art were true, then any two individuals born under the same
meridian, in the same latitude, and at the same moment of time, must
have one and the same destiny; although one were born a prince, and the
other a mendicant." Such a monstrous conclusion is nowhere authorized by
any astrological writer; it is, on the contrary, always maintained by
all of them, that the worldly differences and distinctions, alluded to
in the text, inevitably <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> prevent this exact
resemblance of destiny; and all that they presume to assert is, that, in
their respective degrees, any two individuals, so born, will have a
partial similarity in the leading features of their fate. Whether their
assertion is *uniformly* borne out, I will not take upon me to
determine, but it would be unfair not to subjoin the following fact:--

In the newspapers of the month of February, 1820, the death of a Mr.
Samuel Hemmings is noticed: it was stated that he had been an
ironmonger, and prosperous in trade; that he was born on the 4th of
June, 1738, at nearly the same moment as his late Majesty, and in the
same parish of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields; that he went into business
for himself in October, 1760; that he married on the 8th September,
1761; and finally, after other events of his life had resembled those
which happened to the late King, that he died on Saturday, the 29th
January, 1820.

These coincidences are, at least, highly remarkable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. That Prescience is Useful](ptb06.md)
