[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb03)  [Next](ptb05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS

###### OR

## FOUR BOOKS

###### OF THE

### *INFLUENCE OF THE STARS*

# BOOK THE FIRST

### CHAPTER I

### PROEM

The studies preliminary to astronomical prognostication, O Syrus! are
two: the one, first alike in order and in power, leads to the knowledge
of the figurations of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars; and of their
relative aspects to each other, and to the earth: the other takes into
consideration the changes which their aspects create, by means of their
natural properties, in objects under their influence.

The first mentioned study has been already explained in the
Syntaxis <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) to the utmost practicable
extent; for it is complete in itself, and of essential utility even
without being blended with the second; to which this treatise will be
devoted, and which is not equally self-complete. The present work shall,
however, be regulated by that due regard for truth which philosophy
demands: and since the material quality of the objects acted upon
renders them weak and variable, and difficult to be accurately
apprehended, no positive or infallible rules (as were given in detailing
the first doctrine, which is always governed by the same immutable laws)
can be here set forth: while, on the other hand, a due observation of
most of those general events, which evidently trace their causes to the
Ambient, shall not be omitted.

It is, however, a common practice with the vulgar to slander everything
which is difficult of attainment, and surely they who condemn the first
of these two studies must be considered totally blind, whatever
arguments may be produced in support of those who impugn the second.
There are also persons who imagine that whatever they

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

themselves have not been able to acquire, must be utterly beyond the
reach of all understanding; while others again will consider as useless
any science of which (although they may have been often instructed in
it) they have failed to preserve the recollection, owing to its
difficulty of retention. In reference to these opinions, therefore, an
endeavour shall be made to investigate the extent to which
prognostication by astronomy is practicable, as well as serviceable,
previously to detailing the particulars of the doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[1:1](ptb04.htm#fr_29.md) The Almagest, or *Magna
Constructio*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Knowledge May Be Acquired by Astronomy to a Certain
Extent](ptb05.md)
