[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb15)  [Next](ptb17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII

### THE INFLUENCE OF THE FOUR ANGLES

THE angles are the four cardinal points of the horizon, whence are
derived the general names of the winds. With respect to their qualities,
it is to be observed that the eastern point, or angle of the ascendant,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

is chiefly dry in its nature; because, on the Sun's arrival therein, the
damps occasioned by the night begin to be dried up: and all winds
blowing from that quarter, under the common name of east winds, are arid
and free from moisture.

The southern point, or angle of the mid-heaven, is the most hot; because
the Sun's [meridian](errata.htm#3.md) position, which produces greater
warmth and heat, declines (in this part of the earth) towards the south.
The winds, therefore, which blow from that quarter, and are commonly
called south winds, are hot and rarefying.

The western point, or occidental angle, is moist; because, when the Sun
is there, the moisture, which had been overpowered during the day,
recommences its operation: and the winds proceeding from thence, and
commonly called west winds, are light and damp.

The northern point, or angle of the lower heaven, is the most cold; for
the Sun's meridian position in this part of the earth is far removed
from it in declination: and all winds thence proceeding, under the
common name of north winds, are cold and frosty.

It will, of course, be seen that a thorough acquaintance with the
fore-going matters is essential in order to acquire the faculty of
distinguishing temperaments in every shape and variation: since it is
sufficiently obvious that the effective influence of the stars must be
greatly diversified by the constitutions of the seasons, as well as
those of the ages of life, and of the angles; and also that the stars
have a much stronger influence on any constitution, when there may not
be in it any tendency contrary to their own, as the whole influence is
then entire and unalloyed For example, stars effecting heat operate more
vigorously in constitutions of heat; and those effecting moisture in
constitutions of moisture. On the other hand, should a tendency,
contrary to their own, exist in any constitution, the stars accordingly
become less efficacious; in consequence of being attempered and mixed
with that contrary tendency: and this happens, for instance, when stars
effecting heat are attempered by constitutions of cold, or stars
producing moisture by constitutions of dryness. The influence of every
star is thus modified by the proportion-ate admixture presented by
constitutions of a nature different from its own.

In succession to the previous instructions, the following description of
the natural and peculiar properties of the signs of the zodiac is
annexed: the general temperaments of the signs are analogous to those of
the seasons, which are respectively established under each sign, but
they have, also, certain peculiar energies, arising from their
familiarity with the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, which shall be
hereafter specified;--and the simple and unmixed influences existing in
the signs, as considered only in themselves and with regard to each
other, will be first stated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Tropical, Equinoctial, Fixed, and Bicorporeal
Signs](ptb17.md)
