[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb09)  [Next](ptb11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

### DIURNAL AND NOCTURNAL

THE day and the night are the visible divisions of time. The day, in its
heat and its aptitude for action, is masculine:--the night, in its
moisture and its appropriation to rest, feminine.

Hence, again, the Moon and Venus are esteemed to be nocturnal; the Sun
and Jupiter, diurnal; and Mercury, common; since in his matutine
position he is diurnal, but nocturnal when vespertine.

Of the other two planets, Saturn and Mars, which are noxious, one is
considered to be diurnal, and the other nocturnal. Neither of them,
however, is allotted to that division of time with which its nature
accords (as heat accords with heat), but each is disposed of on a
contrary principle: and for this reason, that, although the benefit is
increased when a favourable temperament receives an addition of its own
nature, yet, the evil arising from a pernicious influence is much
mitigated when dissimilar qualities are mingled with that influence.
Hence the coldness of Saturn is allotted to the day, to counterbalance
its heat; and the dryness of Mars to the night, to counterbalance its
moisture. Thus each of these planets, being moderated by this
combination, is placed in a condition calculated to produce a favourable
temperament. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[15:2](ptb10.htm#fr_41.md) Whalley here appends the
following note: "To this chapter may be properly added, that a planet is
said to be diurnal, when, in a diurnal nativity, above the earth; and,
in a nocturnal nativity, under the earth: but nocturnal, when, in a
nocturnal nativity, above the earth; or, in a diurnal nativity, under
the earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Influence of Position with Regard to the
Sun](ptb11.md)
