[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb10)  [Next](ptb12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### THE INFLUENCE OF POSITION WITH REGARD TO THE SUN

THE respective powers of the Moon and of the three superior planets are
either augmented or diminished by their several positions with regard to
the Sun.

The Moon, during her increase, from her first emerging to her first
quarter, produces chiefly moisture; on continuing her increase from her
first quarter to her full state of illumination, she causes heat; from
her full state to her third quarter she causes dryness; and from her
third quarter to her occultation she causes cold.

The planets, when matutine, and from their first emerging until they
arrive at their first station, are chiefly productive of moisture; from
their first station until they rise at night, of heat; from their rising
at night until their second station, of dryness; and from their second
station until their occultation, they produce cold. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

But it is also sufficiently plain that they must likewise cause, by
their intermixture with each other, many varieties of quality in the
Ambient: because, although their individual and peculiar influence may
for the most part prevail, it will still be more or less varied by the
power of the other heavenly bodies configurated with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[16:1](ptb11.htm#fr_42.md) Although all the
positions mentioned in this paragraph are not applicable to Venus and
Mercury, which can never rise at night, that is to say, at sunset, and
although the author in the beginning of the chapter speaks only of the
Moon and the three superior planets, there yet seems no reason why the
orbits of Venus and Mercury should not be similarly divided by their
inferior and superior conjunctions, and their greatest elongations.

The following is from Whalley: "The first station, in this chapter
mentioned, is when a planet begins to be retrograde; and the second
station when, from retrogradation, a planet becomes direct. They" (the
planets) "begin to rise at night when in opposition to the Sun."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Influence of the Fixed Stars](ptb12.md)
