[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb22)  [Next](ptb24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### CHAPTER XX

### HOUSES OF THE PLANETS

THOSE stars which are denominated planetary orbs have particular
familiarity with certain places in the zodiac, by means of parts
designated as their houses, and also by their triplicities, exaltations,
terms, and so forth.

The nature of their familiarity by houses is as follows:

Cancer and Leo are the most northerly of all the twelve signs; they
approach nearer than the other signs to the zenith of this part of the
earth, and thereby cause warmth and heat: they are consequently
appropriated as houses for the two principal and greater luminaries; Leo
for the Sun, as being masculine; and Cancer for the Moon, as being
feminine. It has hence resulted, that the semicircle from Leo to
Capricorn has been ordained solar, and the semicircle from Aquarius to
Cancer, lunar; in order that each planet might occupy one sign in each
semicircle, and thus have one of its houses configurated with the Sun
and the other with the Moon, conformably to the motions of its own
sphere, and the peculiar properties of its nature.

Saturn, therefore, since he is cold and inimical to heat, moving also in
a superior orbit most remote from the luminaries, occupies the signs
opposite to Cancer and Leo: these are Aquarius and Capricorn; and they
are assigned to him in consideration of their cold and wintry nature;
and because the configuration by opposition does not co-operate towards
the production of good. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

Jupiter has a favourable temperament, and is situated beneath the sphere
of Saturn; he therefore occupies the next two signs, Sagittarius

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

and Pisces. These signs are airy and fruitful, in consequence of their
trinal distance from the houses of the luminaries, which distance
harmonises with the operation of good.

Mars is dry in nature, and beneath the sphere of Jupiter: he takes the
next two signs, of a nature similar to his own, viz. Aries and Scorpio,
whose relative distances from the houses of the luminaries are injurious
and discordant.

Venus, possessing a favourable temperament, and placed beneath the
sphere of Mars, takes the next two signs, Taurus and Libra. These are of
a fruitful nature, and preserve harmony by the sextile distance; and
this planet is never more than two signs distant from the Sun.

Mercury never has greater distance from the Sun than the space of one
sign, and is beneath all the other planets: hence he is placed nearest
to both luminaries, and the remaining two signs, Gemini and Virgo, are
allotted to him. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[28:1](ptb23.htm#fr_59.md) Saturn being also
malefic in his nature.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[29:1](ptb23.htm#fr_60.md) The planets, having two
houses, are said to be more powerful in one by day and in the other by
night: thus,

<div align="center">

|           |              |             |                 |           |
|-----------|--------------|-------------|-----------------|-----------|
| Saturn's  | day house is | Aquarius,   | his night house | Capricorn |
| Jupiter's | ------       | Sagittarius | ------          | Pisces    |
| Mar's     | ------       | Aries       | ------          | Scorpio   |
| Venus's   | ------       | Taurus      | ------          | Libra     |
| Mercury's | ------       | Gemini      | ------          | Virgo     |

</div>

\[paragraph continues\] The above is from Whalley; but the same
disposition is to be found in all modern astrological writers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. The Triplicities](ptb24.md)
