[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb24)  [Next](ptb26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### CHAPTER XXII

### EXALTATIONS

THAT which is termed the exaltation of the planets is considered by the
following rules:

The Sun on his entrance into Aries is then passing into the higher and
more northern semicircle; but, on his entrance into Libra, into the more
southern and lower one: his exaltation, therefore, is determined to be
in Aries, as, when present in that sign, he begins to lengthen the days,
and the influence of his heating nature increases at the same time. His
fall is placed in Libra, for the converse reasons.

Saturn on the contrary, in order to preserve his station opposite to the
Sun, in this respect, as well as in regard to their respective houses,
obtains his exaltation in Libra, and his fall in Aries: since, in all
cases, the increase of heat must be attended by a diminution of cold,
and the increase of cold by a diminution of heat.

The Mood, again, after conjunction with the Sun in Aries, the seat of
his exaltation, makes her first appearance, and begins to augment her
light in Taurus, the first sign of her own triplicity, which is
consequently ascribed to be her exaltation; while Scorpio, the opposite
sign, is her fall.

Jupiter, since he is efficacious in exciting fruitful breezes from the
north, and since he becomes most northerly, and augments his peculiar
influence when in Cancer, accordingly obtains his exaltation in that
sign, and his fall in Capricorn.

Mars possesses a fiery nature, which receives its greatest intensity in
Capricorn, in which sign this planet becomes most southerly; his
exaltation is therefore placed in Capricorn, in opposition to that of
Jupiter, and his fall in Cancer.

Venus is of a moist nature, and becomes chiefly moist when in Pisces.
Under that sign a dampness begins to be perceptible in the atmosphere,
and Venus, from being in that sign, derives an augmentation of her own
proper influence: her exaltation is consequently placed therein, and her
fall in Virgo.

Mercury is of a nature opposite to that of Venus, and is more dry: in
opposition to her, therefore, he takes his exaltation in Virgo, in which
sign the autumnal dryness makes its first appearance; and he receives
his fall in Pisces.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. The Disposition of the Terms](ptb26.md)
