[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb21)  [Next](ptb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

### SIGNS INCONJUNCT

ALL signs, between which there does not exist any familiarity in any of
the modes above specified, are inconjunct and separated.

For instance, all signs are inconjunct which are neither commanding nor
obeying, and not beholding each other nor of equal power, as well as all
signs which contain between them the space of one sign only, or the
space of five signs, and which do not at all share in any of the four
prescribed configurations: viz. the opposition, the trine, the quartile,
and the sextile. All parts which are distant from each other in the
space of one sign only are considered inconjunct, because they are
averted, as it were, from each other; and because, although the said
space between them may extend into two signs, the whole only contains an
angle equal to that of one sign: all parts distant from each other in
the space of five signs are also considered inconjunct, because they
divide the whole circle into unequal parts; whereas the spaces contained
in the configurations above-mentioned, viz. the opposition, trine,
quartile, and sextile, produce aliquot divisions. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[27:1](ptb22.htm#fr_57) It has never been very
clearly shown how the followers of Ptolemy have reconciled the new
aspects \[called the semiquadrate, quintile, sesquiquadrate, biquintile,
&c.\] with the *veto* pronounced in this chapter. Kepler is said to have
invented them, and they have been universally adopted; even Placidus,
who has applied Ptolemy's doctrine to practice better than any other
writer, has availed himself of them, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[\*1](#fn_58) and, if the nativities published by him
are to be credited, he has fully established their importance.

Salmon, in his "Horæ Mathematicæ," beforementioned, gives a long
dissertation (from p. 403 to p. 414) on the old Ptolemaic aspects,
illustrative of their foundation in nature and in mathematics; and,
although his conclusions are not quite satisfactorily drawn, some of his
arguments would seem appropriate, if he had but handled them more fully
and expertly; particularly where he says that the aspects are derived
"from the aliquot parts of a circle, wherein observe that, although the
zodiac may have many more aliquot parts than these four (the sextile,
quartile, trine, and opposition), yet those other aliquot parts of the
circle, or 360 degrees, will not make an aliquot division of the signs
also, which in this design was sought to answer, as well in the number
12, as in the number 360." The passage in which he endeavours to show
that they are authorized by their projection, also deserves attention.

All Salmon's arguments, however, in support of the old Ptolemaic
aspects, militate against the new Keplerian ones; and so does the
following extract <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> from the "Astrological
Discourse" of Sir Christopher Heydon: "For thus, amongst all ordinate
planes that may be inscribed, there are two whose sides, joined
together, have pre-eminence to take up a semicircle, but only the
hexagon, quadrate, and equilateral triangle, answering to the sextile,
quartile, and trine irradiated. The subtense, therefore, of a sextile
aspect consisteth of two signs, which, joined to the subtense of a
trine, composed of four, being regular and equilateral, take up six
signs, which is a complete semicircle. In like manner, the sides of a
quadrate inscribed, subtending three signs, twice reckoned, do occupy
likewise the mediety of a circle. And what those figures are before said
to perform" (that is, to take up a semicircle) "either doubled or joined
together, may also be truly ascribed unto the opposite aspect by itself;
for that the diametral line, which passeth from the place of conjunction
to the opposite point, divideth a circle into two equal parts: the like
whereof cannot be found in any other inscripts; for example, the *side
of a regular pentagon*" (the quintile) "*subtendeth* 72 *degrees, of an
octagon*" (the semiquadrate) "*but* 45; *the remainders of which arcs,
viz*. 108 *and* 135 *degrees, are not subtended by the sides of any
ordinate figure*."

<span id="fn_58"></span>[27:\*1](ptb22.htm#fr_58) Except the
semiquadrate, which he has not at all noticed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Houses of the Planets](ptb23)
