[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb28)  [Next](ptb30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI

### FACES, CHARIOTS, AND OTHER SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES OF THE PLANETS

THE familiarities existing between the planets and the signs are such as
have been already particularised.

There are also, however, further peculiarities ascribed to the planets.
Each is said to be in its proper face, when the aspect it holds to the
Sun, or Moon, is similar to that which its own house bears to their
houses: for example, Venus is in her proper face when making a sextile
aspect to either luminary, provided she be occidental to the Sun, but
oriental to the Moon, agreeably to the primary arrangement of her
houses. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md)

Each planet is also said to be in its proper chariot, or throne, or
otherwise triumphantly situated, when it holds familiarity with the
place which it actually occupies by two, or more, of the prescribed
modes of connection: for when it is so circumstanced, its influence and
energy are specially augmented by the familiarity it thus holds with the
sign which encompasses it, and which is similar in influence and
co-operates with it.

Lastly, each planet (although it may possess no familiarity with the
sign encompassing it) is said to rejoice, when any connection subsists
between itself and other stars of the same condition; as,
notwithstanding the distance between them, a certain sympathy and
communication

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of influence is derived from their mutual resemblance. In the same
manner, again, when a planet occupies a place adverse and dissimilar in
condition to itself, much of its influence is dissipated and lost; in
consequence of the interposition and admixture of the other different
influence, arising out of the dissimilar temperament of the sign by
which it is encompassed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[37:2](ptb29.htm#fr_71.md) *Vide* Chapter xx. It of
course follows that Saturn is in his proper face when he is five signs,
or in quintile, after the Sun or before the Moon; that Jupiter is so
when in trine; Mars when in quartile; Venus when in sextile; and Mercury
when only one sign (or in modern phrase, in semi-sextile), after the Sun
or before the Moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Application, Separation, and Other
Faculties](ptb30.md)
