[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb27)  [Next](ptb29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV

### THE PLACES AND DEGREES OF EVERY PLANET

THE signs have been subdivided by some persons into parts still more
minute, which have been named places and degrees of dominion. Thus the
twelfth part of a sign, or two degrees and a half, has been called a
place, and the dominion of it given to the signs next succeeding. Other
persons again, pursuing various modes of arrangement, attribute to each
planet certain degrees, as being aboriginally connected with it, in a
manner somewhat similar to the Chaldaic arrangement of the terms. But
all these imaginary attributes cannot be herein detailed, for they

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

receive no confirmation from nature, are not capable of being rationally
demonstrated, and are, in fact, merely the offspring of scientific
vanity.

The following observation, however, deserves attention, and must not be
omitted.

The beginnings of the signs, and likewise those of the terms, are to be
taken from the equinoctial and tropical points. This rule is not only
clearly stated by writers on the subject, but is also especially evident
by the demonstration constantly afforded, that their natures, influences
and familiarities have no other origin than from the tropics and
equinoxes, as has been already plainly shown. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) And, if other beginnings were allowed, it
would either be necessary to exclude the natures of the signs from the
theory of prognostication, or impossible to avoid error in then
retaining and making use of them; as the regularity of their spaces and
distances, upon which their influence depends, would then be invaded and
broken in upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[37:1](ptb28.htm#fr_70) *Vide* Chapters xii and
xiv of this Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Faces, Chariots, and Other Similar Attributes of
the Planets](ptb29)
