[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb29)  [Next](ptb31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVII

### APPLICATION, SEPARATION, AND OTHER FACULTIES

IN all cases when the distances between planets or luminaries are but
trifling, <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) the planet which precedes
is said to apply to that which follows; and that which follows to be
separating from that which precedes. <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73)
The same rule obtains both in respect to bodily conjunction and to any
other of the aspects before described; except that, in the application
and separation of the bodily conjunction, it is also essential to
observe the actual latitudes of the bodies, in order to receive and
consider only such a transit as may be made in the same parts of the
zodiac. <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) But in the application and
separation of aspects merely, the same attention is not requisite, since
all the rays are uniformly converged into one focus, that is to say,
into the angle of the earth, <span id="fr_75"></span>[4](#fn_75) and
meet there alike from every quarter.

It appears, therefore, by the whole of what has been already delivered,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

that the effective influence of the stars must be considered as arising
not only from their own peculiar natures and properties, but also from
the quality of the surrounding signs, and from configuration with the
Sun and the angles; all which has been pointed out. The influence of
each planet, however, is strengthened chiefly when it may be oriental,
swift and direct in its proper course and motion--for it has then its
greatest power: but, on the other hand, it loses strength when
occidental and slow in motion or retrograde; as it then acts with
smaller effect. <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) Its influence also
receives accession or diminution, from its position with regard to the
horizon; as, if it be situated in the mid-heaven, or succedent to the
mid-heaven, it is especially strong; likewise, if it be on the actual
horizon, or succedent to the horizon, it is also powerful--particularly
if in the eastern quarter. Should it, however, be below the earth, and
configurated with the ascendant, either from the lower heaven, or from
any other part below the earth, its influence then becomes more languid;
but if, when below the earth, it hold no such configuration, it is
entirely deprived of efficacy. <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[38:1](ptb30.htm#fr_72) This has been understood
to mean, when the planets or luminaries are within each other's orbs;
Saturn's orb being to degrees, Jupiter's 12, Mars's 7 degrees 30
minutes, the Sun's 17 degrees, Venus's 8, Mercury's 7 degrees 30
minutes, and the Moon's 12 degrees 30 minutes.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[38:2](ptb30.htm#fr_73) Astrologers generally
agree, that the inferior planets always apply to the superior, but the
superior never to the inferior, except when the inferior be retrograde.
In the present instance it seems most probable that the author means the
planet which is more occidental, by "the planet which precedes." He
often uses "precedent" as equivalent to "occidental" in regard to the
daily revolution of the heavens: and thus a planet in the first degree
of Aries would precede, and be more occidental than one in the sixth
degree of Aries, to which latter it would, by the regular planetary
motion, be applying.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[38:3](ptb30.htm#fr_74) On this, Whalley says
that "the less the difference of latitude of the planets in conjunction,
the more powerful will be the influence: for if two planets in
conjunction have each considerable latitude of different denomination,
the influence of such conjunction will be much lessened."

<span id="fn_75"></span>[38:4](ptb30.htm#fr_75) Τουτ᾽ εςι επι το κεντρον
της γης. The precise meaning of the word κεντρον is "centre," rather
than "angle"; but Ptolemy uses it throughout this work, in speaking of
the four angles of heaven, and I conceive he uses it here to signify an
angle at, or on, the earth. The following definition of an aspect, by
Kepler, strengthens my opinion: "An aspect is an angle formed on the
earth, by the luminous rays of two planets; efficacious in stimulating
sublunary nature."

<span id="fn_76"></span>[39:1](ptb30.htm#fr_76) Placidus (Cooper's
translation) says that "the three superiors are supposed to be stronger,
if they are found to be matutine, or eastern, from the Sun; the three
inferiors, vespertine, or western; for then they have a greater degree
of light, in which consists their virtual influence, and then they are
called oriental; but occidental if otherwise. Every one knows how
largely, yet to no purpose, authors have treated of the orientality of
the planets."

Moxon's Mathematical Dictionary has the following words on the same
subject: "Now the three superior planets are strongest, being oriental
and matutine; but the three inferior when they are occidental and
vespertine. The reason is, because the first in the first case, but the
last in the second, do then descend to the lowest part of their orbit,
are increased in light, and approaching nearer the earth; and so on the
contrary, the inferiors matutine, the superiors vespertine are
weakened."

<span id="fn_77"></span>[39:2](ptb30.htm#fr_77) In a note on the 6th
Chapter of this Book, Whalley says that, "according to Ptolemy, such as
are between the ascendant and mid-heaven obtain the first place of
strength, and are said to be in their oriental orientality: but, between
the western horizon and the lower heaven, in their occidental
orientality, which is the second place of strength: between the lower
heaven and the ascendant, in their oriental occidentality, the first
degree of weakness; and between the mid-heaven and western horizon, in
their occidental occidentality, the weakest place of all." This is all
very pretty jargon, but certainly NOT "according to Ptolemy," who
distinctly says, on the contrary, that if a planet "is on the actual
horizon, or succedent to the horizon, it is also *powerful, and
particularly* if in the eastern quarter." The last member of this
sentence, as well as the conclusion of this 27th Chapter, shows that
Ptolemy did not consider a situation between the mid-heaven and western
horizon to be "the weakest place of all."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. General Division of the Subject](ptb31)
