[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb30)  [Next](ptb32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

# BOOK THE SECOND

### CHAPTER I

### GENERAL DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT

THE great and leading points, requiring to be attended to as a necessary
means of introduction to the consideration of particular predictions,
having been succinctly defined, the further parts of the subject,
comprehending everything which may tend to facilitate prediction, and
render it complete, shall now be duly proceeded in; and, at the same
time, care shall be taken to confine the whole doctrine within the
limits of natural reason.

The foreknowledge to be acquired by means of Astrology is to be regarded
in two great and principal divisions. The first, which may be properly
called General, or Universal, concerns entire nations, countries, or
cities; and the second, denominated Particular, or Genethliacal, relates
to men individually.

In considering these respective divisions, it seems proper to give
priority to that which has the more general application and influence:
because, in the first place, general events are produced by causes
greater and more compulsatory than the causes of particular events;
secondly, because natures of more extended potency must invariably
control those which are more limited in action; and, thirdly, because
particular events, or individual affections, are comprehended in those
of general influence. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) It is
therefore especially necessary, in desiring to investigate particular
events, to treat first of those which are general.

Again, general events are subdivided according to their operation upon
entire countries, and upon certain cities or districts: one sub-division
being regarded as affecting entire countries, and the other certain
cities or districts only. They are also separately considered according
to the causes by which they are produced; war, pestilence, famine,
earthquakes, inundations, and other similar visitations being dependent
on such greater and more important causes, as arise only after
considerable periods; while slighter causes, arising more frequently,
have reference only to the revolution of the seasons; their greater or
less variation in cold and heat; the severity or mildness of the
weather; the occasional abundance or scarcity of provisions; and other
like occurrences.

Hence the consideration of those events which concern whole

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

countries, and are dependent on the greater causes (since it has a more
extended scope than the other, which attaches only to certain cities, or
districts, and is subject to slighter causes) takes precedence. And, for
its due investigation, two essential points are to be attended to: the
first is, the appropriate familiarity of the zodiacal signs and the
fixed stars with the several regions which may be concerned.; and the
second comprises the indications occasionally arising in those parts of
the heavens where such familiarity is found: for instance, the eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, and such transits as may be made by the planets,
when matutine, and in their respective stations.

The nature of the sympathy between these things must, however, be
explained first; and a brief description will therefore be given of the
chief peculiarities observable in whole nations; in regard to their
manners and customs, as well as to their bodily formation and
temperament; considered agreeably to their familiarity with those stars
and signs whence the natural cause of their peculiarities duly proceeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[40:1](ptb31.htm#fr_78.md) *Vide* Chap. iii, Book
I, pp. [13](ptb06.htm#page_13.md)-14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Peculiarities Observable Throughout Every Entire
Climate](ptb32.md)
