[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb38)  [Next](ptb40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### THE QUALITY AND NATURE OF THE EFFECT

THE discrimination of the peculiar properties and character of the
effect about to be produced, and of its good or evil nature, occupies
the fourth and last division of this part of the subject.

These properties must be gathered from the power of the stars which
control the ruling places, and from the contemperament created by their
relative admixture with each other and with the places which they
control. For, although the Sun and Moon are the acknowledged sources of
all the efficacy and dominion of the stars, and of their strength or
weakness, and in a certain manner regulate and command them, still, it
is by the theory of the contemperament, produced by the stars in
dominion, that the effect is indicated.

In order to understand the indications thus made, it is necessary to
begin by attending to the following detail of the effective property of
each planet--previously observing, however, that, when any circumstance
is said, for the sake of brevity, to come to pass by the general
influence of the five planets, their temperament, and the power and
assistance they may derive from natures similar to their own, the actual
continuance of their own proper constitution, or the casual combination
of any analogous influence, arising from fixed stars or places in the
zodiac, are all, at the same time, to be kept in view. Consequently,
whenever any general remark is herein made relative to the five planets,
it will likewise be necessary to bear in mind both their temperament and
quality; as fully, indeed, as if the stars themselves had not been
named, but only their effective quality and nature. And, it is further
to be remembered, that, in every case of compound temperament, not only
the combination of the planets with each other requires to be
considered, but also that of such fixed stars and zodiacal places as
share in the natures of the planets, by being respectively connected
with them according to the familiarities already described.

Hence, when Saturn may be sole governor, he will produce disasters
concomitant with cold. And, in as far as the event may apply to the
human race in particular, it will induce among men lingering diseases,
consumptions, declines, rheumatisms, disorders from watery humours, and
attacks of the quartan ague; as well as exile, poverty, and a general
mass of evils, griefs, and alarms: deaths also will be frequent, but
chiefly among persons advanced in age. That part of the brute creation
which

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

is most serviceable to man will likewise suffer, and be destroyed by
disease; and men who make use of the animals thus diseased will be
infected by them, and perish with them. The atmosphere will become
dreadfully chilly and frosty, unwholesome, turbid and gloomy, presenting
only clouds and pestilence. Copious and destructive storms of snow and
hail will descend, generating and fostering insects and reptiles noxious
to mankind. In rivers, and at sea, tempests will be frequent and
general, causing disastrous voyages and many shipwrecks; and even fish
will be destroyed. The waters of the sea will retire for a time, and
again return and produce inundations; rivers will overflow their banks,
and cause stagnant pools; and the fruits of the earth, especially such
as are necessary to sustain life, will be lost and cut off by blight,
locusts, floods, rains, hail, or some similar agency; and the loss will
be so extensive as to threaten even famine.

Jupiter, if he should be lord alone, will thoroughly improve and benefit
all things. Among mankind, in particular, this planet promotes honour,
happiness, content, and peace, by augmenting all the necessaries and
comforts of life, and all mental and bodily advantages. It induces also
favours, benefits, and gifts emanating from royalty, and adds greater
lustre to kings themselves, increasing their dignity and magnanimity:
all men, in short, will share in the prosperity created by its
influence. With regard to the operation of the event on brutes, those
which are domestic and adapted to man's service will be multiplied and
will thrive; while others, which are useless and hostile to man, will be
destroyed. The constitution of the atmosphere will be healthy and
temperate, filled with gentle breezes and moisture, and favourable to
fruits. Navigation will be safe and successful; rivers will rise to
their just proportion; fruit and grain, and all other productions of the
earth conducive to the welfare and happiness of mankind, will be
presented in abundance.

Mars, when governing alone, generally causes such mischief and
destruction as are concomitant with dryness. And, among mankind, foreign
wars will be excited, accompanied with intestine divisions, captivity,
slaughter, insurrections of the people, and wrath of princes against
their subjects; together with sudden and untimely death, the consequence
of these disturbances. Feverish disorders, tertian agues, and
hæmorrhages will take place, and will be rapidly followed by painful
death, carrying off chiefly youthful persons: and conflagration, murder,
impiety, every infraction of the law, adultery, rape, robbery, and all
kinds of violence will be practised. The atmosphere will be parched by
hot, pestilential, and blasting winds, accompanied by drought,
lightnings, and fires emitted from the sky. At sea, ships will be
suddenly wrecked by the turbulence of the wind and strokes of lightning.
Rivers will fail, springs will be dried up, and there will be a scarcity
of water proper for food and sustenance. All the creatures and
productions of the earth adapted to the use of man, whether beasts,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

grain, or fruits, will be damaged or destroyed by excessive heat, by
storms of thunder and lightning, or by violent winds; and whatever has
been deposited in store will be destroyed or injured by fire, or by
heat.

Venus, alone in domination, generally produces the same effects as
Jupiter, yet with greater suavity and more agreeably. Glory, honour, and
joy will attend mankind; happy marriages will be contracted, and the
fortunate pairs will be blest with numerous children. Every undertaking
will proceed prosperously, wealth will increase, and the conduct of
human life will be altogether pure, simple and pious; due reverence
being paid to all holy and sacred institutions, and harmony subsisting
between princes and their subjects. The weather also will be of a
favourable temperature, cooled by moistening breezes; the air altogether
pure and salubrious, frequently refreshed by fertilising showers.
Voyages will be performed in safety, and be attended by success and
profit. Rivers will be improved, and receive their adequate supply of
waters; and all things valuable and useful to mankind, whether animal or
vegetable, will abundantly thrive and multiply.

Mercury, if possessing dominion, is usually conjoined with one or other
of the planets beforementioned, and is conformed and assimilated td
their natures; yet as, in itself, it presents a certain addition to
their power, this planet increases the respective impulses of them all.
And, in regard to the operation of the event on mankind, it will promote
industry and skill in business; but, at the same time, thievish
propensities, robberies, and plots of treachery: if configurated with
the malefics, it will produce calamities in navigation, and will also
cause dry and parching diseases, quotidian fever, cough, consumption,
and hæmorrhage. All parts of the ceremonies and services of religion,
the affairs of the executive government, as well as manners, customs,
and laws, are disposed and regulated by this planet, conformably to its
admixture and familiarity with each of the others. And in consequence of
the dryness of its nature, arising from its proximity to the Sun, and
the rapidity of its motion, it will generate in the atmosphere
turbulent, sharp and varied winds, together with thunders, meteors, and
lightnings, accompanied by sudden chasms in the earth, and earthquakes:
by these means it not unfrequently occasions the destruction of animals
and plants assigned to the service of mankind. Besides the foregoing
effects, it produces, when in vespertine position, a diminution of
waters, and, when matutine, an augmentation.

Each of the planets, when fully exercising its own separate and distinct
influence, will properly produce the peculiar effects above ascribed to
it; but should it be combined with others, whether by configuration, by
familiarity arising from the sign in which it may be posited, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) or by

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

its position towards the Sun, the coming event will then happen
agreeably to the admixture and compound temperament which arise from the
whole communion actually subsisting among the influencing powers. It
would, however, be a business of infinite labour and innumerable
combinations, quite beyond the limits of this treatise, to set forth
fully every contemperament and all configurations, in every mode in
which they can possibly exist; and the knowledge of them must therefore
be acquired by particular discrimination in every instance, under the
guidance of the precepts of science. Yet the following additional remark
must not be here omitted.

The nature of the familiarities, subsisting between the stars, lords of
the coming event, and the countries or cities over which the event will
extend, requires to be observed; for, should the stars be benefic, and
their familiarity with the countries liable to sustain the effect be
unimpeded by any opposing influence, they will then exercise the
favour-able energies of their own nature in a greater degree. And, on
the other hand, when any obstacle may intervene to obstruct their
familiarity, or when they themselves may be overpowered by some opposing
influence, the advantages of their operation will be diminished. Again,
should the stars, lords of the coming event, not be benefic, but
injurious, their effect will be less severe, provided they may either
have familiarity with the countries on which the event will fall, or be
restrained by some opposing influence. If, however, they should have no
such familiarity, and not be subjected to restraint by any others,
endowed with a nature contrary to their own and possessing a familiarity
with the countries in question, the evils which they produce will then
be more violent and intense. And all these general affections, of
whatever kind, whether good or evil, will be principally felt by those
persons in whose individual nativities there may be found the same
disposition of the luminaries (which are the most essential
significators), or the same angles, as those existing during the eclipse
which operates the general affection. The same remark equally applies to
other persons, in whose nativities the disposition of the luminaries and
of the angles may be in opposition to that existing during the eclipse.
With respect to these coincidences, the partile agreement, or
opposition, of the ecliptical place of the luminaries to the place of
either luminary in a nativity, produces an effect at least capable of
being guarded against. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[60:1](ptb39.htm#fr_106.md) That is to say
(technically speaking), by reception, or by being posited in a sign in
which another planet has a certain dignity or prerogative.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[61:1](ptb39.htm#fr_107.md) In conformity to the
rule laid down in Chap. VI of this Book, those individuals whose
nativities may thus resemble the position of the heavens at the time of
an eclipse, and who are here stated to be chiefly liable to the effects
of the eclipse, will be more affected by it, if it should be visible to
them.

To the precepts contained in this chapter, Placidus makes the following
allusion in his remarks on the nativity of Cardinal Pancirole. "Any
significator whatever, together with the other stars, whilst they are
moved by a converse universal motion, change the aspect alternately, and
consequently the mundane rays, as it likewise happens when they acquire
parallels: the rays thus acquired <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> are of
a long continuance, and denote a certain universal disposition of the
things signified, either good or bad, according to the nature of the
aspecting stars; as it happened to this Cardinal, who some years before
his death was always sickly: and this observation is wonderful in the
changes of the times and weather; for this principle Ptolemy adhered to
in the Almagest, lib. VIII, cap. 4; and this doctrine he also mentions
in the 2nd Book of Judgments, in the chapter on the Nature of
Events."--(Cooper's [Translation](errata.htm#7), p. 272..md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Colours in Eclipses; Comets, and Similar
Phenomena](ptb40.md)
