[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb36)  [Next](ptb38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### THE TIME AND PERIOD OF THE EVENT

THE second point requiring attention relates to time, and indicates the
date when the event will take place, and the period during which its
effect will continue: these are to be ascertained in the following
manner.

It must however be premised, that as an eclipse, occurring at any
particular season, cannot happen in all climates at the same temporal or
solar hour, <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) so neither will the
magnitude of the obscuration, nor the time of its continuance, be equal
in all parts of the world. First, therefore (as is done in a nativity),
the angles are to be arranged, in every country connected with the
eclipse, according to the hour at which the eclipse, takes place and the
elevation of the pole in that country. The time, during which the
obscuration of the eclipse may continue in each country, is then to be
noted in equatorial hours. <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) And,
after these particulars have been carefully observed, it is to be
understood that the effect will endure as many years as the obscuration
lasted hours, provided the eclipse was solar; but if lunar, a like
number of months is to be reckoned instead of years.

The commencement of the effect, and the period of its general intensity,
or strength, are to be inferred from the situation of the place of the
eclipse with respect to the angles. For, if the ecliptical place be near
the eastern horizon, the effect will begin to be manifested in the
course of the first four months after the date of the eclipse; and its
general height, or intensity, will take place in, or about, the first
third part of the whole extent of its duration. If the ecliptical place
happen to be in or near the mid-heaven, the effect will begin to appear
in the second four months, and its general intensity will occur about
the second third part; and, if the place should fall near the western
horizon, the effect will begin in the third four months, and take its
general intensity in the last third part of its whole duration. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Partial intensities, or relaxations of the effect, are, however, to be
inferred from any combinations which may happen during the intermediate
period, <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) either in the actual places
where the primary cause was presented, or in other places configurated
therewith. They are also to be conjectured by the various courses, or
transits, of such planets as co-operate in producing the effect, by
being configurated with the sign in which the primary cause was
situated; and, with this view, the matutine, vespertine, or stationary
position, or midnight culmination of those planets must be observed; for
the effect will be strengthened and augmented by their matutine or
stationary position; but weakened and diminished by their being
vespertine, or situated under the sunbeams, or by their midnight
culmination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[54:1](ptb37.htm#fr_96) Temporal or solar hours
are duodecimal parts of the Sun's diurnal or nocturnal arc, and are
numbered by day from sunrise to sunset; by night, from sunset to
sunrise.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[54:2](ptb37.htm#fr_97) Equatorial hours are the
twenty-four hours of the earth's revolution on its axis. Each of them is
equal in duration to the passage of 15 degrees of the Equator; and they
are numbered from noon to noon. A particular explanation of the
astronomical use, both of temporal and equatorial hours, is to be found
in the 9th Chapter of the second Book of the Almagest; an extract from
which is given in the Appendix.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[54:3](ptb37.htm#fr_98) The three periods of
four months each, stated in this paragraph, are applicable to solar
eclipses only; for lunar eclipses, these periods may be reckoned at ten
days each; that number of days bearing the same proportion to a month,
as four months to a year. On this point, Whalley, with his usual <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> inaccuracy, has asserted, that "in eclipses of
the Moon, two days, or thereabouts, are equal to the four months" here
reckoned in eclipses of the Sun. He adds, however, what perhaps may be
true, that "lunar eclipses are by no means so powerful as those of the
Sun, although more so than any other lunation."

<span id="fn_99"></span>[55:1](ptb37.htm#fr_99) That is to say, from any
combinations of the Sun and Moon which may take place after the date of
the eclipse, but before the close of its effect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Genus, Class, or Kind, Liable to be
Affected](ptb38)
