[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb45)  [Next](ptb47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

### THE CONCEPTION AND THE PARTURITION, OR BIRTH; BY WHICH LATTER EVENT THE ANIMAL QUITS THE WOMB, AND ASSUMES ANOTHER STATE OF EXISTENCE

THE actual moment, in which human generation commences, is, in fact, by
nature, the moment of the conception itself; but, in efficacy with
regard to subsequent events, it is the parturition or birth.

In every case, however, where the actual time of conception may be
ascertained, either casually or by observation, it is useful to remark
the effective influence of the configuration of the stars as it existed
at that time; and, from that influence, to infer the future personal
peculiarities of mind and body. For the seed will, at the very first,
and at once, receive its due quality, as then dispensed by the Ambient;
and, although in subsequent periods its substance is varied by growth
and conformation, it will still, by the laws of nature, congregate,
during its growth, only such matter as may be proper to itself, and will
become more and more imbued with the peculiar property of the first
quality impressed on it at the time of conception. These precepts must
always be attended to, when that time can be ascertained.

But, if the time of conception cannot be precisely made out, that of the
birth must be received at the original date of generation; for it is
virtually the most important, and is in no respect deficient, on
comparison with the primary origin by conception, except in one view
only; viz. that the origin by conception affords the inference of
occurences which take effect previously to the birth, whereas the origin
by birth can, of course, be available only for such as arise
subsequently. And, although the birth should in strictness be called the
secondary beginning, while the conception might be insisted on as the
primary beginning, it is still found to be equal to the conception in
its efficacy, and much more complete, although later in time. For the
conception may, in fact, be said to be the generation of mere human
seed, but the birth that of man himself; since the infant at its birth
acquires

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

numerous qualities which it would not possess while in the womb, and
which are proper to human nature alone; "such, for instance, as the
particular action of the senses and the movement of the body and
limbs." <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) Besides, even if the
position of the Ambient, actually existing at the birth, cannot be
considered to assist in forming and engendering the particular shape and
qualities of the infant, it is nevertheless still auxiliary to the
infant's entrance into the world: because nature, after completing the
formation in the womb, always effects the birth in immediate obedience
to some certain position of the Ambient, corresponding and sympathising
with the primary position which operated the incipient formation. It is
therefore perfectly admissible, and consistent with reason, that the
configuration of the stars, as it exists at the time of birth, although
it cannot be said to possess any share of the creative cause, should
still be considered to act in signification, as fully as the
configuration at the time of conception; because it has, of necessity, a
power corresponding to that configuration which actually possessed the
creative cause.

In speaking of the practicability of prognostication, in the
commencement of this treatise, the intention of setting forth this part
of the subject, now under consideration, in a scientific manner, has
been already notified. The ancient mode of prediction, founded on the
commixture of all the stars, and abounding in infinite complication and
diversity, will therefore be passed over; and, in fact, any attempt to
detail it, however accurately and minutely made, in conformity to the
several precepts given in the traditions relating to it, would prove
unserviceable and unintelligible: it is therefore entirely abandoned.
And the doctrine, now presented, comprehending every species of event
liable to happen, and explaining all the effective influences generally
exercised by the stars, in their separate qualities, over every species
of event, shall be delivered succinctly, and in agreement with the
theory of nature.

With this view, certain places in the Ambient, regulating the formation
of all inferences of the events liable to affect mankind, are appointed
as a kind of mark to which the whole theory of those inferences is
applied, and to which the operative powers of the stars, when holding
familiarity with the said places, are in a general manner directed: in
the same way as, in archery, the arrow is directed to the target. And
any event, which depends on the compound temperament of many various
natures and influences together, must be left to the discretion of the
artist, who, like the skilful archer, must himself judge of the best
mode of hitting the mark.

To proceed methodically and in due order, it is proper to commence by
investigating such general events as are open to consideration, and
liable to have happened, or to happen, at the actual origin by birth;

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

since, from that origin, all things necessary to be investigated may be
gathered; as before stated. Yet, if a previous inquiry, by means of the
primary origin by conception, should nevertheless be desired and
undertaken, such an inquiry may still in some degree assist
prognostication; although only in regard to properties and qualities
dispensed and imbibed at the time of conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[73:1](ptb46.htm#fr_121.md) The words, thus marked
" ", are not in the Greek, but in two Latin translations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Degree Ascending](ptb47.md)
