[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb43)  [Next](ptb45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV

### THE SIGNIFICATION OF METEORS

IN order to facilitate prognostication in minor and more limited
instances, it is important to make further observation of all remarkable
appearances occasionally visible around or near the Sun, Moon, and
stars. And, for the diurnal state of the atmosphere, the Sun's rising
should be remarked; for the nocturnal state, his setting; but the
probable duration of any such state must be considered by reference to
the Sun's configuration with the Moon; for, in most cases, each aspect,
made between them, indicates the continuance of a certain state until
another aspect shall take place.

Hence, the Sun, when rising or setting, if he shine clear and open,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

free from mists, gloom, and clouds, promises serene weather. But, if he
have a wavering or fiery orb, or seem to emit or attract red rays, or if
he be accompanied in any one part by the clouds called parhelia, or by
other reddish clouds of extended figure, in the form of long rays, he
then portends violent winds, chiefly liable to arise from those parts in
which the said phenomena may have shown themselves. If he should be pale
or lurid, and rise or set encumbered with clouds, or surrounded by
halos, he indicates storms and winds coming from the quarter of his
apparent situation: and, if he be also accompanied by parhelia, or by
lurid or dark rays, similar effects are also threatened from the parts
where those appearances may be situated. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md)

The Moon's course is to be carefully observed, at the third day before
or after her conjunction with the Sun, her opposition, and her
intermediate quarters; for, if she then shine thin and clear, with no
other phenomena about her, she indicates serenity; but, if she appear
thin and red, and have her whole unilluminated part visible, and in a
state of vibration, she portends winds from the quarter of her latitude
and declinations: and if she appear dark, or pale and thick, she
threatens storms and showers. All halos formed around the Moon should
also be observed; for, if there appear one only, bright and clear, and
decaying by degrees, it promises serene weather; but, if two or three
appear, tempests are indicated: and, if they seem reddish and broken,
they threaten tempests, with violent and boisterous winds; if dark and
thick, they foreshow storms and snow; if black and broken, tempests with
both winds and snow; and, whenever a greater number may appear, storms
of greater fury are portended.

The planets, also, and the brighter fixed stars, occasionally have
halos, which indicate certain effects appropriate to their tinctures,
and to the nature of the stars around which they may be situated.

The apparent magnitudes of the fixed stars, and the colours of the
luminous masses among them, are likewise to be remarked: for, when the
stars appear brighter and larger than usual, they indicate an excitation
of the wind from that quarter in which they may be situated. The
nebulous mass of the Præsepe in Cancer, and others similar to it, also
require observation; as, if in fine weather they appear gloomy and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

indistinct, or thick, they thereby threaten a fall of rain; but, if
clear and in continual vibration, they announce rough gales of
wind <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117.md).

Appearances occasionally visible in the sky, resembling the trains of
comets, <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_118.md) usually indicate wind and
drought; in a degree proportionate to their multitude and continuance.

Appearances, resembling shooting or falling stars, when presented in one
part only, threaten a movement of wind from that part; <span
id="fr_119"></span>[3](#fn_119.md) when in various and opposite parts, they
portend the approach of all kinds of tempestuous weather, together with
thunder and lightning. Clouds resembling fleeces of wool will also
sometimes presage tempests; and the occasional appearance of the rainbow
denotes, in stormy weather, the approach of serenity; in fine weather,
storms. And, in a word, all remarkable phenomena, visible in the sky,
universally portend that certain appropriate events will be produced,
each harmonising with its proper cause, in the manner herein described.

 

After the forgoing brief investigation of the more limited as well as
more extensive significations, regarding general events, it becomes
proper to proceed to the doctrine of genethliacal prognostication, or
judgments of individual nativities.

END OF BOOK II

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_116"></span>[69:1](ptb44.htm#fr_116.md) Similar precepts may
be found finely illustrated in Virgil's 1st Georgic, *vide* I, 433 *et
infra*:

"Sol quoque et exoriens et cum se condit in undas  
Signa dabit:"------

Virgil has said almost the same thing in these beautiful lines:

"At si virgineum suffuderit ore ruborem  
Ventus erit: vento semper rubet aurea Phœbe."--*Georg*. I, l. 430.

See also the whole passage, beginning at 1. 424:

"Si vero Solem ad rapidum Lunasque sequentes  
Ordine respicies," &c.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[70:1](ptb44.htm#fr_117.md) At this place, the
following sentence, not found in the Greek, is inserted in a Latin
translation:

"If the northern of the two stars, situated one on each side of the
Præsepe, and called the Asini, should not appear, the north wind will
blow: but, if the southern one be invisible, the south wind."

<span id="fn_118"></span>[70:2](ptb44.htm#fr_118.md) These coruscations
are, perhaps, similar to those now known by the name of the Aurora
Borealis.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[70:3](ptb44.htm#fr_119.md) Virgil again:

"Sæpe etiam stellas vento impendente videbis  
Præcipites cœlo labi."--&c.       Georg. I, l. 365.

\[paragraph continues\] A great part of the 1st Georgic consists of
astrological rules for predicting the weather, closely resembling the
precepts here given by Ptolemy. Virgil is said to have adopted his
doctrine from Aratus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Proem](ptb45.md)
