[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb47)  [Next](ptb49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

### DISTRIBUTION OF THE DOCTRINE OF NATIVITIES

AFTER due attention to the preceding instructions, the doctrine of
genethliacal prognostication should be separately and distinctly
considered, for the sake of order and perspicuity, in its first, second
and successive divisions or heads of inquiry. It will thus be found to
present a mode of investigation, at once practicable, competent and
agreeable to nature.

One division is applicable only to certain circumstances established
previously to the birth; as, for instance, to those which concern the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

parents; another to circumstances, which may be established both before
and after the birth; as those respecting brothers and sisters; another
to circumstances actually occurring at the very time of birth, and
immediately consequent thereupon: and this head of inquiry embraces
various points, and is by no means simple: and the last division relates
to events liable to take place after the birth, at various periods,
earlier or later; and it involves a still more diversified theory.

Thus, the questions to be solved, in regard to the actual circumstances
of the birth itself, are, whether the production will be male or female;
twins, or even more; whether it will be monstrous; and whether it will
be reared.

The questions of the periods subsequent to the birth relate first to the
duration of life (which is distinct from the question of rearing), then
to the shape and figure of the body, to the bodily affections, and to
injuries or defects in the members. After these, further inquiry is
instituted as to the quality of the mind, and the mental affections;
then, as to fortune, in regard to rank and honours as well as wealth. In
succession to these, the character of the employment or profession is
sought out; then, the questions relative to marriage and offspring, and
to consentaneous friendship, are to be considered; then, that concerning
travel; and, lastly, that concerning the kind of death which awaits the
native. The question of death, although depending, in fact, upon the
same influence as the question of the duration of life, seems yet to
find its proper situation in being placed last in the series.

On each of the foregoing points of inquiry, the doctrine and precepts to
be followed shall be thoroughly and succinctly detailed; but all idle
conceits, promulgated by many persons without any foundation capable of
sustaining the test of reason, shall be utterly avoided, in deference to
the only true agency, which is derived from primal Nature herself. It is
only upon clearly effective influences that this treatise is
established: and all matters, which are open to an authorized mode of
inquiry by means of the theory of the stars, and their positions and
aspects with regard to appropriate places, shall be fully discussed
here; but the divination by lots and numbers, unregulated by any
systematic causation, must remain unnoticed.

The brief remarks, immediately following, are applicable to all cases,
generally, and are now at once stated, to avoid the repetition of them
under each particular division or head of inquiry.

Firstly, notice must be taken of that place in the zodiac which
corresponds, according to the scheme of the nativity with the particular
division of inquiry; for example, the place of the mid-heaven is adapted
to questions comprised under the head of employment or profession; and
the Sun's place to those relative to the concerns of the father.

Secondly, after the proper place has thus been duly ascertained, the
planets holding right of dominion there, by any of the five prerogatives
hereinbefore mentioned, are to be observed; and, if any one planet be

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

found to be lord by all these prerogatives, that planet must be admitted
as the ruler of the event liable to happen under that particular head of
inquiry. If, however, two or three planets hold dominion, that one among
them, which may have most claims to the place in question, must be
selected as the ruler.

Thirdly, the natures of the ruling planet and of the signs, in which
itself and the place which it thus controls may severally be situated,
are to be considered as indicating the quality of the event.

Fourthly, the proportionate vigour and strength, or weakness, with which
the dominion is exercised, as exhibited either by the actual cosmical
position of the ruling planet, or by its position in the scheme of the
nativity, will point out to what extent and with what force the event
will operate. And a planet is found to be cosmically powerful when in
one of its own places, <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) or when
oriental, or swift in course; and it is strong in the scheme of the
nativity, when transiting an angle or succedent house; especially those
of the ascendant, or of the mid-heaven. But it is cosmically weaker,
when not in one of its own places; or when occidental, or retarded in
its course; and in respect to the scheme of the nativity, it is weak
when cadent from the angles.

Lastly; the general time, about which the event will take place, is to
be inferred from the ruling planet's matutine or vespertine position, in
regard to the Sun and the ascendant, and from the circumstance of its
being situated in an angle, or a succedent house. As, if it be matutine,
or in an angle, its influence operates earlier and more promptly; but,
if vespertine or in a succedent house, later and more tardily. And, in
reference to this point, the quadrant which precedes the Sun, and that
which precedes the ascendant, together with the quadrants opposite to
these, are oriental and matutine; and the other quadrants, following the
former, are occidental and vespertine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[77:1](ptb48.htm#fr_128.md) In House, Triplicity,
Exaltation, Term or Face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Parents](ptb49.md)
