[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb51)  [Next](ptb53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

### TWINS

WITH respect to the probability of the birth of twins, or a greater
number at once, the same places must be observed, as those mentioned in
the preceding chapter; that is to say, the places of both luminaries and
the ascendant.

When two, or all three, of the said places may be situated in
bicorporeal signs, births of this kind will occur, in consequence of the
combination which then arises; especially, provided all the planets,
which control those places, should also be similarly circumstanced: or
although only some of them be posited in bicorporeal signs, while the
rest may be placed by two or more together. Because even more than twins
will be born, in a case wherein all the ruling places may be in
bicorporeal signs, most of the planets being, at the same time, posited
in the same way, and configurated with them. The number of children,
however, to be produced at the birth, is to be inferred from the planet
which exercises the right of determining the number <span
id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142.md): and the sex or

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

sexes are to be predicted by means of the planets in configuration with
the Sun, Moon, and ascendant.

And, should the position of the heavens be arranged so that the angle of
the mid-heaven, and not that of the ascendant, may be connected with the
luminaries, there will, in that case, be produced, almost always, twins;
and sometimes even more.

To speak, however, more particularly, three males will be born, as in
the nativity of the Anactores, <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143.md)
when Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars may be configurated with the places
before appointed, in bicorporeal signs; and three females, as in the
nativity of the Graces, when Venus and the Moon, with Mercury femininely
constituted, may be configurated in like manner. When Saturn, Jupiter,
and Venus may be configurated, two males and one female will be born; as
in the nativity of the Dioscuri <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144.md);
and, when Venus, the Moon, and Mars may be so configurated, two females
and one male; as in the nativity of Ceres, Core, and Liber. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145.md)

In cases of this kind, however, it most usually happens that the
conception has not been complete, and that the children are born with
some remarkable imperfections or deformities. And, in some instances,
owing to a certain concurrence of events, these numerous productions are
quite extraordinary and amazing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[83:2](ptb52.htm#fr_142.md) The planet here
alluded to, seems to be that which may be connected with most of the
ruling places.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[84:1](ptb52.htm#fr_143.md) I have looked in many
other books for this word "*Anactores*" (plural of ανακωρ), as
designating three particular individuals born at the same birth; for
which signification it is here used by Ptolemy; but my search has been
in vain. Cicero has, however, written a passage, in which a word, very
nearly resembling it, occurs, and which would seem to relate to the very
persons alluded to by Ptolemy: viz. "The godship of the Dioscuri was
established in various modes among the Greeks, and applied to various
persons. One set consisted of three persons, who were styled at Athens
the *Anactes*, and were the sons of Jupiter, the most ancient king, and
Proserpine; their several names were Tritopatreus, Eubuleus and
Dionysius." *De Nat. Deor*., lib. 3, cap. 21.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[84:2](ptb52.htm#fr_144.md) This is the second set
of the Dioscuri, as stated by Cicero: they were the children of the
third, or Cretan Jupiter (the son of Saturn) and Leda; their names were
Castor, Pollux, and Helena. Helena, however, is not mentioned by Cicero.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[84:3](ptb52.htm#fr_145.md) Core is a name of
Proserpine; Liber, of Bacchus. And, although the mention here made of
Ceres, Proserpine and Bacchus, as being the offspring of one and the
same birth, does not accord with the usual notion of the genealogy of
these divinities, it seems that Ptolemy did not so represent them
without some reason. For, in cap. 24, lib. 2, *De Nat. Deor*., Cicero
speaks of Liber as having been deified conjointly with Ceres and Libera
(another name of Proserpine); and adds, that "it may be understood, from
the rites and mysteries of the worship, how the deification took place."
It appears also, by Davies's notes on Cicero, that Livy and Tacitus both
speak of the copartnership in divinity exercised by Liber, Libera and
Ceres. There is not, however, any occasion at present to dive deeper
into the question of the generation of these deities; for our author has
advertised to them only to point out that so many males or females will
be produced at one birth, under certain configurations of the stars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Monstrous or Defective Births](ptb53.md)
