[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb52)  [Next](ptb54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### MONSTROUS OR DEFECTIVE BIRTHS

THE same places, as those pointed out in the two chapters last
preceding, are again to be considered, in inquiring into the probability
of a monstrous or defective birth. For it will be found that, at a birth
of this description, the luminaries are either cadent from the
ascendant, or else not in any manner configurated with it; while, at the
same time, the angles <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) are occupied
by the malefics.

It therefore becomes necessary, when such a position of the heavens may
occur at the time of birth, to observe forthwith the preceding new or
full Moon <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147) and its ruler; as well
as the rulers of the luminaries at the said time of birth. For, if all
the places, in which the rulers of the luminaries, and in which the Moon
herself and Mercury may be situated, at the birth, or, if most of those
places should be totally inconjunct and unconnected with the places of
the said preceding new or full Moon and its ruler, the birth will then
be monstrous. And if it should be further found, in addition to this
absence of connection, that the luminaries may be also posited in
quadrupedal or bestial signs, and the two malefics in angles, the birth
will in that case not be human. And should the luminaries, when so
circumstanced, be not at all supported by any benefic planet, but only
by malefics, the creature born will be wholly indocile, wild, and of
evil nature: if, however, they should receive support from Jupiter or
Venus, the offspring will then be like that of dogs or cats, or other
creatures held in religious veneration and used in worship <span
id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_148): but, if Mercury support the luminaries,
it will resemble that of fowls, oxen, or swine, or, of other animals
adapted to the service of mankind.

When the luminaries may be in signs of human shape, while other
circumstances in the scheme of the nativity may exist as before
described, the creature born will then be human, or will partake of
human nature, although it will still be defective in some peculiar
quality. And, in order to ascertain the nature of that defect, the shape
and form of the signs found on the angles occupied by the malefics, as
well as of those wherein the luminaries are situated, must be taken into
consideration: and, if in this instance also, no benefic planet should
lend support to any one of the prescribed places, the offspring produced
will be utterly void of reason, and indeed indefinable. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_149) If, however, it should happen, that
Jupiter or Venus give support, the defect will be

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

veiled by a specious outward appearance, similar to that of
hermaphrodites, and of those persons called Harpocratiaci, <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) or others of like imperfections. And
should Mercury also give support, in addition to that of Jupiter or
Venus, the offspring will then become an interpreter of oracles and
divinations; but, if Mercury support alone, it will be deaf and
dumb, <span id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) although clever and
ingenious in its intellect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[85:1](ptb53.htm#fr_146) Whalley says here,
"chiefly the ascendant and mid-heaven."

<span id="fn_147"></span>[85:2](ptb53.htm#fr_147) Whichever might have
been nearer in time.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[85:3](ptb53.htm#fr_148) It is perhaps
superfluous to mention that the two kinds of animals here named (as well
as many others) were venerated by the Ægyptians.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[85:4](ptb53.htm#fr_149) The Greek says
"enigmatical."

<span id="fn_150"></span>[86:1](ptb53.htm#fr_150) One Latin translation
has rendered this word "stammerers"; and, as Harpocrates was the god of
silence, Ptolemy has probably used the epithet to signify defect of
speech.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[86:2](ptb53.htm#fr_151) "Dumb." The Greek is
οδοντων εσερημενον, "deprived of teeth," and Allatius has so translated
it: but other translations render these words by dumb, which,
considering the nature of Mercury, seems their preferable signification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Children Not Reared](ptb54)
