[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb50)  [Next](ptb52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

### MALE OR FEMALE

AFTER the indications which regard brothers and sisters have been
investigated by the foregoing rules, consonant with nature and reason,
the actual native, or the person to whom the scheme of nativity is
specially appropriated, demands attention; and the first and most
obvious inquiry is whether the said native will be male or female.

The consideration of this question rests not on a single basis, nor

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

can it be pursued in one sole direction only: it depends, on the
contrary, upon the several situations of the two luminaries and the
ascendant, and upon such planets as possess any prerogatives in the
places of those situations; and all these circumstances should be
specially observed at the time of conception, and, in a general manner
also, at that of birth.

Observation of the said three places, and of the mode in which the
planets ruling them may be constituted, is wholly indispensable: it must
be seen whether all, or most of them, may be constituted masculinely or
femininely; and prediction must, of course, be regulated in conformity
with their disposition, so observed; as tending to produce a male or
female birth.

The masculine or feminine nature of the stars is to be distinguished in
the manner already pointed out in the commencement of this
treatise. <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141) For instance, by the
nature of the signs in which they are situated, by their relative
position to each other, and also by their position towards the earth; as
when in the east, they are masculinely disposed, and, when in the west,
femininely. Their relative position to the Sun also affords guidance in
distinguishing them; since, if they should be matutine, they are
considered to signify the male gender; and if vespertine, the female.
Thus, from the sex chiefly prevalent, as observed by these rules, that
of the native may be rationally inferred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[83:1](ptb51.htm#fr_141) *Vide* Chapter VI,
Book I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Twins](ptb52)
