[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb61)  [Next](ptb63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVIII

### THE QUALITY OF THE MIND

THE consideration of circumstances applicable to the body is practised
under the foregoing rules.

Of the spiritual qualities, however, all those which are national and
intellectual are contemplated by the situation of Mercury; while all
others, which regard the mere sensitive faculties, and are independent
of reason, are considered rather by other luminaries of a less subtle
constitution and more ponderous body; for instance, by the Moon and such
stars as she may be configurated with, as well by separation, <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209) as by application.

Now the mind is liable to impulse in a multiplicity of directions, and
the investigation of them cannot be summarily nor hastily performed, but
must be conducted by means of many various observations: for the
different qualities of the signs, containing Mercury and

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the Moon, or such stars as hold any influence over those two, are well
competent to contribute towards the properties of the mind; so likewise
are the configurations made with the Sun and the angles, by stars
bearing any relation to the point in question; besides, also, the
peculiar nature exercised by each star in operating upon the mental
movements.

Thus, the tropical signs generally dispose the mind to enter much into
political matters, rendering it eager to engage in public and turbulent
affairs, fond of distinction, and busy in theology; at the same time,
ingenious, acute, inquisitive, inventive, speculative, and studious of
astronomy and divination.

Bicorporeal signs render the mind variable, versatile, not easy to be
understood, volatile, and unsteady; inclined to duplicity, amorous,
wily, fond of music, careless, full of expedients, and regretful. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210)

Fixed signs make the mind just, uncompromising, constant, firm of
purpose, prudent, patient, industrious, strict, chaste, mindful of
in-juries, steady in pursuing its object, contentious, desirous of
honour, seditious, avaricious, and pertinacious.

Oriental positions, and those in the ascendant, especially if made by
planets in their proper faces, <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211)
make men liberal, frank, self-confident, brave, ingenious, unreserved,
yet acute. Oriental stations, and positions on the mid-heaven, or
culminations, make men reflective, constant, of good memory, firm,
prudent, magnanimous, successful in pursuing their desires, inflexible,
powerful in intellect, strict, not easily imposed upon, judicious,
active, hostile to crime, and skilful in science.

Precedent and occidental positions make men unsteady, irreverent,
imbecile, impatient of labour, easily impressed, humble, doubting,
wavering, boastful, and cowardly, slothful, lazy, and hard to rouse.
Occidental stations, and positions on the lower heaven (as well as
Mercury and Venus, when making vespertine descension by day, and rising
in the night), will render the mind ingenious and sagacious, but not
capable of great recollection, nor very industrious; yet inquisitive in
occult matters, such as magic and sacred mysteries; also studious of
mechanics, and mechanical instruments: addicted to the observation of
meteors, to philosophy, to augury by means of birds, and to the judgment
of dreams.

Further, should the planets having dominion be in places of their own,
and in conditions suitable to their own qualities, the mental properties
will be rendered exquisite, unimpeded, and successful: and especially if
these planets rule at the same time over both places; that is to say, be
by some mode configurated with Mercury, and holds

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

separation from, or application to the Moon. Should the said planets,
however, not be thus constituted, but be posited in places not
particularly appropriate to themselves, they will yet, even then, infuse
into the composition of the mental energy the properties of their own
nature; but obscurely and imperfectly, and not with such force and
strong evidence as in the other case.

The peculiar qualities of planets in dominion, or in elevation, are
powerfully impressed upon the mental energy: for instance, persons, who,
in consequence of the familiarity of the malefics, become wicked and
dishonest, have their impulse to commit evil, free and unrestrained,
when the said familiarity is not governed by any contrary influence.
But, should a contrary condition impede and govern that familiarity, the
impulse will be frustrated, and the culprits will be easily overtaken,
and undergo punishment. In like manner, persons endowed with goodness
and virtue, by the familiarity between the benefits and the
before-mentioned places, <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) and when
no contrary influence in elevation may interpose, will exert themselves
with cheerfulness and alacrity in performing good actions, will be
subject to no injustice, but enjoy the advantages of their honesty and
virtue. If, however, this familiarity should be superseded by some
contrary condition, the very mildness and humanity of these persons will
operate to their disadvantage, exposing them to contempt and accusation,
and rendering them liable to be wronged by the multitude.

The foregoing observations, relative to the moral habit, apply
generally; and the particular properties, created in the mental energies
by the actual nature of the planets, according to the respective
dominion of each, remain to be treated of.

The planet Saturn, therefore, when alone possessing dominion of the
mind, and governing Mercury and the Moon, and if posited in glory, both
cosmically and with respect to the angles, <span
id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_213) will make men careful of their
bodies, <span id="fr_214"></span>[3](#fn_214) strong and profound in
opinion, austere, singular in their modes of thinking, laborious,
imperious, hostile to crime, avaricious, parsimonious, accumulators of
wealth, violent, and envious: but, if he be not in glory, cosmically,
and as regards the angles, he will debase the mind, making it penurious,
pusillanimous, ill-disposed, indiscriminating, malignant, timorous,
slanderous, fond of solitude, repining, incapable of shame, bigoted,
fond of labour, void of natural affection, treacherous in friendship and
in family connections, incapable of enjoyment, and regardless of the
body. <span id="fr_215"></span>[4](#fn_215) Connected with Jupiter in
the mode before-mentioned, being also situated in glory,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Saturn will render the mind virtuous,
respectful, well-intentioned, ready to assist, judicious, frugal,
magnanimous, obliging, solicitous of good, affectionate in all domestic
ties, mild, prudent, patient, and philosophical: but, if thus connected
and posited ingloriously, he makes men outrageous, incapable of
learning, timorous, highly superstitious, yet regardless of religion,
suspicious, averse to children, incapable of friendship, cunning,
misjudging, faithless, foolishly wicked, irascible, hypocritical, idle
and useless, without ambition, yet regretful, morose, highly reserved,
over-cautious, and dull. Conciliated with Mars, and posited in glory,
Saturn renders men reckless, over-diligent, free in speech, turbulent,
boastful, austere in their dealings, pitiless, contemptuous, fierce,
warlike, bold, fond of tumults, insidious, deceitful, and implacable;
promoters of faction, tyrannical, rapacious, hostile to the
commonwealth, delighting in strife, vindictive, profound in guilt,
strenuous, impatient, insolent, mischievous, overbearing, evil, unjust,
obstinate, inhuman, inflexible, immutable in opinion, busy, able in
office, active, submitting to no opposition, and on the whole successful
in their undertakings; but, if thus connected, and not placed in glory,
he will make men plunderers, robbers, adulterers, submissive to evil,
seeking gain by their turpitude, infidels in religion, void of the
common affections, mischievous, treacherous, thievish, perjurers, and
sanguinary; eaters of unlawful food, familiar with guilt, assassins,
sorcerers, sacrilegious, impious, violators of the tomb, and, in short,
thoroughly depraved. Conciliated with Venus, and being again in glory,
Saturn makes men averse to women, and renders them fond of governing,
prone to solitude, highly reserved, regardless of rank, indifferent to
beauty, envious, austere, unsociable, singular in opinion, addicted to
divination and to religious services and mysteries; solicitous of the
priesthood, fanatical, and subservient to religion; solemn, reverential,
sedate, studious of wisdom, faithful in friendship, continent,
reflective, circumspect, and scrupulous in regard to female virtue: but,
if he be thus conciliated, and not posited in glory, he makes men
licentious and libidinous, practisers of lewdness, careless, and impure
in sexual intercourse; obscene, treacherous to women, especially to
those of their own families; wanton, quarrelsome, sordid, hating
elegance; slanderous, drunken, superstitious, adulterous, and impious;
blasphemers of the gods, and scoffers at holy rites; calumniators,
sorcerers, hesitating at nothing. If conciliated with Mercury, and if in
a glorious position, Saturn makes men inquisitive, loquacious, studious
of law and of medicine, mystical, confederate in secrecy, fabricators of
miracles, impostors, improvident, cunning, familiar with business, quick
in perception, petulant, accurate, vigilant, meditative, fond of
employment, and tractable: but, if connected with Mercury, and not
posited gloriously, he causes men to be frivolous, vindictive,
laborious, alienated from their families, fond of tormenting, and void
of enjoyment; night-wanderers, insidious, treacherous, pitiless, and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

thievish; magicians, sorcerers, forgers of writings, cheats,
unsuccessful in their undertakings, and quickly reduced to adversity.
Such are the effects of Saturn.

When Jupiter alone has dominion of the mind, and is gloriously situated,
he renders it generous, gracious, pious, reverent, joyous, courteous,
lofty, liberal, just, magnanimous, noble, self-acting, compassionate,
fond of learning, beneficent, benevolent, and calculated for government:
and, if posited ingloriously, he will endow the mind with qualities
apparently similar to these, but not of such virtue and lustre: as,
instead, of generosity, he will then cause profusion; instead of piety,
bigotry; for modesty, timidity; for nobleness, arrogance; for
courteousness, folly; for elegance, voluptuousness; for magnanimity,
carelessness; and for liberality, indifference. Conciliated with Mars,
and being in glory, Jupiter will make men rough, warlike, skilful in
military affairs, dictatorial, refractory, impetuous, daring, free in
speech, able in action, fond of disputation, contentious, imperious,
generous, ambitious, irascible, judicious, and fortunate: but, if thus
connected, and not placed in glory, he makes men mischievous, reckless,
cruel, pitiless, seditious, quarrelsome, perverse, calumnious, arrogant,
avaricious, rapacious, inconstant, vain and empty, unsteady,
precipitate, faithless, injudicious, inconsiderate, senseless,. and
officious; inculpators, prodigals, triflers, altogether without conduct,
and giving way to every impulse. When conciliated with Venus, and in a
glorious position, Jupiter will render the mind pure, joyous, delighting
in elegance, in the arts and sciences, and in poetry and music; valuable
in friendship, sincere, beneficent, compassionate, inoffensive,
religious, fond of sports and exercises, prudent, amiable, and
affectionate, gracious, noble, brilliant, candid, liberal, discreet,
temperate, modest, pious, just, fond of glory, and in all respects
honourable and worthy; but, if posited ingloriously, when so connected,
he makes men luxurious, soft, effeminate, fond of dancing, indulgent in
expenses, incapable of managing women, yet amorous and lascivious; mean,
slanderous, adulterous, fond of dress, dissolute, dull, wasteful,
without energy, enervated, fond of personal adornment, womanish in mind,
yet observant of holy rites and ceremonies, faithful, harmless,
pleasant, affable, cheerful, and liberal to misfortune. If connected
with Mercury, and posited in glory, Jupiter will render men fit for much
business, fond of learning, and of geometry and the mathematics;
poetical, public orators, acute, temperate, well-disposed, skilful in
counsel, politic, beneficent, able in government, pious, religious,
valuable in all useful professions, benevolent, affectionate in their
families, ready in acquiring knowledge, philosophical, and dignified:
but when so connected, and placed ingloriously, he will produce contrary
effects, rendering men frivolous, empty, contemptible, credulous of
falsehood, senseless, fanatical, trifling, petulant, affectors of
wisdom, stupid, arrogant, pretenders in art, magicians, and vacillating:
Yet he will

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

also produce men skilled in various learning, and of strong memory,
capable of imparting instruction, and pure in their enjoyments.

Mars alone having dominion of the mind, and placed with glory, makes men
noble, imperious, irascible, warlike, versatile, powerful in intellect,
daring, bold, refractory, careless, obstinate, acute, self-confident,
contemptuous, tyrannical, strenuous, stern and able in government: but,
posited ingloriously, he makes men cruel, mischievous, sanguinary,
tumultuous, extravagant in expense, boisterous, ruffian-like,
precipitate, drunken, rapacious, pitiless, familiar with crime,
restless, outrageous, hostile to their families, and infidels in
religion. Should he be conciliated with Venus, and posited in glory, he
renders the mind cheerful, docile, friendly, complacent, joyous,
playful, frank, delighting in songs and dancing, amorous, fond of the
arts, and of dramatic personation, voluptuous, brave, libidinous in
desire, sensible, cautious, and discreet; disposed to free sexual
intercourse, <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_216) quick in anger,
extravagant in expense, and jealous: but, if he have an inglorious
position when thus conciliated, he makes men overbearing, lascivious,
sordid, opprobious, adulterous, mischievous, liars, fabricators of
deceit, cheats of their own families as well as others, eager in desire,
and at the same time soon satiated, debauchers of wives and virgins,
daring, impetuous, ungovernable, treacherous, faithless, dangerous,
fickle and weak in mind; and occasionally also wasteful, fond of dress,
audacious, and shameless. Connected with Mercury, and placed in glory,
Mars renders men skilful in command, cautious, strenuous, active,
obstinate, yet versatile, inventive, sophistical, laborious, busy in all
things, eloquent, imposing, deceitful, inconstant, overknowing,
maliciously artful, quick witted, seductive, hypocritical, treacherous,
habituated to evil, inquisitive, fond of strife, and successful; fair
dealers with persons of habits similar to their own, and, in short,
altogether mischievous to their enemies, though beneficial to their
friends: but, if Mars be posited ingloriously, and thus connected, he
makes men prodigal, yet avaricious, cruel, daring, bold, regretful and
vacillating; liars, thieves, infidels in religion, perjurers, and
impostors; seditious, incendiaries, frequenters of theatres, covered
with infamy, robbers, housebreakers, sanguinary, forgers of writings,
familiar with crime, jugglers, magicians, sorcerers, and assassins.

When Venus rules alone in a position of glory, she renders the mind
benignant, good, voluptuous, copious in wit, pure, gay, fond of dancing,
jealous, abhorring wickedness, delighting in the arts, pious, modest,
well-disposed, happy in dreams, affectionate, beneficent, compassionate,
refined in taste, easily reconciled, tractable, and entirely amiable:
but, if contrarily posited, she renders the mind dull, amorous,
effeminate, timorous, indiscriminating, 'sordid, faulty, obscure, and
ignominious. Conciliated with Mercury, and posited with glory, Venus
makes men

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

lovers of the arts, philosophical, of scientific mind and good genius,
poetical, delighting in learning and elegance, polite, voluptuous,
luxurious in their habits of life, joyous, friendly, pious, prudent,
fitted for various arts, intelligent, not misled by error, quick in
learning, self-teaching, emulous of worth, followers of virtue, copious
and agreeable in speech, serene and sincere in manner, delighting in
exercise, honest, judicious, high-minded, and continent in desire as
regards women <span id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217); but, when so
conciliated and posited adversely, she will make men oppressive, fit for
various arts, evil-tongued, unsteady, malevolent, fraudulent, turbulent,
liars, calumniators, faithless, crafty, insidious, practised in evil,
uncourteous, debauchers of women, corrupters of youth, <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_218) fond of personal adornment, dissolute,
infamous, notoriously offensive and publicly complained of, yet striving
after all things.

Mercury, alone, having dominion of the mind, and being in a glorious
position, renders it prudent, clever, sensible, capable of great
learning, inventive, expert, logical, studious of nature, speculative,
of good genius, emulous, benevolent, skilful in argument, accurate in
conjecture, adapted to sciences and mysteries, and tractable: but, when
placed contrarily, he makes men busy in all things, precipitate,
forgetful, impetuous, frivolous, variable, regretful, foolish,
inconsiderate, void of truth, careless, inconstant, insatiable,
avaricious, unjust; and altogether of slippery intellect, and
predisposed to error.

To these influences and their effects, as above detailed, the Moon also
contributes: for, should she be in the bends of her southern or northern
boundary, <span id="fr_219"></span>[3](#fn_219) she will render the
properties of the mind more various, more versatile in art, and more
susceptible of change: if she be in her nodes, she will make them more
acute, more practical, and more active. Also, when in the ascendant, and
during the increase of her illumination, she augments their ingenuity,
perspicuity, firmness and expansion; but, when found in her decrease, or
in occultation, she renders them more heavy, more obtuse, more variable
of purpose, more timid, and more obscure.

The Sun likewise co-operates, when conciliated with the lord of the
mental temperament; contributing, if he be in a glorious position, to
increase probity, industry, honour, and all laudable qualities; but, if
adversely situated, he increases debasement, depravity, obscurity,
cruelty, obstinacy, moroseness, and all other evil qualities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_209"></span>[107:1](ptb62.htm#fr_209) That is to say, in
the commencement of her separation from the aspect or conjunction of
such stars.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[108:1](ptb62.htm#fr_210) The Greek is
μεταμελητικους, which means "penitent," or "prone to repentance," or "to
subsequent regret." It is difficult to convey its precise meaning in the
text.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[108:2](ptb62.htm#fr_211) Vide Chapter XXVI,
Book I.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[109:1](ptb62.htm#fr_212) That of Mercury, and
that of the Moon.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[109:2](ptb62.htm#fr_213) This seems to imply,
if well placed in elevation; as, in the mid-heaven, for instance, or in
a conspicuous situation; and in possession of dignities.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[109:3](ptb62.htm#fr_214) Or, persons: the
Greek is φιλοσωματους.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[109:4](ptb62.htm#fr_215) Or, persons:
μισοσωματους.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[112:1](ptb62.htm#fr_216) Προς μιξιν θηλειων
και αρρενων διακειμενους.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[113:1](ptb62.htm#fr_217) Προς αρρενας δε
κεκιννημενους και ζηλοτυπους.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[113:2](ptb62.htm#fr_218) Παιδων διαφθορεας.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[113:3](ptb62.htm#fr_219) That is to say, in
her extreme latitude, whether south or north.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Diseases of the Mind](ptb63)
