[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb70)  [Next](ptb72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

### TRAVELLING

THE circumstances indicative of travel are to be considered by means of
the situation held by both the luminaries, in respect to the angles, and
especially, by means of that held by the Moon. For, should she be
descending, or cadent from the angles, she will cause journeys and
changes of residence: Mars, also, if descending, or cadent from the
zenith, will sometimes do the same, provided he may occupy a situation
in quartile, or in opposition to the luminaries. And, if the part of
Fortune, also, should happen to be placed in signs which produce
travelling, the course and practice of the whole life will be engaged in
foreign lands.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And further, provided the benefics superintend
the aforesaid places, or ascend in succession to them, the engagements
abroad will be honourable and lucrative, and the return home speedy and
unobstructed: but if, on the contrary, the malefics superintend or
ascend in succession to those places, the journey outward will then lead
to peril and misfortune, and the return will be replete with difficulty.
But it is, at the same time, necessary in all cases to consider the
contemperament also, and to observe such of the existing configurations
as are more predominant.

It most usually happens, that, if the luminaries be posited in the
cadent houses of the oriental quadrants, the travel will take place in
the eastern or southern quarters of the world; and that, if placed in
western situations, or in an occidental quadrant, travel will be then
prosecuted in the northern or western parts. And, should the signs,
which operate travel, be themselves single in form, or should the
planets, having dominion of them, be singly posited, the journeys will
then take place after long intervals, and occasionally only: but, if the
said signs be bicorporeal, or double in form or figure, travel will be
constantly repeated and continued.

Thus, when Jupiter and Venus may be in dominion over the luminaries, and
over the places producing travel, they will render the journeys
agreeable, as well as free from danger: for the traveller will be
joyfully forwarded on his way by the magistrates of the country, and by
the concurrent assistance of friendly persons; the state of the
atmosphere will also be favourable, and he will meet with abundance of
accommodation. And, provided Mercury also be present with the planets
above-specified, utility, profit, presents and honours will likewise be
derived from the journey.

Saturn and Mars, if controlling the luminaries, and, especially, if
placed distant from each other, <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269)
will produce great dangers, and at the same time render the journey
fruitless and unavailing. Should they be in watery signs, the dangers
will arise by shipwreck, or among deserts and wilderness <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270); if in fixed signs, by precipices, and
adverse blasts of wind; in tropical and equinoctial signs, by want of
food and other necessaries, and by some unwholesome state of the
atmosphere; in signs of human form, by robbery, treachery, and various
depredations; and, if in terrestrial signs, by the attack of wild
beasts, or from earth-quakes. And, should Mercury also lend concurrence,
the traveller will incur further danger from accusations made against
him, as well as from reptiles and venomous stings or bites.

The question, whether the events will be advantageous or injurious in
quality, must, however, be further considered by observation (made

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

in the forms already detailed), of the peculiar properties of the
places, in which the lords of employment, of wealth, of the body, or of
rank, may be posited. And the periods, at which travelling will take
place, are to be considered by the occasional ingress of the five
planets. <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_271)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[133:1](ptb71.htm#fr_269) The probable meaning
is, "if not acting in concert": but the Latin of Perugio says, "*si sint
oppositi secundum longitudinem*."

<span id="fn_270"></span>[133:2](ptb71.htm#fr_270) There seems a
misprint here in the original: δυσωδιων, "foul vapours," instead of
δυσοδων, "wildernesses."

<span id="fn_271"></span>[134:1](ptb71.htm#fr_271) On the places
indicative of travelling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Kind of Death](ptb72)
