[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb71)  [Next](ptb73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

### THE KIND OF DEATH

IT now remains to treat of the kind and species of death. It is,
however, first to be determined, by the rules already delivered
regarding the duration of life, <span id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_272)
whether death will ensue from an oriental or occidental position of the
predominating influence. And, if death ensue from some oriental
position, or meeting of rays, the place of such meeting must be
observed, and by means of that place the kind of death is to be
distinguished; if from the descension, or setting, of the significator,
or prorogator, the place of descension <span
id="fr_273"></span>[3](#fn_273) must be considered: because death is to
be expected conformable in character to the influences, whatever they
may be, which preside over the said places; or, if not any influences
should directly preside, it will then be conformable to the influences,
of whatever kind, which may be brought first in succession to the places
in question: the configuration of the stars, the property of the
aforesaid anæretic places, and the nature of the signs and of the
terms, <span id="fr_274"></span>[4](#fn_274) are, also, all of them
co-operative.

Thus, for example, if the dominion of death be vested in Saturn, he will
produce death by means of lingering diseases; cough, rheumatism, flux,
ague, disorder of the spleen, dropsy, colic, and complaints in the womb;
and, in short, by all such diseases as proceed from the superabundance
of cold.

Jupiter effects death by quinsey, inflammation of the lungs, apoplexy,
spasm, pains in the head, morbid performance of the heart, and by all
diseases arising from the superabundance of air, and from immoderate and
impure respiration.

Mars causes death by constant fevers, semitertians, sudden and
spontaneous wounds, diseases of the kidneys, expectoration of blood, and
hæmorrhages of various kinds; by miscarriage, or abortion, and by
childbirth, by erysipelas, and, in short, by such diseases as proceed
from abundant and immediate heat.

Venus produces death by disorders of the stomach, and of the liver,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

by scurvy and dysentry: also by consumption or wasting away, <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275) and by fistula and poison, and by all
diseases incident on the superabundance or poverty of moisture, and its
corruption.

Lastly, Mercury causes death to proceed from fury, madness, melancholy,
epilepsy, falling fits, coughs, and obstructions, and by such diseases
as arise from superabundant or disproportionate dryness.

When the lords of death may fully possess their own peculiar and natural
properties, and when neither of the malefics may be in elevation above
them, death will ensue in the modes above detailed, and in the ordinary
course of nature. But a violent and remarkable death will occur when
both the malefics, either in conjunction, or in quartile or opposition
to each other, may be lords of the anæretic places; or if both, or only
one of the two, should attack either both the luminaries, or even only
the Sun or the Moon. In such a case, the evil character of the death
will proceed from the concurrence of the malefic influence, and its
magnitude or remarkable nature from the additional testimony of the
luminaries: its quality, also, will be known by means of the rest of the
planets and stars in configuration, and by the signs which contain the
malefic influence. <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276)

Hence, if it happen that Saturn be in fixed signs, and in quartile or
opposition to the Sun, and contrary in condition, he will produce death
by suffocation, occasioned either by multitudes of people, or by hanging
or strangulation: so, likewise, should he be occidental, and the Moon be
succedent to him, he will operate the same effects. If he be posited in
places or signs of bestial form, the native will be destroyed by wild
beasts: and, if Jupiter also offer testimony, being at the same time
badly afflicted, the death will then occur in public, and by day; for
example, by being exposed to combats with wild beasts. If Saturn be
posited in opposition to either of the luminaries in the
ascendant, <span id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_277) he

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

will cause death in prison: if he be configurated with Mercury, and
especially if near the constellation of the Serpent in the sphere, and
in terrestrial signs of the zodiac, be will produce death by venomous
wounds or bites, and by reptiles and wild beasts. And, should Venus also
attach herself to Saturn and Mercury thus combined, death will then
ensue by poison or female treachery. If Saturn be in Virgo or Pisces, or
watery signs, and configurated with the Moon, he will operate death by
means of water, by drowning and suffocation; and, if found near Argo, by
shipwreck. Should he be in tropical or quadrupedal signs, and the Sun be
either in conjunction with him, or in opposition; or if, instead of the
Sun, Mars should so present himself, death will be caused by the fall of
houses or buildings; and, if posited in the mid-heaven, death will
happen by falls from heights or precipices. These are the various
effects of Saturn, when configurated as described.

Mars, if in signs of human form, and posited in quartile or in
opposition to the Sun or Moon, and contrary in condition, will operate
death by slaughter, either in civil or foreign war, or by suicide: if
Venus add her testimony, death will be inflicted by women, or by
assassins in the employment of women: and, should Mercury also be
configurated with them, death will happen from robbers, thieves, or
highwaymen. If Mars be in mutilated or imperfect signs, or near the
Gorgon <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278) of Perseus, he will produce
death by decapitation, or by mutilation of limb. If found in Scorpio or
Taurus, he will cause death by surgical amputation, burning or searing,
or also by spasms or convulsions. Should he be found in the mid-heaven,
either above or below the earth, death will be inflicted by crucifixion
or impalement, and especially if he be in the vicinity of Cepheus or
Andromeda. If descending, or in opposition to the ascendant, <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) he will produce death by fire: and, if
in quadrupedal signs, by falls and fractures. Should Jupiter, however,
bear testimony to Mars, and be at the same time afflicted, death will
ensue from the wrath of princes and kings, and from judicial
condemnation.

If it happen that the malefics be in concurrence with each other in the
first instance, and afterwards in mutual opposition, in any of the
aforesaid situations, the evil character of the death will be yet
further augmented; but its species or quality, and its dominion, will
depend upon that one which may be in occupation of the anæretic place.
And, if both the malefics claim prerogative in the anæretic places, the
bodies of persons who thus die will be cast abroad without interment,
and will be devoured by beasts and birds: these circumstances will
especially ensue, when the malefics may be found in signs similar in
form to beasts and birds; and provided not any one of the benefics
should offer testimony to the place below the earth, <span
id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_280) nor to the anæretic places.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

Lastly, death will occur in foreign lands, when it may happen that the
planets controlling the anæretic places may be posited in cadent houses;
especially if the Moon be present in the said places also, or if she be
found in quartile or in opposition. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[1](ptb73.htm#fn_281)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[134:2](ptb72.htm#fr_272) *Vide* the 14th
Chapter of the 3rd Book; on the number of the modes of prorogation.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[134:3](ptb72.htm#fr_273) That is to say, the
sign and degree on the occidental horizon.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[134:4](ptb72.htm#fr_274) See a subsequent
note, [p. 135](#page_135), which gives an instance of the mode in which
Placidus applied the power of the terms, in an anæretic direction.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[135:1](ptb72.htm#fr_275) Δια σηψεων. Perhaps
more properly, putridity or rottenness. The Perugio Latin translation
renders it by "cancer."

<span id="fn_276"></span>[135:2](ptb72.htm#fr_276) Placidus, in treating
of the nativity of Lewis, Cardinal Zachia, uses these words: "This
example also teaches us what the sentiments of Ptolemy were concerning a
violent death; when, in a peremptory place, both the enemies meet
together, it is to be understood, that in the nativity the violence is
sometimes first preordained from the unfortunate position of the Apheta;
at other times quite the contrary. But, because the direct direction
happened to be in the terms of Mercury, the sickness was attended with a
delirium and lethargy, so that you may perceive this to have been the
true cause of the native's death." (Cooper's Translation, pp. 198, 199.)

<span id="fn_277"></span>[135:3](ptb72.htm#fr_277) Ειδε ανθωροσκοπησει
προσοιν δηποτε των φωτων: which Allatius has translated, "if he should
be in the ascendant opposed to either of the luminaries" (*si in
horoscopo alteri luminum opponatur*); but the Latin copy of Basle, 1541,
as well as that of Perugio, 1646, give the passage as now rendered. And
it appears in a subsequent place, p. 201 (where the word ανθωροσκοπων
occurs), that it can only be properly translated "*in opposition to the
ascendant*."

<span id="fn_278"></span>[136:1](ptb72.htm#fr_278) Caput Medusæ.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[136:2](ptb72.htm#fr_279) . *Vide* note
<sup>3</sup> in [p. 135](#page_135).

<span id="fn_280"></span>[136:3](ptb72.htm#fr_280) That is to say, the
lower heaven, or imum-cœli. Whalley has translated it, "*above* the
earth," instead of "*below*"; mistaking υπο for υπερ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Periodical Divisions of Time](ptb73)
