[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110062)  [Next](1110064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>homilies</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>of</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c24"><span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>st. john chrysostom,</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>Archbishop of Constantinople,</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>epistle of st. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>romans.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>————————————

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>The Argument. <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) </span>

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>As</span> I keep hearing the Epistles of the
blessed Paul read, and that twice every week, and often three or four
times, whenever we are celebrating the memorials of the holy martyrs,
gladly do I enjoy the spiritual trumpet, and get roused and warmed with
desire at recognizing the voice so dear to me, and seem to fancy him all
but present to my sight, and behold him conversing with me. But I grieve
and am pained, that all people do not know this man, as much as they
ought to know him; but some are so far ignorant of him, as not even to
know for certainty the number of his Epistles. And this comes not of
incapacity, but of their not having the wish to be continually
conversing with this blessed man. For it is not through any natural
readiness and sharpness of wit that even I am acquainted with as much as
I do know, if I do know anything, but owing to a continual cleaving to
the man, and an earnest affection towards him. For, what belongs to men
beloved, they who love them know above all others; because they are
interested in them. And this also this blessed Apostle shows in what he
said to the Philippians; “Even as it is meet for me to think this of you
all, because I have you in my heart, both in my bonds, and in the
defence and confirmation of the Gospel.” ([Phil. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007)<span id="vii.ii-p12.2"></span>.) And
so ye also, if ye be willing to apply to the reading of him with a ready
mind, will need no other aid. For the word of Christ is true which
saith, “Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you.” ([Matt. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span
id="vii.ii-p12.3"></span>.) But since the greater part of those who here
gather themselves to us, have taken upon themselves the bringing up of
children, and the care of a wife, and the charge of a family, and for
this cause cannot afford to all events aroused to receive those things
which have been brought together by others, and bestow as much attention
upon the hearing of what is said as ye give to the gathering together of
goods. For although it is unseemly to demand only so much of you, yet
still one must be content if ye give as much. For from this it is that
our countless evils have arisen—from ignorance of the Scriptures; from
this it is that the plague of heresies has broken out; from this that
there are negligent lives; from this labors without advantage. For as
men deprived of this daylight would not walk aright, so they that look
not to the gleaming of the Holy Scriptures must needs be frequently and
constantly sinning, in that they are walking in the worst darkness. And
that this fall not out, let us hold our eyes open to the bright shining
of the Apostle’s words; for this man’s tongue shone forth above the sun,
and he abounded more than all the rest in the word of doctrine; for
since he labored more abundantly than they, he also drew upon himself a
large measure of the Spirit’s grace. (<span id="vii.ii-p12.4"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="vii.ii-p12.5"></span>.) And this I constantly affirm, not only from
his Epistles, but also from the Acts. For if there were anywhere a
season for oratory, to him men everywhere gave place. Wherefore also he
was thought by the unbelievers to be Mercurius, because he took the lead
in speech. (<span id="vii.ii-p12.6"></span>[Acts xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)<span id="vii.ii-p12.7"></span>.)
And as we are going to enter fully into this Epistle, it is necessary to
give the date also at which it was written. For it is not, as most
think, before all the others, but before all that were written from
Rome, yet subsequent to the rest, though not to all of them. For both
those to the Corinthians were sent before this: and this is plain from
what he wrote at the end of this, saying as follows: “But now I go unto
Jerusalem to minister unto the saints: for it hath pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints
which are at Jerusalem.” (<span id="vii.ii-p12.8"></span>[Rom.
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026)<span id="vii.ii-p12.9"></span>.)
For in writing to the Corinthians he says: “If it be meet that I go
also, they shall go with me” ([1 Cor. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)<span id="vii.ii-p12.10"></span>);
meaning this about those who were to carry the money from thence. Whence
it is plain, that when he wrote to the Corinthians, the matter of this
journey of his was in doubt, but when to the Romans, it stood now a
decided thing. And this being allowed, the other point is plain, that
this Epistle was after those. But that to the Thessalonians also seems
to me to be before the Epistle to the Corinthians: for having written to
them before, and having moved the question of alms to them, when he
said, “But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto
you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another. And indeed
ye do it toward all the brethren” (<span id="vii.ii-p12.11"></span>[1
Thess. 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#010)<span id="vii.ii-p12.12"></span>):
then he wrote to the Corinthians. And this very point he makes plain in
the words, “For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast
of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago, and your
zeal hath provoked very many” ([2 Cor. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002)<span id="vii.ii-p12.13"></span>):
whence he shows that they were the first he had spoken to about this.
This Epistle then is later than those, but prior (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p12.14"></span>πρώτη</span>) to those
from Rome; for he had not as yet set foot in the city of the Romans when
he wrote this Epistle, and this he shows by saying, “For I long to see
you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift.” (<span
id="vii.ii-p12.15"></span>[Rom. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vii.ii-p12.16"></span>.)
But it was from Rome he wrote to the Philippians; wherefore he says,
“All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Cæsar’s household”
([Phil. iv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022)<span
id="vii.ii-p12.17"></span>): and to the Hebrews from thence likewise,
wherefore also he says, “all they of Italy salute them.” ([Heb. xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#024)<span id="vii.ii-p12.18"></span>.)
And the Epistle to Timothy he sent also from Rome, when in prison; which
also seems to me to be the last of all the Epistles; and this is plain
from the end: “For I am now ready to be offered,” he says, “and the time
of my departure is at hand.” ([2 Tim. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii-p12.19"></span>.)
But that he ended his life there, is clear, I may say, to every one. And
that to Philemon is also very late, (for he wrote it in extreme old age,
wherefore also he said, “as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner in
Christ Jesus”) ([Philem. 9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.ii-p12.20"></span>), yet previous to that to the Colossians. And
this again is plain from the end. For in writing to the Colossians, he
says, “All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, whom I have sent
with Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother.” ([Col. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007)<span id="vii.ii-p12.21"></span>.)
For this was that Onesimus in whose behalf he composed the Epistle to
Philemon. And that this was no other of the same name with him, is plain
from the mention of Archippus. For it is he whom he had taken as worker
together with himself in the Epistle to Philemon, when he besought him
for Onesimus, whom when writing to the Colossians he stirreth up,
saying, “Say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast
received, that thou fulfil it.” ([Col. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)<span id="vii.ii-p12.22"></span>.)
And that to the Galatians seems to me to be before that to the
Romans. <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184) But if they have a
different order in the Bibles, that is nothing wonderful, since the
twelve Prophets, though not exceeding one another in order of time, but
standing at great intervals from one another, are in the arrangement of
the Bible placed in succession. Thus Haggai and Zachariah and the
Messenger <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185) prophesied after
Ezekiel and Daniel, and long after Jonah and Zephaniah and all the rest.
Yet they are nevertheless joined with all those from whom they stand so
far off in time.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>But let no one consider this an undertaking
beside the purpose, nor a search of this kind a piece of superfluous
curiosity; for the date of the Epistles contributes no little to what we
are looking after. <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) For when I
see him writing to the Romans and to the Colossians about the same
subjects, and yet not in a like way about the same subjects; but to the
former with much condescension, as when he says, “Him that is weak in
the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations; for one
believeth that he may eat all things, another, herbs” (<span
id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Rom. 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="vii.ii-p16.2"></span>):
who is weak, eateth weak, but to the Colossians he does not write in
this way, though about the same things, but with greater boldness of
speech: “Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ,” he says, “why, as though
living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances (touch not, taste not,
handle not), which all are to perish with the using, not in any honor to
the satisfying of the flesh” (<span id="vii.ii-p16.3"></span>[Col. ii.
20-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020)<span
id="vii.ii-p16.4"></span>);—I find no other reason for this difference
than the time of the transaction. For at the first it was needful to be
condescending, but afterwards it became no more so. And in many other
places one may find him doing this. Thus both the physician and the
teacher are used to do. For neither does the physician treat alike his
patients in the first stage of their disorder, and when they have come
to the point of having health thenceforth, nor the teacher those
children who are beginning to learn and those who want more advanced
subjects of instruction. Now to the rest he was moved to write by some
particular cause and subject, and this he shows, as when he says to the
Corinthians, “Touching those things whereof ye wrote unto me” ([1 Cor.
vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001)<span
id="vii.ii-p16.5"></span>): and to the Galatians too from the very
commencement of the whole Epistle writes so as to indicate the same
thing; but to these for what purpose and wherefore does he write? For
one finds him bearing testimony to them that they are “full of goodness,
being filled with all knowledge, and able also to admonish others.”
([Rom. xv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)<span
id="vii.ii-p16.6"></span>.) Why then does he write to them? “Because of
the grace of God,” he says, “which is given unto me, that I should be
the minister of Jesus Christ” ([Rom.
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span id="vii.ii-p16.7"></span>):
wherefore also he says in the beginning: “I am a debtor; as much as in
me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also;”
for what is said—as that they are “able to exhort others also” (<span
id="vii.ii-p16.8"></span>[Rom. 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015)<span
id="vii.ii-p16.9"></span>),—and the like, rather belongs to encomium and
encouragement: and the correction afforded by means of a letter, was
needful even for these; for since he had not yet been present, he
bringeth the men to good order in two ways, both by the profitableness
of his letter and by the expectation of his presence. For such was that
holy soul, it comprised the whole world and carried about all men in
itself thinking the nearest relationship to be that in God. And he loved
them so, as if he had begotten them all, or rather showed (so 4 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.ii-p16.10"></span>mss.</span>) a greater
instinctive affection than any father (so Field: all <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.ii-p16.11"></span>mss.</span> give “a father’s
toward all”); for such is the grace of the Spirit, it exceedeth the
pangs of the flesh, and displays a more ardent longing than theirs. And
this one may see specially in the soul of Paul, who having as it were
become winged through love, went continually round to all, abiding
nowhere nor standing still. For since he had heard Christ saying,
“Peter, lovest thou Me? feed My sheep” (<span
id="vii.ii-p16.12"></span>[John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="vii.ii-p16.13"></span>);
and setting forth this as the greatest test of love, he displayed it in
a very high degree. Let us too then, in imitation of him, each one bring
into order, if not the world, or not entire cities and nations, yet at
all events his own house, his wife, his children, his friends, his
neighbors. And let no one say to me, “I am unskilled and unlearned:”
nothing were less instructed than Peter, nothing more rude than Paul,
and this himself confessed, and was not ashamed to say, “though I be
rude in speech, yet not in knowledge.” ([2 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii-p16.14"></span>.)
Yet nevertheless this rude one, and that unlearned man, <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) overcame countless philosophers,
stopped the mouths of countless orators, and did all by their own ready
mind and the grace of God. What excuse then shall we have, if we are not
equal to twenty names, and are not even of service to them that live
with us? This is but a pretence and an excuse—for it is not want of
learning or of instruction which hindereth our teaching, but drowsiness
and sleep. (<span id="vii.ii-p17.10"></span>[Acts i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015)<span id="vii.ii-p17.11"></span>;
ii. 41.) Let us then having shaken off this sleep with all diligence
cleave to our own members, that we may even here enjoy much calm, by
ordering in the fear of God them that are akin to us, and hereafter may
partake of countless blessings through the grace and love of our Lord
Jesus Christ towards man, through Whom, and with Whom, be glory to the
Father, with the Holy Ghost, now, and evermore, and to all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[i:1184](1110063.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> Field counts this as the first Homily: but
it seemed needless to disturb the usual numeration.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[i:1185](1110063.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.23"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> It is remarkable that the conclusions of
Chrys. should harmonize so well with the results of modern scholarship
in regard to the order of the Pauline epistles. Except in assigning the
Epistle to the Hebrews to Paul and in apparently interposing a
considerable period between Philemon and Colossians, his statements may
be taken as giving the best conclusions of criticism.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[i:1186](1110063.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span> “Or ‘Angel,’ i.e. Malachi; who was so
called from the expression [Mal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)<span id="vii.ii-p14.1"></span> (LXX.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p14.2"></span>διὰ χειρὸς ἀγγέλου
αὐτοῦ</span> cf. E.V. in margin ‘by the hand of Malachi’), cf. [2 Esdras
1.40](../../../bib/apo/es2001.htm#040)<span id="vii.ii-p14.3"></span>[2
Esdr. i. 40](../../../bib/apo/es2001.htm#040)<span
id="vii.ii-p14.4"></span>.”

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[i:1187](1110063.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span> Our author rightly attaches much
importance to the time and occasion of writing as bearing upon the
meaning of the epistles. The earliest epistles—those to the
Thessalonians—relate to Paul’s missionary labors and are but a
continuation of the apostle’s preaching. They might almost be called
samples of his sermons. The group which falls next in order (Gal., 1 and
2 Cor., and Rom.) comprehends the great doctrinal discussions of the
problems of law and grace, and reflects the conflict of the Apostle to
the Gentiles with the Judaizing tendency in all its phases. This group
is most important for the study of the Pauline theology. The third
group—the epistles of the (first) imprisonment—Col., Philem., Eph. and
Phil.—besides containing a wonderful fulness and richness of Christian
thought, exhibits to us the rise and spread of Gnostic heresies,—the
introduction of heathen philosophical ideas which were destined to exert
a mighty influence upon the theology, religion and life of the church
for centuries. The last group—the Pastoral epistles—has a peculiar
private and personal character from being addressed to individuals. They
have a special value, for all who hold their genuineness, from being the
latest Christian counsels of “Paul the aged.”—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[i:1188](1110063.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="vii.ii-p16.15"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span> The “learning” of the Apostle Paul has
been greatly exaggerated on both sides. It has been customary to
overestimate it. He has been described as learned in Greek literature.
The quotation of a few words from Aratus ([Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="vii.ii-p17.1"></span>) and
the use of two (probably) proverbial sayings which have been traced to
Menander and Epimenides (<span id="vii.ii-p17.2"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="vii.ii-p17.3"></span>;
[Titus i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012)<span
id="vii.ii-p17.4"></span>) furnish too slender support for this opinion.
(vid. Meyer *in locis*). It is said that Paul had abundant opportunity
to become acquainted with the Greek literature in Tarsus. But he left
Tarsus at an early age and all the prejudices of his family would
disincline him to the study of Heathen literature. His connection with
Gamaliel and the style of his epistles alike show that his education was
predominantly Jewish and Rabbinic. He was learned after the manner of
the strictest Pharisees and from his residence in Tarsus and extended
travel had acquired a good writing and speaking knowledge of the Greek
language. Chrys. is uniformly inclined, however, to depreciate the
culture of Paul. This springs from a desire to emphasize the greatness
of his influence and power as compared with his attainments. The
apostle’s confession that he is an <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p17.5"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p17.6"></span>διώτης τῷ-λόγῳ</span> ([2 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii-p17.7"></span>),
means only that he was unskilled in eloquence and is to be taken as his
own modest estimate of himself in that particular. Moreover it is
immediately qualified by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p17.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p17.9"></span>λλ᾽ οὐ τῇ γνώσει</span> which is entirely
inconsistent with the idea that he was rude or illiterate in general, or
that he considered himself to be so.—G.B.S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I on Rom. i. 1, 2.](1110064)
