[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110049)  [Next](1110051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xlv"></span> <span id="vi.xlv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xlv-p1.1"></span>Homily XLV.</span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p2"></span>[Acts XX.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032)<span id="vi.xlv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p3"></span>“And now, brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the word of His grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.”

<span id="vi.xlv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xlv-p4.1"></span>What</span> he does when writing in an Epistle,
this he does also when speaking in council: from exhorting, he ends with
prayer: for since he had much alarmed them by saying, “Grievous wolves
shall enter in among you” ([Acts
20.29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)<span id="vi.xlv-p4.2"></span>),
therefore, not to overpower them, and make them lose all
self-possession, observe the consolation (he gives). “And now,” he says,
as always, “I commend you, brethren, to God, and to the word of His
grace:” that is, to His grace: it is grace that saveth. He constantly
puts them in mind of grace, to make them more earnest as being debtors,
and to persuade them to have confidence. “Which is able to build you
up.” <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) He does not say, to
build, but, “to build up,” showing that they had (already) been built.
Then he puts them in mind of the hope to come; “to give you an
inheritance,” he says, “among all them which are sanctified.” Then
exhortation again: “I have coveted no man’s silver, or gold, or
apparel.” ([Acts 20.33](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xlv-p5.3"></span>.) He takes away that which is the root of
evils, the love of money. “Silver, or gold,” he says. He says not, I
have not taken, but, not even “coveted.” No great thing this, but what
follows after is great. “Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have
showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to support the
weak.” ([Acts 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="vi.xlv-p5.4"></span>.)
Observe him employed in work and not simply that, but toiling. “These
hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with
me:” so as to put them to shame. And see how worthily of them. For he
says not, Ye ought to show yourselves superior to money, but what? “to
support the weak”—not all indiscriminately—“and to hear the word of the
Lord which He spake, It is more blessed to give than to receive.” <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) For lest any one should think that
it was spoken with reference to them, and that he gave himself for an
ensample, as he elsewhere says, “giving an ensample to you” ([Phil. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.1"></span>), he
added the declaration of Christ, Who said, “It is more blessed to give
than to receive.” He prayed over them while exhorting them: he shows it
both by action,—“And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and
prayed with them all,” ([Acts
20.36](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)<span
id="vi.xlv-p6.2"></span>)—he did not simply pray, but with much feeling:
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p6.3"></span>κατανύξεως</span>):
great was the consolation—and by his saying, “I commend you to the Lord.
And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul’s neck and kissed him,
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see
his face no more.” ([Acts 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#038)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.4"></span>.) He
had said, that “grievous wolves should enter in;” had said, “I am pure
from the blood of all men:” and yet the thing that grieved them most of
all was this, “that they should see him no more:” since indeed it was
this that made the war grievous. “And they accompanied them,” it says,
“unto the ship. And it came to pass, that after we had torn ourselves
from them”—so much did they love him, such was their affection towards
him—“and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the
day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara: and finding a
ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth. Now when
we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into
Syria, and landed at Tyre” (<span id="vi.xlv-p6.5"></span>[Acts xxi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.6"></span>): he
came to Lycia, and having left Cyprus, he sailed down to Tyre—“for there
the ship was to unlade her burden. And finding disciples, we tarried
there seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should
not go up to Jerusalem.” ([Acts
21.4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.7"></span>.)
They too prophesy of the afflictions. It is so ordered that they should
be spoken by them also, that none might imagine that Paul said those
things without cause, and only by way of boasting. And there again they
part from each other with prayer. “And when we had accomplished those
days, we departed, and went our way; and they all brought us on our way,
with wives and children, till we were out of the city: and we kneeled
down on the shore, and prayed. And when we had taken our leave one of
another, we took ship; and they returned home again. And when we had
finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the
brethren, and abode with them one day. And the next day we that were of
Paul’s company departed, and came unto Cæsarea: and we entered into the
house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode
with him.” ([Acts 21.5-8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xlv-p6.8"></span>.) Having come to Cæsarea, it says, we abode
with Philip, which was one of the seven. “And the same man had four
daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.” ([Acts
21.9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.9"></span>.)
But it is not these that foretell to Paul, though they were
prophetesses; it is Agabus. “And as we tarried there many days, there
came down from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus. And when he was
come unto us, he took Paul’s girdle, and bound his own hands and feet,
and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind
the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of
the Gentiles.” ([Acts 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.10"></span>.)
He who formerly had declared about the famine, the same says, This “man,
who owneth this girdle, thus shall they bind.” ([Acts
11.28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.11"></span>.)
The same that the prophets used to do, representing events to the sight,
when they spoke about the captivity—as did Ezekiel—the same did this
(Agabus). “And,” what is the grievous part of the business, “deliver him
into the hands of the Gentiles. And when we heard these things, both we,
and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.” ([Acts
21.12](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#012)<span id="vi.xlv-p6.12"></span>.)
Many even besought him not to depart, and still he would not comply.
“Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart?” <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) ([Acts
21.13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013)<span id="vi.xlv-p7.2"></span>.)
Do you mark? Lest, having heard that saying, “I go bound in the Spirit”
([Acts 20.22](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xlv-p7.3"></span>), you should imagine it a matter of necessity,
or that he fell into it ignorantly, therefore these things are foretold.
But they wept, and he comforted them, grieving at their tears. For,
“what mean ye,” he says, “to weep and to break my heart?” Nothing could
be more affectionate: because he saw them weeping, he grieved, he that
felt no pain at his own trials. “For I am ready not to be bound only,
but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And when he
would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be
done.” ([Acts 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#014)<span id="vi.xlv-p7.4"></span>.) Ye
do me wrong in doing this: for do I grieve? Then they ceased, when he
said, “to break my heart.” I weep, he says, for you, not on account of
my own sufferings: as for those (men), I am willing even to die for
them. But let us look over again what has been said.

<span id="vi.xlv-p8"></span>(Recapitulation.) “Silver, or gold, or
apparel,” etc. ([Acts 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034), [1 Cor.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#000), [2 Cor.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#000)<span id="vi.xlv-p8.1"></span>.)
So then, it was not in Corinth only that they did this <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) —they that corrupted the disciples,
but in Asia as well. But he nowhere casts this up as a reproach to the
Ephesians, when writing to them. And why? Because he did not fall upon
any subject that obliged him to speak of this. But to the Corinthians he
says, “My boasting has not been stopped in the regions of Achaia.”
(<span id="vi.xlv-p9.3"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#010)<span id="vi.xlv-p9.4"></span>.) And
he does not say, Ye did not give to me; but, “Silver, or gold, or
apparel, I coveted not,” that it might not seem to be their doing, that
they had not given. And he does not say, From no man have I coveted the
necessaries of life, that again it might not look like accusing them:
but he covertly hints as much, seeing that he provided subsistence for
others as well as himself. See how he worked with earnestness, “night
and day” discoursing (to others), “with tears warning each one of them.”
([Acts 20.31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xlv-p9.5"></span>.) (Here) again he puts them in fear: “I have
showed you all things,” he says: ye cannot take refuge in the plea of
ignorance: “have shown you” by works “how that so laboring ye ought to
work.” And he does not say, that to receive is bad, but that not to
receive is better. For, “remember,” he says, “the words of the Lord
which he spake: It is more blessed to give than to receive.” ([Acts
20.35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="vi.xlv-p9.6"></span>.)
And where said He this? Perhaps the Apostles delivered it by unwritten
tradition; or else it is plain from (recorded sayings, from) which one
could infer it. <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) For in fact
here he has shown both boldness in meeting dangers, sympathy with those
over whom he ruled, teaching with (unshrinking) boldness, humility,
(voluntary) poverty: but, what we have here is even more than that
poverty. For if He says there (in the Gospel), “If thou wilt be perfect,
sell what thou hast and give to the poor” ([Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vi.xlv-p10.2"></span>),
when, besides receiving nothing himself, he provides sustenance for
others also, what could equal this? It is one degree to fling away one’s
possessions; a second, to be sufficient for the supply of one’s own
necessities: a third, to provide for others also; a fourth, for one (to
do all this) who preaches and has a right to receive. So that here is a
man far better than those who merely forego possessions. “Thus it is
right to support the weak:” this is (indeed) sympathy with the weak; for
to give from the labors of others, is easy. “And they fell on his neck,”
it says, “and wept.” ([Acts 20.37](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xlv-p10.3"></span>.) He shows their affection also by saying,
“Upon his neck,” as taking a last and yet a last embrace, such was the
love they conceived from his discourse, such the spell of love that
bound them. For if we groan when simply parting from each other,
although we know that we shall receive one another back again, what a
tearing away of themselves it must have been to them! Methinks Paul also
wept. “Having torn ourselves away,” he says: he shows the violence of it
by saying, “having torn ourselves away from them.” And with reason:
otherwise they could never have got to sea. What means, “We came with a
straight course unto Coos?” Instead of saying, “we did not go round nor
make stay in other places.” Then “unto Rhodes.” ([Acts
21.1](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001)<span id="vi.xlv-p10.4"></span>.)
See how he hastes on. And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia.
([Acts 21.2](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xlv-p10.5"></span>.) Possibly that ship (in which they had come)
was making a stay there: wherefore they shifted to another, and not
having found one going to Cæsarea, but (finding this) for Phenice, they
embarked in it (and pursued their voyage), having left Cyprus also and
Syria: but the expression, “having left it on the left hand,” is not
said simply (in that meaning), but that they made speed not to get to
Syria either. <span id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) “We landed at
Tyre.” ([Acts 21.3](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#003)<span
id="vi.xlv-p11.1"></span>.) Then they tarry with the brethren seven
days. Now that they were come near to Jerusalem, they no longer run.
(*b*) “Who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem.” ([Acts 21.4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xlv-p11.2"></span>.) Observe how, when the Spirit does not
forbid, he complies. They said, “Adventure not thyself into the theatre,
and he did not adventure” ([Acts
19.31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)<span id="vi.xlv-p11.3"></span>):
often they bore him off (from dangers), and he complied: again he
escaped by a window: and now, though numberless persons, so to say,
beseech him, both those at Tyre and those at Cæsarea, weeping also and
predicting numberless dangers, he refuses to comply. And yet it is not
(merely), they predicted the dangers, but “said by the Spirit.” If then
the Spirit bade, why did he gainsay? “By the Spirit,” that is, they
knowing “by the Spirit” (what would be the consequences, said to him):
for of course it does not mean that the exhortation they made was by the
Spirit. For they did not simply foretell to him the dangers (through the
Spirit), but (added of themselves) that it behooved him not to go
up—sparing him. But “after we had accomplished the days,” i.e. had
fulfilled the appointed days, “we separated, and went on our way: they
all bringing us on our way with wives and children.” ([Acts
21.5](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xlv-p11.4"></span>.)—See how great was the entreaty. And again
they part with prayer. Also in Ptolemais they stay one day, but in
Cæsarea many. ([Acts 21.6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xlv-p11.5"></span>.) (*a*) Now that they are near to Jerusalem,
they no longer hurry. For observe, I pray you, all the days. “After the
day of unleavened bread” they came “to Troas in five days” ([Acts
20.6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006)<span id="vi.xlv-p11.6"></span>);
then they there spent “seven;” in all, twelve: then to “Thasos,” to
“Mytilene,” to “Trogylium” and “over against Chios,” and to “Samos” and
“Miletus” ([Acts 20.13-17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xlv-p11.7"></span>); eighteen in all. Then to “Cos,” to “Rhodes,”
to “Patara,” twenty-one: then say <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) five to “Tyre;” twenty-six: there
“seven;” thirty-three; “Ptolemais,” thirty-four; then to “Cæsarea, many
days” ([Acts 21.1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xlv-p12.4"></span>); and then, thereafter, the prophet puts them
up thence. (*c*) When Paul has heard that he has to suffer numberless
perils, then he is in haste, not flinging himself upon the dangers but
accounting it to be the command of the Spirit. (*e*) And Agabus does not
say, “They shall bind” Paul, that he may not seem to speak upon
agreement (with Paul), but “the man that owneth this girdle” ([Acts
21.11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xlv-p12.5"></span>)—so then he had a girdle also. <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) But when they could not persuade
him—this was why they wept—then they “held their peace.” Do you mark the
resignation? do you mark the affection? “They held their peace,” it
says, “saying, The will of the Lord be done.” ([Acts
21.12-14](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xlv-p13.1"></span>.) (*g*) The Lord, say they, Himself will do
that which is pleasing in his sight. For they perceived that it was the
will of God. Else Paul would not be so bent (upon going)—he that on all
(other occasions delivers himself out of dangers. (*d*) “And after
these, days,” it says, “having taken up our baggage”—i.e. having
received the (supplies) necessary for the journey—“we went up to
Jerusalem.” ([Acts 21.15](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xlv-p13.2"></span>.) “And there went with us also certain of the
disciples from Cæsarea, bringing us to one with whom we should lodge,
one Mnason, an ancient disciple of Cyprus.” <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) ([Acts
21.16](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#016)<span id="vi.xlv-p14.4"></span>.)
“And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.”
([Acts 21.17](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xlv-p14.5"></span>.) (*f*) “Bringing us,” it says, “(to him) with
whom we should lodge”—not to the church: for on the former occasion
([Acts 15.4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xlv-p14.6"></span>), when they went up concerning the decrees,
they lodged with the Church, but now with a certain “ancient disciple.”
(The expression) shows that the preaching had been going on a long time:
whence it seems to me that this writer in the Acts epitomizes the events
of many years, relating (only) the matters of chief importance. (*h*) So
unwilling were they to burthen the Church, when there was another to
lodge them; and so little did they stand upon their dignity. “The
brethren,” it says, “received us gladly.” Affairs among the Jews were
now full of peace: there was not much warfare (among them). “Bringing
us,” it says, “to one with whom we should lodge.” Paul was the guest he
entertained. Perchance some one of you says: Aye, if it were given me to
entertain Paul as a guest, I readily and with much eagerness would do
this. Lo! it is in thy power to entertain Paul’s Master for thy guest,
and thou wilt not: for “he that receiveth one of these least,” he saith,
“receiveth Me.” (<span id="vi.xlv-p14.7"></span>[Matt. xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005)<span id="vi.xlv-p14.8"></span>;
[Luke ix. 48](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#048)<span
id="vi.xlv-p14.9"></span>.) By how much the brother may be least, so
much the more does Christ come to thee through him. For he that receives
the great, often does it from vainglory also; but he that receives the
small, does it purely for Christ’s sake. It is in thy power to entertain
even the Father of Christ as thy guest, and thou will not: for, <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) “I was a stranger,” He says, “and
ye took me in” ([Matt. xxv. 35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xlv-p15.1"></span>): and again, “Unto one of the least of these
the brethren that believe on Me, ye have done it unto Me.” ([Matt.
25.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="vi.xlv-p15.2"></span>.)
Though it be not Paul, yet if it be a believer and a brother, although
the least, Christ cometh to thee through him. Open thine house, take Him
in. “He that receiveth a prophet,” He saith, “shall receive a prophet’s
reward.” ([Matt. x. 41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041)<span
id="vi.xlv-p15.3"></span>.) Therefore too he that receives Christ, shall
receive the reward of him who has Christ for his guest. <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043) Do not thou disbelieve His words,
but be believing. Himself hath said, Through them I come to thee: and
that thou mayest not disbelieve, He lays down both punishments for those
who do not receive, and honors for those who do receive; since He would
not have done this, unless both the person honored and the person
insulted were Himself. “Thou receivedst Me,” He saith, “into thy
lodging, I will receive thee into the Kingdom of My Father; thou tookest
away My hunger, I take away thy sins; thou sawest Me bound, I see thee
loosed; thou sawest Me a stranger, I make thee a citizen of heaven; thou
gavest Me bread, I give thee an entire Kingdom, that thou mayest inherit
and possess it.” He saith not, “Receive,” but, “Inherit,” the word which
is spoken of those who have possession by right of ownership; as when we
say, “This have I inherited.” Thou didst it to Me in secret, I will
proclaim it openly: and of thine acts indeed I say, that they were of
free gift, but Mine are of debt. “For since thou,” He saith, “didst
begin, I follow and come after: I am not ashamed to confess the benefits
conferred on Me, nor from what things thou didst free Me, hunger and
nakedness and wandering. Thou sawest Me bound, thou shalt not behold the
fire of hell; thou sawest Me sick, thou shalt not behold the torments
nor the punishments.” O hands, truly blessed, which minister in such
services as these, which are accounted worthy to serve Christ! Feet
which go into prisons for Christ’s sake, with ease defy the fire: no
trial of bonds have they, (the hands) <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044) which saw Him bound! Thou clothedst
Him with a garment, and thou puttest on a garment of salvation: thou
wast in prison with Him, and with Him thou findest thyself in the
Kingdom, not ashamed, knowing that thou visitedst Him. The Patriarch
knew not that he was entertaining Angels, and he did entertain them.
([Gen. xviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003)<span
id="vi.xlv-p17.4"></span>.) Let us take shame to ourselves, I beseech
you: he was sitting in mid-day, being in a foreign land, where he had
none inheritance, “not so much as to set his foot on” ([Acts
7.5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005)<span id="vi.xlv-p17.5"></span>):
he was a stranger, and the stranger entertained strangers: for he was a
citizen of heaven. Therefore, not even while he was on earth was he a
stranger (to Him). We are rather strangers than that stranger, if we
receive not strangers. He had no home, and his tent was his place of
reception. And mark his liberality—he killed a calf, and kneaded fine
meal: mark his ready mind—by himself and his wife: mark the unassuming
manner—he worships and beseeches them. For all these qualities ought to
be in that man who entertains strangers—readiness, cheerfulness,
liberality. For the soul of the stranger is abashed, and feels ashamed;
and unless (his host) show excessive joy, he is as (if) slighted, and
goes away, and it becomes worse than not to have received him, his being
received in this way. Therefore he worships them, therefore he welcomes
them with speech, therefore with a seat. For who would have hesitated,
knowing that this work was done unto Him? “But we are not in a foreign
land.” If we will, we shall be able to imitate him. How many of the
brethren are strangers? There is a common apartment, the Church, which
we call the “Xenon.” Be inquisitive (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p17.6"></span>περιεργάζεσθε</span>), sit before the doors,
receive those who come yourselves; though you may not wish to take them
into your houses, at any rate in some other way (receive them), by
supplying them with necessaries. “Why, has not the Church means” you
will say? She has: but what is that to you? that they should be fed from
the common funds of the Church, can that benefit you? If another man
prays, does it follow that you are not bound to pray? Wherefore do you
not say, “Do not the priests pray? then why should I pray?” “But I,” you
will say, “give to him who cannot be received there.” Give, though it be
to that one: for what we are anxious for is this, that you should give
at any rate. Hear what Paul says: “That it may relieve them that are
widows indeed, and that the Church be not burdened.” (<span
id="vi.xlv-p17.7"></span>[1 Tim. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)<span id="vi.xlv-p17.8"></span>.) Be
it how you will, only do it. But *I* put it, not, “that the Church be
not burdened,” but, “that thou be not burdened;” for at this rate thou
wilt do nothing, leaving all to the Church. This is why there is a
common room set apart by the Church, that you may not say these things.
“The Church,” say you, “has lands, <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045) has money, and revenues.” And has
she not charges? I ask; and has she not a daily expenditure? “No doubt,”
you will say. Why then do you not lend aid to her moderate means? I am
ashamed indeed to say these things: however, I compel no man, if any one
imagines what I am saying to be for gain. Make for yourself a
guest-chamber in your own house: set up a bed there, set up a table
there and a candlestick. (comp. <span id="vi.xlv-p18.8"></span>[2 Kings
iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xlv-p18.9"></span>.) For is it not absurd, that whereas, if
soldiers should come, you have rooms set apart for them, and show much
care for them, and furnish them with everything, because they keep off
from you the visible war of this world, yet strangers have no place
where they might abide? Gain a victory over the Church. Would you put us
to shame? This do: surpass us in liberality: have a room, to which
Christ may come; say, “This is Christ’s cell; this building is set apart
for Him.” Be it but an underground <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) chamber, and mean, He disdains it
not. “Naked and a stranger,” Christ goes about, it is but a shelter He
wants: afford it, though but this. Be not uncompassionate, nor inhuman;
be not so earnest in worldly matters, so cold in spiritual. Let also the
most faithful of thy servants be the one entrusted with this office, and
let him bring in the maimed, the beggars, and the homeless. These things
I say to shame you. For ye ought indeed to receive them in the upper
part of your house; but if ye will not do this, then though it be below,
though but where thy mules are housed, and thy servants, there receive
Christ. Perchance ye shudder at hearing this. What then, when ye do not
even this? Behold, I exhort, behold, I bid you; let this be a matter to
be taken up in earnest. But ye do not wish it thus, perhaps? Do it some
other way. There are many poor men and poor women: set apart some one
(of these) constantly to remain there: let the poor man be (thine
inmate) though but as a guard to thy house: let him be to thee wall and
fence, shield and spear. Where alms are, the devil dares not approach,
nor any other evil thing. Let us not overlook so great a gain. But now a
place is set apart for a chariot, and for litters (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p19.4"></span>βαστερνίοις</span>)
another; but for Christ Who is wandering, not even one! Abraham received
the strangers in the place where he abode himself; his wife stood in the
place of a servant, the guests in the place of masters. He knew not that
he was receiving Christ; knew not that he was receiving Angels; so that
had he known it, he would have lavished his whole substance. But we, who
know that we receive Christ, show not even so much zeal as he did who
thought that he was receiving men. “But they are impostors,” you will
say, “many of them, and unthankful.” And for this the greater thy
reward, when thou receivest for the sake of Christ’s name. For if thou
knowest indeed that they are impostors, receive them not into thy house:
but if thou dost not know this, why dost thou accuse them lightly?
“Therefore I tell them to go to the receiving house.” But what kind of
excuse is there for us, when we do not even receive those whom we know,
but shut our doors against all? Let our house be Christ’s general
receptacle: let us demand of them as a reward, not money, but that they
make our house the receptacle for Christ; let us run about everywhere,
let us drag them in, let us seize our booty: greater are the benefits we
receive than what we confer. He does not bid thee kill a calf: give thou
bread to the hungry, raiment to the naked, shelter to the stranger. But
that thou mayest not make this thy pretext, there is a common apartment,
that of the Church; throw thy money into that, and then thou hast
received them: since (Abraham) there had the reward of those things also
which were done by his servants. “He gave the calf to a young man, and
he hasted to dress it.” (<span id="vi.xlv-p19.5"></span>[Gen. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007)<span id="vi.xlv-p19.6"></span>.) So
well trained were his servants also! They ran, and murmured not as ours
do: for he had made them pious. He drew them out to war, and they
murmured not: so well disciplined were they. ([Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span id="vi.xlv-p19.7"></span>.)
For he had equal care for all as for himself: he all but said as Job
did, “We were alike formed in the same womb.” ([Job xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006)<span id="vi.xlv-p19.8"></span>.)
Therefore let us also take thought for their salvation, and let us make
it our duty to care for our servants, that they may be good; and let our
servants also be instructed in the things pertaining to God. Then will
virtue not be difficult to us, if we train them orderly. Just as in war,
when the soldiers are well-disciplined, the general carries on war
easily, but the contrary happens, when this is not so; and when the
sailors too are of one mind, the pilot easily handles the
rudder-strings; so here likewise. For say now, if thy servants have been
so schooled, thou wilt not be easily exasperated, thou wilt not have to
find fault, wilt not be made angry, wilt not need to abuse them. It may
be, thou wilt even stand in awe of thy servants, if they are worthy of
admiration, and they will be helpers with thee, and will give thee good
counsel. But from all these shall all things proceed that are pleasing
to God, and thus shall the whole house be filled with blessing, and we,
performing things pleasing to God, shall enjoy abundant succor from
above, unto which may we all attain, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost, together
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[i:1034](1110050.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="vi.xlv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p5"></span> The phrase “which is able” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p5.1"></span>τῷ δυναμένῳ</span>) may be
connected with the word “God,” or with “the word of His grace.” As
standing nearer the latter, this would be the natural construction. So
our author has taken it, understanding by “the word of His grace” rather
the grace itself than the doctrine concerning it. Most critics have
preferred to connect the phrase with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p5.2"></span>τῷ θεῷ</span> on the ground that it is more
appropriate to ascribe the giving of an inheritance among the sanctified
directly to God than to His word. (So DeWette, Meyer, Alford,
Gloag).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[i:1035](1110050.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="vi.xlv-p5.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p6"></span> By “the weak” Chrys. evidently understands
the physically weak, the sick and poor (see the Recapitulation) and we
think correctly as opposed to the “weak in faith.” The apostle counsels
labor in order to liberality toward the needy. So Olshausen, DeWette,
Hackett, Gloag, Alford, *vs.* Neander, Tholuck, Lechler, Meyer.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[i:1036](1110050.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="vi.xlv-p6.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p7"></span> The remainder of [Acts
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#014)<span id="vi.xlv-p7.1"></span> we
have removed from this to its proper place.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[i:1037](1110050.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="vi.xlv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p9.1"></span>Οὐκ ἄρα ἐν Κορίνθῳ τοῦτο εἰργάσαντο μόνον οἱ
διαφθείροντες τοὺς μαθητὰς κ. τ. λ</span>. One would have expected <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p9.2"></span>εἰργάσατο μόνον, καὶ οὐχ ὡς
οἱ δ</span>. But the connection, not fully expressed, may be this: “So
different from those “grievous wolves not sparing the flock,” the false
teachers who would make a gain of them! So then” etc.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[i:1038](1110050.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="vi.xlv-p9.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p10"></span> Some text or texts of the Gospels should
be supplied here: beginning perhaps like the next sentence with a <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p10.1"></span>Καὶ γάρ</span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[i:1039](1110050.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="vi.xlv-p10.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p11"></span> By Syria he seems here to mean the
northern parts, about Antioch. “They left Cyprus on the left, but nearer
to it than the opposite coast of Syria, because he did not wish to come
near that either.” Mod. text “This is not said idly, but to show that he
did not think fit even to come near it (Cyprus), they sailing straight
for Syria.” What follows required transposition: the derangement, 2, 1:
3, 5, 7: 4, 6, 8.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[i:1040](1110050.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="vi.xlv-p11.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p12"></span> A. C. Cat. (in B. the original characters
are written over by a later hand), <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p12.1"></span>Εἶτα βουληθῆναι πέντε εἰς Τύρον</span>. Perhaps
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p12.2"></span>βούλει θεῖναι</span>.
Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p12.3"></span>εἶτα
ἐκεῖθεν δἰ ἡμερῶν πέντε</span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[i:1041](1110050.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="vi.xlv-p12.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p13"></span> *Hom.*x. *in Matt.* E. “But why, you may
ask, did he (the Baptist) use a girdle also with his garment? This was a
custom with the ancients, before this present soft and dissolute fashion
of ours came in. Thus Peter appears girdled, and Paul likewise: as it
says, ‘The man that owneth this girdle.”

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[i:1042](1110050.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="vi.xlv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p14"></span> The meaning of the latter part of [Acts
21.16](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#016)<span id="vi.xlv-p14.1"></span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p14.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p14.3"></span>γοντες παῤ ᾧ ξενισθῶμεν
Μνασωνί τινι Κυπρί& 251· κ. τ. λ</span>.), according to Chrys., is that
the disciples from Cæsarea conducted Paul to the house of Mnason at
Jerusalem where he was to lodge, not (as our Eng. vss.), that they
brought with them Mnason on their journey from Cæsarea to Jerusalem. The
former seems the preferable view as there is nothing in the context to
intimate that Mnason was at this time in Cæsarea and his residence was
evidently Jerusalem. The construction of attraction is also equally well
resolved in this way.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[i:1043](1110050.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="vi.xlv-p14.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p15"></span> Here supply, “He that receiveth Me,
receiveth Him that sent Me.”

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[i:1044](1110050.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="vi.xlv-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p16.1"></span>οὐκοῦν καὶ ὁ Χριστὸν</span> (should it be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p16.2"></span>Χριστιανὸν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p16.3"></span>́̈</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p16.4"></span>δεχόμενος, λήψεται μισθὸν
τοῦ Χριστὸν ξενίζονος</span>.—Ben. renders the latter clause, *recipiet
mercedem Christi peregrinantis.*

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[i:1045](1110050.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="vi.xlv-p16.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p17"></span> All our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xlv-p17.1"></span>mss.</span> omit <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p17.2"></span>χεῖρες</span>, but the text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p17.3"></span>αἱ δεδεμένον αὐτὸν
ἰδοῦσαι</span> requires more than this for its emendation. Below, before
“not ashamed.” mod. text inserts, “These things He (Christ) confesseth.”

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[i:1046](1110050.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="vi.xlv-p17.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p18.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p18.2"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἔχει ἰούγα ἡ ἐκκλησία</span>. On <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p18.3"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p18.4"></span>ούγα</span>, *juga,* see p.
74. Here also B. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p18.5"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p18.6"></span>υγγα</span>., mod. text substitutes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p18.7"></span>δαπανήματα</span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[i:1047](1110050.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="vi.xlv-p18.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p19"></span> A. B. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p19.1"></span>κἂν καταγώγιον ᾖ</span> so Morel. Ben. But E.
has here preserved the true reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlv-p19.2"></span>κατώγεον</span>, so Savil. with marg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlv-p19.3"></span>κατάγαιον</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLVI on Acts xxi. 18, 19.](1110051)
