[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110003)  [Next](1110005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span id="v-p1.1"></span>Preface
to Part II. of the Oxford Edition.</span>

<span id="v-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="v-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="v-p3.1"></span>The</span> manifestly imperfect condition in which
these Homilies have come to us may partly be accounted for by the
circumstances of the times in which they were preached. It was in the
Easter weeks of the third year of his residence at Constantinople as
Archbishop, that St. Chrysostom began this course of Sermons; and during
all the remaining part of that year (<span class="c14"><span
id="v-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 400), the Capital of the East was kept in
constant trouble and alarm by the revolt of Gainas and the Goths.
Moreover, scarcely had the preaching commenced, when the complaints from
the Churches of Asia Minor were brought (May, 400) before the
Metropolitan See, which business during many months painfully occupied
the Archbishop’s thoughts, and eventually demanded his presence at
Ephesus. Few of St. Chrysostom’s Sermons were originally prepared in
writing: certainly these were not: and as certainly the text, drawn up
by no skilful hand from notes taken during the preaching, can never have
been revised by the Preacher himself. This was a serious disadvantage:
for these Homilies, if only from the novelty of the subject, stood
especially in need of revision. *The Acts of the Apostles,* though read
in the churches in the season between Easter and Pentecost, were seldom
preached upon; and we find St. Chrysostom complaining in the opening of
these Homilies, as also on an earlier occasion at Antioch, that this
portion of the Scriptures was not so much read as it ought to be, nay,
that there were “many to whom this Book was not even known.” (p. 1 and
note l). Hence it is not surprising, if the Preacher was not always
understood; and, in fact, the attentive reader will not unfrequently see
reason to suspect, that the scribe (or “reporter,”) from whose notes the
text was formed, did not rightly apprehend the sense of what he heard.
Nor has the transcriber (or “redactor”) remedied the defects, whatever
they may have been, of the original report. On the contrary, in other
ways, of which we shall have to speak presently, he has often perplexed
the sense, and sometimes entirely misrepresented the Preacher’s meaning.

<span id="v-p4"></span>The earliest mention of our Homilies is by
Cassiodorus (<span class="c14"><span id="v-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>
514), who relates, that with the assistance of friends he caused “the
fifty-five Homilies on the Acts, by St. John, Bishop of Constantinople,”
to be translated into Latin, *Opp.* t. ii. p. 544. This version
unfortunately is lost. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) In the Canons
of the Fifth and Sixth General Councils, St. Chrysostom’s view of the
Seven Deacons in the Acts is cited at length from Hom. xiv. (p. 91).
John of Damascus, *de Fid. Orthod*. iii. 15, (<span class="c14"><span
id="v-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 730), cites as from the second of these
Homilies a passage which appears in the first, being the comment on i.
9. Photius has an entry in the *Bibliotheca* relating to them, but by
some mistake the number is given as fifty. Of the *Catena* on the Acts,
compiled by a certain Andreas Presbyter of unknown age and country, but
not later than the tenth century (for there is a manuscript of that
age), a large proportion is taken from St. Chrysostom: and the
Commentaries of Œcumenius (990) and Theophylact (1077) are in many
places formed from the Catena: as also are the Scholia in <span
class="c14"><span id="v-p5.2"></span>mss.</span> of the Acts. To these
may be added the *Florilegium* or *Eclogæ,* a compilation the date of
which is unknown, but certainly not later than the first half of the
eleventh century. The Author of this work seems to have resorted to our
Homilies once only (Hom. xix. p 139): but there, he, as all the rest who
have been mentioned, used the text which in the notes we call *the old
text,* and from which the present Translation is made.

<span id="v-p6"></span>For there is another and a widely different text,
by which alone, unfortunately, these Homilies have been known in modern
times, except by the few who have had access to Manuscripts. In the
National Library at Paris there is (No. 729) a manuscript (in our notes
marked E, in Par. Ben. 2, D), which the Parisian Editor describes thus:
*Quorum* (of six <span class="c14"><span id="v-p6.1"></span>mss.</span>
on the Acts) *antiquissimus, olim Colb. nunc Reg. 729, sæc.* X., *nitide
et accurate scriptus, desinit in hom. quinquagesima.* (This is a
mistake; it reaches to the end of the 55th.) Of the other <span
class="c14"><span id="v-p6.2"></span>mss.</span> he assigns A. B. C (No.
725, 6, 7), to the twelfth, fourteenth and thirteenth centuries
respectively. These, and a copy in the Library of New College (N),
contain the *old text.* Two others D, F, (728, and 73 suppl.) exhibit a
text compiled from old and new, and with alterations peculiar to itself.
Of the six Parisian <span class="c14"><span
id="v-p6.3"></span>mss.</span> a full collation was made for “the
Library of the Fathers:” of N we have at present but a partial
collation.

<span id="v-p7"></span>The <span class="c14"><span
id="v-p7.1"></span>ms</span>. E. came into the hands of Erasmus, and
from it he made his Latin version, down to the end of Hom. liii. and
there for some reason which is not explained he goes off to the other
text, of which he has nowhere taken notice in the preceding Homilies. Of
this work he says in an Epistle to Tonstal, Bishop of Durham: *Ex
Chrysostomo in Acta verteram homilias tres; cujus operæ me pœnituit, cum
nihil hic viderem Chrysostomi. Tuo tamen hortatu recepi codicem in
manum; sed nihil unquam legi indoctius. Ebrius ac stertens scriberem
meliora. Habet frigidos sensiculos nec eos satis commode potest
explicare.* In his Preface, however, he considerably abates the severity
of this censure, and contents himself with hinting a doubt whether the
work be St. Chrysostom’s: *quod stylus concisum quiddam et abruptum
habeat, id quod a phrasi Chrysostomi videtur alienum: si docti tamen
censebunt opus Chrysostomo dignum, libenter hoc ego quicquid est
suspicionis ponam.*

<span id="v-p8"></span>Of the Greek text, the *editio princeps*, that of
Commelin, professes to be formed from manuscripts *Biblioth. Palatinæ
Bavaræ, Augustanæ, Pistorianæ*, of which at present we are unable to
give any account. Perhaps Commelin’s leading <span class="c14"><span
id="v-p8.1"></span>ms</span>. was of a composite order: such however is
his text; for it occasionally deserts E, to which, as a general rule, it
closely adheres. This was inconsistent, for the circumstances of the two
texts are such, that one or other ought to be followed throughout. There
can be no valid reason for alternating between the two: for they are not
different reports of the same matter, such that between them one might
hope to approximate to the truth: the one is a refashionment of the
other, and where it differs, it does so, not because its framer had a
more correct report of the Sermons, but because he wished to improve
upon the materials which lay before him in the other text.

<span id="v-p9"></span>Commelin’s text, in substance, is retained in all
the subsequent editions. Savile, from the New College <span
class="c14"><span id="v-p9.1"></span>ms</span>. has corrected words and
phrases here and there, but in the main his text is still that of the
*editio princeps.* (He describes it as composed from the New College
<span class="c14"><span id="v-p9.2"></span>ms</span>., another belonging
to J. A. de Thou (Thuanus), *et tertio non ita pridem excuso in
Germania.*) The edition of Morel (which commonly goes under the name of
Fronto Ducæus) repeats Commelin, but without Savile’s emendations: and
the Benedictines (here not Montfaucon), though they profess to have
collated the Parisian <span class="c14"><span
id="v-p9.3"></span>mss.</span>, have reprinted with but slight
improvements, and with not a few disimprovements, the text of Morel. In
the Parisian reprint of the Benedictine Chrysostom (Par. Ben. 2), the
Editor has occasionally, but not constantly, recurred to the
manuscripts, rarely gives the preference to the text of A. B. C., and
constantly assumes the inferiority of those copies, in contents and
authenticity as well as in antiquity, to the manuscript (E), which
furnished the Latin version of Erasmus, and in substance, as we have
explained, the printed text of the original.

<span id="v-p10"></span>Had the Editors collated the manuscript copies
of these Homilies—a labor from which they, or those whom they employed,
seem to have shrunk—they would probably have reversed their estimate of
the relative value of the two recensions. The general superiority of the
other text in point of sense and coherence, notwithstanding its frequent
abruptness and uncouthness, is too evident to be called in question. Had
they also collated the Catena, Œcumenius, Theophylact, and the Scholia,
they would have found the external testimony to be coincident with the
internal evidence to the higher antiquity as well as greater
authenticity of the text which (for the most part unknown) they
rejected. It would have been seen that this, besides being, with all its
faults, incomparably better, was the older of the two; and that the
other could claim no higher antiquity than that of the manuscript (said
to be of the tenth century) in which it appears: that it is the work of
some scribe, who, offended by the manifest abruptness and ruggedness of
the earlier text, set himself to smooth out the difficulties, and to
make it read more easily. For this is clearly the true state of the
case. With this view, the scribe sometimes alters words and phrases,
sometimes transposes: often omits, where he found something that he did
not understand, oftener still amplifies, or rather dilutes: and
interpolates matter which sometimes is demonstrably borrowed with little
disguise from the Catena (see p. 113, note 1; 279, note 3; 280, note 2);
or which, when it is his own, is little worth. In short, he has thought
more of sound than of sense, and if he could make a passage run smoothly
to the ear, has given himself little concern whether St. Chrysostom was
likely to have so thought, or so expressed himself. The notes appended
to our Translation will abundantly substantiate this censure. To have
noted all the variations, either of the printed text, or of E alone,
would have been a task as unprofitable as it was wearisome: perhaps as
it is, we have given more than enough to vindicate the claims of the
older text. If any one desires larger materials for comparison, Erasmus’
Latin version, which, except in the two last Homilies, keeps close to E,
will show that the text which we represent in our Translation is, with
all its imperfections, incomparably the better of the two. Even if it
were otherwise and were the alterations not, as they mostly are,
disfigurements, but, considered in themselves, decided improvements,
still our duty was plain: the text which came to us accredited by all
the testimony known to be extant, we were not at liberty to reject in
favor of an alien recension, unknown to the Ancients, and, as far as our
evidence goes, unheard of before the tenth century. Therefore, in
forming the text for this Translation we have entirely dismissed E,
except where it has preserved readings which came strictly under the
description of “various readings.”

<span id="v-p11"></span>But while confining ourselves to that older
text, we were not to leave unnoticed its more patent defects and errors.
We could not but perceive, that we had before us an unrevised report of
St. Chrysostom’s Sermons, which, especially in the Expositions, was
frequently imperfect—sometimes, indeed, little more than a set of rough
notes thrown together, with, apparently, little or no attempt at
arrangement. So far as this imperfection was caused by the reporter’s
negligence or incapacity, there was no remedy: and leaving the matter as
we found it, or, at most, inserting in the text the marks of a *lacuna,*
we have only ventured, in the notes, to surmise what may have been the
general purport of St. Chrysostom’s remarks. In other places, where the
defects of our sources seemed to be rather chargeable upon the redactor,
we have sought to apply a remedy, sometimes, but rarely, by conjectural
emendation; very often by inserting portions of sacred text or other
connecting matter in \[\], and also by transposing parts which had
fallen out of their true order. For it seems that the original
transcript from the reporter’s notes was defective in these two regards.
(1) The reporter would frequently omit to note in his tablets the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v-p11.1"></span>κείμενον</span> or some other
text of Scripture, or would indicate it in the shortest possible way by
a word or two at the beginning and ending of the passage, intending to
insert it afterwards at his leisure. It appears, however, that in many
places this was either not done at all, or done in the wrong place.
Hence where the text seemed incurably defective or perplexed, we have
often been able to restore coherency by the simple expedient of
inserting texts which were omitted, or else, by removing the texts
altogether, and redistributing them among the comments. Almost any page
of the Translation, especially in the Recapitulations, will illustrate
this remark.

<span id="v-p12"></span>(2) It often happens, that the order of the
comments both in the first and in the second exposition (or
recapitulation), does not follow the order of the texts. Of course the
Preacher might be supposed to have sometimes returned upon his own
steps, but it was scarcely conceivable that St. Chrysostom should have
delivered an Exposition perplexed, as we often found it, by disjointed
remarks thrown together without the slightest method. It was necessary
therefore to consider whether it might not be possible to educe
something like connected exposition, by assuming that the reporter’s
notes had been transcribed from his tablets in a wrong order. Where it
could be seen that one sentence or portion was given as comment on such
a verse, another on some other verse, and so on, some clue to the true
order was given us in the sequence of the texts themselves. Even so, the
difficulties which beset this part of our task were greater than can be
readily estimated by any one who has not tried it. Sometimes the
complication resisted all attempts at disentanglement. We are far from
supposing that we have done all that might have been done in this way:
but it is hoped that the labor which has been bestowed has not been
altogether wasted, and that the restoration will carry with it its own
evidence. And as in these attempts we have indicated by letters the
order in which the trajected parts lie in the manuscripts, the reader in
every case has the means of forming his own judgment. In the first
seventeen Homilies, we have only now and then resorted to this method:
not because it was less needed there, but because we had not then so
clearly perceived what was the state of the case, and what was
practicable in this way. The eighteenth furnishes a remarkable instance,
pp. 116–120. Let any one read it in the order denoted by the letters,
i.e. the six parts marked (a) consecutively, then the seven parts marked
(b), inserting in the third of the latter (see p. 116, note 3), the
comment on v. 25, from page 117, (“And they when they had testified,”
etc., to “when the Samaritans believed,”) and he will have the entire
“recapitulation” or second exposition of the history of the Samaritans
and Simon Magus as it appears in the <span class="c14"><span
id="v-p12.1"></span>mss.</span>—which he will plainly perceive could not
have proceeded in that form from St. Chrysostom. The same matter, read
as we have arranged it, will be found to form a continuous exposition,
not indeed perfect, for the dislocated state into which it had fallen
seems to have led to further corruptions on the part of the scribes: but
at any rate coherent, and with the parts fitting into each other.
Moreover, if the fourteen parts, as here arranged, be numbered 1. 2. 3.
etc., it will be seen that the order in which they lie in the <span
class="c14"><span id="v-p12.2"></span>mss.</span> is 1. 3. 5: 8. 10. 12:
2. 4. 6: 14: 7. 9. 11. 13., whence it seems that the derangement
proceeded by some kind of method. The like was often found to be the
case in subsequent instances. In p. 229, the trajection is 1. 3. 5. 7.
9. 11. 13: 2. 4. 6. 8. 10. 12: i.e., the transcriber missed the
alternate portions, and brought them all together at the end. In p. 229
(before the series just noticed), and 260, it is 3. 2. 1., and in 170,
4. 3. 2. 1., i. e. three, and four, parts read in reverse order. In a
great number of instances the transposition is only of two parts, 2. 1:
sometimes repeated as in 235, 2. 1., 1: 2. 1: 234, 2. 1: 1: 2. 1: 2. 1:
196, 2. 1: 1: 2. 1: 1: 2. 1: 1: 2. 1. A form of frequent occurrence is
2. 4., 1. 3., as in 188, 220, 225, 247; and combined with others as in
213, 2. 4. 1. 3. 2. 1: in 275, 2. 1: 1: 2. 4. 1. 3. and 183, 2. 1: 1: 2.
4. 1. 3: 2. 1. There is the like regularity in the scheme 2. 1. 4. 3.,
p. 125; and 3. 1. 4. 2. p. 216, 301. In the last Homily, which is
extremely confused, the trajection seems to yield this very regular
scheme, 2. 4. 6. 1. 3. 5: 1: 5. 3. 1. 6. 4. 2. In other instances where
the trajection is less regular, or does not seem to follow a rule, as in
151, 4. 1. 3. 2: 152, 3. 2. 4. 1: 242, 4. 6. 1. 3. 5. 7. 2. 8: 250, 2.
1. 4. 8. 5. 3. 6. 9. 7. and in 298, 316, 321 (on which three see the
notes), the transcriber may have gone wrong on other grounds, and not,
as in the generality of instances, from mistaking the order in which the
reporter had set the matter on his tablets. The trajections we have
attempted to remedy occur mostly in the expository parts. In the
*Ethica* it often appeared to us, that the coherency might be greatly
improved by transposition, but the evidence of the true order was more
precarious here, than where the sequence of the texts furnished a clue;
in these parts, therefore, we have rarely ventured upon applying this
remedy.

<span id="v-p13"></span>In these ways it is hoped that something has
been done towards presenting these Homilies in a form nearer to that in
which they were delivered, than the form in which they are exhibited in
the unadulterated manuscripts, much more in the printed editions. The
task was arduous, and we are far from supposing that our labors have
always been successful; but at least we have not spared pains and
diligence. The Translation was a work only less difficult than the
reconstruction of the text. Here again much indulgence is needed on the
score of the difficulty of producing a version, which, while it
represented the original with its roughnesses and defects, should not be
altogether unreadable. We have attempted, however, to give faithfully,
though not always literally, the sense, or what seemed to be the sense,
of our materials.

<span id="v-p14"></span>As a commentary on *the Acts of the Apostles,*
this Work stands alone among the writings of the first ten centuries.
The Expositions of St. Clement of Alexandria (in the *Hypotyposes*), of
Origen, of Diodorus of Tarsus, and St. Chrysostom’s teacher, Theodore of
Mopsuestia, as well as of Ammonius and others whose materials are used
in the Catena, have perished. Those who are acquainted with the
characteristic qualities of St. Chrysostom’s exegesis, will perceive
here also the same excellencies which mark his other expository
works—especially the clear and full exposition of the historical sense,
and the exact appreciation of the rhetorical momenta in the discourses
of St. Peter, St. Stephen, St. James and St. Paul, as recorded in the
Acts. Of the *Ethica* it is perhaps not too much to affirm, that not the
most finished work of St. Chrysostom will be found to furnish more of
instruction and interesting *matter* (apart from the expression) than
will be found in these Homilies, on the religious and moral subjects of
which they treat: for example, On the delay of Baptism, On spiritual
indolence and excuses derived from the cessation of Miraculous Grace, On
the nature and uses of Miracles, On Prayer, On the Study of the
Scriptures, On Alms, On Anger and Gentleness, Against Oaths and
Swearing, and many others. Nor does any work exhibit a livelier
portraiture of the character and life of the great Preacher and Bishop,
and of the manners of the times in which his lot was cast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[i:1](1110004.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v-p5"></span> From the same Cassiodorus there is extant a
short work on the Acts under the title *Complexiones Actuum
Apostolorum*; but this is merely a brief syllabus of the history, and
contains nothing in which we could trace a reference to St. Chrysostom’s
Exposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles](1110005.md)
