[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110057)  [Next](1110059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.liii"></span> <span id="vi.liii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.liii-p1.1"></span>Homily LIII.</span>

<span id="vi.liii-p2"></span>[Acts XXVI.
30-32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#030)<span id="vi.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p3"></span>“And when he had thus spoken, the king rose
up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them: and when
they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man
doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds. Then said Agrippa unto
Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed
unto Cæsar.”

<span id="vi.liii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.liii-p4.1"></span>See</span> how again also they pass sentence in
his favor, and after having said, “Thou art beside thyself,” ([Acts
26.24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024)<span id="vi.liii-p4.2"></span>)
they acquit him, as undeserving not only of death, but also of bonds,
and indeed would have released him entirely, if he had not appealed to
Cæsar. But this was done providentially, that he should also depart with
bonds. “Unto bonds,” he says, “as an evil doer.” ([1 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span id="vi.liii-p4.3"></span>.) For
if his Lord “was reckoned among the transgressors” ([Mark xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028)<span id="vi.liii-p4.4"></span>),
much more he: but as the Lord did not share with them in their
character, so neither did Paul. For in this is seen the marvellous
thing, the being mixed up with such, and yet receiving no harm from
them. “And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Julius, a
centurion of Augustus’ band. And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we
launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us. And the next day we touched
at Sidon.” ([Acts 27.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)<span
id="vi.liii-p4.5"></span>.) See how far Aristarchus also accompanies
Paul. To good and useful purpose is Aristarchus present, as he would
take back the report of all to Macedonia. “And Julius courteously
entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh
himself. Julius gave Paul liberty,” it says, acting “courteously, that
he might refresh himself;” as it was but natural that he should be much
the worse from his bonds and the fear, and the being dragged hither and
thither. See how the writer does not hide this either, that Paul wished
“to refresh himself. And when we had launched from thence, we sailed
under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.” ([Acts
27.4](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#004)<span id="vi.liii-p4.6"></span>.)
Again trials, again contrary winds. See how the life of the saints is
thus interwoven throughout: escaped from the court of justice, they fall
in with shipwreck and storm. “And when we had sailed over the sea of
Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. And there the
centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us
therein.” ([Acts 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#006)<span id="vi.liii-p4.7"></span>.) “A
ship of Alexandria,” it says. It is likely that both those (in the
former ship) would bear to Asia the report of what had befallen Paul,
and that these <span id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) would do the
same in Lycia. See how God does not innovate or change the order of
nature, but suffers them to sail into the unfavorable winds. But even so
the miracle is wrought. That they may sail safely, He did not let them
go out in the (open) sea, but they always sailed near the land. “And
when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against
Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against
Salmone; and, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called the
fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea. Now when much time
was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now
already past, Paul admonished them.” ([Acts
27.7-9](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#007)<span
id="vi.liii-p5.2"></span>.) By “the fast” here, I suppose he means that
of the Jews. <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) For they
departed thence a long time after the Pentecost, so that it was much
about midwinter that they arrived at the coasts of Crete. And this too
was no slight miracle, that they also should be saved on his account.
“Paul admonished them, and said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this
voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and
ship, but also of our lives. Nevertheless the centurion believed the
master and the owner of the ship, more than those things which were
spoken by Paul. And because the haven was not commodious to winter in,
the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might
attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of Crete, and
lieth toward the southwest and northwest. And when the south wind blew
softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, loosing thence,
they sailed close to Crete. But not long after there arose against it a
tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon. <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) And when the ship was caught, and
could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive” (R.V. “were driven.”)
([Acts 27.10-15](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#010)<span
id="vi.liii-p7.14"></span>.) Paul therefore advised them to remain, and
he foretells what would come of it: but they, being in a hurry, and
being prevented by the place, wished to winter at Phenice. Mark then the
providential ordering of the events: first indeed, “when the south wind
blew softly, supposing they had obtained their purpose,” they loosed the
vessel, and came forth; then when the wind bore down upon them, they
gave way to it driving them, and were with difficulty saved. “And
running under a certain island which is called Clauda, we had much work
to come by the boat: which when they had taken up, they used helps,
undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the
quicksands, <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) strake
sail, <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) and so were driven. And
we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they lightened
the ship; and the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling
of the ship. And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and
no small tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved was then
taken away. But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of
them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have
loosed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and loss.” ([Acts
27.16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#016)<span
id="vi.liii-p9.3"></span>.) Then after so great a storm he does not
speak as insultingly over them, but as wishing that at any rate he might
be believed for the future. Wherefore also he alleges what had taken
place for a testimony of the truth of what was about to be said by him.
“And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of
any man’s life among you, but of the ship. For there stood by me this
night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying, Fear not,
Paul; thou must be brought before Cæsar: and, lo God hath given thee all
them that sail with thee. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer, for I
believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me. Howbeit we must be
cast upon a certain island.” ([Acts
27.22-26](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#022)<span
id="vi.liii-p9.4"></span>.) And he foretells two things; both that they
must be cast upon an island, and that though the ship would be lost,
those who were in it should be saved—which thing he spoke not of
conjecture, but of prophecy—and that he “must be brought before Cæsar.”
But this that he says, “God hath given thee all,” is not spoken
boastfully, but in the wish to win those who were sailing in the ship:
for (he spoke thus), not that they might feel themselves bound to him,
but that they might believe what he was saying. “God hath given thee;”
as much (as to say), They are worthy indeed of death, since they would
not listen to thee: however, this is done out of favor to thee. “But
when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down in
Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some
country; and sounded, and found it twenty fathoms; and when they had
gone a little further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms.
Then fearing lest they should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four
anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day. And as the shipmen
were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into
the sea, under color as though they would have cast anchors out of the
foreship, Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these
abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. Then the soldiers cut off the
ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.” ([Acts
27.27-32](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#027)<span
id="vi.liii-p9.5"></span>.) The sailors however, were about to escape,
having no faith in what was said: but the centurion does believe Paul,
For he says, If these flee, “ye cannot be saved:” so saying, not on this
account, but that he might restrain them, and the prophecy might not
fall to the ground. See how as in a church they are instructed by the
calmness of Paul’s behavior, how he saved them out of the very midst of
the dangers. And it is of providential ordering that Paul is
disbelieved, that after proof of the facts, he might be believed: which
accordingly was the case. And he exhorts them again to take some meat,
and they do as he bids them, and he takes some first, to persuade them
not by word, but also by act, that the storm did them no harm, but
rather was a benefit to their souls. “And while the day was coming on,
Paul besought them all to take meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth
day that ye have tarried and continued fasting having taken nothing.”
([Acts 27.33](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#033)<span
id="vi.liii-p9.6"></span>.)  <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159)
*(b)* And how, say you, did they go without food, having taken nothing?
how did they bear it? Their fear possessed them, and did not let them
fall into a desire of food, being, as they were, at the point of extreme
jeopardy; *(f)* but they had no care for food. “Wherefore I pray you to
take some meat: for this is for your health: for there shall not an hair
fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus spoken, he took
bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all: and when he had
broken it, he began to eat. Then were they all of good cheer, and they
also took some meat,” ([Acts
27.34-36](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#034)<span
id="vi.liii-p10.3"></span>) seeing that there was no question about
their lives being saved. *(d)* “And we were in all in the ship two
hundred threescore and sixteen souls. And when they had eaten enough,
they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea. And when
it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain creek
with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to
thrust in the ship. And when they had taken up the anchors, they
committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and
hoisted up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.” ([Acts
27.37-41](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#037)<span
id="vi.liii-p10.4"></span>.) “They made towards shore,” having given the
rudder-handles to the wind: for oftentimes they do it not in this way.
They were borne along, having loosed the rigging, i.e. the sails. “And
falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and
the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmovable, but the hinder part was
broken with the violence of the waves;” for when there is a strong wind,
this is the consequence, the stern bearing the brunt (of the storm).
*(a)* “And the soldiers’ counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of
them should swim out, and escape.” ([Acts
27.42](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#042)<span
id="vi.liii-p10.5"></span>.) Again the devil tries to hinder the
prophecy, and they had a mind to kill some, but the centurion suffered
them not, that he might save Paul, so much was the centurion attached to
him. “But the centurion, willing to save Paul, kept them from their
purpose; and commanded that they which could swim should cast themselves
first into the sea, and get to land: and the rest, some on boards, and
some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they
escaped all safe to land.” ([Acts
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#044)<span id="vi.liii-p10.6"></span>.)
“And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called
Melita.” ([Acts 28.1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)<span
id="vi.liii-p10.7"></span>.) Do you mark what good came of the storm?
Why then it was no mark of their being forsaken, that the storm came
upon them. *(c)* Now this that happened was in consequence of the season
of the year; but the wonder is greater, that at such a season they were
saved from the midst of the dangers, both he, and for his sake the rest,
*(e)* and this too in the Hadriatic. There were two hundred and
seventy-six souls in all: no small matter this also, if indeed they
believed. The voyage was at an unseasonable time. *(g)* It is natural to
suppose they would ask the reason why they were sailing, and would learn
all. Nor was it for nothing that the voyage was so protracted; it
afforded Paul an opportunity for teaching.

<span id="vi.liii-p11"></span>(Recapitulation.) And Paul says, “I
perceive that (this voyage will be) with hurt and loss.” ([Acts
27.10](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#010)<span
id="vi.liii-p11.1"></span>.) And observe how unassuming the expression
is. That he may not seem to prophesy, but to speak as of conjecture, “I
perceive,” says he. For they would not have received it, had he said
this at the outset. In fact he does prophesy on this former occasion, as
he does afterward, and says (there), “The God whom I serve,” leading
them on. Then how comes it that it was not “with loss” (of any) “of
their lives?” It would have been so, but that God brought them safe
through it. For as far as depended on the nature of the thing, they had
perished, but God prevented it. Then, to show that it was not from
conjecture that he so spake, the master of the ship said the contrary
([Acts 27.11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#011)<span
id="vi.liii-p11.2"></span>), and he a man of experience in the matter:
so far was it from being the case that Paul’s advice was given from
conjecture. Moreover, the place suggested this same (which the master
said), “being not commodious;” and it was evident that from conjecture
“the more part advised” ([Acts
27.12](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#012)<span id="vi.liii-p11.3"></span>)
as they did, rather than Paul. Then, severe the storm (that ensued),
deep the darkness: and that they may not forget, the vessel also goes to
pieces, and the corn is flung out and all beside, that they may not have
it in their power after this to be shameless. For this is why the vessel
goes to pieces, and <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) their
souls are tightly braced. Moreover, both the storm and the darkness
contributed not a little to his obtaining the hearing he did.
Accordingly observe how the centurion does as he bids him, insomuch that
he even let the boat go, and destroyed it. And if the sailors did not as
yet comply with his bidding, yet afterwards they do so: for in fact this
is a reckless sort of people. ([Acts
27.13-20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#013)<span
id="vi.liii-p12.16"></span>.) “Sirs, ye should have hearkened to me,”
etc. ([Acts 27.21](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#021)<span
id="vi.liii-p12.17"></span>.) One is not likely to have a good
reception, when he chides in the midst of calamity; but <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) when he tells them what more there
is (to come) of the calamity, and then predicts the good, then he is
acceptable. Therefore he attacks them then first, when “all hope that
they should be saved was taken away:” that none may say, Nothing has
come of it. And their fear also bears witness. Moreover, the place is a
trying one, for it was in the Adriatic, and then their long abstinence.
They were in the midst of death. It was now the fourteenth day that they
were going without food, having taken nothing. “Wherefore,” said he, “I
pray you to take some meat: for this is for your health” ([Acts
27.34](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#034)<span
id="vi.liii-p13.16"></span>), that ye should eat, lest ye perish of
hunger. Observe, his giving thanks after all that had happened
strengthened them. For this showed an assured mind that they would be
saved. *(b)* “Then were they all of good cheer; and they also took some
meat.” ([Acts 27.36](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#036)<span
id="vi.liii-p13.17"></span>.) And not only so, but henceforth they so
cast all their care upon Paul, that they even cast out the corn ([Acts
27.37](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#037)<span
id="vi.liii-p13.18"></span>), being so many. *(a)* Two hundred and
seventy-six souls ([Acts 27.38](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#038)<span
id="vi.liii-p13.19"></span>): whence had they victuals? <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) *(c)* See how they do their part as
men, and how Paul does not forbid them. “And when it was day,” etc.,
“they loosed the rudder-bands.” ([Acts
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#040)<span id="vi.liii-p14.2"></span>.)
And the vessel goes to pieces in the daytime, that they may not be clean
dissolved with the terror: that you may see the prophecy brought out as
fact. “And the soldiers’ counsel,” etc. ([Acts
27.42](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#042)<span
id="vi.liii-p14.3"></span>.) Do you mark that in this respect also they
were given to Paul? since for his sake the centurion suffered them not
to be slain. So confessedly wicked do those men seem to me to have been:
insomuch that they would have chosen even to slay them: but some swam on
shore, others were borne on boards, and they all were thus saved, and
the prophecy received accomplishment; (a prophecy,) although not solemn
from length of time, since he did not deliver it a number of years
before, but keeping close to the nature of the things themselves: (still
a prophecy it was,) for all was beyond the reach of hope. And (so) it
was through themselves being saved that they learnt who Paul was. But
some one may say: why did he not save the ship? That they might perceive
how great a danger they had escaped: and that the whole matter depended,
not on the help of man, but on God’s hand saving them independently of a
ship. So that righteous men, though they may be in a tempest, or on the
sea, or in the deep, suffer nothing dreadful, but even save others
together with themselves. If (here was) a ship in danger and suffering
wreck, and prisoners were saved for Paul’s sake, consider what a thing
it is to have a holy man in a house: for many are the tempests which
assail us also, tempests far more grievous than these (natural ones),
but He can also give <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) us to be
delivered, if only we obey holy men as those (in the ship) did, if we do
what they enjoin. For they are not simply saved, but themselves also
contributed to other men’s believing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p15.4"></span>πίστιν εἰσήνεγκαν</span>). Though the holy man
be in bonds, he does greater works than those who are free. And look how
this was the case here. The free centurion stood in need of his bound
prisoner: the skilful pilot was in want of him who was no pilot—nay
rather, of him who was the true pilot. For he steered as pilot not a
vessel of this (earthly) kind, but the Church of the whole world, having
learnt of Him Who is Lord also of the sea; (steered it,) not by the art
of man, but by the wisdom of the Spirit. In this vessel are many
shipwrecks, many waves, spirits of wickedness, “from within are
fightings, from without are fears” (<span id="vi.liii-p15.5"></span>[2
Cor. vii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span
id="vi.liii-p15.6"></span>): so that he was the true pilot. Look at our
whole life: it is just such (as was this voyage). For at one time we
meet with kindliness, at another with a tempest; sometimes from our own
want of counsel, sometimes from our idleness, we fall into numberless
evils; from our not hearkening to Paul, when we are eager to go
somewhither, where he bids us not. For Paul is sailing even now with us,
only not bound as he was then: he admonishes us even now, and says to
those who are (sailing) on this sea, “take heed unto yourselves: for
after my departing grievous wolves shall enter in among you” ([Acts xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)<span id="vi.liii-p15.7"></span>):
and again, “In the last times perilous times shall come: and men shall
be lovers of their own selves, lovers of money, boasters.” (<span
id="vi.liii-p15.8"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002)<span id="vi.liii-p15.9"></span>.)
This is more grievous than all storms. Let us therefore abide where he
bids us—in faith, in the safe haven: let us hearken unto him rather than
to the pilot that is within us, that is, our own reason. Let us not
straightway do just what this may suggest; not what the owner of the
ship: no, but what Paul suggests: he has passed through many such
tempests. Let us not learn (to our cost) by experience, but before the
experience let us “avoid both harm and loss.” Hear what he says: “They
that will be rich fall into temptation.” ([1 Tim. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span id="vi.liii-p15.10"></span>.)
Let us therefore obey him; else, see what they suffered, because they
did not take his counsel. And again he tells in another place what
causes shipwrecks: “Who,” he says, “have made shipwreck concerning the
faith. But do thou continue in the things which thou hast learned and
wast assured of.” ([1 Tim. i. 19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)<span
id="vi.liii-p15.11"></span>.) Let us obey Paul: though we be in the
midst of a tempest, we shall surely be freed from the dangers: though we
remain without food fourteen days, though hope of safety may have left
us, though we be in darkness and mist, by doing his bidding, we shall be
freed from the dangers. Let us think that the whole world is a ship, and
in this the evildoers and those who have numberless vices, some rulers,
others guards, others just men, as Paul was, others prisoners, those
bound by their sins: if then we do as Paul bids us, we perish not in our
bonds, but are released from them: God will give us also to him. Or
think you not that sins and passions are grievous bonds? for it is not
the hands only that are bound, but the whole man. For tell me, when any
one possessed of much money uses it not, nor spends it, but keeps it
close, is he not bound more grievously than any prisoner by his
miserliness, a bond that cannot be broken? What again, when a man gives
himself up to (the belief in) Fate, is not he too bound with other
fetters? What, when he gives himself up to observations (of times)?
What, when to omens? are not these more grievous than all bonds? What
again, when he gives himself up to an unreasonable lust and to love? Who
shall break in pieces these bonds for you? There is need of God’s help
that they may be loosed. But when there are both bonds and tempest,
think how great is the amount of dangers. For which of them is not
enough to destroy? The hunger, the tempest, the wickedness of those on
board, the unfitness of the season? But against all these, Paul’s glory
stood its ground. So is it now: let us keep the saints near us, and
there will be no tempest: or rather, though there be a tempest, there
will be great calm and tranquillity, and freedom from dangers: since
that widow had the saint for her friend, and the death of her child was
loosed, and she received back her son alive again. (<span
id="vi.liii-p15.12"></span>[1 Kings xvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)<span id="vi.liii-p15.13"></span>.)
Where the feet of saints step, there will be nothing painful; and if
such should happen, it is for proving us and for the greater glory of
God. Accustom the floor of thy house to be trodden by such feet, and an
evil spirit will not tread there. For as where a sweet odor is, there a
bad odor will not find place: so where the holy unguent is, there the
evil spirit is choked, and it gladdens those who are near it, it
delights, it refreshes the soul. Where thorns are, there are wild
beasts: where hospitality is, there are no thorns: for almsgiving having
entered in, more keenly than any sickle it destroys the thorns, more
violently than any fire. Be not thou afraid: (the wicked one) fears the
tracks of saints, as foxes do lions. For “the righteous,” it says, “is
as bold as alion.” (<span id="vi.liii-p15.14"></span>[Prov. xxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)<span id="vi.liii-p15.15"></span>.)
Let us bring these lions into our house, and all the wild beasts are put
to flight, the lions not needing to roar, but simply to utter their
voice. For not so much does the roaring of a lion put the wild beasts to
flight, as the prayer of a righteous man puts to flight evil spirits:
let him but speak, they cower. And where are such men now to be found,
you will say? Everywhere, if we believe, if we seek, if we take pains.
Where hast thou sought, tell me? When didst thou take this work in hand?
When didst thou make this thy business? But if thou seekest not, marvel
not that thou dost not find. For “he that seeketh findeth” ([Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="vi.liii-p15.16"></span>),
not he that seeketh not. Listen to those who live in deserts: away with
thy gold and silver: (such holy men) are to be found in every part of
the world. Though thou receive not such an one in thy house, yet go thou
to him, live with the man, be at his dwelling-place, that thou mayest be
able to obtain and enjoy his blessing. For a great thing it is to
receive a blessing from the saints: which let us be careful to obtain,
that being helped by their prayers we may enjoy mercy from God, through
the grace and loving-kindness of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[i:1155](1110058.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="vi.liii-p4.8"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p5.1"></span>Καὶ τούτους</span>, meaning perhaps those who
remained at Myra.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[i:1156](1110058.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="vi.liii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p6"></span> The fast referred to was that which
occurred on the great day of atonement (<span
id="vi.liii-p6.1"></span>[Lev. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027)<span id="vi.liii-p6.2"></span>)
i.e. on the tenth of the seventh month (Tisri). This would be about the
end of September, after the autumnal equinox, when navigation was
considered dangerous.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[i:1157](1110058.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="vi.liii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p7"></span> Preponderant authority favors the reading
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.1"></span>εὐρακύλων</span> from
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.2"></span>εὖρος</span>, the S.
E. wind and the Latin *Aquilo,* a N. wind (so <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.3"></span>א</span>, B\* A. Vulgate Erasmus Mill, Bengel,
Olshausen, Hackett, Tischendorf, Lachmann, Tregelles, Westcott and Hort,
R.V.) If <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.4"></span>εὐροκλύδων</span> is read, it is disputed
whether the first part of the word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.5"></span>εὖρος</span> (Alford, Gloag, Howson,) or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.6"></span>εὐρύς</span>, broad. Meyer
defends the latter reading, on the ground that the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.7"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.8"></span>καλοὐμενος</span> requires
that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.9"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.10"></span>υρ</span>. denote a *name* and not merely the
direction of the wind and that it is easier to suppose that this reading
should be modified into the former than the reverse. Alford supposes
that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p7.11"></span>εὐρακύλων</span> was the name of the wind,
which the Greek sailors did not understand and pronounced <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.12"></span>εὐροκλύδων</span>. Meyer’s
argument is inadequate, and the probabilities favor the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p7.13"></span>εὐρακλύδων</span> with the
meaning, N. E. wind, a signification, moreover, which answers all the
conditions of the narrative. (See Bib. Dict. *sub voce.*)—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[i:1158](1110058.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="vi.liii-p7.15"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p8"></span> Rather, “on the Syrtis” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p8.1"></span>εἰς τὴν Σύρτιν</span>.)
There were two shoals on the coast of Africa, called by this name, the
Syrtis Major and the Syrtis Minor. The former to the S. W. of Crete is
the one here referred to.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[i:1159](1110058.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="vi.liii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p9"></span> R.V. “they lowered the gear” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p9.1"></span>σκεῦος</span>). The word
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p9.2"></span>σκεῦος</span>—utensil, implement—is in itself
indefinite and must be understood from the context. It has here been
taken to mean “anchor;” “mast” (Olshausen); “sail” (Meyer, Lechler,
Hackett, A.V.): “gear,” meaning the ropes and topsails in order to set
the ship in a direction off shore.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[i:1160](1110058.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="vi.liii-p9.7"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p10"></span> The confusion here has arisen from the
scribe’s taking the four last portions *a*, *c*, *e*, *g*, i.e. 4, 5, 6,
7, and inserting between them the first three *b*, *f*, *d*, but in the
order *b*, *d*, *f*, i.e. 1, 3, 2: so that the confused order becomes 4,
(1), 5, (3), 6, (2), 7. The texts also needed to be redistruted. Of our
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.liii-p10.1"></span>mss</span>. A, C, omit
all the latter part *d*, *e*, *f*, *g*: so that B and Cat. are the
authorities here followed for the old text. (of N. we have no
collation).—In (*f*), for ἅτε οὐ περὶ τῶν ψυχῶν αὐτῶν ὄντος τοῦ λόγου
which we have referred to, “Then were they of good cheer,” viz. because
they believed Paul’s assurance that their lives were safe, mod. text
substitutes “(they had no care for food,) ἅτε οὐ περὶ τῶν τυχόντων ὄντος
τοῦ κινδύνου.” In (*d*), “κατεῖχον,” τοὺς οἴακας τῇ πνεούσῃ δόντες, the
meaning seems to be, they bore right down (upon the shore), letting the
rudder-handles go, so that the wind was right astern: πόλλακις γὰρ οὐχ
οὕτῳ ποιοῦσιν, for oftentimes they steer not so, but more or less
transverse to the line of the wind. Κατέφερον τὸ σκεῦος, τ. ἐ. τὰ ἰστία:
what this can mean, we do not understand: but above in [Acts
27.17](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#017)<span id="vi.liii-p10.2"></span>,
old text has χαλάσαντες τὸ σκεῦος for χαλ. τὰ ἰστία: hence we read here
κατεφέροντο (χαλάσαντες, or some such word) τὸ σκεῦος, τ. ε. τὰ ἰ.—For
ἐγκοπτομένης τῆς ῥ& 192·μης we read with the Catena ἐγκ. τῆς πρύμνης.
Mod. text substitutes ἐγκόπτοντες (Sav. τος) τοῦ πνεύματος τὴν ῥ&
192·μην.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[i:1161](1110058.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="vi.liii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.1"></span>Καὶ ἐπισφίγγονται αὐτῶν αἱ ψυχαί</span>. *Hom.
in Matt.* p. 60, A. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.3"></span>πισφ</span>. is applied to the action of salt
in stopping corruption; and ib. 167 B. Christians are the salt of the
earth, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.4"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.5"></span>να ἐπισφίγγωμεν τοὺς
διαρρέοντας</span>. Here in a somewhat similar sense, “the vessel goes
to pieces and their (dissolute) souls (which were in danger of going to
pieces) are powerfully constricted, held in a close strain, braced to
the uttermost.” Mod. text omits this, and for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.6"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.7"></span>να μὴ λάθωνται</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.9"></span>ναισχυντεῖν</span>,
substitutes, “That they may not perish, the corn is thrown out and all
the rest.”—Below, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.11"></span>λλ᾽ ὅταν καὶ τὰ πλείονα λέγῃ τῆς
συμφορᾶς</span>: mod. text absurdly substitutes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.12"></span>παρατρέχῃ</span>: we
insert after this the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p12.13"></span>τότε τὰ χρηστὰ προλέγει</span> which our
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.liii-p12.14"></span>mss.</span> have
below after <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p12.15"></span>καὶ ὁ
φόβος μαρτυρεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[i:1162](1110058.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="vi.liii-p12.18"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.1"></span>Καὶ ἐπισφίγγονται αὐτῶν αἱ ψυχαί</span>. *Hom.
in Matt.* p. 60, A. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.3"></span>πισφ</span>. is applied to the action of salt
in stopping corruption; and ib. 167 B. Christians are the salt of the
earth, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.4"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.5"></span>να ἐπισφίγγωμεν τοὺς
διαρρέοντας</span>. Here in a somewhat similar sense, “the vessel goes
to pieces and their (dissolute) souls (which were in danger of going to
pieces) are powerfully constricted, held in a close strain, braced to
the uttermost.” Mod. text omits this, and for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.6"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.7"></span>να μὴ λάθωνται</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.9"></span>ναισχυντεῖν</span>,
substitutes, “That they may not perish, the corn is thrown out and all
the rest.”—Below, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.11"></span>λλ᾽ ὅταν καὶ τὰ πλείονα λέγῃ τῆς
συμφορᾶς</span>: mod. text absurdly substitutes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.12"></span>παρατρέχῃ</span>: we
insert after this the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p13.13"></span>τότε τὰ χρηστὰ προλέγει</span> which our
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.liii-p13.14"></span>mss.</span> have
below after <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p13.15"></span>καὶ ὁ
φόβος μαρτυρεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[i:1163](1110058.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="vi.liii-p13.20"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p14.1"></span>πόθεν τὰ σιτηρεσία εἶχον</span>; i.e. what
were they to subsist upon, having thrown out the rest of the corn? But
they trusted Paul’s assurance for all.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[i:1164](1110058.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="vi.liii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liii-p15.1"></span>χαρίσασθαι</span> i.e. to the holy man, to be
saved for his sake, in like manner as “He gave (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liii-p15.2"></span>κεχάρισται</span>) to Paul
them that sailed with him,” [Acts
27.24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024)<span id="vi.liii-p15.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LIV on Acts xxviii. 1.](1110059)
