[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110028)  [Next](1110030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxiv"></span> <span id="vi.xxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIV.</span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p2"></span>[Acts
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046.md)<span id="vi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p3"></span>“While Peter yet spake these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. And they of the
circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter,
because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God.”

<span id="vi.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Observe</span> God’s providential management.
He does not suffer the speech to be finished, nor the baptism to take
place upon a command of Peter, but, when He has made it evident how
admirable their state of mind is, and a beginning is made of the work of
teaching, and they have believed that assuredly baptism is the remission
of sins, then forthwith comes the Spirit upon them. Now this is done by
God’s so disposing it as to provide for Peter a mighty ground of
justification. <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md) And it is not
simply that the Spirit came upon them, but, “they spake with tongues:”
which was the thing that astonished those who had come together. They
altogether disliked the matter, wherefore it is that the whole is of
God; and as for Peter, it may almost be said, that he is present only to
be taught <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) (with them.md) the
lesson, that they must take the Gentiles in hand, and that they
themselves are the persons by whom this must be done. For whereas after
all these great events, still both in Cæsarea and in Jerusalem a
questioning is made about it, how would it have been if these (tokens)
had not gone step by step with the progress of the affair? Therefore it
is that this is carried to a sort of excess. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md) Peter seizes his advantage, and see
the plea he makes of it. “Can any man forbid water, that these should
not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?”
([Acts 10.47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p7.4"></span>.) Mark the issue to which he brings it; how he
has been travailing to bring this forth. So (entirely) was he of this
mind! “Can any one, he asks, “forbid water?” It is the language, we may
almost say, of one triumphantly pressing his advantage (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p7.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p7.6"></span>πεμβαίνοντος</span>)
against such as would forbid, such as should say that this ought not to
be. The whole thing, he says, is complete, the most essential part of
the business, the baptism with which we were baptized. “And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.” ([Acts
10.48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048)<span id="vi.xxiv-p7.7"></span>..md)
After he has cleared himself, then, and not before, he commands them to
be baptized: teaching them by the facts themselves. Such was the dislike
the Jews had to it! Therefore it is that he first clears himself,
although the very facts cry aloud, and then gives the command. “Then
prayed they him”—well might they do so—“to tarry certain days:” and with
a good courage thenceforth he does tarry.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p8"></span>“And the Apostles and brethren that were in
Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. And
when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision
contended with him, saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and
didst eat with them.” ([Acts
11.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>.) After such great things, “they of the
circumcision contended:” not the Apostles; God forbid! It means, they
took no small offence. <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) And see
what they allege. They do not say, Why didst thou preach? but, Why didst
thou eat with them? But Peter, not stopping to notice this frigid
objection—for frigid indeed it is—takes his stand (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.8"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.9"></span>σταται</span>) on that
great argument, If they had the Spirit Itself given them, how could one
refuse to give them the baptism? But how came it that in the case of the
Samaritans this did not happen, but, on the contrary, neither before
their baptism nor after it was there any controversy, and there they did
not take it amiss, nay, as soon as they heard of it, sent the Apostles
for this very purpose? ([Acts
8.14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxiv-p9.10"></span>..md)
True, but neither in the present case is this the thing they complain
of; for they knew that it was of Divine Grace: what they say is, Why
didst thou eat with them? Besides, the difference <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md) is not so great for Samaritans as it
is for Gentiles. Moreover, it is so managed (as part of the Divine plan)
that he is accused in this way: on purpose that they may learn: for
Peter, without some cause given, would not have related the vision. But
observe his freedom from all elation and vainglory. For it says, “But
Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order
unto them, saying, I was in the city of Joppa, praying:” he does not say
why, nor on what occasion: “and in a trance I saw a vision, a certain
vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by
four corners; and it came even to me ([Acts
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxiv-p10.5"></span>.md):
upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes, I considered, and saw
fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things,
and fowls of the air. And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise, Peter;
slay and eat.” ([Acts 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxiv-p10.6"></span>..md)
As much as to say, This of itself was enough to have persuaded me—my
having seen the linen sheet: but moreover a Voice was added. “But I
said, Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at any time
entered into my mouth.” ([Acts
11.8](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxiv-p10.7"></span>..md)
Do you mark? “I did my part,” says he: “I said, that I have never eaten
aught common or unclean:” with reference to this that they said, “Thou
wentest in, and didst eat with them.” But this he does not say to
Cornelius: for there was no need to mention it to him. “But the voice
answered me again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, that call not
thou common. And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again
into heaven.” ([Acts 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxiv-p10.8"></span>..md)
The essential points were those <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md)
(that ensued at Cæsarea); but by these he prepares the way for them.
Observe how he justifies himself (by reasons), and forbears to use his
authority as teacher. For the more mildly he expresses himself, the more
tractable he makes them. “At no time,” says he, “has aught common or
unclean entered into my mouth.—And, behold—this too was part of his
defence—three men stood at the house in which I was, sent to me from
Cæsarea. And the Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting.” ([Acts
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#012)<span id="vi.xxiv-p11.10"></span>..md)
Do you mark that it is to the Spirit the enacting of laws belongs! “And
these also accompanied me”—nothing can be more lowly, when he alleges
the brethren for witnesses!—“these six men, and we entered into the
man’s house: and he showed us how he had seen an angel in his house,
which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon,
whose surname is Peter; who shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all
thy house shall be saved.” ([Acts
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxiv-p11.11"></span>..md)
And he does not mention the words spoken by the Angel to Cornelius, “Thy
prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God, that he
may not disgust them; but what says he? “He shall tell thee words,
whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved:” with good reason this is
added. <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) Also he says nothing of
the man’s fitness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.3"></span>πιεικές</span>). “The Spirit,” he might say,
“having sent (me), God having commanded, on the one part having summoned
(me) through the Angel, on the other urging (me) on, and solving my
doubt about the things, what was I to do?” He says none of these things,
however: but makes his strong point of what happened last, which even in
itself was an incontrovertible argument. “And as I began to speak,” etc.
([Acts 11.15](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.4"></span>.) Then why did not this happen alone? Of
superabundance (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.6"></span>κ περιουσίας</span>) this is wrought by God,
that it might be shown that the beginning too was not from the Apostle.
But had he set out of his own motion, without any of these things having
taken place, they would have been very much hurt: so <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) that from the beginning he disposes
their minds in his favor\*\*: saying to them, “Who have received the
Holy Ghost even as we.” And not content with this, he reminds them also
of the words of the Lord: “Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how
that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost.” ([Acts
11.16](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p13.4"></span>.) He means, that no new thing has happened,
but just what the Lord foretold. “But <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) there was no need to baptize?” (Comp.
p. 158.) But the baptism was completed already. And he does not say, I
ordered them to be baptized: but what says he? “Forasmuch then as God
gave them the like gift as He did unto us, who believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?” ([Acts
11.17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p14.1"></span>.) He shows that he had himself done nothing:
for the very thing which we have obtained, he says, that same did those
men receive. That he may more effectually stop their mouths, therefore
he says, “The like gift.” Do you perceive how he does not allow them to
have less: when they believed, says he, the same gift did God give unto
them, as He did to us who believed on the Lord, and Himself cleanses
them. And he does not say, To you, but *to us.* Why do you feel
aggrieved, when *we* <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) call them
partakers (with *us?*) “When they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.” ([Acts
11.18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p15.3"></span>.) Do you mark that it all came of Peter’s
discourse, by his admirably skilful way of relating the facts? They
glorified God that He had given repentance to themselves (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p15.4"></span>καὶ αὐτοῖς</span>) also:
they were humbled by these words. Hence was the door of faith opened
thenceforth to the Gentiles. But, if you please, let us look over again
what has been said.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p16"></span>“While Peter yet spake,” etc.
(Recapitulation.) He does not say that Peter was astonished, but, “They
of the circumcision:” since he knew what was in preparation. And yet
they ought to have marvelled at this, how they themselves had believed.
When they heard that they had believed, they were not astonished, but
when God gave them the Spirit. Then <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md) “answered Peter and said,” etc. ([Acts
10.47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.8"></span>.) And therefore it is that he says, “God hath
shown that I should not call common or unclean any human being.” ([Acts
10.28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.9"></span>.) He knew this from the first, and plans his
discourse beforehand (with a view to it). Gentiles? What Gentiles
henceforth? They were no longer Gentiles, the Truth being come. It is
nothing wonderful, he says, if before the act of baptism they received
the Spirit: in our own case this same happened. Peter shows that not as
the rest either were they baptized, but in a much better way. This is
the reason why the thing takes place in this manner, that they may have
nothing to say, but even in this way may account them equal with
themselves. “And they besought him,” it says, “to tarry certain days.”
([Acts 10.48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.10"></span>.) “And the Apostles and brethren, etc. And
they of the circumcision contended with him.” ([Acts
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxiv-p17.11"></span>..md)
Do you remark how they were not kindly disposed towards him? Saying
“Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.” ([Acts
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.12"></span>.) Do you note what zeal they had for the
Law? Not Peter’s authority abashed them, not the signs which had taken
place, not the success achieved, what a thing it was, the Gentiles
having “received the word:” but they contended about those petty things.
For if none of those (signs) had taken place, was not the success
(itself) enough? <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) But not so does
Peter frame his defence: for he was wise, or rather it was not his
wisdom, but the Spirit that spake the words. And by the matter of his
defence, he shows that in no one point was he the author, but in every
point God, and upon Him he casts the whole. “The trance,” he says—“it
was He that caused me to fall into it, for “I was in Joppa,” etc.: the
vessel—it was He that showed it; I objected: again, He spake, and even
then I did not hear: the Spirit commanded me to go, and even then though
I went, I did not run: I told that God had sent me, and after these
things, even then I did not baptize, but again God did the whole. God
baptized them, not I.” And he does not say, Was it not right then to add
the water? but, implying that nothing was lacking, “What was I, that I
should withstand God?” What a defence is here! For he does not say, Then
knowing these things, hold your peace; but what? He stands their attack,
and to their impeachment he pleads—“What was I, to be able to hinder
God?” It was not possible for me to hinder—a forcible plea indeed, and
such as might well put them to shame. Whence being at last afraid, “they
held their peace and glorified God.”

<span id="vi.xxiv-p19"></span>In like manner ought we also to glorify
God for the good things which befall our neighbors, only <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md) not in the way that the rest of the
newly-baptized are insulted, when they see others receiving baptism, and
immediately departing this life. It, is right to glorify God, even
though all be saved: and as for thee, if thou be willing, thou hast
received a greater gift (than they): I do not mean in respect of the
baptism, for the gift there is the same for him as for thee, but in
regard that thou hast received a set time for winning distinction. The
other put on the robe, and was not suffered to exhibit himself therewith
in the procession, whereas to thee, God hath given full opportunity to
use thine arms for the right purpose, thereby to make proof of them. The
other goes his way, having only the reward of his faith: thou standest
in the course, both able to obtain an abundant recompense for thy works,
and to show thyself as much more glorious than he, as the sun is than
the smallest star, as the general, nay rather as the Emperor himself,
than the lowest soldier. Then blame thyself, or rather not blame, but
correct: for it is not enough to blame thyself; it is in thy power to
contend afresh. Hast thou been thrown? hast thou taken grievous hurt?
Stand up, recover thyself: thou art still in the course, the meeting
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.18"></span>θέατρον</span>) is
not yet broken up. Do you not see how many that have been thrown in the
wrestling have afterwards resumed the combat? Only do not willingly come
by thy fall. Dost thou count him a happy man for departing this life?
Much rather count thyself happy. Was he released of his sins? But thou,
if thou wilt, shalt not only wash away thy sins, but shalt also have
achievements (of good works), which in his case is not possible. It is
in our power to recover ourselves. Great are the medicinal virtues
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.19"></span>φάρμακα</span>) of
repentance: let none despair of himself. That man truly deserves to be
despaired of, who despairs of himself; that man has no more salvation,
nor any hopes. It is not the having fallen into a depth of evils, it is
the lying there when fallen, that is dreadful, it is not the having come
into such a condition, it is the making light of it that is impious. The
very thing that ought to make thee earnest, say, is it this that makes
thee reckless? Having received so many wounds, hast thou fallen back? Of
the soul, there can be no incurable wound; for the body, there are many
such, but none for the soul: and yet for those we cease not in our
endeavors to cure them, while for these we are supine. Seest thou not
the thief (on the cross), in how short a time he achieved (his
salvation)? Seest thou not the Martyrs, in how short a time they
accomplished the whole work? “But martyrdom is not to be had nowadays.”
True, but there are contests to be had, as I have often told you, if we
had the mind. “For they that wish,” says the Apostle, “to live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.” (<span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.20"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="vi.xxiv-p20.21"></span>..md)
They that live godly are always undergoing persecution, if not from men,
at any rate from evil spirits, which is a more grievous persecution.
Yes, and it is in consequence, first and foremost, of ease and comfort,
that those who are not vigilant undergo this. Or thinkest thou it is a
trifling persecution to be living at ease? This is more grievous than
all, this is worse than persecution. For, like a running flux, ease
makes the soul languid (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.22"></span>χαυνοἵ</span>): and as summer and winter, so
persecution and ease. But to show you that this is the worse
persecution, listen: it induces sleep in the soul, an excessive yawning
and drowsiness, it stirs up the passions on every side, it arms pride,
it arms pleasure, it arms anger, envy, vainglory, jealousy. But in time
of persecution none of these is able to make a disturbance; but fear,
entering in, and plying the lash vigorously, as one does to a barking
dog, will not let any of these passions so much as attempt to give
tongue. Who shall be able in time of persecution to indulge in
vainglory? Who to live in pleasure? Not one: but there is much trembling
and fear, making a great calm, composing the harbor into stillness,
filling the soul with awe. I have heard from our fathers (for in our own
time God grant it may not happen, since we are bidden not to ask for
temptation), that in the persecution of old time one might see men that
were indeed Christian. None of them cared for money, none for wife, none
for children, nor home, nor country: the one great concern with all was
to save their lives (or, souls). There were they hiding, some in tombs
and sepulchres, some in deserts: yes tender and dainty women too,
fighting all the while with constant hunger.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p21"></span>Then think whether any longing for
sumptuous and dainty living at all came into the mind of a woman, while
in hiding beside a coffin (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p21.1"></span>παρὰ λάρνακι</span>), and waiting for her
maid-servant to bring her meal, and trembling lest she should be taken,
and lying in her terror as in a furnace: was she even aware that there
ever was such a thing as dainty living, that such things as dress and
ornaments exist at all (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p21.2"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p21.3"></span>τι κόσμος ὅλως ἐστίν</span>)? Seest thou that
now is the persecution, with our passions, like wild beasts, setting
upon us on every side? Now is the trying persecution, both in this
regard, and especially if it is not even thought to be persecution at
all. For this (persecution) has also this evil in it, that being war, it
is thought to be peace, so that we do not even arm ourselves against it,
so that we do not even rise: no one fears, no one trembles. But if ye do
not believe me, ask the heathen, the persecutors, at what time was the
conduct of the Christians more strict, at what time were they all more
proved? Few indeed had they then become in number, but rich in virtue.
For say, what profit is it, that there should be hay in plenty, when
there might be precious stones? The amount consists not in the sum of
numbers, but in the proved worth. Elias was one: yet the whole world was
not worth so much as he. And yet the world consists of myriads: but they
are no myriads, when they do not even come up to that one. “Better <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) is one that doeth the will of God,
than ten thousand who are transgressors:” for the ten thousands have not
yet reached to the one. “Desire not a multitude of unprofitable
children.” ([Ecclesiasticus 16.1](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.12"></span>.) Such bring more blasphemy against God,
than if they were not Christians. What need have I of a multitude? It is
(only) more food for the fire. This one might see even in the body, that
better is moderate food with health, than a (fatted) calf with damage.
This is more food than the other: this is food, but that is disease.
This too one may see in war: that better are ten expert and brave men,
than ten thousand of no experience. These latter, besides that they do
no work, hinder also those that do work. The same too one may see to be
the case in a ship, viz. that better are two experienced mariners, than
ever so great a number of unskilful ones: for these will sink the ship.
These things I say, not as looking with an evil eye upon your numbers,
but wishing that all of you should be approved men, and not trust in
your numbers. Many more in number are they who go down into hell: but
greater than it is the Kingdom, however few it contain. As the sand of
the sea was the multitude of the people (Israel) yet one man saved them.
Moses was but one, and yet he availed more than they all: Joshua was one
and he was enabled to do more than the six hundred thousand. Let us not
make this our study merely, that (the people) may be many, but rather,
that they may be excellent; when this shall have been effected, then
will that other follow also. No one wishes at the outset to make a
spacious house, but he first makes it strong and sure, then spacious: no
one lays the foundations so that he may be laughed at. Let us first aim
at this, and then at the other. Where this is, that also will be easy:
but where this is not, the other, though it be, is to no profit. For if
there be those who are able to shine in the Church, there will soon be
also numbers: but where these are not, the numbers will never be good
for anything. How many, suppose you, may there be in our city who are
likely to be saved (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.13"></span>τοὺς σωζομένους</span>)? It is disagreeable,
what I am going to say, but I will say it nevertheless. Among all these
myriads, there are not to be found one hundred likely to be saved: nay,
even as to these, I question it. For think, what wickedness there is in
the young, what supineness in the aged! None <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) makes it his duty to look after his
own boy, none is moved by anything to be seen in his elder, to be
emulous of imitating such an one. The patterns are defaced, and
therefore it is that neither do the young become admirable in conduct.
Tell not me, “We are a goodly multitude:” this is the speech of men who
talk without thought or feeling (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p23.2"></span>ψυχρὥν</span>.) In the concerns of men indeed,
this might be said with some show of reason: but where God is concerned,
(to say this with regard to Him) as having need of us, <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md) can never be allowed. Nay, let me tell
you, even in the former case, this is a senseless speech (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p24.5"></span>ψυχρόν</span>). Listen. A
person that has a great number of domestics, if they be a corrupt set
what a wretched time will he have of it! For him who has none, the
hardship, it seems, amounts to this, that he is not waited on: but where
a person has bad servants, the evil is, that he is ruining himself
withal, and the damage is greater (the more there are of them.) For it
is far worse than having to be one’s own servant, to have to fight with
others, and take up a (continual) warfare. These things I say, that none
may admire the Church because of its numbers, but that we may study to
make the multitude proof-worthy; that each may be earnest for his own
share of the duty—not for his friends only, nor his kindred as I am
always saying, nor for his neighbors, but that he may attract the
strangers also. For example, Prayer is going on; there they lie (on
bended knees), all the young, stupidly unconcerned (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p24.6"></span>ψυχροὶ</span>), (yes,) and
old too: <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md) filthy nuisances rather
than young men; giggling, laughing outright, talking—for I have heard
even this going on—and jeering one another as they lie along on their
knees: and there stand you, young man or elder: rebuke them, if you see
them (behaving thus): if any will not refrain, chide him more severely:
call the deacon, threaten, do what is in your power to do: and if he
dare do anything to you, assuredly you shall have all to help you. For
who is so irrational, as, when he sees you chiding for such conduct, and
them chidden not to take your part? Depart, having received your reward
from the Prayer.—In a master’s house, we count those his best-disposed
servants, who cannot bear to see any part of his furniture in disorder.
Answer me; if at home you should see the silver plate lie tossed out of
doors, though it is not your business, you will pick it up and bring it
into the house: if you see a garment flung out of its place, though you
have not the care of it, though you be at enmity with him whose business
it is, yet, out of good-will to the master, will you not put it right?
So in the present case. These are part of the furniture: if you see them
lying about in disorder, put them to rights: apply to me, I do not
refuse the trouble: inform me, make the offender known to me: it is not
possible for me to see all: excuse me (in this). See, what wickedness
overspreads the whole world! Said I without reason that we are (no
better than) so much hay (disorderly as) a troubled sea? I am not
talking of those (young people), that they behave thus; (what I complain
of, is) that such a sleepy indifference possesses those who come in
here, that they do not even correct this misbehavior.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p26"></span>Again I see others stand talking while
Prayer is going on; while the more consistent <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) of them (do this.md) not only during the
Prayer, but even when the Priest is giving the Benediction. O, horror!
When shall there be salvation? when shall it be possible for us to
propitiate God?—Soldiers <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) go to
their diversion, and you shall see them, all keeping time in the dance,
and nothing done negligently, but, just as in embroidery and painting,
from the well-ordered arrangement in each individual part of the
composition, there results at once an exceeding harmony and good
keeping, so it is here: we have one shield, one head, all of us (in
common): and if but some casual point be deranged by negligence, the
whole is deranged and is spoilt, and the good order of the many is
defeated by the disorder of the one part. And, fearful indeed to think
of, here you come, not to a diversion, not to act in a dance, and yet
you stand disorderly. Know you not that you are standing in company with
angels? with them you chant, with them sing hymns, and do you stand
laughing? Is it not wonderful that a thunderbolt is not launched not
only at those (who behave thus), but at us? For such behavior might well
be visited with the thunderbolt. The Emperor is present, is reviewing
the army: and do you, even with His eyes upon you, stand laughing, and
endure to see another laughing? How long are we to go on chiding, how
long complaining? Ought not such to be treated as very pests and
nuisances; as abandoned, worthless reprobates, fraught with innumerable
mischiefs, to be driven away from the Church? When will these forebear
laughing, who laugh in the hour of the dread Mystery (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p28.1"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p28.2"></span>ν ὣρᾳ φρίκης</span>)? when
refrain from their trifling, who talk at the instant of the Benediction?
Have they no sense of shame before those who are present? have they no
fear of God? Are our own idle thoughts not enough for us, is it not
enough that in our prayers we rove hither and thither, but laughter also
must needs intrude, and bursts of merriment? Is it a theatrical
amusement, what is done here? Aye, but, methinks, it is the theatres
that do this: to the theatres we owe it that the most of you so refuse
to be curbed by us, and to be reformed. What we build up here, is thrown
down there: and not only so, but the hearers themselves cannot help
being filled with other filthinesses besides: so that the case is just
the same as if one should want to clean out a place with a fountain
above it discharging mire; for however much you may clean out, more runs
in. So it is here. For when we clean people out, as they come here from
the theatres with their filthiness, thither they go again, and take in a
larger stock of filthiness, as if they lived for the purpose of only
giving us trouble, and then come back to us, laden with ordure, in their
manners, in their movements, in their words, in their laughter, in their
idleness. Then once more we begin shovelling it out afresh, as if we had
to do this only on purpose that, having sent them away clean, we may
again see them clogging themselves with filth. Therefore I solemnly
protest to you, the sound members, that this will be to you judgment and
condemnation, and I give you over to God from this time forth, if any
having seen a person behaving disorderly, if any having seen any person
talking, especially in that part (of the Service), shall not inform
against him, not bring him round (to a better behavior). To do this is
better than prayer. Leave thy prayer and rebuke him, that thou mayst
both do him good, and thyself get profit, and so we may be enabled all
to be saved and to attain unto the Kingdom of Heaven, through the grace
and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_575"></span>[i:576](1110029.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p5"></span> This is the only instance in the Acts in
which the Holy Spirit is said to be given anterior to baptism (cf. [Acts
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006)<span id="vi.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.md)
which was generally accompanied by the laying on of hands by the
apostles. A special reason is observable here which greatly diminishes
the force of Baur’s objections to the historicity of the narrative drawn
from this exceptional order of events, viz: the marked receptivity of
Cornelius and his company. Perhaps it was intended by divine providence
to signalize this bringing in of the first fruits of the Gentiles by
showing how little the gifts of grace are conditioned upon outward
rites. Some critics suppose that this gift of the Spirit before baptism
was granted to impress Peter with the idea of the admissibility of the
Gentiles, but this seems unnecessary, as he had been taught this lesson
already by the vision and had distinctly avowed his conviction ([Acts
10.35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)<span id="vi.xxiv-p5.2"></span>.md).
Chrysostom’s exposition is in the line of the latter interpretation; he
forcibly calls this gift of the Spirit an ἀπολογίαμεγάλη for Peter. The
principle which Bengel lays down in his comments—*liberum gratia habet
ordinem*—together with the special significance of the occasion is a
sufficient explanation of the apparently exceptional manner of the
bestowment of the Spirit here.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[i:577](1110029.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p6.1"></span>καὶ ὁ Πέτρος σχεδὸν ἁπλῶς πάρεστι
παιδευόμενος</span>. Erasm. *fere simpliciter adest ut discat.* Not
meaning that St. Peter needed to be taught (see above p. 146, note 1),
but that—such is the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p6.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span> for his exculpation—it is made
to appear as if he needed the lesson and was now taught it, and had his
misapprehensions rectified in common with them. Ben., entirely mistaking
the meaning, has *quasi fortuito adest docens.*

<span id="fn_577"></span>[i:578](1110029.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>Καὶ διὰ τοῦτο μεθ᾽ ὑπερβολῆς γίνεται</span>.
Erasm. *Idcirco hæc cum excellentia quadam fiebant.* Ben. *Ideo hæc modo
singulari fiunt.* But the meaning is, “There is a lavish array of Divine
interpositions. The mission of the Angel to Cornelius, Peter’s vision,
the command given by the Spirit, above all, the gift of the Holy Ghost
and the speaking with tongues before the baptism. This last was in
itself an unanswerable declaration of the will of God, and sufficed for
the Apostle’s justification. The others are <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p7.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p7.3"></span>κ περιουσίας</span>, arguments *ex abundanti.*”

<span id="fn_578"></span>[i:579](1110029.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p9"></span> Some critics (as Meyer, Olshausen) have
affirmed the opposite of what Chrys. states, in regard to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.2"></span>ι ἐκ περιτομῆς</span>. He
excludes the apostles from this category; they would include them. The
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.4"></span>ι ἐκ περιτομῆς</span>,
however, seem to have been a special class of Christians in the mind of
the writer. In expressing the fact that the Church learned of the
reception of the Gentiles, the “apostles and brethren” are named, but
when the narrative advances to the thought of the *contention* against
Peter on account of it, a new term is chosen; the writer could not allow
the same subject to stand for the verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p9.5"></span>διεκρίνοντο</span>, but chooses another
term—<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.6"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p9.7"></span>ι ἐκ περιτομῆς</span>. The
two subjects, then, can hardly be identical. The phrase more probably
denotes judaizing Christians, i.e. those who gave special prominence to
the Law and the necessity of circumcision (So Lechler, Gloag,
Alford).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[i:580](1110029.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p9.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p10.2"></span>Αλλως δὲ οὐ τοσοῦτον τὸ διάφορον Σαμαρειτῶν
καὶ ἐθνῶν</span>. Edd. (from E. alone,) for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p10.3"></span>οὐ τοσοῦτον</span> have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p10.4"></span>πολὺ καὶ ἄπειρον</span>,
“great and infinite the difference between Samaritans and Gentiles.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[i:581](1110029.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p10.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p11"></span> A. B. C. (after [Acts
11.11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.xxiv-p11.1"></span>.
which we have removed), <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.3"></span>Εκεῖνα ἀναγκαῖα ἦν</span> (read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p11.4"></span>τὰ ἀν</span>.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p11.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p11.6"></span>λλὰ διὰ τούτων αὐτὰ
κατασκευάζει</span>. By <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.8"></span>κεῖνα</span> he means, what we have heard
above, what happened at Cæsarea. The modern text (Edd.): “What points
were essential, he relates, but of the rest he is silent: or rather by
these he confirms them also, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.9"></span>καὶ αὐτὰ κατασκευάζει</span>.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[i:582](1110029.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p11.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.1"></span>τοῦτο εἰκότως πρόσκειται</span>. i.e. though
this was not mentioned before (see above, p, 145. note 6) with good
reason it is added here: viz. for Peter’s justification. Edd. from E.
“that he may not disgust them: but what had nothing great in it. ‘He
shall speak,’ etc. Do you mark how for this reason I mentioned before,
he hastens on?” But the saying, “He shall speak,” etc. was great, even
greater than that which he omits: but this was not necessary, the other
(Chrys. means) made a strong point for Peter’s defence, and therefore is
added.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[i:583](1110029.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p12.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p13.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p13.2"></span>νωθεν αὐτῶν τὴν διανοίαν οἰκειοῖ</span>, viz.
by letting them see how all along it was not his doing. Then before
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p13.3"></span>λέγων πρὸς
αὐτοὺς</span>, something is wanting: e.g. “Which done, he urges most
effectively, ‘Who have received,’” etc.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[i:584](1110029.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p13.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p14"></span> E. D. F. Edd. “But there was no need to
baptize, it may be said, for the baptism was complete, ‘when the Spirit
fell upon them.’ Therefore he does not say, I first ordered them to be
baptized but what? ‘Can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized?’ By this showing that he did nothing himself. What therefore
we have obtained, those received.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[i:585](1110029.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p15.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p15.2"></span>ταν ἡμεῖς αὐτοὺς κοινωνοὺς λέγωμεν</span>;
“when we put them on a level with us the Apostles and first disciples,
in regard that they received the Spirit in the same manner as we
received, and as the rest of you did not?”

<span id="fn_585"></span>[i:586](1110029.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.1"></span>τότε ὁ Π. ὕστερον ἐξίσταται· καὶ διὰ τοῦτο
φησίν</span>. “But when God gave them the Spirit, then Peter afterwards
is astonished,” etc. This is evidently corrupt. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p17.2"></span>Τότε ὁ Π</span>. seems to
be part of the text [Acts 10.46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.3"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.4"></span>τότε ἀπεκρίθη ὁ Π</span>. For <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p17.5"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p17.6"></span>στερον ἐξίσταται</span> we
may perhaps restore, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.7"></span>καὶ πρὸς τοῦτο ὁ Π. ὕστερον ἵσταται</span>.
“On this Peter afterwards insists (as above, p. 156), and with a view to
this he says (before), ‘God hath shown me,’” etc. The innovator
substitutes: “When Peter expounded to them his trance, saying, ‘God hath
shown me,’” etc. So Edd.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[i:587](1110029.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p17.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p18.1"></span>Εἰ γὰρ μηδὲν τούτων ἦν, οὐκ ἦρκει τὸ
κατόρθωμα</span>; Of the Edd. only Savile puts this, as it ought to be,
interrogatively: Ben. renders, *non sat fuisset præstium.*

<span id="fn_587"></span>[i:588](1110029.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.1"></span>μόνον μὴ καθάπερ οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν νεοφωτίστων
ἐπηρεάζονται, ὅταν ἄλλους ὁρῶσι φωτισθέντας, καὶ εὐθὺς ἀπιόντας.
Δοξάζειν δεῖ τὸν Θεὸν, κᾂν πάντες σωθῶσιν· καὶ σὺ ἐ& 129·ν θέλῃς κ. τ.
λ</span>. Above Hom. i. p. 20, it is said, “the sick man” having
received baptism in the prospect of death, “if he recovers, is as vexed”
because of his baptism “as if some great harm had happened to him.” And
so it might have been said here, “not (to feel) as some of the
newly-baptized (are apt to do, who) are annoyed (or aggrieved, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.3"></span>τηρεάζονται</span>), when
they see others” etc.: i.e. who, seeing such cases, think themselves ill
used that they were not allowed to defer their baptism to the last
moment, but were forced upon the alternative either of leading a strict
life, or of forfeiting the grace of baptism. But the assertion <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.4"></span>οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν νεοφ</span>.
is too sweeping, and the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.6"></span>πηρεάζονται</span> is scarcely suitable to
this sense: it should rather have been <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.7"></span>δεινοπαθοῦσιν</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.9"></span>ναξιοπαθοῦσιν</span>. The
meaning, not fully expressed, is: “only not, like as the rest of the
newly-baptized are insulted, taunted or jeered (by some), when they see
others,” etc.: i.e. it is right to glorify God, only not to imagine that
God is glorified by those who, exulting in the safety of their friends
who received baptism at the point of death, taunt the rest of the newly
baptized, saying, “See, these men are safe: they are baptized to some
purpose; while you have received the gift, only to be in danger of
losing it.”—He adds, “It is right to glorify God, though all be
saved”—though that were the case with all except yourself, that they
passed at once from baptism to that world, with the gift unimpaired, and
no more in danger to be lost. “And as for you, if you will, you have
received a greater gift,” than they: etc.—For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.10"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.11"></span>πηρεάζονται</span>, A. has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.12"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.13"></span>πηρεάζουσιν</span>: and
this is adopted by the innovator, who alters the passage thus (E. Edd.):
“to glorify God, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.14"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p20.15"></span>λλ᾽ οὐκ ἐπηρεάζειν</span> (adopted by F. D.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.16"></span>καθάπερ οἰ πολλοὶ
τῶν νεοφωτ. ἐτηρεάζουσιν</span>, when they see, etc. It is right to
glorify God, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p20.17"></span>καὶ
ὅτι μένειν οὐ συγχωρεῖ· & 169·Ωστε καὶ σὺ ἐ& 129·ν θέλῃς κ. τ.
λ</span>.(Erasm. *et non insultare:* Ben. *non autem insultare illis.*)

<span id="fn_588"></span>[i:589](1110029.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.1"></span>κρείσσων εἷς ποιῶν τὸ θέλημα Κυρίου, ἢ μύριοι
παράνομοι.</span> St. Chrys. repeatedly cites this, and almost in the
same words, as a text of Scripture, and the Edd. refer it to
[Ecclesiasticus 16.3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.2"></span>, but there it is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.3"></span>κρείσσων γὰρ εἷς ἢ χίλιοι</span> (with no
various reading), and here the following words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.4"></span>οἱ</span> (B. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.5"></span>εἰ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.6"></span>γὰρ μύριοι πρὸς τὸν</span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.7"></span>τὸ</span>, B. F.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.8"></span>ἕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.9"></span>να οὐδέπω ἔφθασαν</span>,
seem to be meant as part of the citation. For these E. Edd. substitute,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.10"></span>Τοῦτο καί τις σοφὸς
αἰνιττόμενος οὕτω τως φησί</span>. Savile adopts both, but reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxiv-p22.11"></span>οὐ γὰρ μύριοι</span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[i:590](1110029.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p22.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p23.1"></span>Οὐδεὶς τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ἔχει τοῦ παιδὸς τοῦ
ἑαυτοῦ· οὐδεὶς ἔχει ζῆλον πρὸς πρεσβύτην ἰδὼν μιμήσασθαι</span>. i.e.
“The young are neglected by their own parents and masters, and elsewhere
they see no good example of the old to move them to virtue.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[i:591](1110029.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p24.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p24.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p24.3"></span>πὶ δὲ τοῦ Θεοῦ τοῦ δεομένου ἡμῶν, οὐκ
ἔτι</span>. So A. B. C. The modern text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p24.4"></span>τοῦ οὐδ</span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[i:592](1110029.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p24.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p25.1"></span>πάντες νέοι ψυχροὶ καὶ γέροντες</span>. The
last word must be corrupt, for he is speaking only of the young: perhaps
it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p25.2"></span>γέμοντες</span> with some genitive, e.g. “full
of folly,” or “evil thoughts.” Then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p25.3"></span>καθάρματα μᾶλλον ἢ νέοι</span>, more fit to be
swept away from the floor as filthy litter than to be regarded as young
men. But <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p25.4"></span>κάθαρμα</span>, in the sense derived from the
heathen ritual, has no equivalent in our language: it means, what
remains of the sacrifice used for lustration or atonement, which as
having taken into itself the uncleanness or the guilt which was to be
removed, was regarded with the utmost abhorrence.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[i:593](1110029.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxiv-p27.1"></span>οἱ δὲ ἐπιεικέστεροι αὐτῶν</span>. Erasm., *Et
quidam ex illis, adhuc meliores scilicet.* Ben. *alios modestiores
scilicet.* But the irony is not of this kind, and the word here has its
proper sense: “men whose conduct is more of a piece, the more consistent
of them.” Some stand and talk during the prayers, yet kneel and are
silent for the Benediction: but these make no such inconsistent
pretence: they do not commit this absurdity at least.—Comp. *Hom*. i.
*in. Oziam*, §4, t. vi. p. 101. “A grievous disease prevails in the
Church: when we have purposed to hold converse with God, and are in the
act of sending up the doxology to Him, we interrupt our business, and
each takes his neighbor aside to talk with him about his domestic
concerns, about the goings on in the agora, the public, the theatre, the
army: how this was well managed, that neglected: what is the strong
point, and what the weak point in this or that business: in short, about
all sorts of public and private matters they talk here with one another.
Is this pardonable? When a man speaks with the earthly sovereign, he
speaks only on the subjects the sovereign chooses to speak and put
questions about, and if against the will of the sovereign he should
presume to start any other subject, he would bring upon himself the
severest punishment. And you, who are speaking with the King of kings,
to Whom the angels minister with dread reverence, do you leave your
converse with Him to talk about mire, and dust, and spiders—for that is
what earthly things are? But you say, the public affairs are in such a
bad way, and there is much to talk of and much to be anxious about. And
whose fault is that? They say, The blunders of our rulers are the cause.
No, not the blunders of our rulers, but our sins: the punishment of our
faults. It is these have ruined all, have brought upon us all our
sufferings, wars, and defeats. Therefore if we had an Abraham, a Moses,
a David, a Solomon, for our ruler, yea, the most righteous of men, it
would signify nothing as far as the cause of all our evils is
concerned…And if we have one of the most iniquitous of men, a blundering
ill-managing person for our ruler, it is our own folly and wickedness
that has brought this upon us, it is the punishment of our sins.
Therefore let each when he comes here think of his own sins, and not
complain of others.” *Hom*. ix. *in 1 Tim.* he complains of the women
talking in Church.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[i:594](1110029.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p28"></span> The illustration is taken from some kind
of shield dance, which formed one of the amusements of the camp,
skilfully executed by a large body of soldiers. The innovator, (E. D. F.
Edd.) not understanding the allusion, substitutes: “If you go to a
diversion, you will see all keeping time in the dance, and nothing done
negligently. As therefore in a well-harmonized and curiously wrought
lyre, one well sounding symphony results from the orderly arrangement
severally of the component parts, so here there ought to result from all
one symphonious harmony. For we are become one Church, we count as
members, ‘fitly joined together’ of one Head, we all make one Body: if
any carnal point be done negligently, the whole, etc. Thus the good
order,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXV on Acts xi. 19.](1110030.md)
