[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110061)  [Next](1110063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>Preface to Homilies on Romans.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.i-p3.1"></span>St. Chrysostom’s</span> Commentary on the Epistle
to the Romans is one of the closest and most argumentative of those he
has left us. The style of the Epistle itself called for this, being such
as almost constantly to remind an attentive reader of the necessity of
forming some notion of the views and feelings of the persons to whom it
was originally addressed. To this point St. Chrysostom has paid much
attention, and has consequently obtained a far clearer view of the
doctinal bearing of the Epistle than most other commentators. His early
rhetorical education would probably have given him even too strong a
bias toward that kind of exposition, but for his subsequent course of
severe discipline and ascetic devotion. As it is, the rhetorical element
in his commentary is of very great value. His ready apprehension of the
effect intended to be produced by the style and wording of a sentence,
is often the means of clearing up what might otherwise seem obscure or
even inconsistent. An example of this occurs in the beginning of the
seventh chapter, which he expounds in the 12th Homily. The illustration
of our release from the Law of Moses by partaking in the Death of
Christ, by the dissolution of marriage at death, is so stated in the
Epistle as to contain an apparent inconsistency, as though the death of
the Law, and the death of the person, were confounded. And the various
readings only shift the difficulty, without removing it. This, however,
he has very ably shown to be, in fact, an argument *a fortiori*. Other
cases will strike other persons as they happen to have found difficulty
in the Text.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>A far higher qualification for interpreting
St. Paul, in whom, as much as in any of the sacred writers, the Man
appears as well as the guiding Spirit, was that peculiar affection with
which he regarded him, and which he expresses particularly in the
beginning of the introduction, and at the close of the last Homily. The
effect of this is perhaps best traced in the commentary on [Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.i-p4.1"></span>, Hom.
xvi.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>The elaborate composition of these Homilies,
and the close attention which it must have required, has been thought an
indication that they must have been delivered before the Author was
engaged in the cares of the Bishopric of Constantinople. But Tillemont
has detected even surer indications, which place the point clearly
beyond all question. In his exortation to Charity, Homily 8 he speaks of
himself and his hearers as under one Bishop. It has been objected that
he speaks of himself as Pastor, in Hom. xxix. but he does the same in
other Homilies, certainly delivered by him when he was only a preacher
at Antioch, and the terms are less definite than in the other case, v.
ad. P. Ant. Hom. xx. on the Statues. Besides, he seems to address
persons who have ready access to the place in which St. Paul taught and
was bound, which cannot be shown to tally with Constantinople, but
evidently agrees with Antioch. The binding of St. Paul there mentioned
is not, however, on record, and it is just possible he may mean in that
expression to refer to another place.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>Some account of the life of the Author has
been given in the Preface to the Homilies on the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, already translated. <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182.md) It may be worthwhile, however, to
notice particularly, in connection with this work, the manner in which
St. Chrysostom was quoted in the Pelagian controversy, as some of the
passages were taken from it.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>St. Augustin, *adv. Julianum.* l. 1, c. vi.
discusses a passage in a Homily to the newly baptized, which was alleged
against the doctrine of Original Sin. He had spoken of infants as not
having sins, meaning of course actual sins, as the plural number
implies. The words were, however, easily turned in translation so as to
bear another sense. St. Augustin quotes on the other side his Letter to
Olympias, that “Adam by his sin condemned the whole race of men.” And
Hom. ix. in <span id="vii.i-p8.1"></span>Gen. c. i. v. 28, where he
speaks of the loss of command over the creation, as a penalty of the
Fall. And finally a passage from the homily before quoted (as *ad
Neophytos*), in which he speaks of our Lord finding us “bound by a
hereditary debt;” and one in Hom. x. of this Commentary, viz. that on
[Rom. v. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.i-p8.2"></span>. These are sufficient to make it clear, that St.
Chrysostom did not hold any Pelagian doctrine on this point.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>With respect to Free-will, he has one or two
passages, as in Hom. on the words of St. Paul, [2 Cor. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>. Ben.
t. iii. p. 264. “That first believing, and obeying when called, is of
our good will; but when the foundation of faith is laid, we need the
assistance of the Spirit.” And on St. [John i.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>. Ben.
8. p. 107, p. 154, O.T. “that God does not precede our wills with his
gifts; but when we have begun, when we have sent our will before, then
He gives us abundant opportunities of salvation.” However, in Hom.
lviii. in Gen. he says, “though he received help from above, yet he
first did his own part. So let us persuade ourselves, that though we
strive ever so much, we can do no good thing at all, except we are aided
by help from above. For as we can never do anything aright without that
help, so unless we contribute our own share, we shall not be able to
obtain help from above.” This illustrates his meaning about doing our
own part *first*, and shows that he does not mean to exclude Divine aid
in the very beginning of good actions, only not *superseding* the motion
of our will. The word *gifts* is also to be observed. He probably did
not think of its being applicable to the first motions of prevenient
grace, intending himself the Evangelical gifts. This view of his meaning
seems to solve the difficulties of his expressions, so far as is
necessary in a writer more rhetorical than logical. Some passages in
this Commentary bear on the point, as [Rom. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.i-p9.3"></span>, and
viii. 26.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>In a Letter to Olympias, shortly before his
death, he laments the errors of a “Monk Pelagius,” and it is supposed
that he means the well-known heretic.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>The present Translation is from the text of
Savile, except where otherwise noted. For the first sixteen Homilies,
several <span class="c14"><span id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> have
been collated in Paris, with a view to an Edition of the original, the
rest of the collation is not yet come to hand. Four contain nearly the
whole of the Commentary, and three more several parts of it: two of
these were partially used by the Benedictine Editors, and supply some
valuable readings in the latter homilies. There is also one <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.i-p11.2"></span>ms.</span> in the Bodleian
Library, which has many mistakes, but agrees in general with the best
readings in those which have been collated. It contains nearly the whole
text as far as Hom. xxx. and has been entirely collated after Hom. xvi
and for a great part of the earlier Homilies.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>The Editors are indebted for the
Translation, and much of the matter contained in the notes, to the
Reverend J.B. Morris, M.A., of Exeter College, as well as for the Index.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>C. Marriot</span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>The Benedictine text having been revised by
Mr. Field with singular acumen by aid of collations of all European
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>mss.</span> of any
account, it was not thought right to republish this important volume
without revising the tranlation by that text. This was kindly undertaken
by the Rev. W. H. Simcox, late Fellow of Queen’s College, and has been
executed with the care and exactness to be expected from that
accomplished scholar. In other respects, he has with a remarkable
modesty left the previous translation untouched.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.i-p15.1"></span>E. B. Pusey</span>

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>1876.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[i:1183](1110062.htm#fr_1182.md) <span
id="vii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span> \[For this a more complete sketch of the
Life and Work of St. Chrysostom has been given by the Editor in the
Prolegomena to the first volume.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](1110063.md)
