[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110083)  [Next](1110085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxiii"></span> <span id="vii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXI.</span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p2"></span>[Rom.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p3"></span>“For as we have many members in one body,
and all members have not the same office; so we, being many, are one
body in Christ, and every one members one of another.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Again</span> he uses the same ensample as he
does to the Corinthians, and that to allay the same passion. For great
is the power of the medicine, and the force of this illustration for the
correcting of this disease of haughtiness. Why (he means) dost thou
think highly of thyself? Or why again does another utterly despise
himself? Are we not all one body, both great and small? When then we are
in the total number but one, and members one of another, why dost thou
by thy haughtiness separate thyself? Why dost thou put thy brother to
shame? For as he is a member of thee, so art thou also of him. And it is
on this score that your claims to honor are so equal. For he has stated
two things that might take down their haughty spirit: one that we are
members one of another, not the small of the great only, but also the
great of the small; and another, that we are all one body. Or rather
there are three points, since he shows that the gift was one of grace.
“Therefore be not high-minded.” For it was given thee of God; thou didst
not take it, nor find it even. Hence too, when he touches upon the
gifts, he does not say that one received more, and another less, but
what? *different.* For his words are, “having then gifts,” not less and
greater, but, “differing.” And what if thou art not appointed to the
same office, still the body is the same. And beginning with gifts, he
ends with a good deed (4 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>mss.</span> pl.); and so after mentioning
prophecy, and ministry, and the like, he concludes with mercy,
diligence, and succor. Since then it was likely that some would be
virtuous, yet not have prophecy, he shows how that this too is a gift,
and a much greater one than the other (as he shows in the Epistle to the
Corinthians), and so much the greater, as that one has a reward, the
other is devoid of a recompense. For the whole is matter of gift and
grace. Wherefore he saith,

<span id="vii.xxiii-p5"></span>[Rom.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>.
“Having then gifts differing according to the grace of God that is given
unto us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion
of faith.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p6"></span>Since then he had sufficiently comforted
them, he wishes also to make them vie with each other, <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) and labor more in earnest, by
showing that it is themselves that give the grounds for their receiving
more or less. For he says indeed that it is given by God (as when he
says, “according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith;”
and again, “according to the grace given unto us”) (<span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.4"></span>[Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxiii-p7.5"></span>),
that he may subdue the haughty. But he says also that the beginnings lie
with themselves, to rouse the listless. And this he does in the Epistle
to the Corinthians also, to produce both these emotions. For when he
saith, “covet earnestly the gifts,” (<span id="vii.xxiii-p7.6"></span>[1
Cor. xii. 31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.7"></span>), he shows that they were themselves the
cause of the differences in what was given. But when he says, “Now all
these things worketh one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will” ([1 Cor.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.8"></span>), he is proving that those who have received
it ought not to be elated, so using every way open to him to allay their
disorder. And this he does here also. And again, to rouse those who have
fallen drowsy, he says, “Whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to
the proportion of faith.” For though it is a grace, yet it is not poured
forth at random, but framing its measure according to the recipients, it
letteth as much flow as it may find the vessel of faith that is brought
to be capable of. <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533)

<span id="vii.xxiii-p9"></span>[Rom.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>.
“Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p10"></span>Here he names a comprehensive thing. For
the Apostleship even is called a ministry, and every spiritual work is a
ministry. This is indeed a name of a peculiar office (viz. the
diaconate); however, it is used in a general sense. “Or he that
teacheth, on teaching.” See with what indifference he places them, the
little first and the great afterwards, again giving us the same lesson,
not to be puffed up or elated.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p11"></span>[Rom.
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>. “Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p12"></span>And this is a species of teaching too.
For “if ye have any word of exhortation,” it says, “speak unto the
people.” ([Acts xiii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>.) Then to show that it is no great good to
follow after virtue unless this is done with the proper rule, he
proceeds, “He that giveth” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p12.2"></span>μεταδιδοὺς</span>, imparteth), “let him do
it with simplicity.” For it is not enough to give, but we must do it
with munificence also, for this constantly answereth to the name of
simplicity. Since even the virgins had oil, still, since they had not
enough, they were cast out from everything. “He that defendeth” (A.V.
ruleth, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p12.3"></span>προἵστάμενος</span>,) “with diligence;” for
it is not enough to do undertake the defence. <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) “He that showeth mercy, with
cheerfulness.” For it is not enough to show mercy, but it behooves us to
do it with a largeness and an ungrudging spirit, or rather not with an
ungrudging, but even with a cheerful and rejoicing one, for not grudging
does not amount to rejoicing. And this same point, when he is writing to
the Corinthians also, he insisted very strongly upon. For to rouse them
to such largeness he said, “He that soweth sparingly shall reap also
sparingly, and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.
([2 Cor. ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.3"></span>.) But to correct their temper he added,
“Not grudgingly or of necessity.” ([2 Cor.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.4"></span>.) For both the shower of mercy ought to
have, both ungrudgingness and pleasure. And why dost thou bemoan thyself
of giving alms? (Aristot. *Eth.* *N*. ii. 3 and iv. 1.) Why dost thou
grieve at showing mercy, and lose the advantage of the good deed? For if
thou grievest thou dost not do mercy, but art cruel and inhuman. For if
thou grievest, how shalt thou be able to raise up him that is in sorrow?
For it is much if he suspects no ill, even, when thou art giving with
joyfulness. For since nothing seems to men such a disgrace as to be
receiving from others, unless by an exceedingly cheerful look thou
removest the suspicion, and showest that thou art receiving rather than
giving, thou wilt even cast down the receiver rather than raise him up.
This is why he says, “He that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.” For who
that is receiving a kingdom, is of sad countenance? Who that is
receiving pardon for his sins continueth of dejected look? Mind not then
the expenditure of the money; but the increase that comes of that
expenditure. For if he that soweth rejoiceth though sowing with
uncertainty of return, much more should he do so that farms the Heaven.
For in this way, even though thou give but little, thou wilt be giving
much; even as how much soever thou givest with a sad countenance, thou
wilt have made thy much a little. Thus the widow outweighed many talents
by the two mites, for her spirit was large. And how is it possible, it
may be said, for one that dwells with poverty in the extreme, and
empties forth his all, to do this with a ready mind? Ask the widow, and
thou wilt hear the way, and wilt know that it is not poverty <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) that makes narrow circumstances,
but the temper of a man that effects both this and its opposite. For it
is possible even in poverty to be munificent (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p14.3"></span>μεγαλόψυχον</span>), and in riches to be
niggardly. Hence in giving he looks for simplicity, and in showing mercy
for cheerfulness, and in patronizing for diligence. For it is not with
money only that he wishes us to render every assistance to those in
want, but both with words, and deeds, and in person, and in every other
way. And after mentioning the chief kind of aiding (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p14.4"></span>προστασίαν</span>), that
which lies in teaching, namely, and that of exhorting (for this is a
more necessary kind, in that it nurtures the soul), he proceeds to that
by way of money, and all other means; then to show how these may be
practised aright, he bringeth in the mother of them, love.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p15"></span>[Rom.
12.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>. For, “Let love be without dissimulation,”
he says,

<span id="vii.xxiii-p16"></span>If thou hast this, thou wilt not
perceive the loss of thy money, the labor of thy person, the toil of thy
words, thy trouble, and thy ministering, but thou wilt bear all
courageously, whether it be with person, or money, or word, or any other
thing whatsover, that thou art to assist thy neighbor. As then he doth
not ask for giving only, but that with simplicity, nor aiding, but that
with diligence, nor alms, but that with cheerfulness; so even love too
he requires not alone, but that without dissimulation. Since this is
what love is. And if a man have this, everything else follows. For he
that showeth mercy does so with cheerfulness (for he is giving to
himself): and he that aideth, aideth with diligence; for it is for
himself he is aiding: and he that imparteth doth this with largeness;
for he is bestowing it on himself. Then since there is a love even for
ill things, such as is that of the intemperate, that of those who are of
one mind for money, and for plunder’s sake, and for revels and drinking
clubs, he clears it of all these, by saying, “Abhor (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>ποστυγοὕντες</span>)
that which is evil.” And he does not speak of refraining from it, but of
hating it, and not merely hating it, but hating it exceedingly. For this
word <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>πὸ</span> is often of
intensive force with him, as where he speaks of “earnest
expectation, <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) looking out
for,” <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538) (complete)
“redemption.” <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) For since many
who do not evil things still have a desire after them, therefore he
says, “Abhor.” For what he wants is to purify the thought, and that we
should have a mighty enmity, hatred and war against vice. For do not
fancy, he means, because I said, “Love one another,” that I mean you to
go so far as to coöperate even in bad actions with one another; for the
law that I am laying down is just the reverse. Since it would have you
an alien not from the action only, but even from the inclination towards
vice; and not merely an alien from this same inclination, but to have an
excessive aversion and hatred of it too. And he is not content with only
this, but he also brings in the practice of virtue. “Cleave to that
which is good.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p21"></span>He does not speak of doing only, but of
being disposed too. For this the command to “cleave to” it indicates. So
God, when He knit the man to the woman, said, “For he shall cleave to
his wife.” (<span id="vii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>[Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxiii-p21.2"></span>.)
Then he mentions reasons why we ought to love one another.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p22"></span>[Rom.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>. “Be kindly affectioned one to another with
brotherly love.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p23"></span>Ye are brethren, he means, and have come
of the same pangs. Hence even on this head you ought to love one
another. And this Moses said to those who were quarrelling in Egypt, “Ye
are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another?” (<span
id="vii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>[Exod. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxiii-p23.2"></span>.)
When then he is speaking of those without, he says, “If it be possible,
as much as in you lieth, live peaceably with all men.” (<span
id="vii.xxiii-p23.3"></span>[Rom. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxiii-p23.4"></span>.)
But when he is speaking of his own, he says, “Be kindly affectioned one
to another with brotherly love.” For in the other case he requires
abstinence from quarrelling, and hatred, and aversion: but here loving
too, and not merely loving, but the loving of relatives. For not only
must one’s “love be without dissimulation,” but intense also, and warm,
and glowing. Because, to what purpose would you love without fraud, and
not love with warmth? Whence he says, “kindly affectioned one towards
another, that is, be friends, and warm ones too. Do not wait to be loved
by another, but leap at it thyself, and be the first to begin it. For so
wilt thou reap the wages of his love also. Having mentioned the reason
then why we ought to love one another, he tells us also the way in which
the affection may grow unchangeable. Whence he proceeds, “In honor
preferring one another.” For this is the way that affection is produced,
and also when produced abideth. And there is nothing which makes friends
so much, as the earnest endeavor to overcome one’s neighbor in honoring
him. <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) For what he had
mentioned before comes of love, and love of honor, as honor does too of
love. Then that we may not honor only, he looks for something besides,
when he says,

<span id="vii.xxiii-p25"></span>[Rom.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>. “Not backward in zeal.” <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)

<span id="vii.xxiii-p27"></span>For this also gendereth love when with
honor we also show a readiness to protect: as there is nothing that
makes men beloved so much as honor and forethought. For to love is not
enough, but there must be this also: or rather this also comes of
loving, as also loving has its warmth from this, and they are
confirmative one of another. For there are many that love in mind, yet
reach not forth the hand. And this is why he uses every means to build
up love. And how are we to become “not backward in zeal?”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p28"></span>“Fervent in spirit.” See how in every
instance he aims after higher degrees; for he does not say “give” only,
but “with largeness;” nor “rule,” but do it “with diligence;” nor “show
mercy,” but do it “with cheerfulness;” nor “honor,” but “prefer one
another;” nor “love,” but do it “without dissimulation;” nor refrain
from “evil” things, but “hate” them; nor hold to “what is good,” but
“cleave” to it; nor “love,” but to do it “with brotherly affection;” nor
be zealous, but be so without backwardness; nor have the “Spirit,” but
have it “fervent,” that is, that ye may be warm and awakened. For if
thou hast those things aforesaid, thou wilt draw the Spirit to thee. And
if This abide with thee, It will likewise make thee good for those
purposes, and all things will be easy from the Spirit and the love,
while thou art made to glow from both sides. Dost thou not see the bulls
(Hannibal. ap. Liv. xxii. 16) that carry a flame upon their back, how
nobody is able to withstand them? So thou also wilt be more than the
devil can sustain, if thou takest both these flames. “Serving the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) For it is possible to
serve God in all these ways; in that whatever thou doest to thy brother
passes on to thy Master, and as having been Himself benefited, He will
reckon thy reward accordingly. See to what height he has raised the
spirit of the man that worketh these things! Then to show how the flame
of the Spirit might be kindled, he says,

<span id="vii.xxiii-p30"></span>[Rom.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>. “Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation, continuing instant in prayer.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p31"></span>For all these things are fuel for that
fire. For when he had required the expenditure of money and the labor of
the person, and ruling, and zeal, and teaching, and other laborious
occupations, he again supplies the wrestler with love, with the Spirit,
through hope. For there is nothing which makes the soul so courageous
and venturesome for anything as a good hope. Then even before the good
things hoped for, he gives another reward again. For since hope is of
things to come, he says, “patient in tribulation.” And before the things
to come, in this life present thou wilt gain a great good (see on [Rom.
v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>, p. 397) from tribulation, that of becoming
hardy and tried. And after this he affords them another help, when he
says, “continuing instant in prayer.” When therefore love maketh things
easy, and the Spirit assisteth, and hope lighteneth, and tribulation
maketh thee tried and apt for bearing everything nobly, and thou hast
along with these another very great weapon, to wit, “prayer” and the
aidances that come of prayer, what further grievousness can there be in
what he is enjoining? Surely none. You see how in every way he gives the
wrestler firm footing and shows that the injunctions are perfectly easy.
Consider again how he vindicates almsgiving, or rather not almsgiving
absolutely, but that to the saints. For above when he says, “he that
showeth mercy with cheerfulness,” he makes us open-handed to everybody.
Here, however, it is in behalf of the faithful that he is speaking. And
so he proceeds to say,

<span id="vii.xxiii-p32"></span>[Rom.
12.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p32.1"></span>. “Sharing with the necessity (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p32.2"></span>χρείαις</span>, al.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p32.3"></span>μνείαις</span>,
memories) of the saints.”

<span id="vii.xxiii-p33"></span>He does not say, Bestow upon, but “share
with the necessity <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) of the
saints,” to show that they receive more than they give, that it is a
matter of merchandise, because it is a community. Do you bring in money?
They bring you in boldness toward God. “Given to (Gr. pursuing)
hospitality.” He does not say doing it, but “given” to it, so to
instruct us not to wait for those that shall ask it, and see when they
will come to us, but to run to them, and be given to finding <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) them.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p36"></span>Thus did Lot, thus Abraham. For he spent
the whole day upon it, waiting for this goodly prey, and when he saw it,
leaped upon it, and ran to meet them, and worshipped upon the ground,
and said, “My Lord, if now I have found favor in Thy sight, pass not
away from Thy servant.” ([Gen. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxiii-p36.1"></span>.)
Not as we do, if we happen to see a stranger or a poor man, knitting our
brows, and not deigning even to speak to them. And if after thousands of
entreaties we are softened, and bid the servant give them a trifle, we
think we have quite done our duty. But he did not so, but assumed the
fashion of a suppliant and a servant, though he did not know who he was
going to take under his roof. But we, who have clear information that it
is Christ Whom we take in, do not grow gentle even for this. But he both
beseeches, and entreats, and falls on his knees to them, yet we insult
those that come to us. And he indeed did all by himself and his wife,
whereas we do it not even by our attendants. But if you have a mind to
see the table that he set before them, there too you will see great
bounteousness, but the bounteousness came not from excess of wealth, but
of the riches of a ready will. Yet how many rich persons were there not
then? Still none did anything of the kind. How many widows were there in
Israel? Yet none showed hospitality to Elijah. How many wealthy persons
again were there not in Elisha’s day? But the Shunamite alone gathered
in the fruits of hospitality; as did Abraham also, <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) whom beside his largeness and ready
mind it is just especially to admire, on this ground, that when he had
no knowledge who they were that had come, yet he so acted. Do not thou
then be curious either: since for Christ thou dost receive him. And if
thou art always so scrupulous, many a time wilt thou pass by a man of
esteem, and lose thy reward from him. And yet he that receiveth one that
is not of esteem, hath no fault found with him, but is even rewarded.
For “he that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive
a prophet’s reward.” ([Matt. x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041)<span id="vii.xxiii-p37.2"></span>.)
But he who out of this ill-timed scrupulousness passeth one that should
be admired, shall even suffer punishment. Do not then busy thyself with
men’s lives and doings. For this is the very extreme of niggardliness,
for one loaf to be exact about a man’s entire life. For if this person
be a murderer, if a robber, or what not, does he therefore seem to thee
not to deserve a loaf and a few pence? And yet thy Master causeth even
the sun to rise upon him! And dost thou judge him unworthy of food even
for a day? I will put another case to you besides. Now even if you were
positively certain that he were laden with countless iniquities, not
even then wouldest thou have an excuse for depriving him of this day’s
sustenance. For thou art the servant of Him Who said, “Ye know not what
spirit ye are of.” ([Luke ix. 55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p37.3"></span>.) Thou art servant to Him Who healed those
that stoned Him, or rather Who was crucified for them. And do not tell
me that he killed another, for even if he were going to kill thee
thyself, even then thou shouldest not neglect him when starving. For
thou art a disciple of Him Who desired the salvation even of them that
crucified Him Who said upon the Cross itself, “Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do.” (<span id="vii.xxiii-p37.4"></span>[Luke
xxiii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p37.5"></span>.) Thou art the servant of Him Who healed
him that smote Him, Who upon the Cross itself crowned the man who had
scorned Him. And what can equal this? For both the robbers at first
scorned Him. Still to one of these He opened Paradise. <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) And He bewails those who were upon
the point of killing Him, and is troubled and confounded at seeing the
traitor, not because He was going to be crucified, but because he was
lost. He was troubled then as having foreknowledge of the hanging, and
the punishment after the hanging. And though He knelt his wickedness, He
bore with him <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) to the last
hour, and thrust not away the traitor, but even kissed him. Thy Master
kisseth, and with His lips receiveth him who was on the very point of
shedding His precious Blood. And dost thou count the poor not worthy
even of a loaf, and reverencest not the Law which Christ laid down? Now
by this He shows that we ought not to turn aside, not only from the
poor, but not even from those that would lead us away to death. Do not
tell me then, that so and so hath done me grievous mischief, but just
consider what Christ did near the Cross itself, wishing to amend by His
kiss the traitor by whom He was on the point of being betrayed. And see
with how much power to shame him. For He says, “Judas, betrayest thou
the Son of Man with a kiss?” ([Luke
23.48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.1"></span>.) Who is there He would not have softened?
who is there that this address would not have made yielding? What beast?
what adamant? yet not that wretched man. Do not then say, that such an
one murdered such an one, and that is why I turn aside from him. For
even if he were upon the point of thrusting a sword down into thee, and
to plunge his hand into thy neck itself, kiss this very right hand!
since even Christ kissed that mouth which wrought His death! And
therefore do not thou either hate, but bewail and pity him that plotteth
against thee. For such an one deserveth pity at our hands, and tears.
For we are the servants of Him Who kissed even the traitor (I will not
leave off dwelling over that continually), and spoke words unto him more
gentle than the kiss. For He did not even say, O thou foul and villanous
traitor, is this the sort of recompense thou returnest us for so great a
benefit? But in what words? “Judas;” using his own name, which is more
like a person bemoaning, and recalling him, than one wroth at him. And
he does not say, thy Teacher, thy Master, and Benefactor, but, “the Son
of Man.” For though He were neither Teacher nor Master, yet is it with
One Who is so gently, so unfeignedly affected towards thee, as even to
kiss thee at the time of betrayal, and that when a kiss too was the
signal for the betrayal; is it with Him that thou playest the traitor’s
part? Blessed art Thou, O Lord! What lowliness of mind, what forbearance
hast Thou given us ensamples of! And to him He so behaved. But to those
who came with staves and swords to Him, was it not so too? What can be
more gentle than the words spoken to them? For when He had power to
demolish them all in an instant, He did nothing of the kind, but as
expostulating (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.3"></span>ντρεπτικὥς</span>), addressed them in the
words, “Why, are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves?”
([Matt. xxvi. 55](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#055)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.4"></span>.) And having cast them down backwards
([John xviii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.5"></span>), as they continued insensible, He of His
own accord gave Himself up next, and forbore while He saw them putting
manacles upon His holy hands, while He had the power at once to confound
all things, and overthrow them. But dost thou even after this deal
fiercely with the poor? And even were he guilty of ten thousand sins,
want and famine were enough to soften down a soul ever so blunted. But
thou standest brutalized, and imitating the rage of lions. Yet they
never taste of dead bodies. But thou, while thou seest him a very corpse
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.6"></span>τεταριχευμένον</span> lit. salter, or, a
mummy) for distresses, yet leapest upon him now that he is down, and
tearest his body by thine insults, and gatherest storm after storm, and
makest him as he is fleeing to the haven for refuge to split upon a
rock, and bringest a shipwreck about more distressing than those in the
sea. And how wilt thou say to God, Have mercy upon me, and ask of Him
remission of sins, when thou art insolent to one who hath done no sin,
and callest him to account for this hunger and great necessity, and
throwest all the brute beasts into the shade by thy cruelty. For they
indeed by the compulsion of their belly lay hold of the food needful for
them. But thou, when nothing either thrusts thee on or compels thee,
devourest thy brother, bitest, and tearest him, if not with thy teeth,
yet with words that bite more cuttingly. How then wilt thou receive the
sacred Host (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p39.7"></span>προσφορὰν</span>), when thou hast empurpled
thy tongue in human gore? how give the kiss of peace, with mouth gorged
with war? Nay, how enjoy every common nourishment, when thou art
gathering so much venom? Thou dost not relieve the poverty, why make it
even more grinding? thou dost not lift up him that is fallen, why throw
him down also? thou dost not remove despondency, why even increase it?
thou givest no money, why use insulting words besides? Hast thou not
heard what punishment they suffer that feed not the poor? to what
vengeance they are condemned? For He says, “Depart to the fire prepared
for the devil and his angels.” ([Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="vii.xxiii-p39.8"></span>.)
If then they that feed not are so condemned, what punishment are they to
suffer, who besides not feeding, even insult? What punishment shall they
undergo? what hell? That we kindle not so great evils against ourselves,
whiles we have it in our power, let us correct this evil complaint also,
and put a bridle on the tongue. And let us be so far from insulting, as
even to invite them, both by words and actions, that by laying up much
mercy for ourselves, we may obtain the blessings promised us. Which God
grant that we may all attain unto by the grace and love towards man,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[i:1533](1110084.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p7"></span> Or feel they need an effort <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>ναγωνίους</span>. See on
[Rom. xi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.3"></span> p. 349.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[i:1534](1110084.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.9"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p8"></span> Prophecy is to be κατὰ τὴν αναλογίαν τῆς
πίστεως ([Rom. 12.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>). In the view of some (as Meyer) the man’s
own faith is meant. He should not exceed in his speaking the limits of
his faith. Others (as Philippi) take “faith” in the objective sense as a
body of doctrine and find the idea here which was later associated with
the expression *analogia fidei*: the word πίστις will not bear this
meaning and the individual’s own faith seems too narrow a criterion of
prophecy. It seems better to understand the expression as meaning that
the prophet is to regulate his utterance by the character and contents
of the faith of the church; that he should in his prophetic utterances
keep to the line of the Church’s trust and hope and not feel at liberty
to add new or heterogeneous elements. The terms διακονία ([Rom.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>)
and διδάσκων seem to refer to the two offices of the church deacons and
presbyters, although others hold the view (of Chrys.) that the words are
merely general.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[i:1535](1110084.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p13"></span> Near the end of Hom. 19, we have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>κἂν ἀδικουμένῳ περιτύχῃ
προστήσεται</span>, which proves that he takes the word in the sense
here given. “Unless,” added by Ben. and 2 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>mss.</span> “he do it with diligence and
zeal.”

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[i:1536](1110084.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>πενία</span> here seems distinguished from
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p14.2"></span>πτωχεία</span>, as
in the Plutus.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[i:1537](1110084.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p17"></span> Viz. in composition.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[i:1538](1110084.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p18.2"></span>ποκαραδοκία</span>, <span
id="vii.xxiii-p18.3"></span>[Rom. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxiii-p18.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[i:1539](1110084.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>πεκδεχόμενοι</span>, <span
id="vii.xxiii-p19.3"></span>[Rom. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxiii-p19.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[i:1540](1110084.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p19.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p20.2"></span>πολύτρωσις</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p20.3"></span>,</span> [Rom. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxiii-p20.4"></span>,
see *ad loc.* Hom. xiv. p. 445.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[i:1541](1110084.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p24"></span> Chrys. evidently takes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>προηγουμενοι</span>
([Rom. 12.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>) in the sense of *excelling;* others
understand the word temporally and render *anticipating.* The word
(*hapaxl.*) is better taken as in our vss. *preferring*, i.e. “going
before, as guides, namely, with the conduct which incites others to
follow,” (Meyer).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[i:1542](1110084.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p26"></span> A.V. not slothful in business; R.V. In
diligence not slothful.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[i:1543](1110084.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p29"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>mss.</span> and vss. vary between <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>τῷ κυρί& 251·</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p29.3"></span>τῷ καιρῷ</span>
([Rom. 12.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p29.4"></span>). The latter text gives the idea of serving
the time or adapting one’s self to the opportunity and is adopted by
many (as Meyer, Godet) on the ground that the precept: *serving the
Lord* is too general to be in point here among these specific
exhortations. The <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p29.5"></span>mss.</span> evidence for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiii-p29.6"></span>τῷ κυρί& 251·</span>,
however is too strong to be overthrown by a consideration so subjective
(<span class="Hebrew"><span id="vii.xxiii-p29.7"></span>א</span>, B, A,
E, L, P, It. Syr. vs. D. F. G.).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[i:1544](1110084.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p34"></span> St. Chrysostom (on [2 Tim. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxiii-p34.1"></span>,
p. 189 O.T.) adopts and argues on the reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p34.2"></span>μνείαις</span>, for which there is some
authority. See *Brit. Crit.* No. LI. pp. 80, 81.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[i:1545](1110084.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p35.1"></span>καταδιώκειν</span>. lit. hunt them down.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[i:1546](1110084.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p37"></span> So Field: the passage is corrupt in the
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xxiii-p37.1"></span>mss.</span> Vulg.
“As did Abraham also then with largeness and ready mind. And on this
ground he deserves one’s admiration most, that when,” etc.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[i:1547](1110084.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p37.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p38"></span> Some <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiii-p38.1"></span>mss.</span> add, “first of all men.”

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[i:1548](1110084.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p39"></span> Or “dealt kindly with him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXII on Rom. xii. 14.](1110085)
