[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110064)  [Next](1110066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv"></span> <span id="vii.iv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>[Rom. I.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>“First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ
for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.”

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>An</span> exordium worthy of this blessed
spirit, and able to teach all men to offer unto God the firstlings of
their good deeds and words, and to render thanks not only for their own,
but also for others’ well-doings: which also maketh the soul pure from
envy and grudging, and draweth God in a greater measure towards the
loving spirit of them that so render thanks. Wherefore also elsewhere he
says, “Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who hath
blessed us with all spiritual blessing.” ([Eph. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span id="vii.iv-p4.2"></span>.) And
it is fitting that we render thanks not only when rich, but also when
poor, not when in health only, but also when sick, not when we thrive
only, but also when we have to bear the reverse. For when our affairs
are borne onward with a fair wind, to be thankful is not matter of
wonder. But when no small tempests be upon us, and the vessel veers
about and is in jeopardy, then is the great time for displaying patience
and goodness of heart. For this cause Job also gained a crown from
hence, and the shameless mouth of the devil did he stop, and show
clearly that not even when he saw good days was it through his wealth
that he was thankful, but through his much love toward God. And see too
what things he is thankful for: not for things earthly and perishing, as
power and authority and glory (for these things are of no account), but
for real blessings, faith and boldness of speech. And with how much
feeling <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) he gives thanks: for
he saith not “to God,” but “to my God,” which also the Prophets do, so
making that which is common to all their own. And what is there
wonderful in the Prophets doing so? For God himself plainly does it
continually to His servants, calling Himself the God of Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, as peculiarly theirs. “That your faith is spoken of
throughout the whole world.” What then, had the whole world heard of the
faith of the Romans? Yes, the whole, according to him. (Or, since that
time, <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p5.2"></span>πἅσα ἐξ
ἐκείνου</span>). And it is not a thing unlikely. For the city was not
one of no note, but as being upon a sort of eminence it was on every
account conspicuous. But consider, I pray, the power of the preaching,
how in a short time by means of publicans and fishermen it took hold
upon the very head of all cities, and Syrians became the teachers and
guides of Romans. He attests then two excellencies in them, both that
they believed, and that they believed with boldness, and that so great
as that the fame of them reached into all the world. “For your faith,”
he says “is spoken of throughout the whole world. Your faith,” not your
verbal disputations, nor your questionings, nor your syllogisms. And yet
there were there many hindrances to the teaching. For having recently
acquired the empire of the world they were elated, and lived in riches
and luxury, and fishermen brought the preaching there, and they Jews and
of the Jews, a nation hated and had in abomination among all men; and
they were bidden to worship the Crucified, Who was brought up in Judea.
And with the doctrine the teachers proclaimed also an austere life to
men who were practised in softness, and were agitated about things
present. And they that proclaimed it were poor and common men, of no
family, and born of men of no family. But none of these things hindered
the course of the word. So great was the power of the Crucified as to
carry the word round everywhere. “For it is spoken of,” he says, “in all
the world.” He says not, it is manifested, but, is spoken of, as if all
men had them in their mouths. And indeed when he bears witness of this
in the Thessalonians, he adds another thing also. For after saying,
“from you sounded out the word of God,” he adds, “so that we need not to
speak anything.” (<span id="vii.iv-p5.3"></span>[1 Thess. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008)<span id="vii.iv-p5.4"></span>.) For
the disciples had come into the place of teachers, by their boldness of
speech instructing all, and drawing them to themselves. For the
preaching came not anywhere to a stand, but went over the whole world
more rapidly than fire. But here there is only thus much—“it is spoken
of.” He well says that “it is spoken of,” showing that there was no need
to add aught to what was said, or to take away. For a messenger’s
business is this, to convey from one to another only what is told him.
For which cause also the priest is called a “messenger” (<span
id="vii.iv-p5.5"></span>[Mal. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="vii.iv-p5.6"></span>),
because he speaks not his own words, but those of Him that sent him. And
yet Peter had preached there. But he reckons what was his, to be his own
as well. In such degree, as I said before, was he beyond measure clear
of all grudging!

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>[Rom.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)<span id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>.
“For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of His
Son.”

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>Words these of an Apostle’s bowels of
affection, the showing forth this of fatherly concernment! <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) And what is it which he says, and
why does he call God to witness? He had to declare his feeling toward
them. Since then he had not as yet ever seen them, he therefore called
no man to witness, but Him Who entereth in the hearts. For since he was
saying, “I love you,” and as a token thereof alleged his praying
continually for them, and wishing to come to them, and neither was this
self-evident, he betakes himself to the trustworthy testimony. Will then
any one of you be able to boast that he remembers, when praying at his
house (<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p8.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p8.5"></span>πὶ τἥς οἰκίας</span>) the
entire body of the Church? I think not. But Paul drew near to God in
behalf not of one city only, but of the whole world, and this not once,
or twice, or thrice, but continually. But if the continually bearing any
one about in one’s memory would not happen without much love; to have
any in one’s prayers, and to have them there continually, think what
great affection and friendship that implies. But when he says, “Whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of His Son,” he shows us at once the
grace of God, and also his own humble-mindedness; the grace of God
because He entrusted to him so great a matter; but his own humility,
because he imputes it all not to his own zeal, but to the assistance of
the Spirit. But the addition of “the Gospel,” shows the kind of
ministry. For there are many and diverse modes of service. And as under
kings all are ranged under one that beareth kingly power, and all have
not to minister (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.6"></span>διακονοὕνται</span>) about the same thing, but
to one belongeth the ministry of ruling armies and to another that of
ordering cities and to another again that of keeping treasures in the
storehouses, thus also in spiritual things, one serveth God and laboreth
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p8.7"></span>λατρεύει
καὶδουλεύει</span>) in believing and ordering his own life well, and
another in undertaking the care of strangers, and another in taking in
hand the patronship of them that be in need. As even during the
Apostle’s own time, they of Stephen’s company served God in the
guardianship of the widows, others (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.8"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.9"></span>λλοι</span>2 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.10"></span>mss.</span>, all <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.11"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.12"></span>ν</span>) in the teaching of the word, of whom
also Paul was serving in the preaching of the Gospel. And this was the
fashion of his service: for it was to this that he was appointed. On
this account, he not only calls God to witness, but also says what he
was entrusted with, to show that having so great things put into his
hands, he would not have called Him Who trusted them to him to witness
what was false. And therewith he wished to make another point out also,
viz. that he could not but have this love and care for them. For that
they might not say “who art thou? and, from whence? that thou sayest
that thou art anxious over a city so great, and most imperial,” he shows
that he must needs have this care, <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199) if at least the sort of service
that was committed to him, was to declare the Gospel: for he that hath
this put into his hands, must needs have continually upon his mind them
that are to receive the word. And he shows another thing besides this by
saying, “in my spirit;” that this service is much higher than either the
Gentile or the Jewish. For the Gentile is both fleshly and in error, and
the Jewish is true indeed, yet even this is fleshly. But that of the
Church is the opposite of the Gentile, but more lofty than the Jewish by
a great deal. For the mode of our service is not with sheep and oxen and
smoke and fat, but by a spiritual soul, which Christ also shows in
saying that “God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him
in spirit and in truth.” (<span id="vii.iv-p9.2"></span>[John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="vii.iv-p9.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span>“In the Gospel of His Son.” Having said
above that it was the Father’s Gospel, here he says it is the Son’s. So
indifferent is it to say the Father’s or the Son’s! For he had learnt
from that blessed voice that the things of the Father are the Son’s, and
the things of the Son are the Father’s. For “all Mine are Thine, and
Thine are Mine.” ([John xvii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="vii.iv-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>“That without ceasing I make mention of you
always in my prayers.” This is the part of genuine love, and he seems
indeed to be saying some one thing, yet states four things even here.
Both that he remembers, and that he does so continually, and that it is
in his prayers, and that it is to ask great things for them.

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span>[Rom.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vii.iv-p12.1"></span>.
“Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous
journey by the will of God to come unto you.”

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>You see him painfully desiring to see them,
and yet not enduring to see them contrary to what seemed good unto God,
but having his longing mingled with the fear of God. For he loved them,
and was eager to come to them. Yet he did not, because he loved them,
desire to see them, contrary to what seemed good unto God. This is true
love, not as we love who err on both sides from the laws of love: for
either we love no one, or if we ever do love, we love contrary to what
seemeth good unto God, acting in both against the Divine law. And if
these things be grievous (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p13.1"></span>φορτικὰ</span>) when spoken of, they are more
grievous when done. And how do we love contrary to what seems good to
God? (you will say.) When we neglect Christ pining with hunger, and
provide our children and friends and relations above their needs. Or
rather what need to carry the subject further. For if any one will
examine his own conscience, he will find that this takes place in many
things. But such was not that blessed person, but he knew both how to
love and to love as he ought (3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iv-p13.2"></span>mss.</span> omit “as he ought”), and as was
fitting, and though exceeding all men in loving, he transgressed not the
measures of love. See then two things thrive extremely in him, fear of
God, and also longing towards the Romans. For to be praying continually,
and not to desist when he obtained not, shows exceeding love. But while
loving, thus to continue yielding to the will of God, shows intense
reverence. In another place, however, having “thrice besought the Lord”
([2 Cor. xii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008)<span
id="vii.iv-p13.3"></span>), he not only did not receive, but on the
contrary, when he did not receive, he was very thankful for not having
been heard. So, in all things did he look to God. But here he received,
though not when he asked, but after delay, and neither hereat was he
discontented. And these things I mention that we may not repine at not
being heard, or at being heard slowly. For we are not better than Paul,
who confesses his thankfulness for both, and with good ground. For when
he had once given himself up to the all-governing Hand, and put himself
with as much subjection under it, as clay under the potter, he followed
wheresoever God led. Having then said that he desired to see them, he
mentioned also the cause of his desire; and what is it?

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span>[Rom.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vii.iv-p14.1"></span>.
“That I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be
established.”

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>For it was not merely as many now go
travelling in a needless and profitless way that he also went, but for
necessary and very urgent ends. And he does not tell them his meaning
openly, but by way of hints, for he does not say that I may teach you,
that I may instruct you, that I may fill up that which is wanting; but,
“that I may impart;” showing, that it is not his own things which he is
giving them, but that he was imparting to them what he had received. And
here again he is unassuming, in saying “some,” he means, a small one,
and suited to my powers. And what may this small one be which thou art
now going to impart? This it is, he says, “to the end that ye may be
established.” This then also cometh of grace, namely, the being
unwavering and standing fast. But when you hear of grace, think not that
the reward of resolve on our part is thereby cast aside; for he speaks
of grace, not to disparage the labor of resolve on our part, but to
undermine (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p15.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p15.2"></span>ποτεμνόμενος</span>, as piercing a thing
inflated) the haughtiness of an insolent spirit (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p15.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p15.4"></span>πονοίας</span>). Do not
thou then, because that Paul hath called this a gift of grace, grow
supine. For he knows how, in his great candor, to call even well doings,
graces; because even in these we need much influence from above. But in
saying, “to the end that ye may be established,” he covertly shows that
they needed much correction: for what he would say is this: Of a “long
time I have both desired” and prayed to see you, for no other reason
than that I may “stablish, strengthen, fix” you thoroughly in the word
of God, so that ye be not continually wavering. But he does not express
himself so (for he would have shocked them), but in another way he hints
to them the same thing, though in a subdued tone. For when he says, “to
the end that ye may be established,” he makes this plain. Then since
this also was very irksome, see how he softens it by the sequel. For
that they may not say, are we wavering, and carried about? and need we
speech of yours in order to stand fast? he anticipates and does away any
gainsaying of the kind, by saying as follows.

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span>[Rom.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)<span id="vii.iv-p16.1"></span>.
“That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith
both of you and me.”

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span>As if he said, Do not suspect that I spoke
to accuse you. It was not with this feeling that I said what I did. But
what may it be that I wished to say? Ye are undergoing many
tribulations, being drenched on every side (by those who persecute you
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p17.1"></span>περιαντλούμενοι</span>. 3 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.iv-p17.2"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p17.3"></span>παρενοχλούμενοι</span>,
harassed). I desired then to see you, that I might comfort you, or
rather, not that I might comfort you only, but that I might myself
receive comfort. See the wisdom of the teacher. He said, to the end that
“ye may be strengthened;” he knew that what he had said would be heavy
and irksome to the disciples. He says, “to the end that ye may be
comforted.” But this again is heavy, not indeed to such a degree as the
former, still it is heavy. He then pares down what is galling in this
also, smoothing his speech on every side, and rendering it easy of
acceptance. For he does not say barely, “to be comforted,” but, “to be
comforted together with you;” nor was he content with this but he puts
in a further lenitive, when he says, “by the mutual faith both of you
and me.” <span id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) Oh how great was his
humble-mindedness! He showed himself also to be in need of them, and not
them only of him. And he puts the disciples in the position of teachers,
not letting any superiority remain upon his own side, but pointing out
their full equality. For the gain is mutual, he means, and I need the
comfort from you, and you that from me. And how comes this to pass?
“Through the mutual faith both of you and me.” For as in the case of
fire, if any one gather together many lights, it is a bright flame that
he kindles, thus also does it naturally happen with the faithful. For
when we be by ourselves, torn away from others, we are somehow in worse
spirits. But when we see one another, and are entwined <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) with the members of our own selves,
great is the comfort we receive. You must not look to the present time,
during which, by God’s grace, both in city and in the desert itself,
there be many hosts of believers, and all impiety hath been driven out;
but consider, in that time, how great a good it was both for disciples
to see their master, and for brethren who had come from another city to
be seen of brethren. But that I may make what I am saying plainer, let
me bring the matter to an example. For if it should even happen and come
to pass (may it never do so!) that we had been carried away to the land
of the Persians or Scythians or other barbarians, and had been scattered
(7 <span class="c14"><span id="vii.iv-p19.2"></span>mss.</span> “torn
asunder”) by twos and threes in their cities, and were then suddenly to
see any one of those here coming to us, reflect what a harvest of
comfort we should reap of it! See ye not those too who are in the
prisons, it they see any of their acquaintance, how they revive, and are
quite fluttering with the pleasure? But if I compare those days with
captivity and imprisonment, count it no wonder. For these suffered far
harder things than those, scattered as they were, and driven about, and
dwelling in the midst of famine and of wars, and tremblingly expecting
daily death, and suspecting friends and kindred and relatives, and
dwelling in the world as in a strange land, aye, and in far harder
plight than they who live in another’s country. This is why he says, “to
the end that ye may be established and comforted with us by our mutual
faith.” And this he says, not as though himself needed any assistance
from them (far from it; for how should the pillar of the Church, who was
stronger than iron and the rock, the spiritual adamant, who was equal to
the charge of countless cities), but that he should not make his
language impetuous and his reproof vehement, he says, that he himself
also needs their consolation. But if any one here should say, that the
comfort was his gladness at the increase of their faith, and that Paul
needed this, he would not be mistaking his meaning in this way either.
If then thou desire, one might say, and pray, and wilt gain comfort and
give comfort by it, what is there to hinder thy coming? By way of
dissipating this suspicion then, he proceeds.

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span>[Rom.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)<span id="vii.iv-p20.1"></span>.
“Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I desired
to come unto you (but was let hitherto).”

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span>Here is a compliance great as that of
slaves, and a plain exhibition of his excellent temper (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p21.1"></span>εὐγνωμοσύνης</span>)! For,
that he was let, he says, but why, he does not go on to say. For he does
not pry into the command of his Master, but only obeys. And yet one
might expect a person to start questions, as to why God hindered a city
so conspicuous and great, and towards which the whole world was looking,
from enjoying such a teacher, and that for so long a time. For he that
had overcome the governing city, could easily go on to the subjects of
it. But he that let alone the more royal one, and lay in wait about the
dependents, had the main point left neglected. But none of these things
does he busy himself with, but yields to the incomprehensibleness of
Providence, thereby both showing the right tone of his soul, and
instructing us all never to call God to account for what happens, even
though what is done seem to trouble the minds of many. For the Master’s
part it is alone to enjoin, the servants’ to obey. And this is why he
says, that he was let, but not for what cause; for he means, even I do
not know; ask not then of me the counsel or mind of God. For neither
“shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me
thus?” For why, tell me, do you even seek to learn it? do you not know
that all things are under His care, that He is wise, that He doeth
nothing at a mere hazard, that He loveth thee more than they who begat
thee, and goes exceeding far beyond a father’s yearnings of affection to
thee, and a mother’s anxiousness. Seek then no more, and go not a step
further; for this is sufficient consolation for thee: since even then it
was well ordered for the Romans. And if thou knowest not the manner,
take it not to heart: for this is a main feature of faith, even when in
ignorance of the manner of the dispensation, to receive what is told us
of His Providence.

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span>Paul then having succeeded in what he was
earnest about (and what was this? to show that it was not as slighting
them that he did not come to them, but because, though greatly desiring
it, he was hindered), and having divested himself of the accusation of
remissness, and having persuaded them that he was not less desirous to
see them than themselves, further shows his love to them by other
things. For even when I was hindered he means, I did not stand aloof
from the attempt, but I kept attempting always yet was always hindered,
yet never did I stand aloof thus, without falling out with the will of
God, still keeping my love. For by his purposing it to himself and not
standing aloof from it, he showed his affection; but through his being
hindered and yet not struggling against it, all his love to God. “That I
might have some fruit among you also.” Yet he had told them the cause of
his longing before, and shown that it was becoming him; but still here
also, he states it, clearing away all their suspicion. For since the
city was conspicuous, and in the whole extent of sea and land had no
equal to many even the mere desire of becoming acquainted with it became
a reason (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>πρόφασις</span>) for a journey to it; that they
might not think anything of the sort about Paul, or suspect that, merely
with a view to glory in claiming them to himself he desired to be
present there, he repeatedly lays down the ground of his desire, and
before he says, it was that “I may impart to you some spiritual gift,”
that I desired to see you; but here more clearly, “that I might have
some fruit among you also even as among other Gentiles.” The rulers he
puts with the subjects, and after the countless triumphs and victories
and the glory of the consuls, he puts them with the barbarians, and with
good reason too. For where the nobility of faith is, there is none
barbarian, none Grecian, none stranger, none citizen, but all mount up
to one height of dignity. And see him here also unassuming, for he does
not say, that I may teach and instruct, but what? “that I might have
some fruit.” And not fruit, simply, but “some fruit.” Again,
depreciating his own share therein just as he had said above, “that I
may impart some gift.” And then to repress them too, as I said also
before, he says, “even as among other Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) For, I do not, because you are
rich, and have the advantage of others, show less concern about the
others. For it is not the rich that we are seeking, but the faithful.
Where now are the wise of the Greeks, they that wear long beards and
that are clad in open dress, <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203)
and puff forth great words (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p24.3"></span>τὰ μεγάλα φυσὥντες</span>)? All Greece and all
barbarian lands has the tentmaker converted. But Plato, who is so cried
up and carried about <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) among
them, coming a third time to Sicily with the bombast of those words of
his, with his brilliant reputation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p25.5"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p25.6"></span>πσλήψεως</span>), did not even get the better
of a single king, but came off so wretchedly, as even to have lost his
liberty. But this tentmaker ran over not Sicily alone or Italy, but the
whole world; and while preaching too he desisted not from his art, but
even then sewed skins, and superintended the workshop. And even this did
not give offence to those who were born of consuls, and with very good
reason, for it is not their trades and occupations, but falsehood and
forged doctrines, which usually render teachers easy subjects of
contempt. And for this reason, even Athenians still laugh at the former.
But this man even barbarians attend to, and even foolish and ignorant
men. For his preaching is set forth to all alike, it knows no
distinction of rank, no preëminence of nation, no other thing of the
sort; for faith alone does it require, and not reasonings. Wherefore it
is most worthy of admiration, not only because it is profitable and
saving, but that it is readily admissible and easy (Sav. “lovable”), and
comprehensible to all: which is a main object in the Providence of God,
who setteth forth His blessings to all in common.

<span id="vii.iv-p26"></span>For what He did in respect of the sun and
the moon and the earth and the sea and other things, not giving the rich
and the wise a greater share of the benefits of these, and a less to the
poor, but setting forth the enjoyment of them to all alike, this also
did He with regard to the preaching, and even in a much greater degree,
by how much this is more indispensable than they. Wherefore Paul
repeatedly says, “among all the Gentiles,” to show that he in no respect
favors them, but is fulfilling his Master’s command, and sending them
away to thanksgiving to the God of all, he says;

<span id="vii.iv-p27"></span>[Rom.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)<span id="vii.iv-p27.1"></span>.
“I am a debtor to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both to the wise and
to the unwise.”

<span id="vii.iv-p28"></span>Which also he said when writing to the
Corinthians. And he says it, to ascribe the whole to God. (<span
id="vii.iv-p28.1"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iv-p29"></span>[Rom.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015)<span id="vii.iv-p29.1"></span>.
“So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that
are at Rome also.”

<span id="vii.iv-p30"></span>Oh, noble soul! having taken on him a task
laden of so great dangers, a voyage across the sea, temptations,
plottings, risings—for it was likely, that one who was going to address
so great a city which was under the tyrannic sway of impiety, should
undergo temptations thick as snowflakes; and it was in this way that he
lost his life in this city, being cut off by the tyrant of it—yet still
expecting to undergo so great troubles, for none of these did he become
less energetic, but was in haste and was in travail and was
ready-minded. Wherefore he says, “So, as much as in me is, I am ready to
preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also.”

<span id="vii.iv-p31"></span>[Rom.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p31.1"></span>.
“For I am not ashamed of the Gospel.”

<span id="vii.iv-p32"></span>"What sayest thou, O, Paul? When it were
fitting to say, that I boast, and am proud, and luxuriate in it; thou
sayest not this, but what is less than this, that thou art “not
ashamed,” which is not what we usually say of things very glorious. What
then is this which he says, and why does he thus speak? while yet he
exults over it more than over heaven. At least, in writing to the
Galatians, he said, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (<span id="vii.iv-p32.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="vii.iv-p32.2"></span>.)
How then comes he here to say, not that I even glory, but that “I am not
ashamed?” The Romans were most anxiously eager about the things of the
world, owing to their riches, their empire, their victories; and their
kings they reckoned to be equal to the gods, and so they even called
them. And for this cause too, they worshipped them with temples and with
altars and with sacrifices. Since then they were thus puffed up, but
Paul was going to preach Jesus, who was thought to be the carpenter’s
son, who was brought up in Judea, and that in the house of a mean woman,
who had no body guards, who was not encircled in wealth, but even died
as a culprit with robbers, and endured many other inglorious things; and
it was likely that they were concealing themselves as not as yet knowing
any of the unspeakable and great things: for this reason he says, “I am
not ashamed,” having still to teach them not to be ashamed. For he knew
that if they succeeded in this, they would speedily go on and come to
glorying also: and do you then, if you hear any one saying, Dost thou
worship the Crucified? be not ashamed, and do not look down, but
luxuriate in it, be bright-faced at it, and with the eyes of a free man,
and with uplifted look, take up your confession; and if he say again,
Dost thou worship the Crucified? say in reply to him, Yes! and not the
adulterer, not the insulter of his father, not the murderer of his
children (for such be all the gods they have <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) ), but Him who by the Cross stopped
the mouths of devils, and did away with their countless juggleries. For
the Cross is for our sakes, being the work of unspeakable Love towards
man, the sign of His great concern for us. And in addition to what has
been said, since they were puffed up with great pomposity of speech and
with their cloak of external wisdom, I, he means to say, bidding an
entire farewell to these reasonings, come to preach the Cross, and am
not ashamed because of it: “for it is the power of God to salvation.”
For since there is a power of God to chastisement also (for when He
chastised the Egyptians, He said, “This is My great power, <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) ”) ([Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span id="vii.iv-p34.2"></span>) and
a power to destruction, (for, “fear Him,” He says, “that is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell”), ([Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="vii.iv-p34.3"></span>) for
this cause he says, it is not these that I come to bring, the powers of
chastisement and punishment, but those of salvation. What then? Did not
the Gospel tell of these things also, namely, the account of hell, and
that of the outer darkness, and of the venomous worm? And yet we know of
these from no other source than the Gospel. In what sense then does he
say, “the power of God unto salvation?” Attend only to what follows. “To
every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.”

<span id="vii.iv-p35"></span>For it is not to all absolutely, but to
them that receive it. For though thou be a Grecian (i.e. Heathen), and
even one that has run into every kind of vice, though a Scythian, though
a barbarian, though a very brute, and full of all irrationality, and
burdened with the weights of endless sins, no sooner hast thou received
the word concerning the Cross, and been baptized, than thou hast blotted
out all these; and why says he here, “to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek?” What meaneth this difference? and yet he has often said,
“Neither circumcision is anything, nor uncircumcision” ([1 Cor.
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019), [Gal.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006), [Gal.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span id="vii.iv-p35.1"></span>[1
Cor. vii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019)<span
id="vii.iv-p35.2"></span>. see [Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="vii.iv-p35.3"></span> and
vi. 15); how then doth he here discriminate, setting the Jew before the
Greek? Now why is this? seeing that by being first he does not therefore
receive any more of the grace (for the same gift is bestowed both on
this person and that,) but the “first” is an honor in order of time
only. For he has no such advantage as that of receiving greater
righteousness, but is only honored in respect of his receiving it first.
Since in the case of those that are enlightened (you that are initiated
know what is meant,) all run <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207)
to the baptism, yet not all at the same hour, but one first and another
second. Yet the first doth not receive more than the second, nor he than
the person after him, but all enjoy the same gifts. The “first” then
here is an honor in word, not a superiority in grace. Then after saying,
“unto salvation,” he enhances the gift further, by showing that it
stayeth not at the present point, but proceedeth farther. <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208) For this is what he sets forth,
when he says,

<span id="vii.iv-p38"></span>[Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="vii.iv-p38.1"></span>.
“For therein is the righteousness of God revealed.”

<span id="vii.iv-p39"></span>But he who hath become just shall live, not
for the present life only, but for that which is to come. And he hints
not only this, but also another thing along with this, namely, the
brightness and gloriousness of such a life. For since it is possible to
be saved, yet not without shame (as many are saved of those, who by the
royal humanity are released from punishment), that no one may suspect
this upon hearing of safety, he adds also righteousness; and
righteousness, not thine own, but that of God; hinting also the
abundance of it and the facility. <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) For you do not achieve it by
toilings and labors, but you receive it by a gift from above,
contributing one thing only from your own store, “believing.” Then since
his statement did not seem credible, if the adulterer and effeminate
person, and robber of graves, and magician, is not only to be suddenly
freed from punishment but to become just, and just too with the highest
righteousness; he confirms his assertion from the Old Testament. And
first with a short sentence, he lays open a vast sea of histories to one
who has a capacity for seeing them. For after having said, “from faith
to faith,” he sends the hearer back to the dispensations of God, which
took place thus in the Old Testament, which, when writing to the
Hebrews, he explains with his usual great wisdom, showing that both the
just and the sinners were justified in that way even then, wherefore
also he made mention both of the harlot and of Abraham. But then here,
after having just hinted at it (for he was running on to another and a
pressing subject), he again confirms what he had said from the Prophets,
bringing in Habakkuk before them, crying, and saying, that it is not in
the nature of things for him who is to live, to live otherwise save by
faith; for “the just,” he says, “shall live by faith” (<span
id="vii.iv-p40.12"></span>[Hab. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="vii.iv-p40.13"></span>),
speaking about the life to come. For since what God giveth transcends
reasoning entirely, it is but reason that we need faith. But the man
that thinks meanly of it, and is contemptuous and vainglorious, will not
effect anything at all. Let heretics hearken to the voice of the Spirit,
for such is the nature of reasonings. They are like some labyrinth or
puzzles which have no end to them anywhere, and do not let the reason
stand upon the rock, and have their very origin in vanity. For being
ashamed to allow of faith, and to seem ignorant of heavenly things, they
involve themselves in the dust-cloud of countless reasonings. Then oh
miserable and painful man, fit object for endless tears, should any one
ask thee, how the heaven was made, and how the earth,—and why do I say
the heaven and the earth? how thou wert thyself born, <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) how nourished, and how thou
grewest, art thou then not ashamed of thine ignorance? But if anything
be said about the Only-begotten, dost thou thrust thyself through shame
into a pit of destruction, thinking that it is unworthy of thee not to
know everything? And yet disputatiousness is an unworthy thing, and so
is ill-timed curiosity. And why do I speak of doctrines? for even from
the corruption in our present life we have escaped by no other means
than through the faith. Thus shone also all those aforetime, thus
Abraham, thus Isaac, thus Jacob, thus too the harlot was saved, the one
in the Old Testament, and likewise the one in the New. For, “by faith,”
he says, “the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not when
she had received the spies.” (<span id="vii.iv-p41.2"></span>[Heb. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031)<span id="vii.iv-p41.3"></span>.)
For if she had said to herself, “and how can they that are captives and
exiles, and refugees, and live the life of vagabond tribes, get the
better of us who have a city, and walls, and towers?” she would have
destroyed both herself and them. Which also the forefathers of those who
were then saved did suffer. For when, upon the sight of men great and
tall, they questioned the manner of victory, they perished, without
battle or array, all of them. Seest thou what a pit is that of unbelief!
what a wall that of faith! For the one carried down endless thousands,
the other not only saved a harlot, but made her the patroness of so
numerous a people!

<span id="vii.iv-p42"></span>Now since we know of these and more than
these, never let us call God to account for what is done, but whatsoever
He may lay on us, that let us take up with, and let us not run into
niceties and curious questions, though to human reasoning the thing
commanded appears even amiss. For what, let me ask, looks more amiss
than for a father to slay with his own hands his only and legitimate
son? (<span id="vii.iv-p42.1"></span>[Gen. xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003)<span id="vii.iv-p42.2"></span>.) But
still when the righteous man was bid do it, he raised no nice scruples
about it, but owing to the dignity of the bidder, he merely accepted the
injunction. And another too that was bidden of God to strike a prophet,
when he raised nice scruples about the seeming unreasonableness of the
injunction, and did not simply obey, he was punished to the extreme.
(<span id="vii.iv-p42.3"></span>[1 Kings
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#036)<span id="vii.iv-p42.4"></span>.)
But he that struck, gained a good report. And Saul too, when he saved
men contrary to the decree of God, fell from the kingdom, and was
irretrievably punished. And one might find other instances beside these:
by all which we learn, never to require a reason for God’s
injunctions, <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) but to yield and
obey only. But if it be dangerous to raise nice scruples about aught
that He may enjoin, and extreme punishment is appointed for those who
are curious questioners, what possible excuse shall they have who
curiously question things far more secret and awful than these, as for
instance, how He begat the Son, and in what fashion, and what His
Essence is? Now as we know this, let us with all kindliness receive the
mother of all blessings, faith; that sailing as it were in a still
harbor, we may at once keep our doctrines orthodox, and by steering our
life safely in a straight course, may attain those eternal blessings by
the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom and
with Whom be glory unto the Father, with the Holy Ghost, for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[i:1198](1110065.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="vii.iv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>διαθέσεως</span>, see *Ernesti Lex. Technol.* in
v.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[i:1199](1110065.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span> Four <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>διδασκαλίας</span>, a father’s mode of Teaching.
S. <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p8.3"></span>κηδεμονίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[i:1200](1110065.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="vii.iv-p8.13"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span> One <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iv-p9.1"></span>ms</span>. adds, if Christ hath given him this
care, and

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[i:1201](1110065.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="vii.iv-p17.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span> [Rom.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)<span id="vii.iv-p18.1"></span> is
best understood as a quasi-correction, or modification of [Rom.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vii.iv-p18.2"></span>,
to show that he does not mean that his coming to them would be a
blessing to them alone, but also to himself; thus: I mean to say that I
want to visit you not only that I may impart (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p18.3"></span>μεταδῶ</span>, [Rom.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vii.iv-p18.4"></span>)
something unto you, but that I may be encouraged in you (or among you)
through the action and reaction of our common (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p18.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p18.6"></span>ν ἀλλήλοις</span>) faith. Thus <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p18.7"></span>τοῦτο δὲ ἐστιν</span> is
taken not as simply explanatory, but as mildly adversative.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[i:1202](1110065.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="vii.iv-p18.8"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p19.1"></span>περιπλακῶμεν</span> seems here to have a double
sense from the context.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[i:1203](1110065.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="vii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span> [Rom.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)<span id="vii.iv-p23.1"></span>
adds a new reason for his wish to visit Rome—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p23.2"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p23.3"></span>να τινὰ καρπὸν σχῶ</span>. It seems to me that
more is here meant than the establishing and encouragement of [Rom.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)<span id="vii.iv-p23.4"></span>;
that the Apostle is not here merely repeating the idea of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p23.5"></span>τι μεταδῶ χάρισμα</span>
(Meyer, Afford), but is thinking of the conversion of those outside of
the Roman Christian community. This is confirmed by the generalization
of [Rom. 1.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)<span
id="vii.iv-p23.6"></span>: “And to Greeks and Barbarians, I am debtor.”
It was not merely a joy that he might experience, but a conquest which
he might win for Christ. His purpose to go to Rome is grounded upon his
fixed purpose to carry the gospel to all Gentile nations without
distinction of race or culture (so Godet, Hofmann). Chrysostom’s
exposition proceeds upon the supposition of the simple identity of these
statements.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[i:1204](1110065.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="vii.iv-p23.7"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p24.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p24.2"></span>ξωμίδας</span>, a short tunic leaving the arms
and shoulders bare, which had with it a kind of mantle. It was used by
slaves, and adopted perhaps by these philosophers as a badge of
austerity. See Ælian. *Var. Hist*. 1. ix. c. 34. Ed. Varior. note of
Perizonius.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[i:1205](1110065.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="vii.iv-p24.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p25"></span> Field reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p25.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p25.2"></span>δόμενος καὶ περιφερόμενος</span>, Vulg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p25.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p25.4"></span>γόμενος</span> which may
mean “alleged.”

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[i:1206](1110065.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="vii.iv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p33"></span> And this the wiser heathen urge, as Plato,
Rep. xi. and Euthyph. and Aristoph. Nub.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[i:1207](1110065.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="vii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p34"></span> [Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span id="vii.iv-p34.1"></span>. S.
Ephrem considers that passage to allude to the plagues of Egypt; and so
others.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[i:1208](1110065.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="vii.iv-p35.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p36"></span> See the Ceremonies of Baptism, St. Cyril
Lect. xx. (ii. on Myst.) c. 4. He says they “were led to the holy pool.”
p. 264. O.T.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[i:1209](1110065.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="vii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p37"></span> [Rom.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p37.1"></span>
might almost be considered as a summary of the apostle’s doctrine. It
could be expressed thus: subject: The gospel, what is it? God’s power.
For what? Salvation. For whom? Every one that believeth. On what
historic conditions? To the Jew first and also to the Greek. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p37.2"></span>Πρῶτον</span> is best taken
not as simply chronological (Chrys. Godet, Hodge), but as denoting a
providential, economic precedence (Meyer, De Wette, Tholuck, Philippi,
Alford).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[i:1210](1110065.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="vii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.1"></span>Δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ</span> ([Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="vii.iv-p40.2"></span>)
means a righteousness which is from God (*gen. orig.*) and of which
God’s character is the norm. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.3"></span>δίκαιος</span> stands in an ethical relation
which, on its divine side, is designated as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.4"></span>δικ. θεοῦ</span>. God is the author of this
right condition, but man is placed in it on condition and in consequence
of faith. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.5"></span>δικ</span>. is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.7"></span>κ πίστεως</span> as its conditioning cause and
its aims at faith and terminates in faith—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iv-p40.8"></span>εἰς πίστιν</span>. How closely and vitally are
faith and righteousness connected! And yet they are to be distinguished.
Faith is a subjective exercise; righteousness is a status. The former is
that which man does; the latter is the relation and condition in which
God places the believer. They represent respectively the human and the
divine sides of salvation and are so vitally related that Paul can say:
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iv-p40.9"></span>λογίζεται ἡ πίστις
εἰς δικαιοσύνην</span> (<span id="vii.iv-p40.10"></span>[Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="vii.iv-p40.11"></span>
sq).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[i:1211](1110065.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="vii.iv-p40.14"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p41"></span> See [Eccles. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005)<span id="vii.iv-p41.1"></span>. and
Homer, *Odys.* 1. 216, also Menander as quoted by Eustathius on that
passage.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[i:1212](1110065.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="vii.iv-p42.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p43"></span> 2 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iv-p43.1"></span>mss.</span> “to call God to account for His
injunctions.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily III on Rom. i. 18.](1110066)
