[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110084)  [Next](1110086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxiv"></span> <span id="vii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXII.</span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p2"></span>[Rom. XII.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p3"></span>“ Bless them which persecute you; bless,
and curse not.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>After</span> teaching them how they ought to
be minded towards one another, and after joining the members closely
into one, he next proceeds to lead them forth to the battle without,
which he makes easier as from this point. For as he who hath not managed
things well with those of his own side, will find more difficulty in
arranging affairs with strangers, so he, that has practised himself duly
among these, will with the more ease have the advantage of those without
also. Hence then Paul also as he goes on in his journey, after the one
places the other, and says, “Bless them that persecute you.” He did not
say, be not spiteful or revengeful, but required something far better.
For that a man that was wise might do, but this is quite an angel’s
part. And after saying “bless,” he proceeds, “and curse not,” lest we
should do both the one and the ether, and not the former only. For they
that persecute us are purveyors of a reward to us. But if thou art
sober-minded, there will be another reward after that one, which thou
wilt gain thyself. For he will yield thee that for persecution, but thou
wilt yield thyself the one from the blessing of another, in that thou
bringest forth a very great sign of love to Christ. For as he that
curseth his persecutor, showeth that he is not much pleased at suffering
this for Christ, thus he that blesseth showeth the greatness of his
love. Do not then abuse him, that thou thyself mayest gain the greater
reward, and mayest teach him that the thing is matter of inclination,
not of necessity, of holiday and feast, not of calamity or dejection.
For this cause Christ Himself said, “Rejoice when men speak all manner
of evil against you falsely.” ([Matt. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011)<span id="vii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>.)
Hence too it was that the Apostles returned with joy not from having
been evil spoken of only, but also at having been scourged. (<span
id="vii.xxiv-p4.3"></span>[Acts 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="vii.xxiv-p4.4"></span>.)
For besides what I have mentioned, there will be another gain, and that
no small one, that you will make, both the abashing of your adversaries
hereby, and instructing of them by your actions that you are travelling
to another life; for if he see thee joyous, and elevated, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiv-p4.5"></span>πτερούμενον</span>) from
suffering ill, he will see clearly from the actions that thou hast other
hopes greater than those of this life. So that if thou dost not so, but
weepest and lamentest, how is he to be able to learn from that that thou
art tarrying for any other life? And besides this, thou wilt compass yet
another thing. For provided he see thee not vexed at the affronts done
thee, but even blessing him, he will leave harassing thee. See then how
much that is good comes from this, both a greater reward for thyself and
a less temptation, and he will forbear persecuting thee, and God too
will be glorified: and to him that is in error thy endurance will be
instruction in godliness. For this reason it was not those that insult
us only, but even those that persecute us and deal despitefully with us,
that he bade us requite with the contrary. And now he orders them to
bless, but as he goes on, he exhorts them to do them good in deeds also.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p5"></span>[Rom.
12.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.
“Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p6"></span>Since it is possible to bless and not to
curse, and yet not to do this out of love, he wishes us to be penetrated
with the warmth of friendship throughout. And this is why he goes on in
these words, that we are not only to bless, but even feel compassion for
their pains and sufferings, whenever we happen to see them fallen into
trouble. Yes, it will be said, but to join in the sorrows of mourners
one can see why he ordered them, but why ever did he command them the
other thing, when it is no such great matter? Aye, but that requires
more of a high Christian temper, to rejoice with them that do rejoice,
than to weep with them that weep. For this nature itself fulfils
perfectly: and there is none so hard-hearted as not to weep over him
that is in calamity: but the other requires a very noble soul, so as not
only to keep from envying, but even to feel pleasure with the person who
is in esteem. And this is why he placed it first. For there is nothing
that ties love so firmly as sharing both joy and pain one with another.
Do not then, because thou art far from difficulties thyself, remain
aloof from sympathizing too. For when thy neighbor is ill-treated, thou
oughtest to make the calamity thine own. Take share then in his tears,
that thou mayest lighten his low spirits. Take share in his joy, that
thou mayest make the joy strike deep root, and fix the love firmly, and
be of service to thyself rather than to him in so doing, by thy weeping
rendering thyself merciful, and by thy feeling his pleasure, purging
thyself of envy and grudging. And let me draw your attention to Paul’s
considerateness. For he does not say, Put an end to the calamity, lest
thou shouldest say in many cases (or perchance <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>πολλάκις</span>) that it is impossible: but he
has enjoined the easier task, and that which thou hast in thy power. For
even if thou art not able to remove the evil, yet contribute tears, and
thou wilt take the worst half away. And if thou be not able to increase
a man’s prosperity, contribute joy, and thou wilt have made a great
addition to it. Therefore it is not abstaining from envy only, but what
is a much greater thing that he exhorts us to, namely, joining in the
pleasure. For this is a much greater thing than not envying.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p7"></span>[Rom.
12.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>.
“Be of the same mind one towards another. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p8"></span>Here again he insists much upon lowliness
of mind, the subject he had started this exhortation with. For there was
a probability of their being full of high-mindedness, both on account of
their city (see p. 343), and from sundry other causes; he therefore
keeps drawing off (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>ποσύρει</span>, 2 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.4"></span>ὐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.5"></span>πορύττει</span>) the morbid matter, and lowers
the inflammation. For there is nothing that makes such schisms in the
Churches as vanity does. And what does he mean by, “Be of the same mind
one towards another?” Has a poor man come into thy house? Be like him in
thy bearing, do not put on any unusual pompous air on account of thy
riches. There is no rich and poor in Christ. Be not then ashamed of him
because of his external dress, but receive him because of his inward
faith. And if thou seest him in sorrow, do not disdain to comfort him,
nor if thou see him in prosperity, feel abashed at sharing his pleasure,
and being gladdened with him, but be of the same mind in his case, that
thou wouldest be of in thine own. For it says, “Be of the same mind one
towards another.” For instance, if thou thinkest thyself a great man,
therefore think him so likewise. Dost thou suspect that he is mean and
little? Well then, pass this same sentence upon thyself, and cast aside
all unevenness. And how is this to be? By thy casting aside that
reckless temper. Wherefore he proceeds: “Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate.” That is, bring thyself down to their
humble condition, associate with them, walk with them, do not be humbled
in mind only, but help them also, and reach forth thy hand to them, not
by means of others, but in thine own person, as a father taking care of
a child, as the head taking care of the body. As he says in another
place, “being bound with them that are in bonds.” (<span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.6"></span>[Heb. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxiv-p8.7"></span>.)
But here he means by those of low estate not merely the lowly-minded,
but those of a low rank, and which one is apt to think scorn of. <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548)

<span id="vii.xxiv-p10"></span>“Be not wise in your own conceits.” This
is, do not think that you can do for yourselves. Because the Scripture
saith in another place besides, “Woe to them that are wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own sight.” (<span
id="vii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[Is. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxiv-p10.2"></span>.)
And by this again, he secretly draws off recklessness, and reduces
conceit and turgidity. For there is nothing that so elates men and makes
them feel different from other people, as the notion that they can do by
themselves. Whence also God hath placed us in need one of another, and
though thou be wise thou wilt be in need of another: but if thou think
that thou art not in need of him, thou wilt be the most foolish and
feeble of men. For a man of this sort bares himself of all succor, and
in whatever error he may run into, will not have the advantage either of
correction or of pardon, and will provoke God by his recklessness, and
will run into many errors. For it is the case, aye, and often too, that
a wise man does not perceive what is needful, and a man of less
shrewdness hits upon somewhat that is applicable. And this happened with
Moses and his father-in-law, and with Saul and his servant, and with
Isaac and Rebecca. Do not then suppose that you are lowered by needing
another man. For this exalts you the more, this makes you the stronger,
and the brighter too, and the more secure.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p11"></span>[Rom.
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)<span
id="vii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>. “Recompense to no man evil for evil.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p12"></span>For if thou findest fault with another
who plots against thee, why dost thou make thyself liable to this
accusation? If he did amiss how comest thou not to shun imitating him?
And observe how he puts no difference here but lays down one law for
all. For he does not say, “recompense not evil” to the believer, but to
“no man,” be he heathen, be he contaminated, or what not. “Provide
things honest in the sight of all men.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p13"></span>[Rom.
12.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>. “If it be possible, as much as lieth in
you, live peaceably with all men.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p14"></span>This is that: “let your light shine
before men” ([Matt. v. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>), not that we are to live for vanity, but
that we are not to give those who have a mind for it a handle against
us. Whence he says also in another place, “Give none offence, neither to
the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.” ([1 Cor. x.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032)<span id="vii.xxiv-p14.2"></span>.)
And in what follows he limits his meaning well, by saying, “If it be
possible.” For there are cases in which it is not possible, as, for
instance, when we have to argue about religion, or to contend for those
who are wronged. And why be surprised if this be not universally
possible in the case of other persons, when even in the case of man and
wife he broke through the rule? “But if the unbelieving depart, let him
depart.” (<span id="vii.xxiv-p14.3"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxiv-p14.4"></span>.)
And his meaning is nearly as follows: Do thine own part, and to none
give occasion of war or fighting, neither to Jew nor Gentile. But if you
see the cause of religion suffering anywhere, do not prize concord above
truth, but make a noble stand even to death. And even then be not at war
in soul, be not averse in temper, but fight with the things only. For
this is the import of “as much as in you lieth, be at peace with all
men.” But if the other will not be at peace, do not thou fill thy soul
with tempest, but in mind be friendly (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p14.5"></span>φίλος</span>, several <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p14.6"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p14.7"></span>φιλόσοφος</span>) as I said before, without
giving up the truth on any occasion.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p15"></span>[Rom.
12.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>. “Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but
rather give place unto wrath. For it is written, Vengeance is mine; I
will repay, saith the Lord.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p16"></span>Unto what wrath? To the wrath of God. Now
since what the injured man desires most to see is, himself having the
pleasure of revenge, this very thing he gives him in full measure, that
if thou dost not avenge thyself, he means, God will be thy avenger.
Leave it then to Him to follow up thy wrongs. For this is the force of
“give place unto wrath.” Then to give further comfort, he brings the
quotation forward also, and after winning him more throughly to himself
in this way, he demands more Christian heroism (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>φιλοσόφιάν</span>) of
him, and says:

<span id="vii.xxiv-p17"></span>[Rom.
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.
“If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him to drink; for
in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not overcome
of evil, but overcome evil with good.”

<span id="vii.xxiv-p18"></span>Why, he means, am I telling you that you
must keep peace? For I even insist upon your doing kindness. For he
says, “give him to eat, and give him to drink.” Then as the command he
gave was a very difficult and a great one, he proceeds: “for in so doing
thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.” And this he said both to
humble the one by fear, and to make the other more ready-minded through
hope of a recompense. <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) For he
that is wronged, when he is feeble, is not so much taken with any goods
of his own as with the vengeance upon the person who has pained him. For
there nothing so sweet as to see an enemy chastised. What he is longing
for, then, that he gives him first, and when he has let the venom go,
then he again gives advice of a higher tone, saying, “Be not overcome of
evil.” For he knew that if the enemy were a very brute, he would not
continue an enemy when he had been fed. <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) And if the man injured be of ever
so little <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) a soul, still when
feeding him and giving him to drink, he will not himself even have any
farther craving for his punishment. Hence, out of confidence in the
result of the action, he does not simply threaten, but even dwells
largely upon the vengeance. For he did not say, “thou shalt take
vengeance” but, “thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.” <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) Then he further declares him
victor, by saying, “be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good.” And he gives a kind of gentle hint, that one is not to do it with
that intention, since cherishing a grudge still would be “being overcome
of evil.” But he did not say it at once, as he did not find it advisable
yet. <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) But when he had
disburdened the man of his anger, then he proceeded to say, “overcome
evil with good.” Since this would be a victory. For the combatant is
rather then the conqueror, not when he brings himself under to take the
blows, but when he withdraws himself, and makes his antagonist waste his
strength upon the air. And in this way he will not be struck himself,
and will also exhaust the whole of the other’s strength. And this takes
place in regard to affronts also. For when you do affronts in return,
you have the worse, not as overcome (so 1 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p23.2"></span>νικηθεὶς</span>, Sav. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiv-p23.3"></span>κινηθεὶς</span>) by a
man, but what is far more disgraceful, by the slavish passion of anger.
But if you are silent, then you will conquer, and erect a trophy without
a fight, and will have thousands to crown you, and to condemn the
slander of falsehood. For he that replies, seems to be speaking in
return as if stung. And he that is stung, gives reason to suspect that
he is conscious of being guilty of what is said of him. But if you laugh
at it, by your laughing you do away with the sentence against you. And
if you would have a clear proof of what has been said, ask the enemy
himself, when he is most vexed? when you are heated, and insult him in
return? or when you laugh at him as he insults you? and you will be told
the last rather. For he too is not so much pleased with not being
insulted in return, as he is vexed because his abuse was not able to
gain any hold upon you. Did you never see men in a passion, how they
make no great account of their own wounds, but rush on with much
violence, and are worse than very wild boars for seeking the hurt of
their neighbor, and look to this alone, and are more given to this than
to being on their guard against getting harmed? When therefore thou
deprivest him of that he desires most, thou bereavest him of everything,
by holding him thus cheap, and showing him to be easy to be despised,
and a child rather than a man; and thou indeed hast gained the
reputation of a wise man, and him dost thou invest with the character of
a noisome beast. This too let us do when we are struck, and when we wish
to strike, let us abstain from striking again. But, would you give a
mortal blow? “Turn to him the other cheek also” ([Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="vii.xxiv-p23.4"></span>),
and thou wilt smite him with countless wounds. For they that applaud,
and wonder at thee, are more annoying to him than men to stone him would
be; and before them, his conscience will condemn him, and will exact the
greatest punishment of him, and so he will go off with a confused look
as if he had been treated with the utmost rigor. And if it is the
estimation of the multitude that you look for, this too you will have in
larger share. And in a general way we have a kind of sympathy with those
who are the sufferers; but when we also see that they do not strike
(several <span class="c14"><span id="vii.xxiv-p23.5"></span>mss.</span>
resist, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p23.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p23.7"></span>ντιπίπτοντας</span>) in return, but even give
themselves up to it, we not only pity them, but even feel admiration for
them.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p24"></span>Here then I find reason to lament, that
we who might have things present, if we listened to Christ’s Law as we
should, and also attain to things to come, are cast out of both by not
paying attention to what has been told us, but giving ourselves to
unwarranted philosophising about them. For He has given us laws upon all
these points for our good, and has shown us what makes us have a good
name, what brings us to disgrace. And if it was likely to have proved
His disciples ridiculous, He would not have enjoined this. But since
this makes them the most notable of men namely, the not speaking ill,
when we have ill spoken of us; the not doing ill when we have ill done
us; this was His reason for enjoining it. But if this be so, much more
the speaking of good when we have ill spoken of us, and the praising of
those that insult us, and the doing good to those that plot against us,
will make us so. This then was why He gave these laws. For He is careful
for His own disciples, and knowing well what it is that maketh little or
great. If then He both careth and knoweth, why dost thou quarrel with
Him, and wish to go another road? For conquering by doing ill is one of
the devil’s laws. Hence in the Olympic games which were celebrated to
him <span id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) it is so that all the
competitors conquer. But in Christ’s race this is not the rule about the
prize, for, on the contrary, the law is for the person smitten, and not
for the person smiting, to be crowned. For such is the character of His
race, it has all its regulations the other way; so that it is not in the
victory only, but also in the way of the victory, that the marvel is the
greater. Now when things which on the other side are signs of a victory,
on this side he showeth to be productive of defeat, this is the power of
God, this the race of Heaven, this the theatre of Angels. I know that ye
are warmed thoroughly now, and are become as soft as any wax, but when
ye have gone hence ye will spew it all out. This is why I sorrow, that
what we are speaking of, we do not show in our actions, and this too
though we should be greatest gainers thereby. For if we let our
moderation be seen, we shall be invincible to any man; and there is
nobody either great or small, who will have the power of doing us any
hurt. For if any one abuseth thee, he has not hurt thee at all, but
himself severely. And if again he wrong thee, the harm will be with the
person who does the wrong. Did you never notice that even in the courts
of law those who have had wrong done them are honored, and stand and
speak out with entire freedom, but those who have done the wrong, are
bowed down with shame and fear? And why do I talk of evil-speaking (Sav.
conj. and 5 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p25.2"></span>κακηγορίαν</span>) and of wrong? For were he
even to whet his sword against thee, and to stain his right hand in thy
life-blood (<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiv-p25.3"></span>εἰς τὸν
λαιμὸν</span>, as p. 505), it is not thee that he hath done any harm to,
but himself that he hath butchered. And he will witness what I say who
was first taken off thus by a brother’s hand. For he went away to the
haven without a billow, having gained a glory that dieth not away; but
the other lived a life worse than any death, groaning, and trembling,
and in his body bearing about the accusation of what he had done. Let us
not follow after this then, but that. For he that hath ill done him, has
not an evil that taketh up its constant abode with him, since he is not
the parent of it; but as he received it from others, he makes it good by
his patient endurance. But he that doeth ill, hath the well of the
mischief in himself. Was not Joseph in prison, but the harlot that
plotted against him in a fine and splendid house? Which then wouldest
thou wish to have been? And let me not hear yet of the requital, but
examine the things that had taken place by themselves. For in this way
thou wilt rate Joseph’s prison infinitely above the house with the
harlot in it. For if you were to see the souls of them both, you would
find the one full of enlargement and boldness, but that of the Egyptian
woman in straitness, shame, dejection, confusion, and great despondency.
And yet she seemed to conquer; but this was no real victor. Knowing all
this then, let us fit ourselves for bearing ills, even that we may be
freed from bearing ills, and may attain to the blessings to come. Which
that we may all attain to, God grant, by the grace and love toward man,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[i:1549](1110085.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.8"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>τοῖς ταπεινοῖς</span> is best taken here as
*neuter* (Meyer, De Wette, R.V.) corresponding in this respect to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>τὰ ὑψηλὰ</span>. Meyer
renders and interprets thus: “*being drawn onward by the lowly;* i.e.
instead of following the impulse to high things, rather yielding to that
which is humble, to the claims and tasks which are presented to you by
the humbler relations of life, entering into this impulse towards the
lower strata and spheres of life which lays claim to you, and following
it. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p9.3"></span>ταπεινά</span> ought to have for the Christian
a force of attraction in virtue of which he yields himself to fellowship
with them and allows himself to be guided by them in the determination
of his conduct.” Those who understand <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p9.4"></span>ταπεινοῖς</span> as masculine are divided
between the meanings: *of low rank and of humble disposition.* Chrys.’
interpretation combines both ideas.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[i:1550](1110085.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p19.2"></span>ντιδόσεως</span>. It means a recompense upon
the other.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[i:1551](1110085.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p20"></span> Most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>mss.</span> omit “he would not..…fed.”

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[i:1552](1110085.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p21.1"></span>μικρόψυχος</span>, Ed. Ben. quotes St. Bas.
*Ep.* 74 and St. Ath. t. i. p. 142 a and 152 f. Hist. tracts pp. 41 and
marg., 55, to show that this word may be used in the sense of
“malicious.” It sometimes means “niggardly,” both being characteristics
of a little mind. v. p. 106 and 373.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[i:1553](1110085.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p22"></span> The meaning which is here attached to
the expression: *thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head,* viz.:
thou shalt bring the divine vengeance upon him, is very improbable. Such
a consideration could not be urged as a motive of Christian love.
Augustin well says: “How does any one love the man to whom he gives food
and drink for the very purpose of heaping coals of fire upon his head,
if ‘coals of fire’ in this place signify some heavy punishment?” The
meaning is: thou shalt by returning good for evil, bring the evildoer to
shame and remorse. This course will be the dictate of Christian love
because it will tend to reveal the man’s wrong-doing to himself, induce
repentance for it and lead him to forsake it. The repentance of Saul is
an example (<span id="vii.xxiv-p22.1"></span>[1 Sam. xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxiv-p22.2"></span>).
“And Saul lifted up his voice and wept. And he said: thou art more
righteous than I: for thou hast rendered unto me good, whereas I have
rendered unto thee evil.”—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[i:1554](1110085.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p23"></span> It may be objected that St. Paul was not
speaking to a person in a rage, but generally to all. However, it is
plain that the admonition is meant for those who want it. And there are
many people who justify themselves in bearing malice, so as to require
such management even in a general admonition.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[i:1555](1110085.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p25"></span> The Fathers generally believed the
devils were connected with idol-worship. See Tertullian *de Spectac.* p.
202 O.T. St. Augustin *de Civ. Dei,* i. 32, etc. Clem. *Al. Protr.* c.
3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIII on Rom. xiii. 1.](1110086)
