[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110039)  [Next](1110041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxxv"></span> <span id="vi.xxxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXV.</span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p2"></span>[Acts
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p3"></span>“And on the sabbath we went out of the city
by a river side, where prayer was wont (Chrys. “was thought likely”) to
be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted
thither. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the
city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord
opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.”

<span id="vi.xxxv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p4.1"></span>See</span> again Paul judaizing. “Where <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817.md) it was thought,” it says, both from
the time and from the place, “that prayer would be.—Out of the city, by
a river side:” for it is not to be supposed that they prayed only where
there was a synagogue; they also prayed out of synagogue, but then for
this purpose they set apart, as it were, a certain place, because as
Jews they were more corporeal—and, “on the sabbath-day,” when it was
likely that a multitude would come together. <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818.md) “And we sat down, and spake to the
women which resorted thither.” Mark again the freedom from all pride.
“And a certain woman:” a woman and she of low condition, from her trade
too: but mark (in her) a woman of elevated mind (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.12"></span>φιλόσοφον</span>). In the
first place, the fact of God’s calling her bears testimony to her: “And
when she was baptized,” it says, “she and her household”—mark how he
persuaded all of them—“she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to
be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she
constrained us <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819.md) ” ([Acts
16.15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015)<span id="vi.xxxv-p7.4"></span>.md):
then look at her wisdom, how she importunes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p7.5"></span>δυσωπεἵ</span>), the Apostles how full of
humility her words are, how full of wisdom. “If ye have judged me
faithful,” she says. Nothing could be more persuasive. Who would not
have been softened by these words? She did not request (or, “claim”) did
not entreat simply: but she left them to decide, and (yet) exceedingly
forced them: “And she constrained us,” it says, by those words. And
again in a different way: for see how she straightway bears fruit, and
accounts it a great gain. “If ye have judged me,” that is, That ye did
judge me is manifest, by your delivering to me such (holy) mysteries
(i.e. sacraments, see p. 225, note 3): and she did not dare to invite
them before this. But why was there any unwillingness on the part of
Paul and those with them, that they should need to be constrained? It
was either by way of calling her to greater earnestness of desire, or
because Christ had said, “Enquire who is worthy, and there abide.”
([Luke x. 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p7.6"></span>.) (It was not that they were unwilling), but
they did it for a purpose. <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820.md) —“And
it came to pass,” it says, “as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us, <span
id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821.md) which brought her masters much gain by
soothsaying: the same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation.” ([Acts 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxxv-p9.12"></span>..md)
What may be the reason that both the demon spoke these words, and Paul
forbade him? Both the one acted maliciously, and the other wisely: the
demon wished in fact to make himself credible. <span
id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822.md) For if Paul had admitted his
testimony, he would have deceived many of the believers, as being
received by him: therefore he endures to speak what made against
himself, that he may establish what made for himself: and so the demon
himself uses accommodation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.17"></span>συγκαταβάσει</span>) in order to destruction.
At first then, Paul would not admit it, but scorned it, not wishing to
cast himself all at once upon miracles; but when it continued to do
this, and pointed to their work (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.18"></span>καὶ τὸ ἔργον ἐδείκνυ</span>) “who preach unto
us the way of salvation,” then he commanded it to come out. For it says,
“Paul being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in
the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same
hour. (*a*) <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823.md) And when her masters
saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas.”
([Acts 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxxv-p11.1"></span>..md)
(*d*) So then Paul did all, both miracles and teaching, but of the
dangers Silas also is partaker. And why says it, “But Paul being
grieved?” It means, he saw through the malice of the demon, as he saith,
“For we are not ignorant of his devices.” ([2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="vi.xxxv-p11.2"></span>..md)
*(b)* “And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone.”
Everywhere money the cause of evils. O that heathen cruelty! they wished
the girl to be still a demoniac, that they might make money by her.
“They caught Paul and Silas,” it says, “and dragged them into the
marketplace unto the rulers, and brought them unto the magistrates,
saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city!” ([Acts
16.20](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.3"></span>): by doing what? Then why did you not drag
them (hither) before this? “Being Jews:” the name was in bad odor. “And
teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to
observe, being Romans.” ([Acts
16.21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.4"></span>.) They made a charge of treason of it (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p11.5"></span>εἰς καθοσίωσιν
ἤγαγον</span>). (*e*) Why did they not say, Because they cast out the
demon, they were guilty of impiety against God? For this was a defeat to
them: but instead of that, they have recourse to a charge of treason
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p11.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p11.7"></span>πὶ καθοσίωσιν</span>):
like the Jews when they said, “We have no king but Cæsar: whoso maketh
himself a king speaketh against Cæsar.” (<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.8"></span>[John 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span id="vi.xxxv-p11.9"></span>..md)
(*c*) “And the multitude rose up together against them: and the
magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them.” ([Acts
16.22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.10"></span>.) O the irrational conduct! They did not
examine, did not allow them to speak. And yet, such a miracle having
taken place, ye ought to have worshipped them, ought to have held them
as saviors and benefactors. For if money was what ye wished, why, having
found so great wealth, did ye not run to it? This makes you more famous,
the having power to cast out demons than the obeying them. Lo, even
miracles, and yet love of money was mightier. (*f*) “And when they had
laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison.”—great was
their wrath—“charging the jailer to keep them safely” ([Acts
16.23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.11"></span>): “who, having received such a charge,
thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the
stocks.” ([Acts 16.24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.12"></span>.) Observe, he also again thrust them into
the “inner” prison: and this too was done providentially, because <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824.md) there was to be a great miracle. <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825.md)

<span id="vi.xxxv-p14"></span>(Recapitulation.) “Out of the city.”
([Acts 16.13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p14.1"></span>.) The place was convenient for hearing the
word, aloof from troubles and dangers. (*b*) “On the sabbath.” As there
was no work going on, they were more attentive to what was spoken. *(a)*
“And a certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple” ([Acts
16.14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p14.2"></span>): observe how the writer of the history is
not ashamed of the occupations (of the converts): (*c*) moreover neither
was this city of the Philippians a great one. Having learnt these
things, let us also be ashamed of no man. Peter abides with a tanner
([Acts 9.43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p14.3"></span>): (Paul) with a woman who was a seller of
purple, and a foreigner. Where is pride? “Whose heart the Lord opened.”
Therefore we need God, to open the heart: but God opens the hearts that
are willing: for there are hardened hearts to be seen. <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826.md) “So that she attended to the things
which were spoken of Paul.” The opening, then, was God’s work, the
attending was hers: so that it was both God’s doing and man’s. And she
was baptized ([Acts 16.15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p15.1"></span>), and receives the Apostles with such
earnestness of entreaty; with more than that used by Abraham. And she
speaks of no other token than that whereby she was saved ([Gen. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxxv-p15.2"></span>.md):
she says not, “If ye have judged me” a great, a devout woman; but what?
“faithful to the Lord:” if to the Lord, much more to you. “If ye have
judged me:” if ye do not doubt it. And she says not, Abide with me, but,
“Come into my house and abide:” with great earnestness (she says it).
Indeed a faithful woman!—“A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of
Python.” ([Acts 16.16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p15.3"></span>.) Say, what is this demon? The god, as they
call him, Python: from the place he is so called. Do you mark that
Apollo also is a demon? And (the demon) wished to bring them into
temptation: (therefore) to provoke them, “the same followed Paul and us,
and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God,
which show unto us the way of salvation.” ([Acts
16.17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p15.4"></span>.) O thou accursed, thou execrable one! if
then thou knowest that it is “His way of salvation” that “they show,”
why dost thou not come out freely? But just what Simon wished, when he
said, “Give me, that on whomsoever I lay my hands, he may receive the
Holy Ghost” ([Acts 8.19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p15.5"></span>), the same did this demon: since he saw them
becoming famous, here also he plays the hypocrite: by this means he
thought to be allowed to remain in the body, if he should preach the
same things. But if Christ “receive not testimony from man,” ([John v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034)<span id="vi.xxxv-p15.6"></span>.md),
meaning John, much less from a demon. “Praise is not comely in the mouth
of a sinner” ([Ecclesiasticus
15.9](../../../bib/apo/sir015.htm#009)<span id="vi.xxxv-p15.7"></span>.md),
much less from a demon. For <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827.md) that
they preach is not of men, but of the Holy Ghost. Because they did not
act in a spirit of boasting. “And Paul being grieved,” etc. By their
clamor and shouting they thought to alarm them (the magistrates):
saying, “These men do exceedingly trouble our city.” ([Acts
16.18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.5"></span>.) What sayest thou? Dost thou believe the
demon? Why not here also? He saith, They are “servants of the most high
God;” thou sayest, “They exceedingly trouble our city:” he saith, “They
show us the way of salvation;” thou sayest, “They teach customs which
are not lawful for us to receive.” ([Acts
16.21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.6"></span>.) Observe, how they do not attend even to the
demon, but look only to one thing, their covetousness. But observe them
(Paul and Silas), how they do not answer, nor plead for themselves;
(*b*) “For when,” saith he, “I am weak, then am I strong. My grace is
sufficient for thee, for My strength is made perfect in weakness” (<span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.7"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="vi.xxxv-p16.8"></span>.md): so
that by reason of their gentleness also they should be admired. (*a*)
“And the magistrates,” etc., “charging the jailer to keep them safely”
([Acts 16.22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.9"></span>): that they may be the means <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) of a greater miracle. *(c.md)* The
stricter the custody, the greater the miracle. It was probably from the
wish to cut short the disturbance, that the magistrates did these
things; because they saw the crowd urgent, and wished to stay their
passion at the instant, therefore they inflicted the stripes: at the
same time it was their wish to hear the matter, and that was why they
cast them into prison and gave charge “to keep them safely.” And, it
says, “he made them fast in the stocks” ([Acts
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.7"></span>), (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.8"></span>το ξύλον</span>) as we should say, the
*nervum* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.9"></span>νέρβον</span>).

<span id="vi.xxxv-p18"></span>What tears do not these things call for!
(Think) what they suffer, while we (live) in luxury, we in theatres, we
perishing and drowning (in dissolute living), seeking always idle
amusement, not enduring to suffer pain for Christ, not even as far as
words, not even as far as talk. These things I beseech you let us ever
call to mind, what things they suffered, what things they endured, how
undismayed they were, how unoffended. They were doing God’s work, and
suffered these things! They did not say, Why do we preach this, and God
does not take our part? But even this was a benefit to them, even
apart <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829.md) from the truth, in the
thing itself; it made them more vigorous, stronger, intrepid.
“Tribulation worketh endurance.” ([Rom. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span id="vi.xxxv-p19.3"></span>..md)
Then let us not seek loose and dissolute living. For as in the one case
the good is twofold, that the sufferers are made strong, and that the
rewards are great; so in the other the evil is twofold, that such are
rendered more enervated, and that it is to no good, but only evil. For
nothing can be more worthless than a man who passes all his time in
idleness and luxury. For the man untried, as the saying is, is also
unapproved; unapproved not only in the contests, but also in everything
else. Idleness is a useless thing, and in luxury itself nothing is so
unsuited to the end proposed as the leading a luxurious life: for it
palls with satiety, so that neither the enjoyment of the viands is so
great, nor the enjoyment of relaxation, but all becomes vapid, and runs
to waste.

<span id="vi.xxxv-p20"></span>Then let us not seek after this. For if we
will consider which has the pleasanter life, he that is toiled and
hardworked, or he that lives in luxury, we shall find it to be the
former. For in the first place, <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830.md)
the bodily senses are neither clear nor sound, but dull (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p21.3"></span>χαὕναι</span>) and
languid; and when those are not right, even of health there is plainly
no enjoyment. Which is the useful horse, the pampered or the exercised?
which the serviceable ship, that which sails, or that which lies idle?
which the best water, the running or the stagnant? which the best iron,
that which is much used, or that which does no work? does not the one
shine bright as silver, while the other becomes all over rusty, useless,
and even losing some of its own substance? The like happens also to the
soul as the consequence of idleness: a kind of rust spreads over it, and
corrodes both its brightness and everything else. How then shall one rub
off this rust? With the whetstone of tribulations: so shall one make the
soul useful and fit for all things. Else, how, I ask, will she be able
to cut off the passions, with her edge turned (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p21.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p21.5"></span>νακλώσης</span>) and bending like lead? How
shall she wound the devil?—And then to whom can such an one be other
than a disgusting spectacle—a man cultivating obesity, dragging himself
along like a seal? I speak not this of those who are naturally of this
habit, but of those who by luxurious living have brought their bodies
into such a condition, of those who are naturally of a spare habit. The
sun has risen, has shot forth his bright beams on all sides, and roused
up each person to his work: the husbandman goes forth with his spade,
the smith with his hammer, and each artisan with his several
instruments, and you will find each handling his proper tools; the woman
also takes either her distaff or her webs: while he, like the swine,
immediately at the first dawn goes forth to feed his belly, seeking how
he may provide sumptuous fare. And yet it is only for brute beasts to be
feeding from morning to night; and for them, because their only use is
to be slaughtered. Nay, even of the beasts, those which carry burdens
and admit of being worked, go forth to their work while it is yet night.
But this man, rising from his bed, when the (noon-tide) sun has filled
the market-place, and people are tired of their several works, then this
man gets up, stretching himself out just as if he were indeed a hog in
fattening, having wasted the fairest part of the day in darkness. Then
he sits there for a long time on his bed, often unable even to lift
himself up from the last evening’s debauch, and having wasted (still)
more time in this (listlessness), proceeds to adorn himself, and issues
forth, a spectacle of unseemliness, with nothing human about him, but
with all the appearance of a beast with a human shape: his eyes rheumy
from the effect of wine, <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831.md) \* \*
\* while the miserable soul, just like the lame, is unable to rise,
bearing about its bulk of flesh, like an elephant. Then he comes and
sits in (various) places, and says and does such things, that it were
better for him to be still sleeping than to be awake. If it chance that
evil tidings be announced, he shows himself weaker than any girl; if
good, more silly than any child; on his face there is a perpetual yawn.
He is a mark for all that would do harm, if not for all men, at least
for all evil passions; and wrath easily excites such a man, and lust,
and envy, and all other passions. All flatter him, all pay court to him,
rendering his soul weaker than it is already: and each day he goes on
and on, adding to his disease. If he chance to fall into any difficulty
of business, he becomes dust and ashes, <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832.md) and his silken garments are of no help
to him. We have not said all this without a purpose, but to teach you,
that none of you should live idly and at random. For idleness and luxury
are not conducive to work, to good reputation, to enjoyment. <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833.md) For who will not condemn such a man?
Family, friends, kinsfolk (will say), He is indeed a very encumbrance of
the ground. Such a man as this has come into the world to no purpose: or
rather, not to no purpose, but to ill purpose against his own person, to
his own ruin, and to the hurt of others. But that this is more
pleasant—let us look to this; for this is the question. Well then, what
can be less pleasant than (the condition of) a man who has nothing to
do; what more wretched and miserable? Is it not worse than all the
fetters in the world, to be always gaping and yawning, as one sits in
the market-place, looking at the passers by? For the soul, as its nature
is to be always on the move, cannot endure to be at rest. God has made
it a creature of action: to work is of its very nature; to be idle is
against its nature. For let us not judge of these things from those who
are diseased, but let us put the thing itself to the proof of fact.
Nothing is more hurtful than leisure, and having nothing to do: indeed
therefore hath God laid on us a necessity of working: for idleness hurts
everything. Even to the members of the body, inaction is a mischief.
Both eye, if it perform not its work, and mouth, and belly, and every
member that one could mention, falls into the worst state of disease:
but none so much as the soul. But as inaction is an evil, so is activity
in things that ought to be let alone. For just as it is with the teeth,
if one eats not, one receives hurt to them, and if one eats things
unfitting, it jars them, and sets them on edge: <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834.md) so it is here; both if the soul be
inactive, and if inactive in wrong things, it loses its proper force.
Then let us eschew both alike; both inaction, and the activity which is
worse than inaction. And what may that be? Covetousness, <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835.md) anger, envyings, and the other
passions. As regards these, let us make it our object to be inactive, in
order that we may obtain the good things promised to us, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_817"></span>[i:818](1110040.htm#fr_817.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p5"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. place <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p5.2"></span>οὗ ἐν. προσευχὴ
εἶναι</span> after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.4"></span>πὸ τοῦ τόπου</span>, so that it reads, “See
Paul again judaizing both from the time and from the place.” Chrys. here
explains the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.6"></span>νομίζετο</span> (in the sense “was thought”):
viz. St. Paul expected to find a congregation assembled for prayer, both
because the place was set apart for that purpose, and because it was the
sabbath.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[i:819](1110040.htm#fr_818.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p5.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p6"></span> Two variations of text occur in [Acts
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p6.1"></span>,
which materially affect the meaning. Modern critics read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.2"></span>πύλης</span> St. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.3"></span>πόλεως</span>—“they went
outside the gate” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p6.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p6.5"></span>νομίζομεν</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.7"></span>νομίζετο</span>—“where we
supposed there was a place of prayer.” (So B. C. <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.8"></span>א</span>, R.V.,
Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort.) If the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p6.10"></span>νομίζετο</span> is
retained, it more probably means; “where a place of prayer was wont to
be” rather than (as Chrys.) “where, it was thought, that prayer would
be.” The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p6.11"></span>προσευχαι</span> were places of prayer
situated often in the open air, and chosen in the neighborhood of
streams on account of the custom of washing the hands before prayer.
They served the purposes of synagogues in places where they did not
exist.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[i:820](1110040.htm#fr_819.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p6.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p7.2"></span>λλ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἀφῆκε κυρίους εἶναι, καὶ</span>.
Mod. text, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p7.3"></span>οὐκ ἀφῆκε
κ. ἐ. ἀλλὰ καὶ</span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[i:821](1110040.htm#fr_820.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p7.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p8.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p8.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p8.3"></span>λλὰ δἰ οἰκονομίαν ἐποίουν</span>, B. Cat.
“their seeming reluctance was ‘economy.’” A. C., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p8.4"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p8.5"></span>Ολα δἰ οἰκ. ἐπ</span>. Mod.
text, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p8.6"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p8.7"></span>Ω</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p8.8"></span>στε πάντα δἰ οἰκ.
ἐπ</span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[i:822](1110040.htm#fr_821.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p8.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p9"></span> Most critical editions read in [Acts
16.16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p9.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p9.2"></span>πύθωνα</span> st.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p9.3"></span>πύθωνος</span>
(following A. B. C. <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.4"></span>א</span>). In this case the word is in
apposition with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.5"></span>πνεῦμα</span> and has the force of an
adjective, “having a Pythonic spirit,” in allusion to the serpent which
was said to have guarded Delphi and to have been slain by Apollo. From
this feat the God was called Pythius, and in his temple the priestess
was called “the Pythian,” as being inspired by Apollo. Hence the term
became equivalent to a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.6"></span>δαιμονίον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.7"></span>μαντικόν</span>. In later times the power of
the ventriloquist was attributed to such a Pythonic spirit (as by
Plutarch) and the LXX. render the word <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.8"></span>אוב</span> by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.9"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.10"></span>γγαστρίμυθος</span> in accordance with this
view. Meyer maintains that this damsel had the power of ventriloquism
which the people attributed to a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.11"></span>πνεῦμα πύθωνα</span>. The apostle did not
share this opinion but treated the case as one of demoniacal
possession.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[i:823](1110040.htm#fr_822.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p9.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p10"></span> B. and Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.2"></span>βούλετο λοιπὸν ἀξιόπιστον ἑαυτὸν</span> (B.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.3"></span>αὐτὸν</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.4"></span>ποιεῖν</span>. The other
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.5"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.7"></span>βούλετο</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.9"></span>βουλεύετο</span> A.C.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.10"></span>γὰρ μὴ ἀξ. αὐτὸν
ποιεῖν</span>: wished to make him (Paul) not credible. That the former
is the true reading, is shown by what follows: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.11"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.12"></span>να στήσῃ τὰ ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ</span>: i.e., to gain
credit with the believers in order to deceive them afterwards. In the
next clause, we read with Cat. and Sav. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.13"></span>τὰ καθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ</span>, our <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.14"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.15"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p10.16"></span>αυτοὺς</span>, and so the
other Edd.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[i:824](1110040.htm#fr_823.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p10.19"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p11"></span> The scribe has copied the parts in the
order 1, 3, 5: 2, 4, 6. See p. 213, note 5.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[i:825](1110040.htm#fr_824.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p11.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p12"></span> Edd. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.2"></span>Επειδὴ γὰρ</span>, and join this sentence with
the following. The compiler of the Catena perceived that the
Recapitulation begins with the next sentence, which he therefore gives
to [Acts 16.13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.3"></span>, though he repeats it wrongly under [Acts
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.4"></span>.—Mod. text, inserts the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p12.5"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p12.6"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἴδωμεν κ. τ.
λ</span>. before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.7"></span>Γνύη, φ., πορφυρόπωλις</span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[i:826](1110040.htm#fr_825.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p12.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p13"></span> This is the first recorded instance of
the persecution of Christians by the Roman power. Hitherto the
persecutions have proceeded from the Jews and here it is inflicted upon
the Christians because they are considered to be Jews who were now under
special disfavor, having been shortly before banished from Rome by
Claudius.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[i:827](1110040.htm#fr_826.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p14.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p15"></span> Here mod. text. “But let us look over
again what has been said. ‘A woman,’ it says, ‘a seller of purple,’”
etc.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[i:828](1110040.htm#fr_827.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p15.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p16"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.2"></span>τὸ γὰρ κηρύττειν οὐκ ἀνθρώπων ἀλλὰ Πν. ᾽Επεὶ
οὖν ἀλαζονικῶς ἐποίουν βοῶντες κ. τ. λ</span>. The passage needs
emendation. We read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.3"></span>οὐκ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.4"></span>οὖν</span>. “They did not catch at praise,
least of all from a demon: for they were no braggarts, knowing that the
power to preach was not of men,” etc.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[i:829](1110040.htm#fr_828.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p16.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.1"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.2"></span>να μείζονος θαύματος αἴτιοι γένωνται</span>.
B. Cat. Sav. marg. The other <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.4"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p17.5"></span>να μείζονος ἄξιοι θαύμ. γ</span>., “They
forbear to answer, so as to become worthy of more admiration.” Hence
this clause has been transposed. We refer it to [Acts
16.23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p17.6"></span>.
“The magistrates give order for their safe custody, thereby becoming the
means of a greater miracle.”

<span id="fn_829"></span>[i:830](1110040.htm#fr_829.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p19"></span> B. C , <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p19.1"></span>καὶ χωρὶς τῆς ἀληθειας, ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ
πράγματι</span>. A. and mod. text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p19.2"></span>καὶ χ. τῆς βοηθείας αὐτῷ. τῷ. πρ</span>.,
“even without the Divine succour, even though that had been withheld,
yet their sufferings were *ipso facto* a benefit.” But this alteration
is not necessary. “Even apart from the Truth which they
preached,—irrespectively of the fact that they were preachers of the
Truth—their sufferings were a benefit. Even though they were deceived,
and not preachers of the Truth, they gained by suffering: it made them
strong,” etc.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[i:831](1110040.htm#fr_830.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p21"></span> As no “secondly” follows this “first,”
the scribes have supplied the seeming deficiency: thus N. (Sav. marg.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p21.1"></span>πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι τὸ
σῶμα ἀνεπιτήδειον πρὸς πάντα καὶ ἐκνενευρισμένον ἐστί· δευτέρον δὲ ὅτι
καὶ</span>—. Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p21.2"></span>Πρ. μὲν γὰρ τοῦ τοιούτου τὸ σῶμα αὐτὸ ἔκλυτον
καὶ πεπλαδηκός· ἔπειτα καὶ</span>—.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[i:832](1110040.htm#fr_831.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p21.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p22"></span> Mod. text, “his eyes watery, his mouth
smelling of wine.” It is evident that Chrys. is very imperfectly
reported here.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[i:833](1110040.htm#fr_832.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p23.1"></span>τέφρα καὶ κόνις γίνεται</span>. Unless there
be an hiatus here, the meaning is, he has no more solidity in him than
so much ashes and dust.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[i:834](1110040.htm#fr_833.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p24"></span> Mod. text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p24.1"></span>πρὸς δόξαν μόνον, πρὸς ἡδονην</span>: “but
only to vainglory, to pleasure.”

<span id="fn_834"></span>[i:835](1110040.htm#fr_834.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.1"></span>ποιεῖ αὐτους βρύχειν καὶ ὠμοδιᾷν</span> (r.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p25.2"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p25.3"></span>μωδιᾷν</span>). In [Jer.
31.29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.4"></span>[Jer.
xxxi.](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p25.5"></span>
(Gr. xxxviii.) 29, the phrase is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.6"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.7"></span>δόντες τῶν τέκνων ᾑμωδίασαν</span> and so
Hippocrat. uses the verb. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.8"></span>αἱμωδιᾷν</span>. But as Ed. Par. Ben. 2,
remarks, the passage of Jer. is sometimes cited with <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p25.9"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxv-p25.10"></span>μωδίασαν</span>; *Synops.
Athanas.* t. ii. 167. *Isidor. Pelus.* iv. [Ep.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.xxxv-p25.11"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[i:836](1110040.htm#fr_835.md) <span
id="vi.xxxv-p25.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p26"></span> Here, Edd. before Par. Ben. 2, adopt the
amplified peroration of D. F. “Covetings, wrath, envyings, strifes,
grudgings, emulations, and all the other passions. In these we ought to
aim at being inactive, and with all earnestness to do the work of the
virtues, that we may attain,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXVI on Acts xvi. 25, 26.](1110041.md)
