[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110082)  [Next](1110084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxii"></span> <span id="vii.xxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XX.</span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p2"></span>[Rom. XII.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p3"></span>“I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.”

<span id="vii.xxii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxii-p4.1"></span>After</span> discoursing at large upon the
love of God toward man, and pointing out His unspeakable concern for us,
and unutterable goodness, which cannot even be searched into, he next
puts it forward with a view of persuading those who have received the
benefit to exhibit a conversation worthy of the gift. And though he is
so great and good a person, yet he does not decline beseeching them, and
that not for any enjoyment he was likely to get himself, but for that
they would have to gain. And why wonder that he does not decline
beseeching, where he is even putting God’s mercies before them? For
since, he means, it is from this you have those numberless blessings,
from the mercies of God, reverence them, be moved to compassion by them.
For they themselves take the attitude of suppliants, that you would show
no conduct unworthy of them. I entreat you then, he means, by the very
things through which ye were saved. As if any one who wished to make a
person, who had had great kindnesses done him, show regard, was to bring
him the benefactor himself as a suppliant. And what dost thou beseech?
let me hear. “That ye would present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.” For when
he had said sacrifice, to prevent any from thinking he bade them kill
themselves, he forthwith added (Greek order) “living.” Then to
distinguish it from the Jewish, he calls it “holy, acceptable to God,
your reasonable <span id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520.md) service.” For
theirs was a material one, and not very acceptable either. <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521.md) Since He saith, “Who hath required
this at your hands?” (<span id="vii.xxii-p6.3"></span>[Isa. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxii-p6.4"></span>..md)
And in sundry other passages He clearly throws them aside. For it was
not this, but this with the other, that He looked to have presented.
Wherefore he saith, “The sacrifice of praise shall glorify Me.” And
again, “I will praise the name of my God with a song, and this shall
please him better than a bullock that putteth forth horns and hoofs.”
(<span id="vii.xxii-p6.5"></span>[Ps. l.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p6.6"></span>;
lxix. 30, 31.) And so in another place He rejects it, and says, “Shall I
eat the flesh of bulls, or drink goat’s blood?” ([Ps.
50.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxii-p6.7"></span>.md)
and proceeds with, “Offer unto God a sacrifice of praise, and pay thy
vows unto the Most High.” ([Ps.
50.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p6.8"></span>.) So Paul also here bids us “present our
bodies a living sacrifice.” And how is the body, it may be said, to
become a sacrifice? Let the eye look upon no evil thing, and it hath
become a sacrifice; let thy tongue speak nothing filthy, and it hath
become an offering; let thine hand do no lawless deed, and it hath
become a whole burnt offering. Or rather this is not enough, but we must
have good works also: let the hand do alms, the mouth bless them that
cross one, and the hearing find leisure evermore for lections of
Scripture. <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522.md) For sacrifice
allows of no unclean thing: sacrifice is a first-fruit of the other
actions. Let us then from our hands, and feet, and mouth, and all other
members, yield a first-fruit unto God. Such a sacrifice is well
pleasing, as that of the Jews was even unclean, for, “their sacrifices,”
it says, “are unto them as the bread of mourning.” ([Hos. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxii-p7.6"></span>..md)
Not so ours. That presented the thing sacrificed dead: this maketh the
thing sacrificed to be living. For when we have mortified our members,
then we shall be able to live. For the law of this sacrifice is new, and
so the sort of fire is a marvellous one. For it needeth no wood or
matter under it; but our fire liveth <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523.md) of itself, and doth not burn up the
victim, but rather quickeneth it. This was the sacrifice that God sought
of old. Wherefore the Prophet saith, “The sacrifice of God is a broken
spirit.” (<span id="vii.xxii-p8.2"></span>[Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxii-p8.3"></span>..md)
And the three Children offer this when they say, “At this time there is
neither prince, or prophet, or leader, or burnt offering, or place to
sacrifice before Thee, and to find mercy. Nevertheless, in a contrite
heart and an humble spirit let us be accepted.” (<span
id="vii.xxii-p8.4"></span>Song of 3 Ch. 15, 16.) And observe how great
the exactness wherewith he useth each word. For he does not say, offer
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p8.5"></span>ποιήσατε</span>
<span id="vii.xxii-p8.6"></span>[Ex. xxix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p8.7"></span>.
LXX.) your bodies as a sacrifice, but “present” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p8.8"></span>παραστήσατε</span> see
below) them, as if he had said, never more have any interest in them. Ye
have given them up to another. For even they that furnish (same word)
the war-horses have no further interest in them. And thou too hast
presented thy members for the war against the devil and for that dread
battle-array. Do not let them down to selfish appliances. And he shows
another thing also from this, that one must make them approved, if one
means to present them. For it is not to any mortal being that we present
them, but to God, the King of the universe; not to war only, but to have
seated thereon the King Himself. For He doth not refuse even to be
seated upon our members, but even greatly desireth it. And what no king
who is but our fellow-servant would choose to do, that the Lord of
Angels chooseth. Since then it is both to be presented (i.e. as for a
King’s use) and is a sacrifice, rid it of every spot, since if it have a
spot, it will no longer be a sacrifice. For neither can the eye that
looks lecherously be sacrificed, nor the hand be presented that is
grasping and rapacious, nor the feet that go lame and go to play-houses,
nor the belly that is the slave of self-indulgence, and kindleth lusts
after pleasures, nor the heart that hath rage in it, and harlots’ love,
nor the tongue that uttereth filthy things. Hence we must spy out the
spots on our body upon every side. For if they that offered the
sacrifices of old were bid to look on every side, and were not permitted
to offer an animal “that hath anything superfluous or lacking, or is
scurvy, or scabbed” (<span id="vii.xxii-p8.9"></span>[Lev.
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxii-p8.10"></span>.md),
much more must we, who offer not senseless animals, but ourselves,
exhibit more strictness, and be pure in all respects, that we also may
be able to say as did Paul, “I am now ready to be offered, and the time
of my departure is at hand.” ([2 Tim. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxii-p8.11"></span>..md)
For he was purer than any sacrifice, and so he speaks of himself as
“ready to be offered.” But this will be brought about if we kill the old
man, if we mortify our members that are upon the earth, if we crucify
the world unto ourselves. In this way we shall not need the knife any
more, nor altar, nor fire, or rather we shall want all these, but not
made with the hands, but all of them will come to us from above, fire
from above, and knife also, and our altar will the breadth of Heaven be.
For if when Elijah offered the visible sacrifice, a flame, that came
down from above consumed the whole water, wood, and stones, much more
will this be done upon thee. And if thou hast aught in thee relaxed and
secular, and yet offerest the sacrifice with a good intention, the fire
of the Spirit will come down, and both wear away that worldliness, and
perfect (so Field: <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxii-p8.12"></span>mss.</span> “carry up”) the whole sacrifice.
But what is “reasonable (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p8.13"></span>λογικὴ</span>) service?” It means spiritual
ministry, conversation according to Christ. As then he that ministereth
in the house of God, and officiateth, of whatever sort he may be, then
collects himself (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p8.14"></span>συστέλλεται</span> [Ezek.
44.19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p8.15"></span>), and becomes more dignified; <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524.md) so we ought to be minded all our
whole life as serving and ministering. And this will be so, if every day
you bring Him sacrifices (3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxii-p9.4"></span>mss.</span> “thyself as a sacrifice”), and
become the priest of thine own body, and of the virtue of thy soul; as,
for example, when you offer soberness, when alms-giving, when goodness
and forbearance. For in doing this thou offerest “a reasonable service”
(or worship, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p9.5"></span>λατρείαν</span>), that is, one without aught
that is bodily, gross, visible. Having then raised the hearer by the
names bestowed, and having shown that each man is a priest of his own
flesh by his conversation, he mentions also the way whereby we may
compass all this. What then is the way?

<span id="vii.xxii-p10"></span>[Rom.
12.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p10.1"></span>.
“And be not fashioned <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525.md) after
this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind.”

<span id="vii.xxii-p12"></span>For the fashion of this world is
grovelling and worthless, and but for a time, neither hath ought of
loftiness, or lastingness, or straightforwardness, but is wholly
perverted. If then thou wouldest walk upright (or aright <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p12.1"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p12.2"></span>ρθὰ</span>), figure not
thyself after the fashion of this life present. For in it there is
nought abiding or stable. And this is why he calls it a *fashion* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p12.3"></span>σχἥμα</span>); and so in
another passage, “the fashion of this world passeth away.” (<span
id="vii.xxii-p12.4"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="vii.xxii-p12.5"></span>..md)
For it hath no durability or fixedness, but all in it is but for a
season; and so he calls it this age (or world, Gr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p12.6"></span>αἰ& 241·ν</span>), hereby
to indicate its liableness to misfortune, and by the word fashion its
unsubstantialness. For speak of riches, or of glory, or beauty of
person, or of luxury, or of whatever other of its seemingly great things
you will, it is a fashion only, not reality, a show and a mask, not any
abiding substance (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p12.7"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p12.8"></span>πόστασις</span>). But “be not thou fashioned
after this, but be transformed,” he says, “by the renewing of your
mind.” He says not change the fashion, but “be transformed” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p12.9"></span>μεταμορφοὕ</span>), to
show that the world’s ways are a fashion, but virtue’s not a fashion,
but a kind of real form, <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526.md) with
a natural beauty of its own, lacking not the trickeries and fashions of
outward things, which no sooner appear than they go to nought. For all
these things, even before they come to light, are dissolving. If then
thou throwest the fashion aside, thou wilt speedily come to the
form. <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527.md) For nothing is more
strengthless than vice, nothing so easily wears old. Then since it is
likely that being men they would sin every day, he consoles his hearer
by saying, “renew thyself” from day to day. This is what we do with
houses, we keep constantly repairing them as they wear old, and so do
thou unto thyself. Hast thou sinned to-day? hast thou made thy soul old?
despair not, despond not, but renew it by repentance, and tears (Hilary
on [Ps. cxix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p14.5"></span>), and confession, and by doing of good
things. And never fail of doing this. And how are we to do this?

<span id="vii.xxii-p15"></span>“That ye may prove (things more expedient
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p15.1"></span>διαφέροντα</span>), and know <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) .md) what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God.”

<span id="vii.xxii-p17"></span>Either he means by this, be renewed, that
ye may learn what is more expedient for you, and what the will of God.
Or rather, that ye can get so renewed if ye learn the things expedient,
and what God may will. For if thou see this, and know how to distinguish
the nature of things, thou art in possession of the whole way of virtue.
And who, it may be said, is ignorant of what is expedient, and what is
the will of God? They that are flurried with the things of this world,
they that deem riches an enviable thing, they that make light of
poverty, they that follow after power, they that are gaping after
outward glory, they that think themselves great men when they raise fine
houses, and buy costly sepulchres, and keep herds of slaves, and carry a
great swarm of eunuchs about with them; these know not what is expedient
for them, or what the will of God is. For both of these are but one
thing. For God willeth what things are expedient for us, and what God
willeth, that is also expedient for us. What then are the things which
God willeth? to live in poverty, in lowliness of mind, in contempt of
glory; in continency, not in self-indulgence; in tribulation, not in
ease; in sorrow, not in dissipation and laughter; in all the other
points whereon He hath given us laws. But the generality do even think
these things of ill omen; <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529.md) so
far are they from thinking them expedient, and the will of God. This
then is why they never can come near even to the labors for virtue’s
sake. For they that do not know so much even as what virtue may be, but
reverence vice in its place, and take unto their bed the harlot instead
of the modest wife, how are they to be able to stand aloof from the
present world? Wherefore we ought above all to have a correct estimate
of things, and even if we do not follow after virtue, to praise virtue,
and even if we do not avoid vice, to stigmatize vice, that so far we may
have our judgments uncorrupted. For so as we advance on our road, we
shall be able to lay hold on the realities. This then is why he also
bids you be renewed, “that ye may prove what is the will of God.” But
here he seems to me to be attacking the Jews too, who cling to the Law.
For the old dispensation was a will of God, yet not the ultimate
purpose, but allowed owing to their feebleness. But that which is a
perfect one, and well-pleasing, is the new conversation. So too when he
called it “a reasonable service,” it was to set it in contrast with that
other (v. note p. 496) that he gave it such a name.

<span id="vii.xxii-p19"></span>[Rom.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p19.1"></span>.
“For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among
you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to
think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of
faith.”

<span id="vii.xxii-p20"></span>After saying above, “I beseech you by the
mercies,” here he says again, “by the grace.” Observe the teacher’s
lowliness of mind, observe a spirit quite subdued! He means to say that
he is in no respect worthy to be trusted in such an exhortation and
counsel. But at one time he takes the mercies of God along with him, at
another His grace. It is not my word, he would say, that I am speaking,
but one from God. And he does not say, For I say unto you by the wisdom
of God, or, for I say unto you by the Law given of God, but, “by the
grace,” so reminding them continually of the benefits done them, so as
to make them more submissive, and to show that even on this account,
they were under an obligation to obey what is here said. “To every man
that is among you.” Not to this person and to that merely, but to the
governor and to the governed, to the slave and to the free, to the
unlearned and to the wise, to the woman and to the man, to the young and
to the old. For the Law is common to all as being the Lord’s. And by
this he likewise makes his language inoffensive, setting the lessons he
gives to all, even to such as do not come under them, that those who do
come under them may with more willingness accept such a reproof and
correction. And what dost thou say? Let me hear. “Not to think more
highly than he ought to think.” Here he is bringing before us the mother
of good deeds, which is lowliness of mind, in imitation of his own
Master. For as He, when He went up into the mountain, and was going to
give a tissue of moral precepts, took this for his first beginning, and
made this the foundation, in the words, “Blessed are the poor in spirit”
([Matt. v. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p20.1"></span>); so Paul too, as he has now passed from the
doctrinal parts to those of a more practical kind, has taught us virtue
in general terms, by requiring of us the admirable sacrifice; and being
on the point of giving a more particular portrait of it, he begins from
lowliness of mind as from the head, and tells us, “not to think more
highly of one’s self than one ought to think,” (for this is His will),
(many <span class="c14"><span id="vii.xxii-p20.2"></span>mss.</span> om.
for etc.), “but to think soberly.” But what he means is about this. We
have received wisdom not that we should use it to make us haughty, but
to make us sober-minded. And he does not say in order to be lowly in
mind, but in order to sobriety, meaning by sobriety (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p20.3"></span>σωφροσύνη</span>) here
not that virtue which contrasts with lewdness, nor the being free from
intemperance, but being sober and healthful in mind. And the Greek name
of it means keeping the mind safe. <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530.md) To show then that he who is not
thus modest (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p21.2"></span>μετριάζοντα</span>), cannot be sober either,
that is, cannot be staid and healthful minded (because such an one is
bewildered, and out, of his wits, and is more crazed than any madman),
he calls lowliness of mind, soberness of mind.

<span id="vii.xxii-p22"></span>“According as God hath dealt to every man
the measure of faith.” For since having gifts given them had made many
unreasonably elated, both with these and with the Corinthians, see how
he lays open the cause of the disease, and gradually removes it. For
after saying that we should think soberly, he proceeds, “according as
God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith,” meaning here the gift
by faith: and by using the word “dealt,” he solaces him who had the
less, and humbles him who had the greater share. For if God dealt it,
and it is no achievement of thine, why think highly of thyself? But if
any one says that faith here does not mean the gift, this would only the
more show that he was humbling the vain boasters. For if that which is
the cause of the gift (so Field with most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxii-p22.1"></span>mss.</span>: Vulg. “If the faith by which
miracles are wrought is the cause of the gift”), that faith by which
miracles are wrought, be itself from God, on what ground dost thou think
highly of thyself? If He had not come, or been incarnate, then the
things of faith would not have fared well either. And it is from hence
that all the good things take their rise. But if it is He that giveth
it, He knoweth how He dealeth it. For He made all, and taketh like care
of all. And as His giving came of His love towards man, so doth the
quantity which He giveth. For was He Who had shown His goodness in
regard to the main point, which is the giving of the gift, likely to
neglect thee in regard to the measure? For had He wished to do thee
dishonor, then He had not given them at all. But if to save thee and to
honor thee was what He had in view (and for this He came and distributed
such great blessings), why art thou confounded and disturbed, and
abusest thy wisdom to foolishness, making thyself more disgraceful than
one who is by nature so? For being foolish by nature is no ground of
complaint. But being foolish through wisdom, is at once bereaving one’s
self of excuse, and running into greater punishment.

<span id="vii.xxii-p23"></span>Such then are those, who pride themselves
upon their wisdom, and fall into the excess of recklessness. <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531.md) For recklessness of all things
makes a person a fool. Wherefore the Prophet calls the barbarian by this
name. But “the fool,” he says, “shall speak folly.” ([Is. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.1"></span>..md)
But that you may see the folly of him from his own words, hear what he
says. “Above the stars of heaven will I place my throne, and I will be
like the Most High.” ([Isa. 14.14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p24.2"></span>.) “I will take hold of the world as a nest,
and as eggs that are left will I take them away.” ([Isa.
10.14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p24.3"></span>.) Now what can be more foolish than these
words? And every instance of haughty language immediately draws on
itself this reproach. And if I were to set before you every expression
of them that are reckless, you would not be able to distinguish whether
the words are those of a reckless man or a fool. So entirely the same is
this failing and that. And another of a strange nation says again, “I am
God and not man” ([Ezek. 28.2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p24.4"></span>); and another again, Can God save you, or
deliver you out of my hand?” (<span id="vii.xxii-p24.5"></span>[Dan.
iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.xxii-p24.6"></span>.) And the Egyptian too, “I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go.”( [Ex. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.7"></span>..md)
And the foolish body in the Psalmist is of this character, who hath
“said in his heart, There is no God.” ([Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.8"></span>..md)
And Cain, “Am I my brother’s keeper?” ([Gen. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.9"></span>..md)
Can you now distinguish whether the words are those of the reckless or
those of the fool? For recklessness going out of due bounds, and being a
departure from reason (whence its name recklessness, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p24.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p24.11"></span>πόνοια</span>), maketh
men both fools and vainglorious. For likewise, “the beginning of wisdom
is the fear of the Lord” ([Prov. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.12"></span>.md),
so then the beginning of folly is surely not knowing the Lord. If then
knowing be wisdom, and not knowing Him folly, and this ignorance come of
haughtiness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p24.13"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p24.14"></span>περηφανία</span>), (for the beginning of
haughtiness is the not knowing of the Lord), then is haughtiness the
extreme of folly. Such was Nabal, if not to Godward, at least toward
man, having become senseless from his recklessness. But he afterwards
died of fear. For when any falleth from the measure of wisdom, he
becomes at once a coward and bold (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p24.15"></span>θρασυδειλοὶ</span> Ar. *Eth.* iii.), his
soul having been made feeble. For as the body when it loseth its proper
tone having become out of condition, is a prey to any disease, thus too
the soul when it hath lost its greatness of nature and lowly-mindedness,
having gotten any feeble habit (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p24.16"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p24.17"></span>ξιν</span>), becomes fearful, as well as
bold and unreasonable, and loses its powers of self-consciousness. And
he that has lost these, how is he to know things above himself? For as
he that is seized with a frenzy, when he has so lost them, knoweth not
even what is right before him; and the eye, when it is dimmed, darkeneth
all the other members; so doth it happen with this recklessness.
Wherefore these are more miserable than the mad, or than those silly by
nature. For like them they stir laughter, and like them they are
ill-tempered. And they are out of their wits as the others are, but they
are not pitied as they are. And they are beside themselves, as are
these, but they are not excused, as are these, but are hated only. And
while they have the failings of either, they are bereaved of the excuse
of either, being ridiculous not owing to their words only, but to their
whole appearance also. For why, pray, dost thou stiffen up thy neck? or
why walk on tiptoe? why knit up thy brows? why stick thy breast out?
Thou canst not make one hair white or black, ([Matt. v.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036)<span id="vii.xxii-p24.18"></span>.md)
and thou goest with as lofty gait as if thou couldest command
everything. No doubt thou wouldest like to have wings, and not go upon
the earth at all! No doubt thou wouldest wish to be a prodigy! For hast
thou not made thyself prodigious now, when thou art a man and triest to
fly? or rather flying from within, and bloated in every limb? What shall
I call thee to quit thee of thy recklessness? Shall I call thee ashes,
and dust, and smoke, and pother? I have described thy worthlessness to
be sure, but still I have not laid hold of the exact image I wanted. For
I want to put their bloatedness before me, and all its emptiness. What
image am I to find then which will suit with all this? To me it seems to
be like tow in a blaze. For it seems to swell when lighted, and to lift
itself up; but when it is submitted to a slight touch of the hand, it
all tumbles down, and turns out to be more worthless than the veriest
ashes. Of this sort are the souls of these men; that empty inflatedness
of theirs even the commonest attack may humble and bring down. For he
that behaves recklessly must of necessity be a thoroughly feeble person,
since the height he has is not a sound one, but even as bubbles are
easily burst, so are these men easily undone. But if thou dost not
believe, give me a bold reckless fellow, and you will find him more
cowardly than a hare even at the most trivial circumstance. For as the
flame that rises from dry sticks is no sooner lighted than it becomes
dust, but stiff logs do not by their nature easily kindle up, and then
keep up their flame a long time burning; so souls that be stern and firm
are not easily kindled or extinguished; but these men undergo both of
these in a single moment. Since then we know this, let us practise
humble-mindedness. For there is nothing so powerful as it, since it is
stronger even than a rock and harder than adamant, and places us in a
safety greater than that of towers and cities and walls, being too high
for any of the artillery of the devil. As then recklessness makes men an
easy prey even to ordinary occurrences, being, as I was saying, easier
broken than a bubble, and rent more speedily than a spider’s web, and
more quickly dissolved than a smoke; that we then may be walking upon
the strong rock, let us leave that and take to this. For thus in this
life present we shall find rest, and shall in the world to come have
every blessing, by the grace and love toward man, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[i:1521](1110083.htm#fr_1520.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p5"></span> Reasonable is here used for what has been
termed super-sensuous, as in the Syriac, and later Latin, see p. 498.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[i:1522](1110083.htm#fr_1521.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p6"></span> Evidently Chrys. understands by <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>λογικήν</span> here
rational as opposed to material service such as the Jews offered in
animal sacrifices. Others have understood of it of spiritual service as
opposed to the superstitious service of the heathen (Calvin). Others
find in it a contrast with the irrational animals (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p6.2"></span>ζῶα ἄλογα</span>) offered
in sacrifice (Theodoret, Grotius). The first view is preferable.
*Christianus omnia recte reputat, et ex beneficio Dei miserentis
colligit offcium suum,* says Bengel.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[i:1523](1110083.htm#fr_1522.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p6.9"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p7.1"></span>θείαις ἀκροάσεσιν</span>. See Suicer in <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p7.3"></span>κροάομαι</span>. lit.
“divine hearings.” The place where those stood who were not yet admitted
to Communion, but heard the Scriptures read, was called the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p7.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p7.5"></span>κρόασις</span> or hearing;
here the act of hearing is meant.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[i:1524](1110083.htm#fr_1523.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p7.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p8"></span> 2 or 3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxii-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> “boileth” which Heyse prefers.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[i:1525](1110083.htm#fr_1524.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p8.16"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p9.1"></span>σεμνότερος</span>, which implies reverence as
well as dignity. The word before probably refers also to dress. See
<span id="vii.xxii-p9.2"></span>[Ex. xxviii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p9.3"></span>,
but in this case the outward act so truly represents the inward, that it
is difficult to separate them.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[i:1526](1110083.htm#fr_1525.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p11"></span> A.V. conformed to. The translation is
altered to express the distinction noticed in the comment.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[i:1527](1110083.htm#fr_1526.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p12.10"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p13.1"></span>μορφὴ</span>. See [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p13.2"></span>,
and St. Chrysostom on the passage, Hom. vi. pp. 363, sqq. O.T.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[i:1528](1110083.htm#fr_1527.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p14"></span> The two words here rendered: “be
fashioned” and “be transformed” differ as the terms (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p14.1"></span>σχῆμα</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxii-p14.2"></span>μορφή</span>) which
underlie them differ. “The term <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p14.3"></span>μορφή</span>, *form,* strictly denotes, not
an external pose suitable for imitation, like <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p14.4"></span>σχῆμα</span>, *attitude,* but an *organic
form,* the natural product of a principle of life which manifests itself
thus.” Godet. “Be not conformed, but be transformed” (A.V.) marks well
the distinction.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[i:1529](1110083.htm#fr_1528.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p16"></span> See the note of Matthiæ on the place.
Nearly all <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> have and know; it seems a slip of
memory; see <span id="vii.xxii-p16.2"></span>[Rom. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.xxii-p16.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[i:1530](1110083.htm#fr_1529.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p18.1"></span>οἰωνίζονται</span> v. Jung. ad J. Poll. v.
163. Dem. adv. Aristog. 1. (794, 5), it means to make a sign of
detestation on meeting anything counted unlucky.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[i:1531](1110083.htm#fr_1530.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxii-p21.1"></span>σώζουσαν τὴν φρόνησιν</span>, Aristot. *Eth.*
vi.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[i:1532](1110083.htm#fr_1531.md) <span
id="vii.xxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p24"></span> This word has been sometimes translated
haughtiness, but means something more; usually the recklessness of
despair, but sometimes that of pride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXI on Rom. xii. 4, 5.](1110084.md)
