[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110033)  [Next](1110035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxix"></span> <span id="vi.xxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxix-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIX.</span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p2"></span>[Acts
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p3"></span>“Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his
hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience. The God
of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when
they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm
brought He them out of it.”

<span id="vi.xxix-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxix-p4.1"></span>Behold</span> Barnabas giving place to Paul—how
should it be otherwise?—to him whom he brought from Tarsus; just as we
find John on all occasions giving way to Peter: and yet Barnabas was
more looked up to than Paul: true, but they had an eye only to the
common advantage. “Then Paul stood up,” it says;—this <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) was a custom of the Jews—“and beckoned
with his hand.” And see how he prepares the way beforehand for his
discourse: having first praised them, and showed his great regard for
them in the words, “ye that fear God,” he so begins his discourse. And
he says not, Ye proselytes, since it was a term of disadvantage. <span
id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661) “The God of this people chose our
fathers: and the people”—See, he calls God Himself *their* God
peculiarly, Who is the common God of men; and shows how great from the
first were His benefits, just as Stephen does. This they do to teach
them, that now also God has acted after the same custom, in sending His
own Son; ([Luke xx. 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xxix-p6.3"></span>): as (Christ) Himself (does) in the parable of
the vineyard—“And the people,” he says, “He exalted when it sojourned in
the land of Egypt”—and yet the contrary was the case: <span
id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) true, but they increased in numbers;
moreover, the miracles were wrought on their account: “and with an high
arm brought He them out of it.” Of these things (the wonders) which were
done in Egypt, the prophets are continually making mention. And observe,
how he passes over the times of their calamities, and nowhere brings
forward their faults, but only God’s kindness, leaving those for
themselves to think over. “And about the time of forty years suffered He
their manners in the wilderness.” ([Acts
13.18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018)<span id="vi.xxix-p7.4"></span>.)
Then the settlement. “And when he had destroyed seven nations in the
land of Canaan, He divided their land to them by lot.” ([Acts
13.19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxix-p7.5"></span>.)
And the time was long; four hundred and fifty years. “And after that He
gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years,
until Samuel the prophet.” <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663)
([Acts 13.20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xxix-p8.8"></span>.) Here he shows that God varied His
dispensations towards them (at divers times). “And afterward they
desired a king:” and (still) not a word of their ingratitude, but
throughout he speaks of the kindness of God. “And God gave unto them
Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of
forty years.” ([Acts 13.21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xxix-p8.9"></span>.) “And when he had removed him, He raised up
unto them David to be their king: to whom also He gave testimony, and
said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after Mine own heart,
which shall fulfil all My will. Of this man’s seed hath God according to
His promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus.” ([Acts
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)<span id="vi.xxix-p8.10"></span>.)
This was no small thing that Christ should be from David. Then John
bears witness to this: “When John had first preached before His coming
the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. And as John
fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not He.
But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of His feet I am not
worthy to loose.” ([Acts 13:0](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#000), [Acts
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#000), [Acts
25:0](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#000)<span id="vi.xxix-p8.11"></span>.)
And John too not merely bears witness (to the fact), but (does it in
such sort that) when men were bringing the glory to him, he declines it:
for it is one thing (not to affect) an honor which nobody thinks of
offering; and another, to reject it when all men are ready to give it,
and not only to reject it, but to do so with such humility. “Men and
brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you
feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. For they that
dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew Him not, nor yet
the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning Him. And though they found no cause of
death in Him, yet desired they Pilate that He should be slain.” ([Acts
13.26-28](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxix-p8.12"></span>.) On all occasions we find them making a
great point of showing this, that the blessing is peculiarly theirs,
that they may not flee (from Christ), as thinking they had nothing to do
with Him, because they had crucified Him. “Because they knew Him not,”
he says: so that the sin was one of ignorance. See how he gently makes
an apology even on behalf of those (crucifiers). And not only this: but
he adds also, that thus it must needs be. And <span
id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) how so? “By condemning Him, they
fulfilled the voices of the prophets.” Then again from the Scriptures.
“And when they had fulfilled all that was written of Him, they took Him
down from the tree, and laid Him in a sepulchre. But God raised Him from
the dead. And He was seen many days of them which came up with Him from
Galilee to Jerusalem, who are His witnesses unto the people—”([Acts
13.29-31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p9.9"></span>) that He rose again. “And we declare unto you
glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God
hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that He hath raised
up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art My
Son, this day have I begotten Thee. And as concerning that He raised Him
up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, He said on this
wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he saith also
in another Psalm, Thou shalt not suffer Thine Holy One to see
corruption. For David, after he had served his own generation by the
will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw
corruption: but He, Whom God raised again, saw no corruption. Be it
known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this Man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by Him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses.” ([Acts
13.32-39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032)<span
id="vi.xxix-p9.10"></span>.) Observe <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) how Paul here is more vehement in his
discourse: we nowhere find Peter saying this. Then too he adds the
terrifying words: “Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is
spoken of in the prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish:
for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise
believe, though a man declare it unto you.” ([Acts
13:40](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)<span id="vi.xxix-p10.4"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xxix-p11"></span>(*a*) Observe <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) how he twines (the thread of) his
discourse (alternately) from things present, from the prophets. Thus,
“from <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) (this man’s) seed
according to the promise”—( [Acts
13.23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxix-p13.6"></span>): (*c*) the name of David was dear to them;
well then, is it not (a thing to be desired) that a son of his, he says,
should be their king?—(*b*) then he adduces John: then again the
prophets, where he says, “By condemning they fulfilled,” and again, “All
that was written:” then the Apostles as witnesses of the Resurrection:
then David bearing witness. For neither the Old Testament proofs seemed
so cogent when taken by themselves as they are in this way, nor yet the
latter testimonies apart from the former: wherefore he makes them
mutually confirm each other. “Men and brethren,” etc. ([Acts
13.26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxix-p13.7"></span>.) For since they were possessed by fear, as
having slain Him, and conscience made them aliens (the Apostles),
discourse not with them as unto Christicides, neither as putting into
their hands a good which was not theirs, but one peculiarly their own.
(*d*) “For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers:” as much as
to say, not ye, but they: <span id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) and
again, apologizing even for those, “Because they knew Him not, and the
voices of the Prophets which are read every sabbath day, in condemning
Him, they fulfilled them.” A great charge it is against them that they
continually hearing heeded not. But no marvel: for what was said above
concerning Egypt and the wilderness, was enough to show their
ingratitude. And observe how this Apostle also, as one moved by the
Spirit Himself, <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) continually
preaches the Passion, the Burial. (*g*) “Having taken Him down from the
tree.” Observe, what a great point they make of this. He speaks of the
manner of His death. Moreover they bring Pilate (conspicuously) forward,
that (the fact of) the Passion may be proved by the mention of the
tribunal (by which he was condemned), but at the same time, for the
greater impeachment of those (His crucifiers), seeing they delivered Him
up to an alien. And he does not say, They made a complaint (against
Him), (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p15.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p15.4"></span>νέτυχον</span>, al. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p15.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p15.6"></span>ντυγχάνει</span>) but,
“They desired, though having found no cause of death” (in Him), “that He
should be slain. (*e*) Who appeared,” he says, “for many days to them
that came up with Him from Galilee to Jerusalem.” ([Rom. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxix-p15.7"></span>.)
Instead of <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) \*\* he says, “Who
are His witnesses unto the people,” to wit, “The men which came up with
Him from Galilee to Jerusalem.” Then he produces David and Esaias
bearing witness. “The faithful (mercies),” the abiding (mercies), those
which never perish. (*h*) Paul loved them exceedingly. And observe, he
does not enlarge on the ingratitude of the fathers, but puts before
*them* what they must fear. For Stephen indeed with good reason does
this, seeing he was about to be put to death, not teaching them; and
showing them, that the Law is even now on the point of being abolished:
([Acts 7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#000)<span
id="vi.xxix-p16.8"></span>.) but not so Paul; he does but threaten and
put them in fear. (*f*) And he does not dwell long on these, <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) as taking it for granted that the word
is of course believed; nor enlarge upon the greatness of their
punishment, and assail that which they affectionately love, by showing
the Law about to be cast out: but dwells upon that which is for their
good (telling them), that great shall be the blessings for them being
obedient, and great the evils being disobedient.

<span id="vi.xxix-p18"></span>But let us look over again what has been
said. “Ye men of Israel,” etc. ([Acts
13.16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016)<span
id="vi.xxix-p18.1"></span>.) The Promise then, he says, the fathers
received; ye, the reality. (*j*) And observe, he nowhere mentions right
deeds of theirs, but (only) benefits on God’s part: “He chose: Exalted:
Suffered their manners:” these are no matters of praise to them: “They
asked, He gave.” But David he does praise (and him) only, because from
him the Christ was to come. “I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man
after Mine own heart, which shall fulfil all My will.” ([Acts
13.22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxix-p18.2"></span>.) (*i*) Observe also; it is with praise (that
he says of him), “David after that he had served the will of God:” just
as Peter—seeing it was then the beginning of the Gospel—making mention
of him, said, “Let it be permitted me to speak freely of the patriarch
David.” ([Acts 2.29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p18.3"></span>.) Also, he does not say, Died, but, “was
added to his fathers. (*k*) Of this man’s seed,” etc. “When John,” he
says, “had first preached before His entry”—by *entry* he means the
Incarnation—“the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.”
([Acts 13.23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxix-p18.4"></span>.) Thus also John, writing his Gospel,
continually has recourse to him: for his name was much thought of in all
parts of the world. And observe, he does not say it “Of this man’s
seed,” etc. from himself, but brings John’s testimony.

<span id="vi.xxix-p19"></span>“Men and brethren, children of the stock
of Abraham”—he also calls them after their father—“unto you was the word
of this salvation sent.” ([Acts
13.26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxix-p19.1"></span>.) Here the expression, “Unto you,” does not
mean, Unto (you) Jews, but it gives them a right to sever themselves
from those who dared that murder. And what he adds, shows this plainly.
“For,” he says, “they that dwell at Jerusalem, because they know Him
not.” ([Acts 13.27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xxix-p19.2"></span>.) And how, you will say, could they be
ignorant, with John to tell them? What marvel, seeing they were so, with
the prophets continually crying aloud to them? Then follows another
charge: “And having found no cause of death in Him:” in which ignorance
had nothing to do. For let us put the case, that they did not hold Him
to be the Christ: why did they also kill Him? And “they desired of
Pilate, he says, that He should be slain.” ([Acts
13.28](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xxix-p19.3"></span>.) “And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of Him.” ([Acts 13.29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p19.4"></span>.) Observe what a point he makes of showing
that the (whole) thing was a (Divine) Dispensation. See, <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) by saying what did they persuade men?
(By telling them) that He was crucified? Why, what could be less
persuasive than this? That He was buried—by them to whom it was promised
that He should be salvation? that He who was buried forgives sins, yea,
more than the Law (has power to do)? And (observe), he does not say,
From which ye would not but, “from which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses.” ([Acts 13.39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)<span
id="vi.xxix-p20.4"></span>.) “Every one,” he says: be who he may. For
those (ordinances) are of no use, unless there be some benefit (accruing
therefrom.) This is why he brings in forgiveness later: and shows it to
be greater, when, the thing being (otherwise) impossible, yet this is
effected. “Who are His witnesses,” he says, “unto the people”—the people
that slew Him. Who would never have been so, were they not strengthened
by a Divine Power: for they would never have borne such witness to
blood-thirsty men, to the very persons that killed Him. But, “He hath
raised up Jesus again: This day,” he says, “I have begotten thee.” <span
id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) ([Acts
13.33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xxix-p21.7"></span>.) Aye, upon this the rest follows of course.
Why did he not allege some text by which they would be persuaded that
forgiveness of sins is by Him? Because the great point with them was to
show, in the first place, that He was risen: this being acknowledged,
the other was unquestionable. “Through this man,” nay more, by Him, “is
remission of sins.” ([Acts 13.38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xxix-p21.8"></span>.) And besides, he wished to bring them to a
longing desire of this great thing. Well then, His death was not
dereliction, but fulfilling of Prophecy.—For the rest, he puts them in
mind of historical facts, wherein they through ignorance suffered evils
without number. And this he hints in the conclusion, saying, “Look, ye
despisers, and behold.” And observe how, this being harsh, he cuts it
short. Let not that, he says, come upon you, which was spoken for the
others, that “I work a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though
one declare it unto you.” ([Acts
13.41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)<span
id="vi.xxix-p21.9"></span>.) Marvel not that it seems incredible: this
very thing was foretold from the first—(that it would not be believed).
“Behold, ye despisers,” as regards those who disbelieve in the
Resurrection.

<span id="vi.xxix-p22"></span>This too might with reason be said to
us: <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) “Behold ye despisers.” For
the Church indeed is in very evil case, although ye think her affairs to
be in peace. For the mischief of it is, that while we labor under so
many evils, we do not even know that we have any. “What sayest thou? We
are in possession of our Churches, our Church property, and all the
rest, the services are held, the congregation comes to Church every
day.” <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) True, but one is not to
judge of the state of a Church from these things. From what then?
Whether there be piety, whether we return home with profit each day,
whether reaping some fruit, be it much or little, whether we do it not
merely of routine and for the formal acquittance of a duty (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p24.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p24.3"></span>φοσιούμενοι</span>). Who
has become a better man by attending (daily) service for a whole month?
That is the point: otherwise the very thing which seems to bespeak a
flourishing condition (of the Church,) does in fact bespeak an ill
condition, when all this is done, and nothing comes of it. Would to God
(that were all), that nothing comes of it: but indeed, as things are, it
turns out even for the worse. What fruit do ye get from your services?
Surely if you were getting any profit by them, ye ought to have been
long leading the life of true wisdom (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p24.4"></span>τἥς φιλοσοφίας</span>), with so many Prophets
twice in every week discoursing to you, so many Apostles, and
Evangelists, all setting forth the doctrines of salvation, and placing
before you with much exactness that which can form the character aright.
The soldier by going to his drill, becomes more perfect in his tactics:
the wrestler by frequenting the gymnastic ground becomes more skilful in
wrestling: the physician by attending on his teacher becomes more
accurate, and knows more, and learns more: and thou—what hast thou
gained? I speak not to those who have been members of the Church only a
year, but to those who from their earliest age have been attending the
services. Think you that to be religious is to be constant in
Church-going (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p24.5"></span>παραβάλλειν τᾕ συνάξει</span>)? This is
nothing, unless we reap some fruit for ourselves: if (from the gathering
together in Church) we do not gather (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p24.6"></span>συνάγωμεν</span>) something for ourselves, it
were better to remain at home. For our forefathers built the Churches
for us, not just to bring us together from our private houses and show
us one to another: since this could have been done also in a
market-place, and in baths, and in a public procession:—but to bring
together learners and teachers, and make the one better by means of the
other. With us it has all become mere customary routine, and formal
discharge of a duty: a thing we are used to; that is all. Easter comes,
and then great the stir, great the hubbub, and crowding of—I had rather
not call them human beings, for their behavior is not commonly human.
Easter goes, the tumult abates, but then the quiet which succeeds is
again fruitless of good. “Vigils, and holy hymn-singing.”—And what is
got by these? Nay, it is all the worse. Many do so merely out of vanity.
Think how sick at heart it must make me, to see it all like (so much
water) poured into a cask with holes in it! But ye will assuredly say to
me, We know the Scriptures. And what of that? If ye exemplify the
Scriptures by your works, that is the gain, that the profit. The Church
is a dyer’s vat: if time after time perpetually ye go hence without
receiving any dye, what is the use of coming here continually? Why, the
mischief is all the greater. Who (of you) has added ought to the
customary practices he received from his fathers? For example: such an
one has a custom of observing the memorial of his mother, or his wife,
or his child: this he does whether he be told or whether he be not told
by us, drawn to it by force of habit and conscience. Does this displease
thee, you ask? God forbid: on the contrary, I am glad of it with all my
heart: only, I would wish that he had gained some fruit also from our
discoursing, and that the effect which habit has, were also the effect
as regards us <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) (your
teachers)—the superinducing of another habit. Else why do I weary myself
in vain, and talk uselessly, if ye are to remain in the same state, if
the Church services work no good in you? Nay, you will say, we pray. And
what of that? “Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of My Father
which is in heaven.” ([Matt. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)<span id="vi.xxix-p25.6"></span>.)
Many a time have I determined to hold my peace, seeing no benefit
accruing to you from my words; or perhaps there does accrue some, but I,
through insatiableness and strong desire, am affected in the same way as
those that are mad after riches. For just as they, however much they may
get, think they have nothing; so I, because I ardently desire your
salvation, until I see you to have made good progress, think nothing
done, because of my exceeding eager desire that you should arrive at the
very summit. I would that this were the case, and that my eagerness were
in fault, not your sloth: but I fear I conjecture but too rightly. For
ye must needs be persuaded, that if any benefit had arisen in all this
length of time, we ought ere now to have done speaking. In such case,
there were no need to you of words, since both in those already spoken
there had been enough said for you, <span
id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) and you would be yourselves able to
correct others. But the fact, that there is still a necessity of our
discoursing to you, only shows, that matters with you are not in a state
of high perfection. Then what would we have to be brought about? for one
must not merely find fault. I beseech and entreat you not to think it
enough to have invaded <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) the
Church, but that ye also withdraw hence, having taken somewhat, some
medicine, for the curing of your own maladies: and, if not from us, at
any rate from the Scriptures, ye have the remedies suitable for each.
For instance, is any passionate? Let him attend to the
Scripture-readings, and he will of a surety find such either in history
or exhortation. In exhortation, when it is said, “The sway of his fury
is his destruction” ([Ecclesiasticus
1.22](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.5"></span>);
and, “A passionate man is not seemly” ([Prov. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.6"></span>);
and such like: and again, “A man full of words shall not prosper” (<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.7"></span>[Ps. cxl.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.8"></span>);
and Christ again, “He that is angry with his brother without a cause”
([Matt. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.9"></span>); and again the Prophet, “Be ye angry, and
sin not” ([Ps. iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.10"></span>); and, “Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce.” (<span id="vi.xxix-p27.11"></span>[Gen. xlix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.12"></span>.)
And in histories, as when thou hearest of Pharaoh filled with much
wrath, and the Assyrian. Again, is any one taken captive by love of
money? let him hear, that “There is not a more wicked thing than a
covetous man: for this man setteth even his own soul for sale”
([Ecclesiasticus 9.9](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.13"></span>); and how Christ saith, “Ye cannot serve God
and mammon” ([Matt. vi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.14"></span>); and the Apostle, that “the love of money
is a root of all evils” (<span id="vi.xxix-p27.15"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.16"></span>);
and the Prophet, “If riches flow in, set not your heart upon them” ([Ps.
lxii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.17"></span>); and many other like sayings. And from the
histories thou hearest of Gehazi, Judas, the chief scribes, and that
“gifts blind the eyes of the wise.” ([Exod.
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008), [Deut.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.18"></span>[Exod. xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.19"></span> and
[Deut. xvi. 19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.20"></span>.) Is another proud? Let him hear that “God
resisteth the proud” (<span id="vi.xxix-p27.21"></span>[James iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.22"></span>);
and, “Pride is the beginning of sin” ([Ecclesiasticus
10.14](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxix-p27.23"></span>) and, “Every one that hath a high heart, is
impure before the Lord.” (<span id="vi.xxix-p27.24"></span>[Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxix-p27.25"></span>.)
And in the histories, the devil, and all the rest. In a word, since it
is impossible to recount all, let each choose out from the Divine
Scriptures the remedies for his own hurts.

<span id="vi.xxix-p28"></span>So wash out, if not the whole at once, a
part at any rate, part today, and part tomorrow, and then the whole. And
with regard to repentance too, and confession, and almsgiving, and
justice also, and temperance, and all other things, thou wilt find many
examples. “For all these things,” says the Apostle, “were written for
our admonition.” (<span id="vi.xxix-p28.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="vi.xxix-p28.2"></span>.)
If then Scripture in all its discoursing is for our admonition, let us
attend to it as we ought. Why do we deceive ourselves in vain? I fear it
may be said of us also, that “our days have fallen short in vanity, and
our years with haste.” ([Psa.
78.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xxix-p28.3"></span>[Ps. lxxvii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#033)<span id="vi.xxix-p28.4"></span>.)
Who from hearing us has given up the theatres? Who has given up his
covetousness? Who has become more ready for almsgiving? I would wish to
know this, not for the sake of vainglory, but that I may be inspirited
to more zeal, seeing the fruit of my labors to be clearly evident. But
as things now are, how shall I put my hand to the work, when I see that
for all the rain of doctrine pouring down upon you shower after shower,
still our crops remain at the same measure, and the plants have waxed
none the higher? Anon the time of threshing is at hand (and) He with the
fan. I fear me, lest it be all stubble: I fear, lest we be all cast into
the furnace. The summer is past, the winter is come: we sit, both young
and old, taken captive by our own evil passions. Tell not me, I do not
commit fornication: for what art thou the better, if though thou be no
fornicator thou art covetous? It matters not to the sparrow caught in
the snare that he is not held tight in every part, but only by the foot:
he is a lost bird for all that; in the snare he is, and it profits him
not that he has his wings free, so long as his foot is held tight. Just
so, thou art caught, not by fornication, but by love of money: but
caught thou art nevertheless; and the point is, not *how* thou art
caught, but *that* thou art caught. Let not the young man say, I am no
money-lover: well, but perchance thou art a fornicator: and then again
what art thou the better? For the fact is, it is not possible for all
the passions to set upon us at one and the same time of life: they are
divided and marked off, and that, through the mercy of God, that they
may not by assailing us all at once become insuperable, and so our
wrestling with them be made more difficult. What wretched inertness it
shows, not to be able to conquer our passions even when taken one by
one, but to be defeated at each several period of our life, and to take
credit to ourselves for those which (let us alone) not in consequence of
our own hearty endeavors, but merely because, by reason of the time of
life, they are dormant? Look at the chariot-drivers, do you not see how
exceedingly careful and strict they are with themselves in their
training-practice, their labors, their diet, and all the rest, that they
may not be thrown down from their chariots, and dragged along (by the
reins)?—See what a thing art is. Often even a strong man cannot master a
single horse: but a mere boy who has learnt the art shall often take the
pair in hand, and with ease lead them and drive them where he will. Nay,
in India it is said that a huge monster of an elephant shall yield to a
stripling of fifteen, who manages him with the utmost ease. To what
purpose have I said all this? To show that, if by dint of study and
practice we can throttle into submission (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.5"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.6"></span>γχομεν</span>) even elephants and wild horses,
much more the passions within us. Whence is it that throughout life we
continually fail (in every encounter)? We have never practised this art:
never in a time of leisure when there is no contest, talked over with
ourselves what shall be useful for us. We are never to be seen in our
place on the chariot, until the time for the contest is actually come.
Hence the ridiculous figure we make there. Have I not often said, Let us
practise ourselves upon those of our own family before the time of
trial? With our servants (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.7"></span>παἵδας</span>) at home we are often
exasperated, let us there quell our anger, that in our intercourse with
our friends we may come to have it easily under control. And so, in the
case of all the other passions, if we practised ourselves beforehand, we
should not make a ridiculous figure in the contests themselves. But now
we have our implements and our exercises and our trainings for other
things, for arts and feats of the palæstra, but for virtue nothing of
the sort. The husbandman would not venture to meddle with a vine, unless
he had first been practised in the culture of it: nor the pilot to sit
by the helm, unless he had first practised himself well at it: but we,
in all respects unpractised, wish for the first prizes! It were good to
be silent, good to have no communication with any man in act or word,
until we were able to charm (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.8"></span>κατεπᾴδειν</span>) the wild beast that is
within us. The wild beast, I say: for indeed is it not worse than the
attack of any wild beast, when wrath and lust make war upon us? Beware
of invading the market-place (Μ<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.9"></span>ὴ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p28.10"></span>ἐμβάλῃς εἰς ἀγοράν</span>) with these beasts,
until thou have got the muzzle well upon their mouths, until thou have
tamed and made them tractable. Those who lead about their tame lions in
the market-place, do you not see what a gain they make of it, what
admiration they get, because in the irrational beast they have succeeded
in producing such tameness—but, should the lion suddenly take a savage
fit, how he scares all the people out of the market-place, and then both
the man that leads him about is himself in danger, and if there be loss
of life to others, it is his doing? Well then do thou also first tame
thy lion, and so lead him about, not for the purpose of receiving money,
but that thou mayest acquire a gain, to which there is none equal. For
there is nothing equal to gentleness, which both to those that possess
it, and to those who are its objects, is exceeding useful. This then let
us follow after, that having kept in the way of virtue, and with all
diligence finished our course therein, we may be enabled to attain unto
the good things eternal, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_660"></span>[i:661](1110034.htm#fr_660) <span
id="vi.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p5"></span> i.e. for one of the congregation to
expound or preach: or perhaps rather, to preach standing, not sitting,
as Christian bishops did for their sermons. We have transposed the
comment to its proper place.—Mod. text adds, “Wherefore he too in
accordance with this discourses to them.”

<span id="fn_661"></span>[i:662](1110034.htm#fr_661) <span
id="vi.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p6.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p6.2"></span>περ ἦν συμφορᾶς ὄνομα</span>, in regard that a
proselyte might be deemed inferior to a Jew of genuine descent, “a
Hebrew of the Hebrews.”

<span id="fn_662"></span>[i:663](1110034.htm#fr_662) <span
id="vi.xxix-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p7.1"></span>καὶ μὴν τοὐναντίον γέγονεν</span>. Here also we
have transposed the comment to the clause to which it belongs. In the
Edd. it comes after “And with a high arm,” etc. whence Ben. mistaking
its reference says, “i.e., if I mistake not, God brought them out of
Egypt, that he might bring them into the Land of Promise: but, for their
wickedness, the contrary befell: for the greatest part of them perished
in the wilderness.” It plainly refers to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p7.2"></span>ὕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p7.3"></span>ψωσεν</span>—i.e. how is it said, that He
exalted them in Egypt, where, on the contrary, they were brought low?
This is true—but He did exalt them by increasing them into a great
multitude, and by the miracles which He wrought on their behalf.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[i:664](1110034.htm#fr_663) <span
id="vi.xxix-p7.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p8"></span> Upon the reading of the T. R. (A.V.) the
period of the Judges is here stated to have been 450 years. This agrees
with the chronology of the book of Judges and of Josephus, but conflicts
with [1 Kings vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xxix-p8.1"></span> where we are told that “in the four hundred
and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the
land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, he
began to build the house of the Lord.” This would give but 331 years for
the period of the Judges. It is the view of many critics that Paul has
here followed a different chronology from that of 1 Kings which was also
in use among the Jews and was followed by Josephus (so Meyer.) But if
the reading of Tischendorf, Lechler, and Westcott and Hort (R.V.) is
adopted—and it is sustained by A. B. C. א—the difficulty, so far as
[Acts xiii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xxix-p8.2"></span> is concerned, disappears. This reading places
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p8.3"></span>μετὰ ταῦτα</span>
after <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p8.4"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p8.5"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p8.6"></span>ἔτεσιν</span> sq. and
inserts a period after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p8.7"></span>πεντήκοντα</span>. Then the translation would
be, “He gave them their land for an inheritance for about four hundred
and fifty years. And after these things He gave them judges,” etc. On
this reading the 450 years is the period of their inheritance,
approximately stated, up to the time of the judges. The point from which
Paul reckoned is not stated and is uncertain. This is the preferable
reading and explanation.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[i:665](1110034.htm#fr_664) <span
id="vi.xxix-p8.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p9.1"></span>Καὶ πόθεν ὅτι ἀνέστη φησι καὶ μάρτυρες εἰσιν.
Εἶτα πάλιν ἀπὸ τῶν γραφῶν</span>, followed by [Acts
13.29-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p9.2"></span>. We read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p9.3"></span>καὶ πόθεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p9.4"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p9.5"></span>ὅτι τὰς φωνὰς τῶν προφ., κρίναντες τοῦτον
ἐπλήρωσαν. Εἶτα πάλιν ἀπὸ τ. γρ</span>. [Acts
13.29-31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p9.6"></span>, ending, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p9.7"></span>καὶ μάρτυρες αὐτοῦ εἰσιν πρὸς τὸν λαὸν ὅτι
ἀνέστη</span>. The mod. text “And that no man may say, And whence is
this manifest that He rose again? He says that (word), And are His
witnesses. Then again He presses them from the Scriptures, [Acts
13.29-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxix-p9.8"></span>.”

<span id="fn_665"></span>[i:666](1110034.htm#fr_665) <span
id="vi.xxix-p9.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p10"></span> This comment, which in the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxix-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. is
inserted after [Acts 13.37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xxix-p10.2"></span>, refers to the following [Acts
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)<span id="vi.xxix-p10.3"></span>,
i.e. to what is there said of the insufficiency of the Law for
justification: we have therefore transposed it.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[i:667](1110034.htm#fr_666) <span
id="vi.xxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p12"></span> In the old text the parts lie in the
order here shown by the letters *a, b,* etc. The confusion may be
explained by the scribe’s copying in the wrong order from the four pages
of his tablets: viz. in the first place, in the order 1, 3, 2, 4: then
2, 4, 1, 3: and lastly, 2, 1. In the modern text, a different
arrangement is attempted by which all is thrown into worse confusion.
Thus it was not perceived that Chrys. having in a cursory way read
through [Acts 13.24-41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxix-p12.1"></span>, begins his exposition in detail with the
remark of the Apostle’s passing and repassing from the Old to the New
Test. and *vice versa,* viz. alleging first the Promise, then John, then
the Prophets, then the Apostles, then David and Isaiah, [Acts
13.24-34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxix-p12.2"></span>; then comments upon the matters contained in
these and the following verses, and then as usual goes over the whole
again in a second exposition. Now the innovator makes the recapitulation
begin immediately after (*a*), commencing it at [Acts
13.26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)<span id="vi.xxix-p12.3"></span>,
and collecting the comments in this order: [Acts
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxix-p12.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[i:668](1110034.htm#fr_667) <span
id="vi.xxix-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p13"></span> The transposition of the part (*c*),
makes this read in the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxix-p13.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. as if it were parallel
with <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p13.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p13.3"></span>πὸ τῶν παρόντων</span>
(i.e. New Testament facts), <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p13.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p13.5"></span>πὸ τῶν Προφητῶν</span> (Old Testament
testimonies).

<span id="fn_668"></span>[i:669](1110034.htm#fr_668) <span
id="vi.xxix-p13.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p14"></span> It is probable that Chrys. has pointed
out the true connection of thought as established by <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p14.1"></span>γὰρ</span> ([Acts
13.27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xxix-p14.2"></span>). “The word of this salvation is sent unto
you (of the dispersion) on the ground that the Jews at Jerusalem have
rejected it.” (So Meyer, Gloag.) The more common explanation is: The
word is sent unto you because the Jews have fulfilled the prophecies
which spoke of the rejection of the Messiah and have thus proved that He
is the Messiah. (De Wette, Hackett, Lechler.)—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[i:670](1110034.htm#fr_669) <span
id="vi.xxix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p15"></span> i.e. Though not one of the original
witnesses, [Acts 13.31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxix-p15.1"></span>, yet, being one who has been moved or raised
up, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p15.2"></span>κεκινημένον</span>, by the Spirit of Christ
Himself, he preaches as they did, insisting much on the Passion, etc.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[i:671](1110034.htm#fr_670) <span
id="vi.xxix-p15.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p16.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p16.2"></span>Αντὶ τοῦ, Οἱ ἄνδρες οἱ συναναβάντες κ. τ.
λ</span>. Perhaps the sense may be supplied thus: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p16.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p16.4"></span>Αντὶ τοῦ, Οὗ πάντες ἡμεῖς
ἐσμεν μάρτυρες</span>, [Acts 2.32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032)<span
id="vi.xxix-p16.5"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p16.6"></span>οὗ ἡμεῖς μάρτ. ἐσμεν</span>, [Acts
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span id="vi.xxix-p16.7"></span>.
Instead of saying as Peter does, “Whereof we are witnesses.”

<span id="fn_671"></span>[i:672](1110034.htm#fr_671) <span
id="vi.xxix-p16.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.1"></span>Καὶ οὐκ ἐγχρονίζει τούτοις</span>, as in the
recapitulation on [Acts 13:40](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)<span id="vi.xxix-p17.2"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.3"></span>καὶ ὅρα, τραχὺ ὂν
πῶς ὑποτέμνεται</span>. Hence it is clear that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.4"></span>τούτοις</span> refers not to “the sure mercies
of David,” as in <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.5"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. (end of *e*), but to the
threats and terrors (end of *h*). Below, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.7"></span>λλ᾽ ἐπιτείνει τὴν κόλασιν</span> the sense of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.9"></span>πιτείνει</span> (not as
Ben. *minatur,* but *intentat,* “makes much of, aggravates, dwells upon
the greatness of)”, and the whole scope of the passage, require us to
read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.10"></span>οὐδὲ</span>.
Then, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.11"></span>καὶ
μετέρχεται</span> with the negative extending to the whole clause, “and
(like Stephen) assail that which is dear to them, (viz. their
preëminence as Jews,) by showing the Law on the point of being cast
out:” then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p17.13"></span>λλὰ</span> (so we restore for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.14"></span>καὶ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p17.15"></span>τῷ συμφ. ἐνδιατρ</span>.,
but dwells, etc.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[i:673](1110034.htm#fr_672) <span
id="vi.xxix-p19.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p20"></span> Edd. “But let us hear <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p20.1"></span>τί καὶ λέγοντες οἱ ᾽Απόστ.
ἔπεισαν, ὅτι ἐσταυρώθη</span>, by saying what, by what announcement, the
Apostles persuaded (men) that He was crucified.” For <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p20.2"></span>τί τούτου ἀπιθ</span>. B.
has <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p20.3"></span>τὸ τ. ἀ</span>.
“(yea), what is more incredible still.” Both clauses must be read
interrogatively. The scope of the whole passage (which is obscure in the
original) is, the supreme importance of the article of the Resurrection.
Leave that out, and see what the preaching of the Apostles would have
been; how it would have been received.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[i:674](1110034.htm#fr_673) <span
id="vi.xxix-p20.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p21"></span> The reading: “In the *Second* Psalm” is
the best attested and is followed by the T. R., R.V. and Wescott and
Hort. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p21.1"></span>Πρώτῳ</span>
is found in D. and is supported by the Fathers. It is the more difficult
reading and for this reason is preferred by Tischendorf, Lachmann,
Meyer, Alford and Gloag. If it is correct, we must suppose that what we
now call the first psalm was considered introductory and that our second
psalm was counted as the first. In some Heb. <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxix-p21.2"></span>mss.</span> this order actually occurs. The
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p21.3"></span>δευτέρῳ</span>, however, is better supported.
The expression: “this day have I begotten thee” refers evidently to the
resurrection of Christ. (Cf. <span id="vi.xxix-p21.4"></span>[Heb. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxix-p21.5"></span>;
[Rom. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xxix-p21.6"></span>.) The resurrection is conceived as the solemn
inauguration of Christ into his office as theocratic king represented
under the figure of begetting.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[i:675](1110034.htm#fr_674) <span
id="vi.xxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p23"></span> We have transposed this clause from
before, “Behold,” etc. preceding.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[i:676](1110034.htm#fr_675) <span
id="vi.xxix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p24"></span> Mod. text needlessly adds, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p24.1"></span>Καὶ καταφρονοῦμεν</span>;
“And do we make light of these things?”

<span id="fn_676"></span>[i:677](1110034.htm#fr_676) <span
id="vi.xxix-p24.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p25.1"></span>Τοῦτο καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν γενέσθαι, ἑτέραν
ἐπεισαχθῆναι συνήθειαν</span>. Morel. Ben. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p25.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p25.3"></span>φ᾽ ἡμῶν</span>, “By our means,” *idque unum
probandum,* Ed. Par. but <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p25.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p25.5"></span>φ᾽ ἡμῶν</span> is not as he renders it, *in
nobis;* the meaning is, “where habit works, this is the effect (in the
case of habit): wish it were so in the case of us (where we work).”

<span id="fn_677"></span>[i:678](1110034.htm#fr_677) <span
id="vi.xxix-p25.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p26"></span> Mod. text “Having been so sufficiently
spoken, that ye are able to correct others, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p26.1"></span>εἴγε ἀπόντων ὠφέλειά τις ὑμῖν
προσεγίνετο</span>, since in their absence some benefit accrued to you.”

<span id="fn_678"></span>[i:679](1110034.htm#fr_678) <span
id="vi.xxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p27.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxix-p27.2"></span>πως εἰς ᾽Εκκλησίαν ἐμβάλητε, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως τι καὶ
λαβόντες ἀναχωρῆτε</span>. (Above we had the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p27.3"></span>παραβάλλειν τῇ
συνάξει</span>.) Here the metaphor is taken from an invading army. So
below, p. 188, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxix-p27.4"></span>μη
ἐμβάλῃς εἰς αγοράν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXX on Acts xiii. 42.](1110035)
