[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110046)  [Next](1110048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xlii"></span> <span id="vi.xlii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xlii-p1.1"></span>Homily XLII.</span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p2"></span>[Acts
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023)<span id="vi.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p3"></span>“After these things were ended, Paul
purposed in the Spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia,
to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see
Rome. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him,
Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season. And
the same time there arose no small stir about the Way.”

<span id="vi.xlii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xlii-p4.1"></span>He</span> sends Timothy and Erastus into
Macedonia, but himself remains at Ephesus. Having made a long enough
stay in that city, he wishes to remove elsewhere again. But how is it,
that having from the first chosen to depart into Syria, he turns back to
Macedonia? “He purposed,” it says, “in the Spirit,” showing that all
(that he did) was done not of his own power. Now he prophesies, saying,
“I must also see Rome:” perhaps to comfort them with the consideration
of his not remaining at a distance, but coming nearer to them again, and
to arouse the minds of the disciples by the prophecy. At this
point, <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) I suppose, it was that he
wrote his Epistle to the Corinthians from Ephesus, saying, “I would not
have you ignorant of the trouble which came to us in Asia.” (<span
id="vi.xlii-p5.7"></span>[2 Cor. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008)<span id="vi.xlii-p5.8"></span>.) For
since he had promised to go to Corinth, he excuses himself on the score
of having loitered, and mentions the trial relating the affair of
Demetrius. “There arose no small stir about the Way.” <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) Do you see the renown <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) (acquired)? They contradicted, it
says: (then) came miracles, twofold: (then) again, danger: such is the
way the threads alternate throughout the whole texture (of the history).
“For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver
temples of Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen.” ([Acts
19.24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xlii-p7.9"></span>.). “Which made,” it says, “silver temples of
Diana.” And how is it possible that temples could be made of silver?
Perhaps as small boxes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p7.10"></span>κιβώρια</span>.) <span
id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) Great was the honor paid to this
(Diana) in Ephesus; since, when (*Hom. in Eph.* Prol.) their temple was
burnt it so grieved them, that they forbade even the name of the
incendiary ever to be mentioned. See how, wherever there is idolatry, in
every case we find money at the bottom of it. Both in the former
instance it was for money, and in the case of this man, for money.
([Acts 19.13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xlii-p8.2"></span>.) It was not for their religion, because they
thought that in danger; no, it was for their lucrative craft, that it
would have nothing to work upon. Observe the maliciousness of the man.
He was wealthy himself, and to him indeed it was no such great loss; but
to them the loss was great, since they were poor, and subsisted on their
daily earnings. Nevertheless, these men say nothing, but only he. And
observe: <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) “Whom having collected,
and the workmen of like occupation,” having themselves common cause with
him, “he said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth”
([Acts 19.25](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xlii-p9.6"></span>); then he brought the danger home to them,
that we are in danger of falling from this our craft into starvation.
“Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost
throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much
people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands: so that
not only this our craft is in danger to be set at naught; but also, that
the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath,
and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.” ([Acts
19.26-28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xlii-p9.7"></span>.) And yet the very things he spoke were enough
to bring them to true religion: but being poor senseless creatures, this
is the part they act. For if this (Paul being) man is strong enough to
turn away all, and the worship of the gods is in jeopardy, one ought to
reflect, how great must this man’s God be, and that he will much more
give you those things, for which ye are afraid. Already (at the outset)
he has secured a hold upon their minds by saying, “This Paul hath turned
away much people, saying, that they be no gods, which are made with
men’s hands.” See what it is that the heathen are so indignant at;
because he said that “they which be made of men are no gods.”
Throughout, he drives his speech at their craft. Then that which most
grieved them he brings in afterwards. But, with the other gods, he would
say, we have no concern, but that “the temple also of the great goddess
Diana is in danger to be destroyed.” Then, lest he should seem to say
this for the sake of lucre, see what he adds: “Whom the whole world
worshippeth.” Observe how he showed Paul’s power to be the greater,
proving all (their gods) to be wretched and miserable creatures, since a
mere man, who was driven about, a mere tentmaker, had so much power.
Observe the testimonies borne to the Apostles by their enemies, that
they overthrew their worship. <span id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981)
There (at Lystra) they brought “garlands and oxen.” ([Acts
14.13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xlii-p10.11"></span>.) Here he says, “This our craft is in danger
to be set at naught.—Ye have filled (all) everywhere with your
doctrine.” ([Acts 5.28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xlii-p10.12"></span>.) So said the Jews also with regard to
Christ: “Ye see how the world is going after Him” ([John xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)<span id="vi.xlii-p10.13"></span>);
and, “The Romans shall come and take away our city.” ([John
11.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)<span
id="vi.xlii-p10.14"></span>). And again on another occasion, “These that
have turned the world upside down are come hither also.” ([Acts
17.6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xlii-p10.15"></span>).—“And when they heard these sayings, they
were full of wrath.” Upon what was that wrath called forth? On hearing
about Diana, and about their source of gain. “And cried out, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And the whole city was filled with
confusion: and rushed with one accord into the theatre.” ([Acts
19.29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xlii-p10.16"></span>). Such is the way with vulgar minds, any
trivial occasion shall hurry them away and inflame their passions.
Therefore <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) it behooves to do
(things) with (strict) examination. But see how contemptible they were,
to be so exposed to all (excitements)! “Having caught Gaius and
Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s companions in travel, they dragged
them:” (here) again recklessly, just as did the Jews in the case of
Jason; and everywhere they set upon them. <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) “And when Paul would have entered in
unto the people, the disciples suffered him not,” ([Acts
19.30](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#030)<span id="vi.xlii-p12.5"></span>)
so far were they from all display and love of glory. “And certain of the
Asiarchs, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he
would not adventure himself into the theatre” ([Acts
19.31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)<span id="vi.xlii-p12.6"></span>)
to a disorderly populace and tumult. And Paul complies, for he was not
vainglorious, nor ambitious. “Some therefore cried one thing, and some
another: for the assembly was confused.” Such is the nature of the
multitude: it recklessly follows, like fire when it has fallen upon
fuel; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.”
([Acts 19.32](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032)<span
id="vi.xlii-p12.7"></span>.) “And they drew Alexander out of the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward.” It was the Jews that thrust
him forward; <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) but as providence
ordered it, this man did not speak. “And Alexander beckoned with the
hand, and would have made his defence unto the people.” ([Acts
19.33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xlii-p13.3"></span>.) “But when they knew that he was a Jew, all
with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians.” ([Acts 19.34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034)<span
id="vi.xlii-p13.4"></span>.) A childish understanding indeed! as if they
were afraid, lest their worship should be extinguished, they shouted
without intermission. For two years had Paul abode there, and see how
many heathen there were still! “And when the town clerk had appeased the
people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not
how that the city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great goddess
Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?” ([Acts
19.35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xlii-p13.5"></span>.) As if the thing were not palpable. With
this saying first he extinguished their wrath. “And of the Diopetes.”
There was another sacred object (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p13.6"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p13.7"></span>ερὸν</span>) that was so called. Either he
means the piece of burnt earth or her image. <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985)  <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) This (is) a lie. “Seeing then that
these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do
nothing rashly. For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither
robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.” ([Acts
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)<span id="vi.xlii-p15.3"></span>.)
All this however he says to the people; but in order that those
(workmen) also might become more reasonable, he says: “Wherefore if
Demetrius, and the craftsman which are with him, have a matter against
any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one
another. But if ye enquire anything concerning other matters, it shall
be determined in a lawful assembly. For we are in danger to be called in
question for this day’s uproar, there being no cause, for which (matter)
we shall not be able to give an account for this concourse.” ([Acts
19.38-40](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xlii-p15.4"></span>.) “A lawful assembly,” he says, for there
were three assemblies according to law in each month; but this one was
contrary to law. Then he terrified them also by saying, “We are in
danger to be called to account” for sedition. But let us look again at
the things said.

<span id="vi.xlii-p16"></span>(Recapitulation.) “After these things were
ended,” it says, “Paul purposed in the Spirit, when he had passed
through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem,” saying, “After I have
been there, I must also see Rome.” ([Acts
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xlii-p16.1"></span>.) He no longer speaks here after the manner
of a man, <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) or, He purposed to
pass through those regions, without tarrying longer. Wherefore does he
send away Timothy and Erastus? Of this I suppose he says, “Wherefore
when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens
alone. He sent away,” it says, “two of those who ministered to him”
(<span id="vi.xlii-p17.10"></span>[1 Thess. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)<span id="vi.xlii-p17.11"></span>),
both to announce his coming, and to make them more eager. “But he
himself tarried awhile in Asia.” ([Acts
19.22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xlii-p17.12"></span>.) Most of all does he pass his time in Asia;
and with reason: there, namely, was the tyranny, of the
philosophers. <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) (Afterwards) also
he came and discoursed to them again. “And the same time” etc. ([Acts
19.23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xlii-p18.6"></span>), for indeed the superstition was excessive.
(*a*) “Ye both see and hear,” so palpable was the result that was taking
place—“that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this
Paul by persuading hath turned away,” not by violence: this is the way
to persuade a city. Then, what touched them closely, “that they be no
gods which are made with hands.” ([Acts
19.26](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xlii-p18.7"></span>.) He overturns, says he, our craft: (*e*)
“From this work we have our wealth. Hath persuaded.” How <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) did he persuade—he, a man of mean
consideration? How prevail over so great a force of habit? by doing
what—by saying what? It is not for a Paul (to effect this), it is not
for a man. Even this is enough, that he said, “They are no gods.” Now if
the impiety (of the heathen religions) was so easy to detect, it ought
to have been condemned long ago: if it was strong, it ought not to have
been overthrown so quickly. (*b*) For, lest they should consider within
themselves (how strange), that a human being should have such power as
this, and if a human being has power to effect such things, why then one
ought to be persuaded by that man, he adds: (*f*) “not only is this our
craft in danger to be set at naught, but also,” as if forsooth alleging
a greater consideration, “the temple of the great goddess Diana,” etc.
(*c*) “whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.” ([Acts
19.27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xlii-p19.1"></span>.) (*g*) “And when they heard, they were
filled with wrath, and shouted, Great is Diana of the Ephesians!” ([Acts
19.28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xlii-p19.2"></span>.) For each city had its proper gods. (*d*)
They thought to make their voice a barrier against the Divine Spirit.
Children indeed, these Greeks! (*h*) And their feeling was as if by
their voice they could reinstate the worship of her, and undo what had
taken place! “And the whole city,” etc. ([Acts
19.29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xlii-p19.3"></span>.) See a disorderly multitude! “And when
Paul,” etc. ([Acts 19.30](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xlii-p19.4"></span>.) Paul then wished to enter in that he might
harangue them: for he took his persecutions as occasions for teaching:
“but the disciples suffered him not.” Mark, how great forethought we
always find them taking for him. At the very first they brought him out
that they might not (in his person) receive a mortal blow; and yet they
had heard him say, “I must also see Rome.” But it was providential that
he so predicts beforehand, that they might not be confounded at the
event. But they would not that he should even suffer any evil. “And
certain of the Asiarchs besought him that he would not enter into the
theatre.” Knowing his eagerness, they “besought him:” so much did all
the believers love him.—“And they drew Alexander,” etc. ([Acts
19.33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xlii-p19.5"></span>.) This Alexander, why did he wish to plead?
Was he accused? No, but it was to find an opportunity, and overturn the
whole matter, and inflame <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) the
anger of the people. “But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one
voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.” ([Acts 19.34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034)<span
id="vi.xlii-p20.7"></span>.) Do you mark the inordinate rage? Well, and
with rebuke does the town clerk say, “What man is there that knoweth not
how that the city of the Ephesians—” ([Acts
19.35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035)<span id="vi.xlii-p20.8"></span>)
(coming to the point) which they were frightened about. Is it
this, <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) says he, that ye do not
worship her? And he does not say, “That knoweth not” Diana, but, “our
city,” that it always worshipped her. <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) “Seeing then that these things cannot
be spoken against.” ([Acts 19.36](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#036)<span
id="vi.xlii-p22.4"></span>.) Why then do ye make a question about them,
as if these things were not plain? (*b*) Then he quietly chides them,
showing that they had come together without reason. “And to do nothing
rashly,” he says. Showing that they had acted rashly. (*a*) “For ye have
brought hither,” etc. ([Acts
19.37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xlii-p22.5"></span>.) They wanted to make religion the pretext
for what concerned their own money-making: (*c*) and it was not right on
account of private charges to hold a public assembly. For he put them to
a nonplus, and left them not a word to say for themselves. <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) “There being no cause,” he says, “for
this concourse, for which” (matter) “we shall not <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) be able to give the account.” ([Acts
19.40](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#040)<span
id="vi.xlii-p24.6"></span>.) See how prudently, how cleverly, the
unbelievers (act). Thus he extinguished their wrath. For as it is easily
kindled, so also is it easily extinguished. “And when he had thus
spoken,” it says, “he dismissed the assembly.” ([Acts
19.41](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#041)<span
id="vi.xlii-p24.7"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xlii-p25"></span>Seest thou how God permits trials, and by
them stirs up and awakens the disciples, and makes them more energetic?
Then let us not sink down under trials: for He Himself will “also make
the way of escape, that we may be able to bear them.” (<span
id="vi.xlii-p25.1"></span>[1 Cor x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="vi.xlii-p25.2"></span>.)
Nothing so makes friends, and rivets them so firmly, as affliction:
nothing so fastens and compacts the souls of believers: nothing is so
seasonable for us teachers in order that the things said by us may be
heard. For the hearer when he is in ease is listless and indolent, and
seems to suffer annoyance from the speaker: but when he is in affliction
and distress, he falls into a great longing for the hearing. For when
distressed in his soul, he seeks on all sides to find comfort for his
affliction: and the preaching brings no small comfort. “What then,” you
will say, “of the Jews? How was it that in consequence of their
weakheartedness, they did not hear?” Why, they were Jews, those ever
weak and miserable creatures: and besides, the affliction in their case
was great, but we speak of affliction in moderation. For observe: they
expected to be freed from the evils that encompassed them, and they fell
into numberless greater evils: now this is no common distress to the
soul. Afflictions cut us off from the sympathy we have for the present
world, as appears in this, that we wish for death immediately, and cease
to be loving of the body: which very thing is the greatest part of
wisdom, to have no hankering, no ties to the present life. The soul
which is afflicted does not wish to be concerned about many things:
repose and stillness are all it desired, content for its part to have
done with the things present, even though there be nothing else to
follow. As the body when wearied and distressed does not wish to indulge
in amours, or gormandizing, but only to repose and lie down in quiet; so
the soul, harassed <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) by numberless
evils, is urgent to be at rest and quiet. The soul which is at ease is
(apt to be) fluttered, alarmed, unsettled: whereas in this there is no
vacuity, no running to waste: and the one is more manly, the other more
childish; the one has more gravity, in the other more levity. And as
some light substance, when it falls upon deep water, is tossed to and
fro, just so is the soul when it falls into great rejoicing. Moreover,
that our greatest faults arise out of overmuch pleasure, any one may
see. Come, if you will, let us represent to ourselves two houses, the
one where people are marrying, the other where they are mourning: let us
enter in imagination into each: let us see which is better than the
other. Why, that of the mourner will be found full of seriousness (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p26.4"></span>φιλοσοφίας</span>); that
of the marrying person, full of indecency. For look, (here are) shameful
words, unrestrained laughter, more unrestrained motions, both dress and
gait full of indecency, words fraught with mere nonsense and foolery: in
short, all is ridicule there, all ridiculous. <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) I do not say the marriage is this; God
forbid; but the accompaniments of the marriage. Then nature is beside
itself in excess of riot. Instead of human beings, those present become
brute creatures, some neighing like horses, others kicking like asses:
such utter license, such dissolute unrestraint: nothing serious, nothing
noble: (it is) the devil’s pomp, cymbals, and pipes, and songs teeming
with fornication and adultery. But not so in that house where there is
mourning; all is well-ordered there: such silence, such repose, such
composure; nothing disorderly, nothing extravagant: and if any one does
speak, every word he utters is fraught with true philosophy: and then
the wonderful circumstance is, that at such times not men only, but even
servants and women speak like philosophers—for such is the nature of
sorrow—and while they seem to be consoling the mourner, they in fact
utter numberless truths full of sound philosophy. Prayers are there to
begin with, that the affliction may stop there, and go no further: many
a one comforting the sufferer, and recitals without number of the many
who have the like cause for mourning. “For what is man?” (they ask) (and
thereupon) a serious examination of our nature—“aye, then, what is man!”
(and upon this) an impeachment of the life (present) and its
worthlessness, a reminding (one another) of things to come, of the
Judgment. (So from both these scenes) each returns home: from the
wedding, grieved, because he himself is not in the enjoyment of the like
good fortune; from the mourning, light-hearted, because he has not
himself undergone the like affliction, and having all his inward fever
quenched. But what will you? Shall we take for another contrast the
prisons and the theatres? For the one is a place of suffering, the other
of pleasure. Let us again examine. In the former there is seriousness of
mind; for where there is sadness, there must needs be seriousness. He
who aforetime was rich, and inflated with his own importance, now will
even suffer any common person to converse with him, fear and sorrow,
like some mightier fire, having fallen on his soul, and softening down
his harshness: then he becomes humble, then of a sad countenance, then
he feels the changes of life, then he bears up manfully against
everything. But in a theatre all is the reverse of this—laughter,
ribaldry, devil’s pomp, dissoluteness, waste of time, useless spending
of days, planning for extravagant lust, adultery made a study of,
practical training to fornication, schooling in intemperance,
encouragement to filthiness, matter for laughter, patterns for the
practice of indecency. Not so the prison: there you will find humbleness
of mind, exhoration, incentive to seriousness, contempt of worldly
things; (these) are all trodden under foot and spurned and, fear stands
over (the man there), as a schoolmaster over a child, controlling him to
all his duties. But if you will, let us examine in a different
way. <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) I should like you to meet a
man on his return from a theatre, and another coming out of prison; and
while you would see the soul of the one fluttered, perturbed, actually
tied and bound, that of the other you would see enlarged, set free,
buoyant as on wings. For the one returns from the theatre, enfettered by
the sight of the women there, bearing about chains harder than any iron,
the scenes, the words, the gestures, that he saw there. But the other on
his return from the prison, released from all (bounds), will no longer
think that he suffers any evil as comparing his own case with that of
(those) others. (To think) that he is not in bonds will make him
thankful ever after; he will despise human affairs, as seeing so many
rich men there in calamity, men (once) having power to do many and great
things, and now lying bound there: and if he should suffer anything
unjustly, he will bear up against this also; for of this too there were
many examples there: he will be led to reflect upon the Judgment to come
and will shudder, seeing here <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998)
(in the earthly prison) how it will be there. For as it is with one here
shut up in prison, so in that world also before the Judgment, before the
Day that is to come. Towards wife, children, and servants, he will be
more gentle.

<span id="vi.xlii-p30"></span>Not so he that comes from the theatre: he
will look upon his wife with more dislike, he will be peevish with his
servants, bitter towards his children, and savage towards all. Great are
the evils theatres cause to cities, great indeed, and we do not even
know that they are great. Shall we examine other scenes of laughter
also, I mean the feasts, with their parasites, their flatterers, and
abundance of luxury, and (compare with them) places where are the halt
and blind? As before, in the former is drunkenness, luxury, and
dissoluteness, in the latter the reverse.—See also with regard to the
body, when it is hot-blooded, when it is in good case, it undergoes the
quickest change to sickness: not so, when it has been kept low. Then let
me make my meaning clearer to you:—let there be a body having plenty of
blood, plenty of flesh, plump with good living: this body will be apt
even from any chance food to engender a fever, if it be simply idle. But
let there be another, struggling rather with hunger and hardship: this
is not easily overcome, not easily wrestled down by disease. Blood,
though it may be healthy in us, does often by its very quantity engender
disease: but if it be small in quantity, even though it be not healthy,
it can be easily worked off. So too in the case of the soul, that which
leads an easy, luxurious life, has its impulses quickly swayed to sin:
for such a soul is next neighbor to folly, to pleasure, to vainglory
also, and envy, and plottings, and slanderings. Behold this great city
of ours, what a size it is! Whence arise the evils? is it not from those
who are rich? is it not from those who are in enjoyment? Who are they
that “drag” men “before the tribunals?” Who, that dissipate properties?
Those who are wretched and outcasts, or those who are inflated with
consequence, and in enjoyment? It is not possible that any evil can
happen from a soul that is afflicted. ([James ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006)<span id="vi.xlii-p30.1"></span>.)
Paul knew the gain of this: therefore he says, “Tribulation worketh
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope maketh
not ashamed.” (<span id="vi.xlii-p30.2"></span>[Rom. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="vi.xlii-p30.3"></span>.)
Then let us not sink in our afflictions, but in all things give thanks,
that so we may get great gain, that we may be well-pleasing to God, who
permits afflictions. A great good is affliction: and we learn this from
our own children: for without affliction (a boy) would learn nothing
useful. But we, more than they, need affliction. For if there, when the
passions (as yet) are quiet, (chastisement) benefits them, how much more
us, especially possessed as we are by so many! Nay, we behoove rather to
have schoolmasters than they: since the faults of children cannot be
great, but ours are exceeding great. Our schoolmaster is affliction. Let
us then not draw it down willingly upon ourselves, but when it is come
let us bear it bravely, being, as it is, always the cause of numberless
good things; that so we may both obtain grace from God, and the good
things which are laid up for them that love Him, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
might, honor, now and evermore, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_976"></span>[i:977](1110047.htm#fr_976) <span
id="vi.xlii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p5.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p5.2"></span>Εντεῦθεν</span>. If St. Chrys. is rightly
reported, he means the second Epistle, which he proceeds to quote from.
But that Epistle was plainly not written <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p5.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p5.4"></span>πὸ ᾽Εφέσου</span>. Perhaps what he said was to
this effect: “At this point I suppose it was—viz. after the mission of
Timothy and Erastus—that he wrote (his first Epistle) to the Corinthians
from Ephesus: and in the second Epistle he alludes to the great trial
which ensued in the matter of Demetrius. He had promised to come to
Corinth sooner, and excuses himself on the score of the delay.” But
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p5.5"></span>τὰ κατὰ Δημήτριον
διηγούμενος</span> can hardly be meant of St. Paul: it should be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p5.6"></span>αἰνιττόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[i:978](1110047.htm#fr_977) <span
id="vi.xlii-p5.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p6"></span> The use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p6.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p6.2"></span>ὁδός</span> without further definition, to
represent the Christian religion, is peculiar to the Acts ([Acts
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002), [Acts
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023), [Acts
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022)<span id="vi.xlii-p6.3"></span>).
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p6.4"></span>Κυρίου</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p6.5"></span>σωτηρίας</span> would
express the omitted defining idea.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[i:979](1110047.htm#fr_978) <span
id="vi.xlii-p6.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p7.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p7.2"></span>Ορᾳς τὴν εὐδοκίμησιν</span>; This seems to
refer to [Acts 19.17-20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xlii-p7.3"></span>. “But see how successes and trials here, as
all along, alternate. Then the Jews contradicted: ([Acts
19.9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)<span id="vi.xlii-p7.4"></span>)
then miracles, twofold, ([Acts
19.11-19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xlii-p7.5"></span>): now again (after that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p7.6"></span>εὐδοκίμησις</span>),
danger.”—Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xlii-p7.7"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. give [Acts
19.24-27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xlii-p7.8"></span>, which we have distributed to their proper
places.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[i:980](1110047.htm#fr_979) <span
id="vi.xlii-p7.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p8"></span> These silver “temple” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p8.1"></span>ναοὺς</span>) were shrines,
small models of the temple containing images of the goddess, which
pilgrims to the temple purchased and carried away and probably used in
their homes as objects of domestic worship.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[i:981](1110047.htm#fr_980) <span
id="vi.xlii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p9.1"></span>Καὶ ὅρα κοινωνοὺς ὄντας αὐτούς· εἶτα τὸν
κίνδυνον ἐπέστησεν</span> (so Cat. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p9.2"></span>-σαν</span>, A. B. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p9.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p9.4"></span>πέτησεν</span>). Mod. text, “But being
themselves partners of the craft, he takes them as partners also of the
riot. Then also he exaggerated (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p9.5"></span>ηὔξησεν</span>) the danger, adding. This our
craft is in danger of coming into contempt. For this is pretty nearly
what he declares by this, that from this art,” etc.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[i:982](1110047.htm#fr_981) <span
id="vi.xlii-p9.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p10.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p10.2"></span>τι καθαιρῶν</span> (Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p10.3"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p10.4"></span>τε ἐκαθῄρουν</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p10.5"></span>αὐτῶν τὰ σεβάσματα, ἐκεῖ
στέμματα καὶ ταύρους προσέφερον· ἐνταῦθα φησιν ὅτι κινδυνεύει κ. τ.
λ</span>. These seem to be only rough notes or hints of what Chrys.
said. The first words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p10.6"></span>καθ. αὐτῶν τὰ σεβ</span>. look like a
reference to <span id="vi.xlii-p10.7"></span>[Acts xvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023)<span id="vi.xlii-p10.8"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p10.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p10.10"></span>ναθεωρῶν τὰ σεβάσματα
ὑμῶν</span>: “thus at Athens, surveying the objects of their worship,
and finding an Altar, etc. he thence takes occasion to preach the
Unknown God. At Lystra, they brought garlands and oxen, and the Apostles
thereupon, etc. Therefore these men here might well say, Our craft is in
danger. For it was true, as was said on another occasion (at Jerusalem),
Ye have filled, etc.: and, They that have turned the world, etc. Nay, of
Christ also the Jews said the same, The world is going after Him.”

<span id="fn_982"></span>[i:983](1110047.htm#fr_982) <span
id="vi.xlii-p10.17"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p11.1"></span>Διὰ ταῦτα μετ᾽ ἐξετάσεως δεῖ ποιεῖν</span>,
Mod. text adds <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p11.2"></span>πάντα</span>. This sentence, om. by A., seems
to be out of place, and to belong rather to [Acts
19.36](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#036)<span id="vi.xlii-p11.3"></span>.
We have transposed the text [Acts
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)<span id="vi.xlii-p11.4"></span>,
which in <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xlii-p11.5"></span>mss.</span>
and Edd. is given after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p11.6"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p11.7"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p11.8"></span>πᾶσι προκεῖσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[i:984](1110047.htm#fr_983) <span
id="vi.xlii-p11.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p12.1"></span>καὶ πανταχοῦ αὐτοῖς προκεῖνται</span>. To make
some sense of the passage, we adopt <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p12.2"></span>προσκεῖνται</span> from B. We also transpose
[Acts 19.30](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xlii-p12.3"></span> which is given with [Acts
19.31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)<span id="vi.xlii-p12.4"></span>
after the following sentence.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[i:985](1110047.htm#fr_984) <span
id="vi.xlii-p12.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p13.1"></span>Προεβάλοντο ᾽Ιουδαῖοι οἰκονομικῶς δὲ</span>
(supplied by Cat.) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p13.2"></span>οὗτος οὐκ ἐφθέγξατο</span>. Mod. text “The
Jews thrust him forward, as Providence ordered it, that they might not
have (it in their power) to gainsay afterwards. This man is thrust
forward, and speaks: and hear what (he says).”

<span id="fn_985"></span>[i:986](1110047.htm#fr_985) <span
id="vi.xlii-p13.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p14"></span> Old text: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.2"></span>Ιερὸν ἕτερον οὕτως ἐκαλεῖτο</span>—meaning, as
we take it, the Palladium of Troy, which was also called “the Diopetes,”
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.3"></span>τὸ Παλλάδιον τὸ
Διοπετὲς καλούμενον</span>, Clem. Alex. Protrept. iv. 47.—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.4"></span>ἤ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.5"></span>τοι τὸ ὄστρακον αὐτῆς
φησιν</span>. Something more is needed, therefore we supply <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.6"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.7"></span>τὸ ἄγαλμα αὐτῆς
φησιν</span>. But <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.8"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.9"></span>ερὸν</span> in this sense is not usual. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.10"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.11"></span>Οστρακον</span>, whatever
it mean, cannot be the image of Diana, which was known to be of wood.
The passage seems to be corrupt, and one might conjecture that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.12"></span>ἱ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.13"></span>ερὸν ἕτερον</span>
relates to “another Temple” of Diana built after the first which was
burned by Herostratos, and that the name of this man is latent in the
unintelligible <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.14"></span>ητοιτοοστρακον</span>, and that Chrysostom’s
remark is this, that together with that former Temple perished the
original Diopetes: so that to speak of that image as still in being was
a lie (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.15"></span>τοῦτο
ψεῦδος</span>)—Mod. text “But a different <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.16"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.17"></span>ερὸν</span> was thus called <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.18"></span>διοπετές</span>: either
then the idol of Diana they called Diopetes, ὡς <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.19"></span>ἐκ τοῦ Διὸς τὸ ὄστρακον
ἐκεῖ νοπεπτωκὸς</span>, and not made by man: or a different <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.20"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.21"></span>γαλμα</span>was thus
called among them.”—Isidore of Pelus. in the Catena: “Some say that it
is spoken of the image of Diana, i.e. ‘(a worshipper) of the great Diana
and of her <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.22"></span>διοπετες
ἄγαλμα</span>:’ some that the Palladium also (is here named as <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.23"></span>διοπ</span>.), i.e. the
image of Minerva, which they worshipped along with Diana.” Ammonius
ibid., “the <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.24"></span>ναὸς
τοῦ Διός</span>: or the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.25"></span>στρογγυλοειδὲς</span>”—meaning the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.26"></span>ὄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.27"></span>στρακον</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.28"></span>?</span>—“or rather,
which is the true explanation, this image of Diana: or the Palladium,
which they thought came from Jupiter, and was not the work of men.”
Œcum. gives the same variety of explanations, from the Catena. The words
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.29"></span>τοῦτο
ψεῦδος</span>, which in the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.30"></span>mss.</span> follow the text [Acts
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)<span id="vi.xlii-p14.31"></span>,
are better referred to the Diopetes, as in our translation.—Mod. text
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.32"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p14.33"></span>ρα τὸ πᾶν ψεῦδος</span>:
and then, “these things however he says to the people, in order that
those also,” etc. omitting <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p14.34"></span>δὲ</span> preserved by the old text.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[i:987](1110047.htm#fr_986) <span
id="vi.xlii-p14.35"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p15"></span> This *Diopetes,* the image which was
supposed to have fallen down from Jupiter or heaven (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p15.1"></span>Δίος</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p15.2"></span>πίπτω</span>), was the
image of Diana which was in the great temple at Ephesus. This was the
superstitious belief of the people as is clear from the many instances
in classic mythology in which statues are famed to have fallen from
heaven. This image was of wood and was probably found there by the
Greeks when they colonized Ionia.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[i:988](1110047.htm#fr_987) <span
id="vi.xlii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p17"></span> i.e. In this, he prophesies (see above on
this verse): but in his purpose of going to Jerusalem from Achaia, he
was disappointed, for he had to return through Macedonia: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p17.1"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p17.2"></span>προείλετο</span>, i.e.
this is the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p17.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p17.4"></span>θετο ἐν πνεύματι</span>. Mod. text om. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p17.5"></span>οὐκέτι ἐγχρονίσας</span>,
and adds: “for this is the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p17.6"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p17.7"></span>θετο</span>, and such is the force of the
expression.” Then: “But why he sends away T. and E., the writer does not
say: but it seems to me that of this also he says, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p17.8"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p17.9"></span>Εν πνεύματι</span>.
Wherefore when,” etc.—The meaning is: “He sends them away on this
occasion, as he did at Athens: viz. because he could no longer forbear,
therefore he thought it good to be left alone.”

<span id="fn_988"></span>[i:989](1110047.htm#fr_988) <span
id="vi.xlii-p17.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p18.2"></span>κεῖ γὰρ ἦν ἡ τυραννὶς</span> (mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p18.3"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p18.4"></span>πολλὴ φατρία</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p18.5"></span>τῶν φιλοσόφων</span>. But
this seems to belong rather to Athens.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[i:990](1110047.htm#fr_989) <span
id="vi.xlii-p18.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p19"></span> Mod. text inserts for connection: “And if
from this work wealth accrues to you, how hath he persuaded,” etc.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[i:991](1110047.htm#fr_990) <span
id="vi.xlii-p19.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p20.2"></span>κκαῦσαι</span>. Erasm. *ut et confutaret totum
et furorem populi extingueret.* Ben. *subverteret*.…*extingueret.* But
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p20.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p20.4"></span>κκαῦσαι</span> will not
bear this sense, nor does the context suggest it. Alexander’s object, it
is represented, was to overthrow the preaching, and kindle the rage of
the people yet more.—Cat. and Sav. marg. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p20.5"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p20.6"></span>λκύσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[i:992](1110047.htm#fr_991) <span
id="vi.xlii-p20.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p21"></span> Mod. text “As if he had said, Do ye not
worship her?”

<span id="fn_992"></span>[i:993](1110047.htm#fr_992) <span
id="vi.xlii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p22"></span> Mod. text “But, Our city, paying court to
them: θεραπεύων αὐτοὺς:” for which the old text has, But, Your city.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p22.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p22.2"></span>Εθεράπευσεν αὐτήν</span>.
Which may mean, Thus he, the town clerk, paid homage to the city, by
speaking of its honors. But <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p22.3"></span>θεραπεύετε αὐτὴν</span> in the preceding
sentence requires the sense given in the translation.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[i:994](1110047.htm#fr_993) <span
id="vi.xlii-p22.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p23.1"></span>Σφόδρα γὰρ αὐτοὺς ἠλόγησεν καὶ
διηπόρησεν</span>. Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p23.2"></span>Τούτῳ σφ. αὐτοὺς διηπ</span>., omitting, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p23.3"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p23.4"></span>λόγησεν</span>, which, if
not corrupt is here put in an unusual sense.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[i:995](1110047.htm#fr_994) <span
id="vi.xlii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p24.1"></span>οὐ δυνησόμεθα</span> old text, here and above,
as in the Alexandrine <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xlii-p24.2"></span>ms.</span> of the N. T. (received by
Griesbach) but here with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p24.3"></span>τῆς συστρ. τ</span>. transposed. (If the
negative be retained, it is better to read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p24.4"></span>περὶ τῆς σ. τ</span>. as in the leading
authorities of the text: so that this clause is epexegetical to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p24.5"></span>περὶ οὗ·</span> for which,
namely, for this concourse.)

<span id="fn_995"></span>[i:996](1110047.htm#fr_995) <span
id="vi.xlii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p26.1"></span>ταραχθεῖσα</span> B. The other <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xlii-p26.2"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p26.3"></span>ταριχευθεῖσα</span>, which
is unsuitable here.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[i:997](1110047.htm#fr_996) <span
id="vi.xlii-p26.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p27.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p27.2"></span>λως οὐδὲν ἕτερον ἡ πάντα γέλως καὶ κατάγελως
τὰ εκεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[i:998](1110047.htm#fr_997) <span
id="vi.xlii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p28"></span> C., <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.2"></span>Αλλ᾽ εἰ βούλει πάλιν πολλοὺς ἐξετάσωμεν
τόπους·</span> B., <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.4"></span>Αλλὰ πάλιν εἰ βούλει ἑτέρους ἐξετ.
τόπους</span>. Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.6"></span>Αλλ᾽ εἰ β., πάλιν ἑτέρως ἐξετ. τοὺς αὐτοὺς
τόπους</span>. In the Translation we adopt <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.7"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p28.8"></span>τέρως</span> and omit <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p28.9"></span>τόπους</span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[i:999](1110047.htm#fr_998) <span
id="vi.xlii-p28.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p29"></span> The text is corrupt: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p29.1"></span>καὶ φρίξει τοὺς
τόπους</span>—perhaps it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p29.2"></span>τοὺς ἐκεῖ τόπους</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p29.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlii-p29.4"></span>νταῦθα ὁρῶν· καθάπερ, γὰρ
ἐνταῦθα ἐν δεσμωτηρί& 251· τυγχάνων οὕτω κἀκεῖ πρὸ τῆς κρίσεως πρὸ τῆς
μελλούσης ἡμέρας</span>, sc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlii-p29.5"></span>φρίξει</span>. i.e. “just as here, being shut
up in prison he looks forward with dread to the coming trial, so will he
in that world,” etc. Mod. text quite misrepresenting the sense: “For, as
he that is here shut up in prison is gentle towards all, so those also
before the Judgment, before the coming Day, will be more gentle,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLIII on Acts xx. 1.](1110048)
