[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110000)  [Next](1110002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface to the American Edition.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>In</span> the preparation of this volume of
Chrysostom’s Homilies on Acts and Romans, the effort has been to improve
the Oxford edition by some changes and corrections, and by the addition
of critical and explanatory notes. The translation remains substantially
unchanged. Frequent minor changes have, however, been made in
phraseology, where it has seemed to me that the sense could thereby be
made plainer. Archaic and obsolescent words or expressions have often
been replaced by more idiomatic modern language. In Biblical quotations
where the translation was an inaccurate rendering of the original, I
have substituted either the Revised Version or a translation conformed
to the recent critical texts. A considerable number of errors in the
English edition have been corrected. The imperfect state of the original
text of the Homilies on Acts is a serious embarrassment, alike to
translator and editor, in this part of the work. Often the reports of
the discourses are in hopeless confusion, and it is impossible to
determine confidently the meaning of what has been reported, much less
of what the preacher originally said. Happily this remark applies to
only a part of the exposition.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The notes which I have added are intended to
bring modern criticism into relation with the statements of Chrysostom
upon points of special difficulty or importance. Sometimes they are
added by way of correction to what is stated in the text. More
frequently however, they are intended to present briefly the opinions of
critical interpreters upon disputed or doubtful points, and thus to
supplement for the modern reader the practical expositions of these
books of the New Testament. At other times it has seemed desirable to
explain matters which are but lightly touched upon in the text or passed
over without explanation or notice. There is frequent occasion to
observe how the spiritual insight of the great preacher has led him, in
the case of difficult passages, to a right discernment of the same sense
which critical exegesis discovers. I trust that these brief annotations,
touching upon a great variety of points, may contribute somewhat to the
usefulness of the edition.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>These notes are distinguished from those of the
English editors by having appended to them the initials, G. B. S.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The annotations of the English editors which are
so copious upon the Homilies on Acts have been, with trifling
exceptions, retained and the references have been, so far as possible,
adapted to the American edition. It is obvious, however, that this
adaptation could not be perfectly made because but few of the volumes of
the American edition of the Homilies had appeared when this volume was
prepared for the press. References to English editions of works not yet
accessible in an American edition were, of necessity, left unchanged.
Some small-portions of the work of the English editors which seemed to
have no present value have been omitted. It is not improbable that still
other omissions might well have been made, but the editor has been slow
to follow his own judgment in this particular in dealing with the
conscientious and painstaking labors of the Oxford editors.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>It will be noticed that the English notes to the
Homilies on Romans are few and brief. These have been retained with such
adaptations as could be made, and the American editor has added a
considerable number of statements of critical opinions, together with
such explanations of the course of thought and connections of ideas in
difficult passages of the Epistle, as seemed desirable and useful. In
the Homilies on Romans the state of the text is such and the work of the
translators so well performed, that one is rarely at a loss to perceive
the author’s meaning; the nature and limitations of his exposition,
however, seem to call for occasional supplementing and correction.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The indexes have been carefully revised. Topics
which seemed unimportant and texts which are merely quoted or alluded
to, without being explained, have often been omitted. By this process of
revision the size of the indexes has been considerably reduced. It is
hoped that they will be found sufficient to guide those who consult the
volume to what is said upon the main themes which find place in it.

<span id="ii-p9"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p9.1"></span>George</span> B. <span class="c14"><span
id="ii-p9.2"></span>Stevens</span>.

<span id="ii-p10"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p10.1"></span>Yale University, New Haven</span>, March, 1889.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](1110002)
