[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110005)  [Next](1110007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span> <span id="vi.i-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>[Acts 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>“The former treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to
teach, until the day on which, having given charge to the Apostles, whom
He had chosen, by the Holy Spirit, He was taken up.”

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>To</span> many persons this Book is so little
known, both it and its author, that they are not even aware that there
is such a book in existence. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) For this
reason especially I have taken this narrative for my subject, that I may
draw to it such as do not know it, and not let such a treasure as this
remain hidden out of sight. For indeed it may profit us no less than
even the Gospels; so replete is it with Christian wisdom and sound
doctrine, especially in what is said concerning the Holy Ghost. Then let
us not hastily pass by it, but examine it closely. Thus, the predictions
which in the Gospels Christ utters, here we may see these actually come
to pass; and note in the very facts the bright evidence of Truth which
shines in them, and the mighty change which is taking place in the
disciples now that the Spirit has come upon them. For example, they
heard Christ say, “Whoso believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he
do also, and greater works than these shall he do” ([John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="vi.i-p5.4"></span>): and
again, when He foretold to the disciples, that they should be brought
before rulers and kings, and in their synagogues they should scourge
them, and that they should suffer grievous things, and overcome all
([Matt. x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)<span
id="vi.i-p5.5"></span>): and that the Gospel should be preached in all
the world ([Matt. 24.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span
id="vi.i-p5.6"></span>): now all this, how it came to pass exactly as it
was said, may be seen in this Book, and more besides, which He told them
while yet with them. Here again you will see the Apostles themselves,
speeding their way as on wings over land and sea; and those same men,
once so timorous and void of understanding, on the sudden become quite
other than they were; men despising wealth, and raised above glory and
passion and concupiscence, and in short all such affections: moreover,
what unanimity there is among them now; nowhere any envying as there was
before, nor any of the old hankering after the preeminence, but all
virtue brought in them to its last finish, and shining through all, with
surpassing lustre, that charity, concerning which the Lord had given so
many charges saying, “In this shall all men know that ye are My
disciples, if ye love one another.” ([John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="vi.i-p5.7"></span>.) And
then, besides, there are doctrines to be found here, which we could not
have known so surely as we now do, if this Book had not existed, but the
very crowning point of our salvation would be hidden, alike for practice
of life and for doctrine.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>The greater part, however, of this work is
occupied with the acts of Paul, who “laboured more abundantly than they
all.” ([1 Cor. xv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>.) And the reason is, that the author of this
Book, that is, the blessed Luke, was his companion: a man, whose high
qualities, sufficiently visible in many other instances, are especially
shown in his firm adherence to his Teacher, whom he constantly
followed. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) Thus at a time when all had
forsaken him, one gone into Galatia, another into Dalmatia, hear what he
says of this disciple: “Only Luke is with me.” (<span
id="vi.i-p7.3"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p7.4"></span>.) And
giving the Corinthians a charge concerning him, he says, “Whose praise
is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches.” (<span
id="vi.i-p7.5"></span>[2 Cor. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p7.6"></span>.)
Again, when he says, “He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve,” and,
“according to the Gospel which ye received” (<span
id="vi.i-p7.7"></span>[1 Cor. 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p7.8"></span>), he
means the Gospel of this Luke. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) So that
there can be no mistake in attributing this work to him: and when I say,
to him, I mean, to Christ. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) And why
then did he not relate every thing, seeing he was with Paul to the end?
We may answer, that what is here written, was sufficient for those who
would attend, and that the sacred writers ever addressed themselves to
the matter of immediate importance, whatever it might be at the time: it
was no object with them to be writers of books: in fact, there are many
things which they have delivered by unwritten tradition. Now while all
that is contained in this Book is worthy of admiration, so is especially
the way the Apostles have of coming down to the wants of their hearers:
a condescension suggested by the Spirit who has so ordered it, that the
subject on which they chiefly dwell is that which pertains to Christ as
man. For so it is, that while they discourse so much about Christ, they
have spoken but little concerning His Godhead; it was mostly of the
Manhood that they discoursed, and of the Passion, and the Resurrection,
and the Ascension. For the thing required in the first instance was
this, that it should be believed that He was risen, and ascended into
heaven. As then the point on which Christ himself most insisted was, to
have it known that He was come from the Father, so is it this writer’s
principal object to declare, that Christ was risen from the dead, and
was received up into Heaven, and that He went to God, and came from God.
For, if the fact of His coming from God were not first believed, much
more, with the Resurrection and Ascension added thereto, would the Jews
have found the entire doctrine incredible. Wherefore gently and by
degrees he leads them on to higher truths. Nay, at Athens Paul even
calls Him man simply, without saying more (<span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>). For
if, when Christ Himself spoke of His equality with the Father, they
often attempted to stone Him, and called Him a blasphemer for this
reason, it was little to be expected that they would receive this
doctrine from the fishermen, and that too, with the Cross coming before
it.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>But why speak of the Jews, seeing that even
the disciples often upon hearing the more sublime doctrines were
troubled and offended? Therefore also He told them, “I have many things
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.” (<span
id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>[John xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span id="vi.i-p10.2"></span>.) If
those could not, who had been so long time with Him, and had been
admitted to so many secrets, and had seen so many wonders, how was it to
be expected that men, but newly dragged away from altars, and idols, and
sacrifices, and cats, and crocodiles (for such did the Gentiles
worship), and from the rest of their evil ways, should all at once
receive the more sublime matters of doctrine? And how in particular
should Jews, hearing as they did every day of their lives, and having it
ever sounded in their ears, “The Lord thy God is one Lord, and beside
Him is none other” (<span id="vi.i-p10.3"></span>[Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p10.4"></span>): who
also had seen Him hanging nailed on the Cross, nay, had themselves
crucified and buried Him, and not seen Him even risen: when they were
told that this same person was God and equal with the Father, how should
they, of all men, be otherwise than shocked and revolted? Therefore it
is that gently and little by little they carry them on, with much
consideration and forbearance letting themselves down to their low
attainments, themselves the while enjoying in more plentiful measure the
grace of the Spirit, and doing greater works in Christ’s name than
Christ Himself did, that they may at once raise them up from their
grovelling apprehensions, and confirm the saying, that Christ was raised
from the dead. For this, in fact, is just what this Book is: a
Demonstration of the Resurrection: <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)
 <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) this being once believed, the rest
would come in due course. The subject then and entire scope of this
Book, in the main, is just what I have said. And now let us hear the
Preface itself.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>“The former treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and to teach.” ([Acts
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>) Why
does he put him in mind of the Gospel? To intimate how strictly he may
be depended upon. For at the outset of the former work he says, “It
seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things
from the very first, to write unto thee in order.” (<span
id="vi.i-p13.2"></span>[Luke i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.i-p13.3"></span>.) Neither is he content with his own testimony,
but refers the whole matter to the Apostles, saying, “Even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses and
ministers of the word.” ([Luke i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p13.4"></span>.)
Having then accredited his account in the former instance, he has no
need to put forth his credentials afresh for this treatise, seeing his
disciple has been once for all satisfied, and by the mention of that
former work he has reminded him of the strict reliance to be placed in
him for the truth. For if a person has shown himself competent and
trustworthy to write of things which he has heard, and moreover has
obtained our confidence, much more will he have a right to our
confidence when he has composed an account, not of things which he has
received from others, but of things which he has seen and heard. For
thou didst receive what relates to Christ; much more wilt thou receive
what concerns the Apostles.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>What then, (it may be asked), is it a
question only of history, with which the Holy Spirit has nothing to do?
Not so. For, if “those delivered it unto us, who from the beginning were
eyewitnesses and ministers of the word;” then, what he says, is
*theirs.* And why did he not say, ‘As they who were counted worthy of
the Holy Spirit delivered them unto us;’ but “Those who were
eyewitnesses?” Because, in matter of belief, the very thing that gives
one a right to be believed, is the having learned from eyewitnesses:
whereas the other appears to foolish persons mere parade and pretension.
And therefore John also speaks thus: “I saw, and bare record that this
is the Son of God.” (<span id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>[John. i.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034)<span id="vi.i-p14.2"></span>.) And
Christ expresses Himself in the same way to Nicodemus, while he was dull
of apprehension, “We speak that we do know, and testify that we have
seen; and no one receiveth our witness.” ([John
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)<span id="vi.i-p14.3"></span>.)
Accordingly, He gave them leave to rest their testimony in many
particulars on the fact of their having seen them, when He said, “And do
ye bear witness concerning Me, because ye have been with Me from the
beginning.” (<span id="vi.i-p14.4"></span>[John xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027)<span id="vi.i-p14.5"></span>.) The
Apostles themselves also often speak in a similar manner; “We are
witnesses, and the Holy Spirit which God hath given to those that obey
Him.” ([Acts ii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032)<span
id="vi.i-p14.6"></span>); and on a subsequent occasion, Peter, still
giving assurance of the Resurrection, said, “Seeing we did eat and drink
with Him.” (<span id="vi.i-p14.7"></span>[Acts x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041)<span id="vi.i-p14.8"></span>.) For
they more readily received the testimony of persons who had been His
companions, because the notion of the Spirit was as yet very much beyond
them. Therefore John also at that time, in his Gospel, speaking of the
blood and water, said, he himself *saw it,* making the fact of his
having seen it equivalent, for them, to the highest testimony, although
the witness of the Spirit is more certain than the evidence of sight,
but not so with unbelievers. Now that Luke was a partaker of the Spirit,
is abundantly clear, both from the miracles which even now take place;
and from the fact that in those times even ordinary persons were gifted
with the Holy Ghost; and again from the testimony of Paul, in these
words, “Whose praise is in the Gospel” (<span id="vi.i-p14.9"></span>[2
Cor. viii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)<span
id="vi.i-p14.10"></span>); and from the appointment to which he was
chosen: for having said this, the Apostle adds, “But also appointed of
the Churches to travel with us with this grace which is administered by
us.” <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>Now mark how unassuming he is. He does not
say, The former Gospel which I preached, but, “The former treatise have
I made;” accounting the title of Gospel to be too great for him;
although it is on the score of this that the Apostle dignifies him:
“Whose praise,” he says, “is in the Gospel.” But he himself modestly
says, “The former treatise have I made—O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began both to do and to teach:” not simply “of all,” but from the
beginning to the end; “until the day,” he says, “in which He was taken
up.” And yet John says, that it was not possible to write all: for “were
they written, I suppose,” says he, “that even the world itself could not
contain the books written.” ([John xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>.) How
then does the Evangelist here say, “Of all?” He does not say “all,” but
“of all,” as much as to say, “in a summary way, and in the gross;” and
“of all that is mainly and pressingly important.” Then he tells us in
what sense he says *all,* when he adds, “Which Jesus began both to do
and to teach;” meaning His miracles and teaching; and not only so, but
implying that His doing was also a teaching.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>But now consider the benevolent and Apostolic
feelings of the writer: that for the sake of a single individual he took
such pains as to write for him an entire Gospel. “That thou mightest
have,” he says, “the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been
instructed.” (<span id="vi.i-p17.1"></span>[Luke i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p17.2"></span>.) In
truth, he had heard Christ say, “It is not the will of My Father that
one of these little ones should perish.” ([Matt. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p17.3"></span>.) And
why did he not make one book of it, to send to one man Theophilus, but
has divided it into two subjects? For clearness, and to give the brother
a pause for rest. Besides, the two treatises are distinct in their
subject-matter.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>But consider how Christ accredited his words
by His deeds. Thus He saith, “Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart.” ([Matt. 11.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.i-p18.1"></span>.) He taught men to be poor, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) and
exhibited this by His actions: “For the Son of Man,” He says, “hath not
where to lay His head.” ([Matt.
8.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p20.4"></span>.)
Again, He charged men to love their enemies; and He taught the same
lesson on the Cross, when He prayed for those who were crucifying Him.
He said, “If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also” ([Matt.
5.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span id="vi.i-p20.5"></span>):
now *He* not only gave His garments, but even His blood. In this way He
bade others teach. Wherefore Paul also said, “So as ye have us for an
example.” (<span id="vi.i-p20.6"></span>[Philip. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017)<span id="vi.i-p20.7"></span>.) For
nothing is more frigid than a teacher who shows his philosophy only in
words: this is to act the part not of a teacher, but of a hypocrite.
Therefore the Apostles first taught by their conduct, and then by their
words; nay rather they had no need of words, when their deeds spoke so
loud. Nor is it wrong to speak of Christ’s Passion as action, for in
suffering all He performed that great and wonderful act, by which He
destroyed death, and effected all else that He did for us.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>“Until the day in which He was taken up,
after that He, through the Holy Spirit, had given commandments unto the
Apostles whom He had chosen. After He had given commandments through the
Spirit” ([Acts 1.2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002)<span
id="vi.i-p21.1"></span>); i.e. they were spiritual words that He spake
unto them, nothing human; either this is the meaning, or, that it was by
the Spirit that He gave them commandments. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) Do you observe in what low terms he still
speaks of Christ, as in fact Christ had spoken of Himself? “But if I by
the Spirit of God cast out devils” ([Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="vi.i-p22.2"></span>); for
indeed the Holy Ghost wrought in that Temple. Well, what did He command?
“Go ye therefore,” He says, “make disciples of all the nations,
baptizing them into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you.” ([Matt. 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p22.3"></span>.) A
high encomium this for the Apostles; to have such a charge entrusted to
them, I mean, the salvation of the world! words full of the Spirit! And
this the writer hints at in the expression, “through the Holy Ghost”
(and, “the words which I spake unto you,” saith the Lord, “are Spirit”)
([John vi. 63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063)<span
id="vi.i-p22.4"></span>); thus leading the hearer on to a desire of
learning what the commands were, and establishing the authority of the
Apostles, seeing it is the words of the Spirit they are about to speak,
and the commandments of Christ. “After He had given commandments,” he
says, “He was taken up.” He does not say, ‘ascended;’ he still speaks as
concerning a man. It appears then that He also taught the Disciples
after His resurrection, but of this space of time no one has related to
us the whole in detail. St. John indeed, as also does the present
writer, dwells at greater length on this subject than the others; but
none has clearly related every thing (for they hastened to something
else); however, we have learnt these things through the Apostles, for
what they heard, that did they tell. “To whom also He shewed Himself
alive.” Having first spoken of the Ascension, he adverts to the
Resurrection; for since thou hast been told that “He was taken up,”
therefore, lest thou shouldest suppose Him to have been taken up by
others <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) , he adds, “To whom He
shewed Himself alive.” For if He shewed Himself in the greater, surely
He did in the minor circumstance. Seest thou, how casually and
unperceived he drops by the way the seeds of these great
doctrines? <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>“Being seen of them during forty days.” He
was not always with them now, as He was before the Resurrection. For the
writer does not say “forty days,” but, “during forty days.” He came, and
again disappeared; by this leading them on to higher conceptions, and no
longer permitting them to stand affected towards Him in the same way as
before, but taking effectual measures to secure both these objects, that
the fact of His Resurrection should be believed, and that He Himself
should be ever after apprehended to be greater than man. At the same
time, these were two opposite things; for in order to the belief in His
Resurrection, much was to be done of a human character, and for the
other object, just the reverse. Nevertheless, both results have been
effected, each when the fitting time arrived.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span>But why did He appear not to all, but to the
Apostles only? <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) Because to the many
it would have seemed a mere apparition, inasmuch as they understood not
the secret of the mystery. For if the disciples themselves were at first
incredulous and were troubled, and needed the evidence of actual touch
with the hand, and of His eating with them, how would it have fared in
all likelihood with the multitude? For this reason therefore by the
miracles \[wrought by the Apostles\] He renders the evidence of His
Resurrection unequivocal, so that not only the men of those times—this
is what would come of the ocular proof—but also all men thereafter,
should be certain of the fact, that He was risen. Upon this ground also
we argue with unbelievers. For if He did not rise again, but remains
dead, how did the Apostles perform miracles in His name? But they did
not, say you, perform miracles? How then was our religion (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p27.3"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p27.4"></span>θνος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p27.5"></span>)</span> instituted? For this
certainly they will not controvert nor impugn what we see with our eyes:
so that when they say that no miracles took place, they inflict a worse
stab <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) upon themselves. For this
would be the greatest of miracles, that without any miracles, the whole
world should have eagerly come to be taken in the nets of twelve poor
and illiterate men. For not by wealth of money, not by wisdom of words,
not by any thing else of this kind, did the fishermen prevail; so that
objectors must even against their will acknowledge that there was in
these men a Divine power, for no human strength could ever possibly
effect such great results. For this He then remained forty days on
earth, furnishing in this length of time the sure evidence of their
seeing Him in His own proper Person, that they might not suppose that
what they saw was a phantom. And not content with this, He added also
the evidence of eating with them at their board: as to signify this, the
writer adds, “And being at table <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)
with them, He commanded.” <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) ([Acts
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p30.10"></span>.)
And this circumstance the Apostles themselves always put forth as an
fallible token of the Resurrection; as where they say, “Who did eat and
drink with Him.” ([Acts x. 41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041)<span
id="vi.i-p30.11"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span>And what did He, when appearing unto them
those forty days? Why, He conversed with them, says the writer,
“concerning the kingdom of God.” ([Acts
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="vi.i-p31.1"></span>.)
For, since the disciples both had been distressed and troubled at the
things which already had taken place, and were about to go forth to
encounter great difficulties, He recovered them by His discourses
concerning the future. “He commanded them that they should not depart
from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father.” ([Acts
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p31.2"></span>.)
First, He led them out to Galilee, afraid and trembling, in order that
they might listen to His words in security. Afterwards, when they had
heard, and had passed forty days with Him, “He commanded them that they
should not depart from Jerusalem.” Wherefore? Just as when soldiers are
to charge a multitude, no one thinks of letting them issue forth until
they have armed themselves, or as horses are not suffered to start from
the barriers until they have got their charioteer; so Christ did not
suffer these to appear in the field before the descent of the Spirit,
that they might not be in a condition to be easily defeated and taken
captive by the many. Nor was this the only reason, but also there were
many in Jerusalem who should believe. And then again that it might not
be said, that leaving their own acquaintance, they had gone to make a
parade among strangers, therefore among those very men who had put
Christ to death do they exhibit the proofs of His Resurrection, among
those who had crucified and buried Him, in the very town in which the
iniquitous deed had been perpetrated; thereby stopping the mouths of all
foreign objectors. For when those even who had crucified Him appear as
believers, clearly this proved both the fact of the crucifixion and the
iniquity of the deed, and afforded a mighty evidence of the
Resurrection. Furthermore, lest the Apostles should say, How shall it be
possible for us to live among wicked and bloody men, they so many in
number, we so few and contemptible, observe how He does away their fear
and distress, by these words, “But wait for the promise of the Father,
which ye have heard of Me.” ([Acts
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p31.3"></span>.) You
will say, When had they heard this? When He said, “It is expedient for
you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you.” ([John xvi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="vi.i-p31.4"></span>.) And again, “I will pray the Father, and He
shall send you another Comforter, that He may abide with you.” ([John
14.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p31.5"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>But why did the Holy Ghost come to them, not
while Christ was present, nor even immediately after his departure, but,
whereas Christ ascended on the fortieth day, the Spirit descended “when
the day of Pentecost,” that is, the fiftieth, “was fully come?” ([Acts
ii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p32.1"></span>.)
And how was it, if the Spirit had not yet come, that He said, “Receive
ye the Holy Ghost?” ([John xx. 22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="vi.i-p32.2"></span>.) In order to render them capable and meet for
the reception of Him. For if Daniel fainted at the sight of an Angel
([Dan. viii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)<span
id="vi.i-p32.3"></span>), much more would these when about to receive so
great a grace. Either this then is to be said, or else that Christ spoke
of what was to come, as if come already; as when He said, “Tread ye upon
serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the devil.” ([Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="vi.i-p32.4"></span>.) But
why had the Holy Ghost not yet come? It was fit that they should first
be brought to have a longing desire for that event, and so receive the
grace. For this reason Christ Himself departed, and then the Spirit
descended. For had He Himself been there, they would not have expected
the Spirit so earnestly as they did. On this account neither did He come
immediately after Christ’s Ascension, but after eight or nine days. It
is the same with us also; for our desires towards God are then most
raised, when we stand in need. Accordingly, John chose that time to send
his disciples to Christ when they were likely to feel their need of
Jesus, during his own imprisonment. Besides, it was fit that our nature
should be seen in heaven, and that the reconciliation should be
perfected, and then the Spirit should come, and the joy should be
unalloyed. For, if the Spirit being already come, Christ had then
departed, and the Spirit remained; the consolation would not have been
so great as it was. For in fact they clung to Him, and could not bear to
part with Him; wherefore also to comfort them He said, “It is expedient
for you that I go away.” ([John xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p32.5"></span>.) On
this account He also waits during those intermediate days, that they
might first despond for awhile, and be made, as I said, to feel their
need of Him. and then reap a full and unalloyed delight. But if the
Spirit were inferior to the Son, the consolation would not have been
adequate; and how could He have said, “It is expedient for you?” For
this reason the greater matters of teaching were reserved for the
Spirit, that the disciples might not imagine Him inferior.

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>Consider also how necessary He made it for
them to abide in Jerusalem, by promising that the Spirit should be
granted them. For lest they should again flee away after His Ascension,
by this expectation, as by a bond, He keeps them to that spot. But
having said, “Wait for the promise of the Father, which ye have heard of
Me,” He then adds, “For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.” ([Acts
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005)<span id="vi.i-p33.1"></span>.) For
now indeed He gives them to see the difference there was betwixt Him and
John, plainly, and not as heretofore in obscure hints; for in fact He
had spoken very obscurely, when He said, “Notwithstanding, he that is
least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he:” but now He says
plainly, “John baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost.” ([Matt. xi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span
id="vi.i-p33.2"></span>.) And he no longer uses the testimony, but
merely adverts to the person of John, reminding the disciples of what he
had said, and shows them that they are now become greater than John;
seeing they too are to baptize with the Spirit. Again, He did not say, I
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, but, “Ye shall be baptized:” teaching
us humility. For this was plain enough from the testimonyof John, that
it was Christ Himself Who should baptize: “He it is that shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire” (<span
id="vi.i-p33.3"></span>[Luke iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p33.4"></span>.);
wherefore also He made mention of John. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>The Gospels, then, are a history of what
Christ did and said; but the Acts, of what that “other Comforter” said
and did. Not but that the Spirit did many things in the Gospels also;
even as Christ here in the Acts still works in men as He did in the
Gospels: only then the Spirit wrought through the Temple, now through
the Apostles: then, He came into the Virgin’s womb, and fashioned the
Temple; now, into Apostolic souls: then in the likeness of a dove; now,
in the likeness of fire. And wherefore? Showing there the gentleness of
the Lord, but here His taking vengeance also, He now puts them in mind
of the judgment likewise. For, when need was to forgive, need was there
of much gentleness; but now we have obtained the gift, it is henceforth
a time for judgment and examination.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>But why does Christ say, “Ye shall be
baptized,” when in fact there was no water in the upper room? Because
the more essential part of Baptism is the Spirit, through Whom indeed
the water has its operation; in the same manner our Lord also is said to
be anointed, not that He had ever been anointed with oil, but because He
had received the Spirit. Besides, we do in fact find them receiving a
baptism with water \[and a baptism with the Spirit\], and these at
different moments. In our case both take place under one act, but then
they were divided. For in the beginning they were baptized by John;
since, if harlots and publicans went to that baptism, much rather would
they who thereafter were to be baptized by the Holy Ghost. Then, that
the Apostles might not say, that they were always having it held out to
them in promises (<span id="vi.i-p36.1"></span>[John
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p36.2"></span>),
(for indeed Christ had already discoursed much to them concerning the
Spirit, that they should not imagine It to be an impersonal Energy or
Operation, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p36.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p36.4"></span>νέργειαν ἀνυπόστατον</span>) that they might not
say this, then, He adds, “not many days hence.” And He did not explain
when, that they might always watch: but, that it would soon take place,
He told them, that they might not faint; yet the exact time He refrained
from adding, that they might always be vigilant. Nor does He assure them
by this alone; I mean, by the shortness of the time, but withal by
saying, “The promise which ye have heard of Me.” For this is not, saith
He, the only time I have told you, but already I have promised what I
shall certainly perform. What wonder then that He does not signify the
day of the final consummation, when this day which was so near He did
not choose to reveal? And with good reason; to the end they may be ever
wakeful, and in a state of expectation and earnest heed.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>For it cannot, it cannot be, that a man
should enjoy the benefit of grace except he watch. Seest thou not what
Elias saith to his disciple? “If thou see me when I am taken up” (<span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>[2 Kings ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p37.2"></span>), this
that thou askest shall be done for thee. Christ also was ever wont to
say unto those that came unto Him, “Believest thou?” For if we be not
appropriated and made over to the thing given, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) neither do we greatly feel the benefit.
So it was also in the case of Paul; grace did not come to him
immediately, but three days intervened, during which he was blind;
purified the while, and prepared by fear. For as those who dye the
purple first season with other ingredients the cloth that is to receive
the dye, that the bloom may not be fleeting; <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) so in this instance God first takes order
that the soul shall be thoroughly in earnest, and then pours forth His
grace. On this account also, neither did He immediately send the Spirit,
but on the fiftieth day. Now if any one ask, why we also do not baptize
at that season of Pentecost? we may answer, that grace is the same now
as then; <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) but the mind becomes more
elevated now, by being prepared through fasting. And the season too of
Pentecost furnishes a not unlikely reason. What may that be? Our fathers
held Baptism to be just the proper curb upon evil concupiscence, and a
powerful lesson for teaching to be sober-minded even in a time of
delights.

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>As if then we were banquetting with Christ
Himself, and partaking of His table, let us do nothing at random, but
let us pass our time in fastings, and prayers, and much sobriety of
mind. For if a man who is destined to enter upon some temporal
government, prepares himself all his life long, and that he may obtain
some dignity, lays out his money, spends his time, and submits to
endless troubles; what shall we deserve, who draw near to the kingdom of
heaven with such negligence, and both show no earnestness before we have
received, and after having received are again negligent? Nay, this is
the very reason why we are negligent after having received, that we did
not watch before we had received. Therefore many, after they have
received, immediately have returned to their former vomit, and have
become more wicked, and drawn upon themselves a more severe punishment;
when having been delivered from their former sins, herein they have more
grievously provoked the Judge, that having been delivered from so great
a disease, still they did not learn sobriety, but that has happened unto
them, which Christ threatened to the paralytic man, saying, “Behold thou
art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee” (<span
id="vi.i-p41.1"></span>[John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p41.2"></span>): and
which He also predicted of the Jews, that “the last state shall be worse
than the first.” ([Matt. xii. 45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045)<span
id="vi.i-p41.3"></span>.) For *if,* saith He, showing that by their
ingratitude they should bring upon them the worst of evils, “if I had
not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin” ([John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p41.4"></span>); so
that the guilt of sins committed after these benefits is doubled and
quadrupled, in that, after the honour put upon us, we show ourselves
ungrateful and wicked. And the Laver of Baptism helps not a whit to
procure for us a milder punishment. And consider: a man has gotten
grievous sins by committing murder or adultery, or some other crime:
*these* were remitted through Baptism. For there is no sin, no impiety,
which does not yield and give place to this gift; for the Grace is
Divine. A man has again committed adultery and murder; the former
adultery is indeed done away, the murder forgiven, and not brought up
again to his charge, “for the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance” (<span id="vi.i-p41.5"></span>[Rom. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="vi.i-p41.6"></span>); but
for those committed after Baptism he suffers a punishment as great as he
would if both the former sins were brought up again, and many worse than
these. For the guilt is no longer simply equal, but doubled and
tripled. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Look: in proof that the
penalty of these sins is greater, hear what St. Paul says: “He that
despised Moses’ law died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who
hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of
the covenant an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of
grace?” (<span id="vi.i-p42.1"></span>[Heb.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span id="vi.i-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span>Perhaps we have now deterred many from
receiving baptism. Not however with this intention have we so spoken,
but on purpose that having received it, they may continue in temperance
and much moderation. ‘But I am afraid,’ says one. If thou wert afraid,
thou wouldest have received and guarded it. ‘Nay,’ saith he, ‘but this
is the very reason why I do not receive it,—that I am frightened.’ And
art thou not afraid to depart thus? ‘God is merciful,’ saith he. Receive
baptism then, because He is merciful and ready to help. But thou, where
to be in earnest is the thing required, dost not allege this
mercifulness; thou thinkest of this only where thou hast a mind to do
so. And yet that was the time to resort to God’s mercy, and we shall
then be surest of obtaining it, when we do our part. For he that has
cast the whole matter upon God, and, after his baptism, sins, as being
man it is likely, he may, and repents, shall obtain mercy; whereas he
that prevaricates with God’s mercy, and departs this life with no
portion in that grace, shall have his punishment without a word to be
said for him. ‘But how if he depart,’ say you, ‘after having had the
grace vouchsafed to him?’ He will depart empty again of all good
works. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) For it is impossible, yes,
it is in my opinion impossible, that the man who upon such hopes dallied
with baptism should have effected ought generous and good. And why dost
thou harbor such fear, and presume upon the uncertain chance of the
future? Why not convert this fear into labor and earnestness, and thou
shalt be great and admirable? Which is best, to fear or to labor?
Suppose some one to have placed thee, having nothing to do, in a
tottering house, saying, Look for the decaying roof to fall upon thy
head: for perhaps it will fall, perhaps not; but if thou hadst rather it
should not, then work and inhabit the more secure apartment: which
wouldest thou have rather chosen, that idle condition accompanied with
fear, or this labor with confidence? Why then, act now in the same way.
For the uncertain future is like a decayed house, ever threatening to
fall; but this work, laborious though it be, ensures safety.

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>Now God forbid that it should happen to us to
fall into so great straits as to sin after baptism. However, even if
aught such should happen, God is merciful, and has given us many ways of
obtaining remission even after this. But just as those who sin after
baptism are punished for this reason more severely than the Catechumens,
so again, those who know that there are medicines in repentance, and yet
will not make use of them, will undergo a more grievous chastisement.
For by how much the mercy of God is enlarged, by so much does the
punishment increase, if we do not duly profit by that mercy. What sayest
thou, O man? When thou wast full of such grievous evils, and given over,
suddenly thou becamest a friend, and wast exalted to the highest honor,
not by labors of thine own, but by the gift of God: thou didst again
return to thy former misconduct; and though thou didst deserve to be
sorely punished, nevertheless, God did not turn away, but gave
unnumbered opportunities of salvation, whereby thou mayest yet become a
friend: yet for all this, thou hast not the will to labor. What
forgiveness canst thou deserve henceforth? Will not the Gentiles with
good reason deride thee as a worthless drone? For if there be power in
that doctrine of yours, say they, what means this multitude of
uninitiated persons? If the mysteries be excellent and desirable, let
none receive baptism at his last gasp. For that is not the time for
giving of mysteries but for making of wills; the time for mysteries is
in health of mind and soundness of soul. For, if a man would not prefer
to make his will in such a condition; and if he does so make it, he
gives a handle for subsequent litigation (and this is the reason why
testators premise these words: “Alive, in my senses, and in health, I
make this disposal of my property:”), how should it be possible for a
person who is no longer master of his senses to go through the right
course of preparation for the sacred mysteries? <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) For if in the affairs of this life, the
laws of the world would not permit a man who was not perfectly sound in
mind to make a will, although it be in his own affairs that he would lay
down the law; how, when thou art receiving instruction concerning the
kingdom of heaven, and the unspeakable riches of that world, shall it be
possible for thee to learn all clearly, when very likely too thou art
beside thyself through the violence of thy malady? And when wilt thou
say those words <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) to Christ, in the
act of being buried with Him when at the point to depart hence? For
indeed both by works and by words must we show our good will towards
Him. (<span id="vi.i-p47.2"></span>[Rom. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p47.3"></span>.) Now
what thou art doing is all one, as if a man should want to be enlisted
as a soldier, when the war is just about to break up; or to strip for
the contest in the arena, just when the spectators have risen from their
seats. For thou hast thine arms given thee, not that thou shouldest
straightway depart hence, but that being equipped therewith, thou mayest
raise a trophy over the enemy. Let no one think that it is out of season
to discourse on this subject, because it is not Lent now. Nay, this it
is that vexes me, that ye look to a set time in such matters. Whereas
that Eunuch, barbarian as he was and on a journey, yea on the very
highway, he did not seek for a set time (<span
id="vi.i-p47.4"></span>[Acts viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027)<span id="vi.i-p47.5"></span>); no,
nor the jailer, though he was in the midst of a set of prisoners, and
the teacher he saw before him was a man scourged and in chains, and whom
he was still to have in his custody. ([Acts
16.29](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#029)<span id="vi.i-p47.6"></span>.)
But here, not being inmates of a jail, nor out on a journey, many are
putting off their baptism even to their last breath.

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span>Now if thou still questionest that Christ is
God, stand away from the Church: be not here, even as a hearer of the
Divine Word, and as one of the catechumens: <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) but if thou art sure of this, and knowest
clearly this truth, why delay? Why shrink back and hesitate? For fear,
say you, lest I should sin. But dost thou not fear what is worse, to
depart for the next world with such a heavy burden? For it is not
equally excusable, not to have gotten a grace set before you, and to
have failed in attempting to live uprightly. If thou be called to
account, Why didst thou not come for it? what wilt thou answer? In the
other case thou mayest allege the burden of thy passions, and the
difficulty of a virtuous life: but nothing of the kind here. For here is
grace, freely conveying liberty. But thou fearest lest thou shouldest
sin? Let this be thy language after Baptism: and then entertain this
fear, in order to hold fast the liberty thou hast received; not now, to
prevent thy receiving such a gift. Whereas now thou art wary before
baptism, and negligent after it. But thou art waiting for Lent: and why?
Has that season any advantage? Nay, it was not at the Passover that the
Apostles received <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) the grace, but at
another season; and then three thousand (Luke says,) and five thousand
were baptized: ([Acts 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041), [Acts
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004), [Acts
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#000)<span id="vi.i-p50.3"></span>.)
and again Cornelius. Let us then not wait for a set time, lest by
hesitating and putting off we depart empty, and destitute of so great
gifts. What do you suppose is my anguish when I hear that any person has
been taken away unbaptized, while I reflect upon the intolerable
punishments of that life, the inexorable doom! Again, how I am grieved
to behold others drawing near to their last gasp, and not brought to
their right mind even then. Hence too it is that scenes take place quite
unworthy of this gift. For whereas there ought to be joy, and dancing,
and exultation, and wearing of garlands, when another is christened; the
wife of the sick man has no sooner heard that the physician has ordered
this, than she is overcome with grief, as if it were some dire calamity;
she sets up the greatest lamentation, and nothing is heard all over the
house but crying and wailing, just as it is when condemned criminals are
led away to their doom. The sick man again is then more sorely grieved;
and if he recovers from his illness, is as vexed as if some great harm
had been done to him. For since he had not been prepared for a virtuous
life, he has no heart for the conflicts which are to follow, and shrinks
at the thought of them. Do you see what devices the devil contrives,
what shame, what ridicule? Let us rid ourselves of this disgrace; let us
live as Christ has enjoined. He gave us Baptism, not that we should
receive and depart, but that we should show the fruits of it in our
after life. How can one say to him who is departing and broken down,
Bear fruit? Hast thou not heard that “the fruit of the Spirit is love,
joy, peace?” (<span id="vi.i-p50.4"></span>[Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p50.5"></span>.) How
comes it then that the very contrary takes place here? For the wife
stands there mourning, when she ought to rejoice; the children weeping,
when they ought to be glad together; the sick man himself lies there in
darkness, and surrounded by noise and tumult, when he ought to be
keeping high festival; full of exceeding despondency at the thought of
leaving his children orphans, his wife a widow, his house desolate. Is
this a state in which to draw near unto mysteries? answer me; is this a
state in which to approach the sacred table? <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) Are such scenes to be tolerated? Should
the Emperor send letters and release the prisoners in the jails, there
is joy and gladness: God sends down the Holy Ghost from Heaven to remit
not arrears of money, but a whole mass of sins, and do ye all bewail and
lament? Why, how grossly unsuitable is this! Not to mention that
sometimes it is upon the dead that the water has been poured, and holy
mysteries flung upon the ground. However, not we are to blame for this,
but men who are so perverse. I exhort you then to leave all, and turn
and draw near to Baptism with all alacrity, that having given proof of
great earnestness at this present time, we may obtain confidence for
that which is to come; whereunto that we may attain, may it be granted
unto us all by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[i:3](1110006.htm#fr_2) <span
id="vi.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> St. Chrys. had made the same complaint at
Antioch in the *Homilies* (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387) *in Principium Actorum,* etc. t.
iii. p. 54. “We are about to set before you a strange and new
dish.…strange, I say, and not strange. Not strange; for it belongs to
the order of Holy Scripture: and yet strange; because peradventure your
ears are not accustomed to such a subject. Certainly, there are many to
whom this Book is not even known (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p5.2"></span>πολλοῖς γοῦν τὸ βιβλίον τοῦτο οὐδὲ γνώριμόν
ἐστι</span>) and many again think it so plain, that they slight it: thus
to some men their knowledge, to some their ignorance, is the cause of
their neglect……We are to enquire then who wrote it, and when, and on
what subject: and why it is ordered (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p5.3"></span>νενομοθέτηται</span>) to be read at this festival.
For peradventure you do not hear this Book read \[at other times\] from
year’s end to year’s end.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[i:4](1110006.htm#fr_3) <span
id="vi.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span> The two reasons which Chrysostom urges for
the study of the Acts are also the two chief grounds upon which modern
criticism depends for establishing not only the general trust-worthiness
of the book, but also its authorship by Luke. They are in substance, (1)
The continuity of the history as connected with the gospels and,
particularly, coincidences of style, matter and diction with the third
gospel, and (2) The remarkable undesigned coincidences of statement
between the Acts and Pauline Epistles which exclude the possibility of
inter-dependence. From [Col. 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014), [Phlm.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024), [2 Tim.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)<span id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>, we
learn that Luke was a close companion of Paul. In the part of the Book
of Acts which treats especially of the work of Paul, the writer
frequently refers to himself in the use of the first person plural as an
associate of the apostle (vid. [Acts
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010), [Acts
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006), [Acts
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001), [Acts
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p7.2"></span>).
These considerations demonstrate the fitness of Luke to prepare such a
treatise as the Acts and render the supposition of his authorship
plausible. When they are combined with those mentioned under (1) and
when the dedication of both books to a certain Theophilus is considered,
the argument becomes very cogent and complete.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[i:5](1110006.htm#fr_4) <span
id="vi.i-p7.9"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span> The reference in the Text of the expression:
“the Gospel which ye received,” (<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p8.2"></span>) to
Luke’s “gospel” is, of course, groundless. Paul speaks of it as the
gospel which he preached unto them. It is “his gospel” as in [Rom.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016), [Rom.
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025), [Gal.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011)<span id="vi.i-p8.3"></span>, etc.
The use of <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p8.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p8.5"></span>υαγγέλιον</span> to denote a
book is post-apostolic.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[i:6](1110006.htm#fr_5) <span
id="vi.i-p8.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span> *Hom. in Princip. Act.* p. 54. “First we must
see who wrote the Book.…whether a man, or God: and if man, let us reject
it; for, ‘Call no man master upon earth:’ but if God, let us receive
it.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[i:7](1110006.htm#fr_6) <span
id="vi.i-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span> *Hom. cur in Pentec. Acta legantur,* t. iii.
p. 89. E. “The demonstration of the Resurrection is, the Apostolic
miracles: and of the Apostolic miracles this Book is the school.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[i:8](1110006.htm#fr_7) <span
id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span> The statement that the Acts is a
“Demonstration of the Resurrection” has a certain profound truth, but is
incorrect if intending to assert that such was the conscious purpose of
the author. The resurrection of Jesus is a prominent theme in the
Apostolic discourses but the book is no more designed primarily to prove
the resurrection than are the Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians.
The immediate purpose of the book is to record the labors and triumphs
of the Apostolic Church as supplementary to the narrative of the
teaching and work of Jesus ([Acts 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p12.1"></span>). The
events narrated presuppose the resurrection and would have been
impossible without it.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[i:9](1110006.htm#fr_8) <span
id="vi.i-p14.11"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span> Chrys. states too confidently that “the
brother” whose praise is referred to in <span id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>[2
Cor. viii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)<span
id="vi.i-p15.2"></span>, is Luke. It cannot be determined who this
“brother” was. See Meyer *in loco.* Other conjectures are: Barnabas,
Mark, Erastus, and an actual brother of Titus.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[i:10](1110006.htm#fr_9) <span
id="vi.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.i-p19.1"></span>Ms</span>. C. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p19.2"></span>οἰκτίρμονας</span>, *merciful;* the rest, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p19.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p19.4"></span>κτήμονας</span>, *without
possessions,* which is certainly the true reading. Thus in the *Sermon
de futuræ Vitæ deliciis,* where Chrys. discourses largely on the harmony
of Christ’s teaching and actions, he says, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p19.5"></span>Πάλιν ἀκτημοσύνην παιδεύων, ὅρα πῶς διὰ τῶν ἔργων
αὐτὴν ἐπιδείκνυται, λέγων, Αἱ ἀλώπεκες, κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[i:11](1110006.htm#fr_10) <span
id="vi.i-p19.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span> “He taught them to be poor.” Here we have a
tinge of asceticism. Even if we suppose that the beatitude of the poor
refers to literal poverty (<span id="vi.i-p20.1"></span>[Luke vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p20.2"></span>) as
well as to poverty in spirit ([Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="vi.i-p20.3"></span>), it is
still incorrect to say that Jesus taught his disciples that poverty was
in itself a virtue. The ascetic principle is of heathen, not of
Christian origin. It is noticeable that Chrys. quotes no passage to
sustain his statement.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[i:12](1110006.htm#fr_11) <span
id="vi.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span> The latter is doubtless the correct
interpretation. (So Meyer, Hackett). Cf. [Matt.
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028), [John
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034), [Luke
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)<span
id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[i:13](1110006.htm#fr_12) <span
id="vi.i-p22.5"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span> i.e. as Œcumenius explains *in l.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p23.1"></span>ί</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p23.2"></span>να μή τις νομίσῃ ἐτέρου
ουνάμει τοῦτο γενέσθαι</span>, lest any should suppose this to have been
done by the power of another, he adds, to show that it was His own act,
*To whom also,* etc.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[i:14](1110006.htm#fr_13) <span
id="vi.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span> It is more than doubtful whether the mention
of the resurrection is introduced ([Acts
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="vi.i-p24.1"></span> sq.)
for the purpose of meeting sceptical objections. The writer will rather
make it the point of departure for his subsequent narrative. He has
mentioned the ascension; the resurrection is the other great event and
he will introduce a resumé of the more important circumstances which
happened during the period between these two events and which have an
important bearing upon the history about to be related.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[i:15](1110006.htm#fr_14) <span
id="vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span> Chrys. seems to overlook the appearance “to
above five hundred brethren at once,” <span id="vi.i-p27.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span
id="vi.i-p27.2"></span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[i:16](1110006.htm#fr_15) <span
id="vi.i-p27.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>Περιπείρουσι</span>, <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.i-p28.2"></span>ms</span>. C. and Cat. (see <span
id="vi.i-p28.3"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span id="vi.i-p28.4"></span>,
pierced themselves through with many sorrows), and in this sense *Hom.
in Matt.* 455 B. 463 A. The word is used as here, ibid. 831 C. where
several <span class="c14"><span id="vi.i-p28.5"></span>mss.</span> have
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p28.6"></span>πανταχοῦ ἡ πλάνη ἑαυτὴν
περιπείρει</span>, for ἑ<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p28.7"></span>αυτῇ περιπίπτει</span>.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[i:17](1110006.htm#fr_16) <span
id="vi.i-p28.8"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p29.1"></span>Συναλιζόμενος</span>. In the margin of E.V.
“Eating together with them.” The Catena here and below, had pr. man. the
other reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p29.2"></span>συναυλιζόμενος</span>, but corrected in both
places. St. Chrys. so takes the word, *Hom. in Princip. Act.* §11.767 E.
*in Joann.* 522 D. Œcumen. in 1. explains it, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p29.3"></span>τουτέστι κοινωνῶν ἁλῶν, κοινωνῶν τραπέζης</span>,
“Partaking of the salt, partaking of the table.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[i:18](1110006.htm#fr_17) <span
id="vi.i-p29.4"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span> Chrys. here follows the interpretation which
derives <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p30.1"></span>συναλιζόμενος</span> (i. 4) from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.2"></span>σύν</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.3"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.4"></span>λς</span> (salt) hence,
*eating together.* So several ancient authorities as Vulgate
(*convesceus*) and even modern, as Meyer. But the preferable derivation
is from <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.5"></span>σύν</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.6"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p30.7"></span>λής</span> (crowded), hence
*to be assembled, to meet with* (sc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p30.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p30.9"></span>υτοῖς</span>). So Olshausen, Hackett, Lechler,
Thayer’s *Lex.* and most modern authorities.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[i:19](1110006.htm#fr_18) <span
id="vi.i-p33.5"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span> So <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>mss.</span> C. F. D. and the Catena. The others
have <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p34.2"></span>μόνου
αὐτοῦ</span>, “of him (John) alone,” not of his testimony.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[i:20](1110006.htm#fr_19) <span
id="vi.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p38.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p38.2"></span>Εὰν γὰρ μὴ οἰκειωθῶμεν πρὸς τὸ διδόμενον</span>.
Erasm. *Nisi rei datæ addicti fuerimus.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[i:21](1110006.htm#fr_20) <span
id="vi.i-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p39.1"></span>Οἱ τὴν ἁλουργίδα βάπτοντες</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p39.2"></span>.…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p39.3"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p39.4"></span>να μὴ ἐξίτηλον γένηται τὸ
ἄνθος</span>. Comp. *Plat. Republ.* iv. vol. i. p. 289. Stallb. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p39.5"></span>Οὐκοῦν οἶσθα, ἦν δ᾽ ἐγὼ, ὅτι
οἱ βαφεῖς, ἐπειδὰν βουληθῶσι βάψαι ἔρια ὥστ᾽ εἶναι ἁλούργα, πρῶτον μὲν
ἐκλέγονται ἐκ τοσούτων χρωμάτων μίαν φύσιν τὴν τῶν λευκῶν, ἔπειτα
προπαρασκευάζουσι οὐκ ὀλίγῃ παρα σκεύ& 219· θεραπεύσαντες ὅπως δέξεται
ὅτι μάλιστα τὸ ἄνθος, καὶ οὕτω δὴ βάπτουσι</span>.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[i:22](1110006.htm#fr_21) <span
id="vi.i-p39.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span> The question, fully expressed, is, ‘Why do
we baptize, not at Pentecost, *but on Easter Eve?*’ And the answer is,
‘Because the lenten fast forms a meet preparation for the reception of
baptism. And moreover, there is a reason which weighed with our fathers,
in respect of this season of the fifty days, the time of the Church’s
great festivity. The baptism newly received would restrain the neophytes
from giving loose to carnal lusts; having prepared them to keep the
feast with a holy and awful gladness.’ It should be borne in mind, that
these Homilies were commenced during the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p40.1"></span>Πεντηκοστὴ</span>, i.e. the period of fifty days
between Easter and Pentecost; at which season the Book of Acts was
usually read in the Churches.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[i:23](1110006.htm#fr_22) <span
id="vi.i-p41.7"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span> This view, that baptism cleansed from all
sin, and that, therefore, sin after baptism was far more heinous and
hard to be forgiven, held wide sway in the early church and operated as
a powerful motive for the delay of baptism. The reception of the grace
of baptism involves this increased liability to deadlier sin. For this
reason Tertullian had urged its postponement. “And so according to the
circumstances and disposition, and even age, of each individual, the
delay of baptism is preferable; principally, however, in the case of
little children.” “If any understand the weighty import of baptism, they
will fear its reception more than its delay,” etc. *De Baptismo,* xviii.
Chrys. did not carry the idea to this length.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[i:24](1110006.htm#fr_23) <span
id="vi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p44.1"></span>Τί οὖν ἃν καταξιωθείς φησιν ἀπελεύσεται πάλιν
κενὸς κατορθωμάτων</span>, Cod. C, and so A, but with <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.3"></span>πελεύσῃ</span> In the latter
recension this sentence is omitted, and instead of it, we have, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.4"></span>Τί δὲ ταῦτα κατὰ τῆς σεαυτοῦ
σωτηρίας προβάλλῃ</span>; ‘But why dost thou put forth such pretences
against thine own salvation?’ Chrys. had just said, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.6"></span>πελθὼν ἄμοιρος τῆς χάριτος
ἀπαιραίτητον ἕξει τὴν τιμωρίον</span>. The objector (with the usual
prevaricating formula, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p44.7"></span>τί οὖν ἐ& 129·ν τὸ καὶ τό</span>; *Hom. in Matt.*
229 D.) says: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.8"></span>τί οὖν ἂν
καταξιωθεὶς</span>, sc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p44.9"></span>τῆς χαριτὸς ἀπέλθῃ</span>; to which Chrys.
answers: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.10"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p44.11"></span>Απελεύσεται πάλιν κενὸς
κατορθωμάτων</span>: He will depart as empty of good works as he was
before his baptism: adding, For it is, I think, utterly impossible that
such an one \[though he should live ever so long after baptism\] would
have wrought out his own salvation.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[i:25](1110006.htm#fr_24) <span
id="vi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>Μετὰ ἀκριβείας μυσταγωγεῖσθαι</span>: alluding to
the <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p46.2"></span>κατήχησις
μυσταγωγική</span>, i.e. the course of instruction by which the
catechumens were prepared for baptism. See the Catechetical Discourses
of St. Cyril of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[i:26](1110006.htm#fr_25) <span
id="vi.i-p46.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>Τὰ ῥ& 208·ματα ἐκεῖνα</span>: i.e. not (as Ben.
seems to interpret) “Buried with Christ;” as if this were part of the
form of words put into the mouth of the person to be baptized; but the
words, “I renounce thee, O Satan, and all thy angels, and all thy
service, and all thy pomp: and I enlist myself with Thee, O Christ.” St.
Chrysost. *Serm. ad pop. Antioch,* xxi. p. 244. The words, “buried with
Him,” serve to show more clearly the absurdity of such delay: “we are
‘buried with Christ in His death,’ that we may rise again to newness of
life, not that we should pass at once from the spiritual burial to the
literal.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[i:27](1110006.htm#fr_26) <span
id="vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span> The catechumens were allowed to be present
at the first part of the service (*Missa catechumenorum*); and were
dismissed after the Sermon, before the proper Prayers of the Church, or
*Missa Fidelium.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[i:28](1110006.htm#fr_27) <span
id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p50.1"></span>Κατηξιώθησαν τῆς χάριτος</span>, as above, p. 8,
note 1, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p50.2"></span>τί οὖν ἄν
καταξιωθείς</span>;

<span id="fn_28"></span>[i:29](1110006.htm#fr_28) <span
id="vi.i-p50.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span> The Holy Communion, administered immediately
after baptism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily II on Acts i. 6.](1110007)
