[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110036)  [Next](1110038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxxii"></span> <span id="vi.xxxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXII.</span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p2"></span>[Acts XV.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p3"></span>“And certain men which came down from
Judea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the
manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.”

<span id="vi.xxxii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p4.1"></span>Mark <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md)
</span> how at every step of the right progress in respect of the
Gentiles, the beginning is brought in as matter of necessity. Before
this (Peter) being found fault with, justified himself, and said all
that he said in the tone of apology, which was what made his words
acceptable: then, the Jews having turned away, upon this (Paul) came to
the Gentiles. Here again, seeing another extravagance coming in, upon
this (the apostle) enacts the law. For as it is likely that they, as
being taught of God, discoursed to all indifferently, this moved to
jealousy them of the Jews (who had believed). And they did not merely
speak of circumcision, but they said, Ye cannot even be saved. Whereas
the very opposite to this was the case, that receiving circumcision they
could not be saved. Do you mark how closely the trials succeed each
other, from within, from without? It is well ordered too, that this
happens when Paul is present, that he may answer them. “When therefore
Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them,
they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this
question.” ([Acts 15.2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.11"></span>.) And Paul does not say, What? Have I not a
right to be believed after so many signs? but he complied for their
sakes. “And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed
through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles:
and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.” ([Acts
15.3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.12"></span>.) And observe, the consequence is that all
the Samaritans also, learn what has come to the Gentiles: and they
rejoiced. “And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared all things
that God had done with them.” ([Acts
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.13"></span>.) See what a providence is here! “But there
rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying,
That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the
law of Moses. And the apostles and elders came together to consider of
this matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and
said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that of old days God made
choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of
the Gospel, and believe.” ([Acts
15.5-7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.14"></span>.) Observe Peter from the first standing
aloof (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.15"></span>κεχωρισμένον</span>) from the affair, and
even to this time judaizing. And yet (says he) “ye know.” ([Acts
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045.md), [Acts
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.16"></span>.) Perhaps those were present who of old
found fault with him in the matter of Cornelius, and went in with him
(on that occasion): for this reason he brings them forward as witnesses.
“From old days,” he says, “did choose among you.” What means, “Among
you?” Either, in Palestine, or, you being present. “By my mouth.”
Observe how he shows that it was God speaking by him, and no human
utterance. “And God, that knoweth the hearts, gave testimony unto them:”
he refers them to the spiritual testimony: “by giving them the Holy
Ghost even as unto us.” ([Acts
15.8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.17"></span>.) Everywhere he puts the Gentiles upon a
thorough equality. “And put no difference between us and them, having
purified their hearts by faith.” ([Acts
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.18"></span>.) From faith alone, he says, they obtained
the same gifts. This is also meant as a lesson to those (objectors);
this is able to teach even them that faith only is needed, not works nor
circumcision. For indeed they do not say all this only by way of apology
for the Gentiles, but to teach (the Jewish believers) also to abandon
the Law. However, at present this is not said. “Now therefore why tempt
ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples?” ([Acts
15.10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.19"></span>.) What means, “Tempt ye God?” As if He had
not power to save by faith. Consequently, it proceeds from a want of
faith, this bringing in the Law. Then he shows that they themselves were
nothing benefited by it, and he turns the whole (stress of his speech)
against the Law, not against them, and (so) cuts short the accusation of
them: “which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear. But we
believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall be saved, even
as they.” ([Acts 15.11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.20"></span>.) How full of power these words! The same
that Paul says at large in the Epistle to the Romans, the same says
Peter here. “For if Abraham,” says (Paul), “was justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory, but not before God.” ([Rom. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxxii-p5.21"></span>..md)
Do you perceive that all this is more a lesson for them than apology for
the Gentiles? However, if he had spoken this without a plea for
speaking, he <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md) would have been
suspected: an occasion having offered, he lays hold of it, and speaks
out fearlessly. See on all occasions how the designs of their foes are
made to work with them. If those had not stirred the question, these
things would not have been spoken, nor what follows. <span
id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md)

<span id="vi.xxxii-p8"></span>(Recapitulation.) (*b*) But <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736.md) let us look more closely at what has
been said. “And certain men,” etc. In Jerusalem, then, there were not
any believers from among the Gentiles: but in Antioch of course there
were. Therefore <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md) there came down
certain yet laboring under this disease of the love of rule, and wishing
to have those of the Gentiles attached to them. And yet Paul, though he
too was learned in the Law, was not thus affected. “When therefore Paul
and Barnabas had no small disputation with them,” etc. ([Acts
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.3"></span>.) But when he returned from thence, the
doctrine also became more exact. For if they at Jerusalem enjoin no such
thing, much more these (have no right to do so). “And being brought on
their way,” etc, “they caused no small joy to the brethren.” ([Acts
15.3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.4"></span>.) Do you mark, as many as are not enamoured
of rule, rejoiced in their believing? It was no ambitious feeling that
prompted their recitals, neither was it for display, but in
justification of the preaching to the Gentiles. ([Acts
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.5"></span>.) Thus they say nothing of what had happened
in the matter of the Jews. <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738.md) “But
there arose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed,”
etc. ([Acts 15.5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p11.2"></span>.) (*a*) But even if they would needs bring
over the Gentiles to their side, they learn that neither must the
Apostles overlook it. <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739.md) “And the
Apostles and elders,” etc. ([Acts
15.6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p12.3"></span>.) “Among us,” he says, “God chose:” and
“from old days:” long ago, he says, not now. And <span
id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740.md) this too is no small point—at a time
when Jews believed, not turned away (from the Gospel). “Among us;” an
argument from the place: “of old days,” from the time. And that
expression, “Chose:” just as in their own case <span
id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) he says not, (so.md) willed it, but,
“Chose that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel
and believe.” Whence is this proved? From the Spirit. Then he shows that
the testimony given them is not of grace merely, but of their virtue.
“And God which knoweth the hearts bare them witness” ([Acts
15.8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.5"></span>); having afforded to them nothing less (than
to us), for, he says, “Put no difference between us and them.” ([Acts
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.6"></span>.) Why then, hearts are what one must
everywhere look to. <span id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742.md) And it is
very appositely said, “God that knoweth the hearts bare them witness:”
as in the former instance, “Thou, Lord, that knowest the hearts of all
men.” ([Acts 1.24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.4"></span>.) For to show that this is the meaning,
observe what he adds, “Put no difference between us and them.” When he
has mentioned the testimony borne to them, then he utters that great
word, the same which Paul speaks, “Neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision.” (<span id="vi.xxxii-p15.5"></span>[1 Cor.
vii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.6"></span>.) “That he may make the twain one in
Himself.” (<span id="vi.xxxii-p15.7"></span>[Eph. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxxii-p15.8"></span>..md)
Of all these the seeds lie in Peter’s discourse. And he does not say
(between) them of the circumcision, but “Between us,” that is the
Apostles, “and them.” Then, that the expression, “no difference” may not
seem an outrage, After faith, he says—“Having purified their hearts by
faith” ([Acts 15.10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.9"></span>)—He thoroughly cleansed them first. <span
id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743.md) Then he shows, not that the Law was
evil, but themselves weak.—“But we believe that through the grace of the
Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they.” ([Acts
15.11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.7"></span>.) Mark how he ends with a fearful
consideration. He <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744.md) does not
discourse to them from the Prophets, but from things present, of which
themselves were witnesses. Of course <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) (the Prophets.md) also themselves anon
add their testimony (*infra* v. 15), and make the reason stronger by
what has now come to pass. And observe, he first permits the question to
be moved in the Church, and then speaks. “And put no difference
between”—he said not, them of the circumcision, but “us and them,” i.e.
the Gentiles: for <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746.md) this (gradual
advance) little by little is stronger. “Why therefore tempt ye God?” who
is become (the) God of the Gentiles: for this was tempting: <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747.md) \* \* \* whether He is able to save
even after the Law. See what he does. He shows that they are in danger.
For if, what the Law could not do, faith had power to do, “we believe
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they”
(comp. [Gal. ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p20.4"></span>): but faith falling off, behold, themselves
(are) in destruction. And he did not say, Why do ye disbelieve? which
was more harsh, but, “Tempt God,” and that when the fact is
demonstrated.

<span id="vi.xxxii-p21"></span>(*c*) Great effrontery this, of the
Pharisees, that even after faith they set up the Law, and will not obey
the Apostles. But see these, how mildly they speak, and not in the tone
of authority: such words are amiable, and more apt to fix themselves in
the mind. Observe, it is nowhere a display of words, but demonstration
by facts, by the Spirit. And yet, though they have such proofs, they
still speak gently. And observe they <span
id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748.md) do not come accusing those at Antioch,
but “declaring all things that God had done with them:” ([Acts
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.15"></span>) but thence again these men lay hold upon
the occasion (to compass their own objects), “but there rose up,” etc.
([Acts 15.1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.16"></span>.) Such were the pains they took in their
love of power: and it was not with the knowledge of the Apostles that
they Paul and Barnabas were blamed. But still they brought forward none
of these charges: but when they have proved the matter, then (the
Apostles) write in stronger terms.

<span id="vi.xxxii-p23"></span>For gentleness <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749.md) is everywhere a great good:
gentleness, I say, not stupid indifference; gentleness, not adulation:
for between these there is a vast difference. Nothing ruffled Paul,
nothing discomposed Peter. When thou hast convincing proofs, why lose
thy temper, to render these of none effect? It is impossible for one who
is out of temper ever to persuade. Yesterday also we discoursed about
anger; but there is no reason why we should not to-day also; perchance a
second exhortation coming directly after the first will effect somewhat.
For indeed a medicine though of virtue to heal a wound, unless it be
constantly renewed, mars all. And think not that our continual
discoursing about the same things is a condemning of you: for if we
condemned you, we should not discourse; but now, hoping that you will
gain much, we speak these things. Would indeed that we did speak
constantly of the same things: would that there were no other subject of
our discourses, than how we might overcome our passions. For is it not
contrary to all reason, that while emperors, living in luxury and so
great honor, have no subject of discourse either while sitting at table,
or at any other time, save only how to overcome their enemies <span
id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750.md) —and therefore it is that they hold
their assemblies each day, and appoint generals and soldiers, and demand
taxes and tributes; and that of all state affairs, the moving causes are
these two, the overcoming of those who make war upon them, and the
establishing of their subjects in peace—we have no mind for such themes
as this, nor ever even dream of conversing upon them: but how we may buy
land, or purchase slaves, and make our property greater, these are
subjects we can talk about every day, and never be tired of them: while
concerning things in ourselves and really our own, we neither wish to
speak ourselves, nor so much as dream of tolerating advice, nor of
enduring to hear others speaking about them? But answer me, what do you
talk about? About dinner? Why that is a subject for cooks. Of money?
Nay, that is a theme for hucksters and merchants. Of buildings? That
belongs to carpenters and builders. Of land? That talk is for
husbandmen. But for us, there is no other proper business, save this,
how we may make wealth for the soul. Then let not the discourse be
wearisome to you. Why is it that none finds fault with the physician for
always discoursing of the healing art, nor with people of other crafts
for talking about their peculiar arts? If indeed the mastery over our
passions were really achieved, so that there were no need of putting us
in mind, we might reasonably be taxed with ambition and display: or
rather, not then either. For even if it were gained, for all that, there
would be need of discoursing, that one might not relapse and remain
uncorrected: as in fact physicians discourse not only to the sick, but
also to the whole, and they have books on this subject, on the one part
how to free from disease, on the other how to preserve health. So that
even if we are well, still we must not give over, but must do all in
order to the preserving of our health. And when we are sick there is a
twofold necessity for advice: first, that we may be freed from the
disease; secondly, that having been freed, we may not fall into it
again. Well then, we are discoursing now by the method of treating the
sick, not by the rules for the treatment of the healthy.

<span id="vi.xxxii-p26"></span>How then may one root out this evil
passion? how subdue (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.2"></span>ποσκελίσειε</span>) this violent fever? Let
us see whence it had its birth, and let us remove the cause. Whence is
it wont to arise? From arrogance and much haughtiness. This cause then
let us remove, and the disease is removed together with it. But what is
arrogance? whence does it arise? for perhaps we are likely to have to go
back to a still higher origin. But whatever course the reason of the
thing may point out, that let us take, that we may go to the bottom of
the mischief, and pluck it up by the roots. Whence then comes arrogance?
From our not looking into our own concerns, but instead of that, busying
ourselves about the nature of land, though we are not husbandmen, and
the nature of gold, though we are not merchants, and concerning
clothing, and everything else: while to ourselves and our own nature we
never look at all. And who, you will say, is ignorant of his own nature?
Many: perhaps all, save a few: and if ye will, I will show the proof of
it. For, tell me, what is man? If one were asked, will he be able to
answer outright to the questions, In what he differs from the brutes, in
what he is akin to the heavenly inhabitants, what can be made of man?
For as in the case of any other material, so also in this case: man is
the subject-matter, but of this can be made either an angel or a beast.
Does not this seem a strange saying? And yet ye have often heard it in
the Scriptures. For of certain human beings it was said, “he is the
angel of the Lord” (<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.3"></span>[Mal. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.4"></span>.md):
and “from his lips,” saith it, “they shall seek judgment” (<span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.5"></span>[Mal. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.6"></span>.md):
and again, “I send My angel before Thy face:” but of some, “Serpents,
generation of vipers.” ([Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.7"></span>..md)
So then, it all depends upon the use. Why do I say, an angel? the man
can become God, and a child of God. For we read, “I have said, Ye are
gods, and all of you are children of the Most High.” (<span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.8"></span>[Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.9"></span>..md)
And what is greater, the power to become both God and angel and child of
God is put into his own hands. Yea, so it is, man can be the maker of an
angel. Perchance this saying has startled you? Hear however Christ
saying: “In the Resurrection they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are like unto the angels.” ([Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.10"></span>..md)
And again, “He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.” ([Matt.
xix. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.11"></span>.) In a word, it is virtue which makes
angels: but this is in our power: therefore we are able to make angels,
though not in nature, certainly in will. For indeed if virtue be absent,
it is no advantage to be an angel by nature; and the Devil is a proof of
this, who was an angel once: but if virtue be present, it is no loss to
be a man by nature; and John is a proof of this, who was a man, and
Elias who went up into heaven, and all those who are about to depart
thither. For these indeed, though with bodies, were not prevented from
dwelling in heaven: while those others, though without bodies, could not
remain in heaven. Let no one then grieve or be vexed with his nature as
if it were a hindrance to him, but with his will. He (the Devil) from
being incorporeal became a lion: for lo! it saith, “Our adversary, as a
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour” ([1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.12"></span>.md):
we from being corporeal, become angels. For just as if a person, having
found some precious material, should despise it, as not being an
artificer, it will be a great loss to him, whether it be pearls, or a
pearl shell, or any other such thing that he has seen; so we likewise,
if we are ignorant of our own nature, shall despise it much: but if we
know what it is, we shall exhibit much zeal, and reap the greatest
profits. For from this nature is wrought a king’s robe, from this a
king’s house, from this nature are fashioned a king’s members: all are
kingly. Let us not then misuse our own nature to our hurt. He has made
us “a little lower than the angels,” (<span
id="vi.xxxii-p26.13"></span>[Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxxii-p26.14"></span>.md),
I mean, by reason of death: but even that little we have now recovered.
There is nothing therefore to hinder us from becoming nigh to the
angels, if we will. Let us then will it, let us will it, and having
exercised ourselves thoroughly, let us return honor to the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, world without end, Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_733"></span>[i:734](1110037.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.2"></span>Ορα πανταχοῦ τῆς εἰς τὰ ἔθνη διορθώσεως</span>
(the putting things right, the introduction of the right and proper
course: mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.3"></span>μεταβάσεως</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.5"></span>ναγκαίαν τὴν ἀρχὴν εἰσαγομένην</span>. Mod.
text <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p5.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p5.7"></span>π᾽ αὐτῶν εἰσαγ</span>.
which Ben. renders, *vide ubique transitum ad Gentes necessario a Judæis
inductum.* But the meaning is: “Throughout, it is so ordered by the
Providence of God, that the Apostles do not seem to act spontaneously in
this matter, but to be led by the force of circumstances.” The persons
(Peter, Paul, James) are not specified, the sense being: First, upon
fault being found, there is apologizing and self-justifying: then, upon
the Jews’ open aversion, the preaching comes to the Gentiles: now, upon
a new emergency, a law is enacted.—In the next sentence, B. C. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p5.8"></span>διαφόρως</span>: A. and
mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.10"></span>διαφόρως</span>, which we retain.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[i:735](1110037.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p5.22"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p6"></span> Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p6.1"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p6.2"></span>σως οὐδαμῶς ὕποπτος ἦν</span>, “perhaps he
would *not* have been any way suspected.”

<span id="fn_735"></span>[i:736](1110037.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p7"></span> With Luke’s narrative of the Apostolic
council at Jerusalem should be compared Paul’s ([Gal.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="vi.xxxii-p7.1"></span>..md)
which gives additional particulars. The conference marked an epoch in
the history of the church. Here came into decisive conflict two opposing
tendencies—the Pharisaic tendency which insisted that the Gentiles must
enter the Kingdom through the door of the law, and the catholic spirit
which, following the principles of Stephen’s apology and appreciating
the revelations made to Peter, insisted that adherence to the Mosaic law
was not only unnecessary, but was positively inconsistent with the
freedom and completeness of Christ’s salvation. The decree of the
council was, no doubt, of great service in checking the Judaizing
tendencies of the early church. It was in the line of this decree that
the work of Paul was done, as the champion of catholic Christianity. The
chief points to be noted in [Acts
15.1-12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p7.2"></span> are: (1) The representatives of the narrower
Jewish view came to Antioch on purpose to antagonize the work of Paul
and Barnabas among the Gentiles ([Acts
15.1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)<span id="vi.xxxii-p7.3"></span>.md).
(2) They took the extreme position that salvation depended on
circumcision and caused great anxiety and debate among the Gentile
Christians regarding their relations to the Mosaic law ([Acts
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxxii-p7.4"></span>.md).
(3) The Apostles and messengers who were sent to appeal the question to
the leaders of the mother church at Jerusalem answered their objections
by the *fact* of the Gentiles’ conversion ([Acts
15.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p7.5"></span>). (4) Peter’s position was now clear and
pronounced. This is implied even in his subsequent conduct at Antioch
whence he withdrew from the Gentiles ([Gal. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.xxxii-p7.6"></span>
sq.) which Paul represents as an *inconsistency.* (5) Peter’s view is
first given both on account of his prominence among the Apostles and
because he had been the first to bear the gospel to the Gentiles.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[i:737](1110037.htm#fr_736.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p9"></span> In the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p9.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. the part marked (*b*) is
transposed to the beginning (*c*) of the remarks introductory to the
morale, so that the Recapitulation (announced by mod. text at the end of
the first sentence of (*a*) is split into two halves and the latter
given first. In the old text the two parts (*b*) (*c*) make the entire
Recapitulation, so that it is by no means <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p9.3"></span>κριβέστερον</span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[i:738](1110037.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p10"></span> Mod. text “Therefore they depart
(thither) and stay no short time there ([Acts
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#028.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.1"></span>). ’But there arose certain of the Pharisees
([Acts 15.5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.2"></span>) yet laboring under the disease,” etc.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[i:739](1110037.htm#fr_738.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p10.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p11.1"></span>τῶν εἰς τοὺς ᾽Ιουδαίους συμβεβηκότων</span>:
i.e. of the dispute about circumcision, see below p. 203, note 7. The
first sentence of (*c*) “Great effrontery (this) of the Pharisees,”
etc., would come in suitably here, but it is required for introduction
of the sentence which follows it, “But see the Apostles,” etc.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[i:740](1110037.htm#fr_739.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p12"></span> Here mod. text has the formula, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p12.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p12.2"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἴδωμεν ἄνωθεν τὰ
εἰρημένα</span>.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[i:741](1110037.htm#fr_740.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p13.1"></span>Καὶ τοῦτο δὲ οὐ μικρὸν, ᾽Ιουδαίων πιστεύοντων
καὶ τούτων οὐκ ἀποστραφέντων, ἀπὸ τοῦ τόπου, ἀπὸ τοῦ καιροῦ</span>. Mod.
text substitutes the sense of the latter words: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p13.2"></span>δύο τούτοις ὃ λέγει
πιστοῦται, τῷ καιρῷ καὶ τῷ τόπῳ</span>: but for the former, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p13.3"></span>οὐ μικρὸν δὲ τὸ καὶ
᾽Ιουδαίων πιστευόντων τοῦτο ἀποστραφῆναι</span>, *quod etiam Judæis
credentibus hoc avertatur.* Ben. We reject <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p13.4"></span>τούτων</span>, which disturbs the sense. He
says: “Long ago—therefore why raise this question now, which was settled
in those early days, when Jews received the faith, not rejected it with
aversion? which aversion of theirs is *now* the occasion of the
preachers’ turning to the Gentiles. Yet even then the will of God was
plainly declared. Thus the Apostle argues strongly both from the
place—here in the midst of the Jews—and from the time.”

<span id="fn_741"></span>[i:742](1110037.htm#fr_741.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.1"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.2"></span>σπερ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν</span>: referring to [Acts
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.xxxii-p14.3"></span>.
as below on <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.4"></span>καρδιογνώστης</span>. He means, “It was a
purpose of the Lord, and a high distinction: therefore he does not say,
He would, or was willing that the Gentiles should hear, but He elected
me for this work, as He elected us to the Apostleship.”

<span id="fn_742"></span>[i:743](1110037.htm#fr_742.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p14.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.2"></span>Αρα καρδίας δεῖ πανταχοῦ ζητεῖν</span>. i.e.
“He implies that God, as knowing the hearts of all men saw the fitness
of these Gentiles, therefore chose them, and made no distinction between
us and them in point of fitness. Consequently, the heart, not
circumcision, is what we must everywhere look to. Nay, he adds, this
same expression, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.3"></span>καρδιογνώστης</span> was used by the Apostles
on the occasion above referred to: so that Peter, by using it here also,
declares the Gentiles to be upon a par with the Apostles themselves: no
difference between *us* the Apostles, and them.”

<span id="fn_743"></span>[i:744](1110037.htm#fr_743.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p15.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p16"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.3"></span>Εξεκάθαρε πρότερον τὸν λόγον, καὶ τότε κ. τ.
λ</span>. Either <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.4"></span>τὸν λόγον</span> has come in from another
place (perhaps after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.5"></span>εἰς φοβερὸν κατέληξε</span> below), or some
words are lost, e.g. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.6"></span>πίστει τῇ εἰς τὸν λὸγον</span>.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[i:745](1110037.htm#fr_744.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p16.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p17"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p17.1"></span>φοβερὸν</span> is in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p17.2"></span>καθ᾽ ὃν τρόπον
κἀκεῖνοι</span>. “Our danger, through the Law, is greater than theirs.
Not only are they put upon a par with us, but we may be thankful to be
put upon a par with them.” To bring out this point, he reviews the tenor
and drift of St. Peter’s speech.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[i:746](1110037.htm#fr_745.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p18.1"></span>Εἰκότως καὶ αὐτοὶ λοιπὸν
ἐπιμαρτυροῦσι</span>: that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p18.2"></span>αὐτοὶ</span> means the Prophets (cited by St.
James), seems to be shown by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p18.3"></span>τοῖς ἤδη γενομένοις</span>, “what they long
ago foretold, which is even now come to pass.”

<span id="fn_746"></span>[i:747](1110037.htm#fr_746.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p19.1"></span>τὸ γὰρ καταμικρὸν τοῦτο ἰσχυρότερον γενόμενον
τῶν ἐθνῶν· τοῦτο γὰρ πειράζοντος ἦν κ. τ. λ</span>. Mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p19.2"></span>τοῦτο γὰρ κατὰ μικρὸν
ἐπαγόμενον ἐγίνετο ἰσχυρότερον· ἐκεῖνο δὲ πειρ. ἦν</span>.—The meaning
is: “He does not come at once to the point, but advances to it
gradually: first, ‘Put no difference—though, as he afterwards shows, if
there be a difference it is in their favor: we are not to think it much
that they are to be saved as we, but that we may trust to be saved even
as they.’”

<span id="fn_747"></span>[i:748](1110037.htm#fr_747.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p20"></span> Above, it was “disbelieving God, as not
able to save by faith.” Here, “You are tempting God by your unbelief:
whereas the question is not so much whether He can save without the Law,
as <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p20.1"></span>εἰ δύναται καὶ
μετὰ νόμον</span> (B. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p20.2"></span>τοῦ νόμου</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p20.3"></span>σῶσαι</span>.”

<span id="fn_748"></span>[i:749](1110037.htm#fr_748.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.1"></span>οὐκ ἀπέρχονται διαβάλλοντες τοὺς ἐν
᾽Αντ</span>. This also shows the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.3"></span>πιείκεια</span> of Paul and Barnabas, that
when they come to Jerusalem, we do not find them complaining of the Jews
who had come to Antioch, but they confine themselves to the recital of
“all that God had done with them,” [Acts
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.xxxii-p22.4"></span>;
as he had said above, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.5"></span>οὐδὲν λέγουσι περὶ τῶν εἰς τοὺς ᾽Ιουδαίους
συμβεβηκότων</span>. The next clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.6"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.7"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἐκεῖθεν πάλιν λαμβάνουσιν ἀφορμὴν</span>
may be referred to the Apostles, “they again take advantage of this
opportunity, viz. of the Judaizing opposition, to establish the freedom
of the Gentiles.” We have referred it to the Pharisaic brethren, [Acts
15.5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.xxxii-p22.8"></span>,
for the sake of connection with the following <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.9"></span>οὕτως ἐμελέτων τὸ φιλαρχεῖν</span>.—In the
next clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.10"></span>καὶ</span> (mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p22.11"></span>οἵ καὶ</span>), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p22.12"></span>οὐκ εἰδότων τῶν
ἀποστόλων ἐμέμφθησαν</span>, Sav. marg. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.13"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p22.14"></span>πεμφθησαν</span>, “these Judaizers were not
sent with knowledge of the Apostles.”

<span id="fn_749"></span>[i:750](1110037.htm#fr_749.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p24.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p24.2"></span>Επιείκεια</span>, gentleness, in the sense of
moderation and forbearance, keeping one’s temper: here distinguished
from the temper of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p24.3"></span>ψυχρὸς</span>, which is unruffled only
because he does not feel, and that of the flatterer, who puts up with
everything for the sake of pleasing.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[i:751](1110037.htm#fr_750.md) <span
id="vi.xxxii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p25"></span> He means, that to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxii-p25.1"></span>βασιλεῖς</span>, when
there is an enemy in the field against them, the engrossing theme of
discourse, even at table, is how to overcome their enemies. Such was
probably the state of things when this Homily was preached: for the note
of time in Hom. xliv. implies that it was delivered either at the close
of 400 or the beginning of 401 <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxii-p25.2"></span>a.d.</span>: now the former of these years
was signalized by the revolt and defeat of Gainas. Hence the following
passage might be rendered, “they are holding assemblies each day,
appointing generals and demanding taxes,” etc. The war ended Dec. 400,
in the defeat of Gainas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIII on Acts xv. 13, 15.](1110038.md)
