[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110026)  [Next](1110028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxii"></span> <span id="vi.xxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXII.</span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p2"></span>[Acts X.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)<span id="vi.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p3"></span>“There was a certain man in Cæsarea called
Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian band, a devout
man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to
the people, and prayed to God alway. He saw in a vision evidently about
the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in to him, and saying
unto him, Cornelius. And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said,
What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are
come up for a memorial before God.”

<span id="vi.xxii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxii-p4.1"></span>This</span> man is not a Jew, nor of those
under the Law, but he had already forestalled our manner of life. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) Observe, thus far, two persons, both
of high rank, receiving the faith, the eunuch at Gaza and this man; and
the pains taken on behalf of these men. But do not imagine that this was
because of their high rank: God forbid! it was because of their piety.
For that the Scripture mentions their dignified stations, is to show the
greatness of their piety; since it is more wonderful when a person being
in a position of wealth and power is such as these were. What makes the
praise of the former is, his undertaking so long a journey, and this
when there was no (festival) season to require it, <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) and his reading on his road, and while
riding in his chariot, and his beseeching Philip, and numberless other
points: and the great praise of the latter is, that he makes alms and
prayers, and is a just man, holding such a command. The reason why the
writer describes the man so fully, is, that none may say that the
Scripture history relates falsehoods: “Cornelius,” he says, “a centurion
of the band called the Italian band.” ([Acts
10.1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)<span id="vi.xxii-p6.2"></span>.)
A “band,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p6.3"></span>σπεἵρα</span>, is what we now call a
“numerous.” <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) “A devout man,” he
says, “and one that feared God with all his house” ([Acts
10.2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxii-p7.4"></span>):
that you may not imagine that it is because of his high station that
these things are done.—When Paul was to be brought over, there is no
angel, but the Lord Himself: and He does not send him to some great one,
but to a very ordinary person: <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524)
but here, on the contrary, He brings the chief Apostle (to these
Gentiles), not sends them to him: herein condescending to their
weakness, and knowing how such persons need to be treated. As indeed on
many occasions we find Christ Himself hasting (to such), as being more
infirm. Or (it may be) because (Cornelius) was not able himself to leave
his home. But here again is a high commendation of alms, just as was
there given by means of Tabitha. “A devout man,” it says, “and one that
feared God with all his house.” Let us hear this, whoever of us neglect
them of our own house, whereas this man was careful of his soldiers
also. “And that gave alms,” it says, “to all the people.” Both his
doctrines and his life were right. “He saw in a vision evidently, about
the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him, and saying
unto him, Cornelius.” ([Acts 10.3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003)<span
id="vi.xxii-p8.5"></span>.) Why does he see the angel? This also was in
order to the full assurance of Peter, or rather, not of him, but of the
others, the weaker ones. “At the ninth hour,” when he was released from
his cares and was at quiet, when he was engaged in prayers and
compunction. “And when he looked on him, he was afraid.” ([Acts
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)<span id="vi.xxii-p8.6"></span>.)
Observe how what the angel speaks he does not speak immediately, but
first rouses and elevates his mind. At the sight, there was fear, but a
fear in moderation, just so far as served to fix his attention. Then
also the words relieved him of his fear. The fear roused him: the praise
mitigated what was unpleasant in the fear. “Thy prayers,” saith he, “and
thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. And now send men to
Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter.” ([Acts
10.5](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxii-p8.7"></span>.)
Lest they should come to a different person, he designates the man not
only by his surname, but by the place. “And the same,” saith he, “is
lodging with one Simon a tanner, who hath his house by the seaside.”
([Acts 10.6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xxii-p8.8"></span>.) Do you mark how the Apostles, for love of
solitude and quiet, affected the retired quarters of the cities? “With
one Simon a tanner:” how then if it chanced that there was another?
Behold, there is another token, his dwelling by the seaside. All three
tokens could not possibly coincide (elsewhere). He does not tell him for
what purpose, that he may not take off the intense desire, but he leaves
him to an eager and longing expectation of what he shall hear.
“And <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) when the Angel which spake
unto Cornelius was departed, he called two of his household servants,
and a devout soldier of them that waited on him continually; and when he
had declared all these things unto them, he sent them to Joppa.” ([Acts
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxii-p9.2"></span>.) Do
you see, that it is not without purpose that the writer says this? (it
shows) that those also “who waited on him continually” were such as he.
“And when he had declared the whole matter unto them:” observe the
unassuming character of the man: for he does not say, Call Peter to me:
but, in order also to induce him to come, he declared the whole
matter:—this was so ordered by Providence;—for he did not choose to use
the authority of his rank to fetch Peter to him; therefore “he declared
the matter;” such was the moderation of the man: and yet no great notion
was to be formed of one lodging with a tanner. “And on the morrow, as
they journeyed, and drew nigh to the city” ([Acts
10.9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxii-p9.3"></span>.)—observe how the Spirit connects the times:
no sooner than this, and no later, He Causes this to take place—“Peter
about the sixth hour went up upon the housetop to pray:” that is,
privately and quietly, as in an upper chamber. “And he became very
hungry, and would have eaten; but while they made ready, there fell upon
him a trance.” ([Acts 10.10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxii-p9.4"></span>.) What means this expression, <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.27"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.28"></span>κστασις</span>, “trance?” Rather, there was
presented to him a kind of spiritual view (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.29"></span>θεωρία</span>): the soul, so to say, was
caused to be out of the body (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.30"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.31"></span>ξέστη</span>). “And saw heaven opened, and,
knit at the four corners, a certain vessel descending unto him, as it
had been a great sheet, and let down to the earth: wherein were all
manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping
things, and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise,
Peter; kill, and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never
eaten anything that is common or unclean. And the voice spake unto him
again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou
common. This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into
heaven.” ([Acts 10.11-16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxii-p10.32"></span>.) What is this? It is a symbol of the whole
world. The <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) man was
uncircumcised: and —for he had nothing in common with the Jews—they
would all accuse him as a transgressor: “thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them: ([Acts
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxii-p11.2"></span>)”
this <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) was a thing altogether
offensive to them: observe then what is providentially managed. He
himself also says, “I have never eaten:” not being himself afraid—far be
the thought from us—but it is so contrived by the Spirit, in order that
he may have it to say in answer to those accusing him, that he did
object: for it was altogether necessary for them to observe the Law. He
was in the act of being sent to the Gentiles: therefore that these also
may not accuse him, see how many things are contrived (by the Providence
of God). For, that it may not seem to be a mere fancy, “this was done
thrice. I <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) said,” saith he, “Not
so, Lord, for I have never eaten aught common or unclean.—And the voice
came unto him, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.”
([Acts 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#008), [Acts
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxii-p13.6"></span>.) It seems indeed to be spoken to him, but
the whole is meant for the Jews. For if the teacher is rebuked, much
more these. <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) The earth then, this
is what the linen sheet denotes, and the wild beasts in it, are they of
the Gentiles, and the command, “Kill and eat,” denotes that he must go
to them also; and that this thing is thrice done, denotes baptism. “What
God hath cleansed,” saith it, “call not thou common.” Great daring!
Wherefore <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) did he object? That
none may say that God was proving him, as in the case of Abraham, this
is why he says, “Not so, Lord,” etc. not gainsaying—just as to Philip
also He said, “How many loaves have ye?” Not to learn, but tempting, or
“proving him.” <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) And yet it was
the same (Lord) that had discoursed above (in the Law) concerning things
clean and unclean. But in that sheet were also “all the four-footed
beasts of the earth:” the clean with the unclean. And <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) for all this, he knew not what it
meant. “Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had
seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius had
made enquiry for Simon’s house, and stood before the gate, and called,
and asked whether Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were lodged there.
But while Peter,” it says, “doubted in himself” ([Acts
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#018)<span id="vi.xxii-p17.1"></span>),
the men come at the right moment to solve his doubt: just as (the Lord)
suffered Joseph first to be perturbed in mind, and then sends the Angel:
for the soul with ease accepts the solution, when it has first been in
perplexity. His perplexity neither lasts long (when it did occur), nor
(did it occur) before this, but just at the moment when they “asked
whether he were lodging there. While Peter thought on the vision, the
Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee. Arise therefore, and
get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent
them.” (*supra,* p. 142, and 145, note 7; [Acts
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#020)<span id="vi.xxii-p17.2"></span>.)
And this again is a plea for Peter in answer to the disciples, that he
did doubt, and was instructed to doubt nothing. “For I,” saith He, “have
sent them.” Great is the authority of the Spirit! What God doth, this
the Spirit is said to do. Not so the Angel, but having first said, “Thy
prayers and thine alms have ascended, for a memorial before God,” to
show that he is sent from thence, then he adds, “And now send men,”
etc.: the Spirit not so, but, “For I have sent them. Then Peter went
down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius; and said,
Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are come?
And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that feareth
God and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from
God by an holy angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words
of thee.” ([Acts 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxii-p17.3"></span>.)
They speak his praises, so as to persuade him that an Angel has in fact
appeared unto him. “Then called he them in,” <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) *(b)* that they may suffer no harm,
“and lodged them:” thenceforth he without scruple takes his meals with
them. “And on the morrow Peter went away with them, and certain brethren
from Cæsarea accompanied him. And the morrow after, they entered into
Cæsarea.” ([Acts 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024)<span id="vi.xxii-p18.1"></span>.)
The man was a person of note, and it was in a city of note that he then
was.

<span id="vi.xxii-p19"></span>(a) But let us look over again what has
been said. “There was a certain man in Cæsarea,” etc. (Recapitulation,
[Acts 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxii-p19.1"></span>.)
Observe with whom the beginning of the Gentiles is made—with “a devout
man,” and one proved to be worthy by his works. For if, though the case
be so, they are still offended, if this had not been the case, what
would not have been the consequence! But <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) mark the greatness of the assurance.
*(c)* To this end <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) all is done
(in the way it is done), and the affair takes its beginning from Judea.
*(d)* “He saw in a vision, evidently,” etc. ([Acts
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxii-p21.3"></span>).
It was not in his sleep that the Angel appeared to him, but while he was
awake, in the daytime, “about the ninth hour. He <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) saw an Angel of God coming in unto
him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he looked on him, he was
afraid.” So occupied was he with himself. Implying, that it was in
consequence of the Angel’s calling him by a voice that he saw him; as,
had he not called him, he would not have seen him: so taken up was he
with the act in which he was engaged. <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) But the Angel says to him, “Thy
prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God, and now
send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, who is called Peter.” ([Acts
10.5](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxii-p23.1"></span>.)
So far, he signified that the sending for him would be for good
consequences, but in what way good, he did not intimate. <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) So, neither does Peter relate the
whole matter, but everywhere, the narratives are in part only, for the
purpose of making the hearers apply their minds to what is said. “Send
and call for Simon:” in like manner the Angel only calls Philip.
“And <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) as they went on their
journey, and drew nigh to the city” ([Acts
10.9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)<span id="vi.xxii-p25.1"></span>):
in order that Peter should not be in perplexity too long. “Peter went up
upon the housetop,” etc. Observe, that not even his hunger forced him to
have recourse to the sheet. “Rise, Peter,” saith the Voice, “kill and
eat.” ([Acts 10.13](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xxii-p25.2"></span>.) Probably he was on his knees when he saw
the vision.—To me <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) it seems that
this also denotes the Gospel (or, “the Preaching”). That the thing
taking place was of God (the circumstances made evident, namely), both
that he sees it (descending) from above, and that he is in a trance;
and, that the voice comes from thence, and the thrice confessing that
the creatures there were unclean, and its coming from thence, and being
drawn back thither (all this), is a mighty token of the cleanness
(imparted to them).—But why is this done? For <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) the sake of those thereafter, to whom
he is about to relate it. For to himself it had been said, “Go not into
the way of the Gentiles.” ([Matt. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxii-p27.1"></span>.) \*
\* For if Paul needed both (to give) circumcision, and (to offer)
sacrifice, much more (was some assurance needed) then, in the beginning
of the Preaching, while they were as yet weaker. (<span
id="vi.xxii-p27.2"></span>[Acts xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxii-p27.3"></span>;
xxi. 16.)—Observe <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) too how he did
not at once receive them. For, it says, they “called, and asked, whether
Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were lodging there.” ([Acts
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xxii-p28.9"></span>.) As it was a mean looking house, they asked
below, they inquired <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) of the
neighbors. “And while Peter thought, the Spirit said unto him, Arise,
get thee down, and go, nothing doubting, for I have sent them.” ([Acts
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#020)<span id="vi.xxii-p29.3"></span>.)
And he does not say, For to this end did the vision appear unto thee;
but, “I have sent them. Then Peter went down” ([Acts
10.21](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xxii-p29.4"></span>)—this is the way the Spirit must be obeyed,
without demanding reasons. For it is sufficient for all assurance to be
told by Him, This do, this believe: nothing more (is needed)—“Then Peter
went down, and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) what is the cause wherefore ye are
come?” He saw a soldier, saw a man: <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) it was not that he was afraid, on the
contrary, having first confessed that he was the person whom they
sought, then he asks for the cause (of their coming); that it may not be
supposed that the reason of his asking the cause, was, that he wished to
hide himself: (he asks it) in order, that if it be immediately urgent,
he may also go forth with them, but if not, may receive them as guests.
“And <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) they said, etc. into his
house.” ([Acts 10.22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxii-p32.10"></span>.) This he had ordered them. Do not think he
has done this out of contempt: not as of contempt has he sent, but so he
was ordered. “And Cornelius was waiting for them, and had called
together his kinsmen and near friends.” ([Acts
10.24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxii-p32.11"></span>.) It was right that his kinsmen and friends
should be gathered to him. But being there present, <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) they would have heard from him (what
had happened).

<span id="vi.xxii-p34"></span>See how great the virtue of alms, both in
the former discourse, and here! There, it delivered from death temporal;
here, from death eternal; and opened the gates of heaven. Such are the
pains taken for the bringing of Cornelius to the faith, that both an
angel is sent, and the Spirit works, and the chief of the Apostles is
fetched to him, and such a vision is shown, and, in short, nothing is
left undone. How many centurions were there not besides, and tribunes,
and kings, and none of them obtained what this man did! Hear, all ye
that are in military commands, all ye that stand beside kings. “A just
man,” it says, “fearing God; devout” ([Acts
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxii-p34.1"></span>);
and what is more <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) than all, with
all his house. Not as we (who): that our servants may be afraid of us,
do everything. but not that they may be devout. And <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) over the domestics too, so \* \*. Not
so this man; but he was “one that feared God with all his house” ([Acts
10.2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxii-p36.5"></span>),
for he was as the common father of those with him, and of all the others
(under his command.) But observe what (the soldier) says himself. For,
fearing \* \*, he adds this also: “well reported of by all the nation.”
For what if he was uncircumcised? Nay, but those give him a good report.
Nothing like alms: great is the virtue of this practice, when the alms
is poured forth from pure stores; for it is like a fountain discharging
mud, when it issues from unjust stores, but when from just gains, it is
as a limpid and pure stream in a paradise, sweet to the sight, sweet to
the touch, both light and cool, when given in the noon-day heat. Such is
alms. Beside this fountain, not poplars and pines, nor cypresses, but
other plants than these, and far better, of goodly stature: friendship
with God, praise with men, glory to Godward, good-will from all;
blotting out of sins, great boldness, contempt of wealth. This is the
fountain by which the plant of love is nourished: for nothing is so wont
to nourish love, as the being merciful: it makes its branches to lift
themselves on high. This fountain is better than that in Paradise ([Gen.
ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxii-p36.6"></span>); a fountain, not dividing into four heads,
but reaching unto Heaven itself: this gives birth to that river “which
springeth up into eternal life” (<span id="vi.xxii-p36.7"></span>[John
iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxii-p36.8"></span>): on this let Death light, and like a spark
it is extinguished by the fountain: such, wherever it drops, are the
mighty blessings it causes. This quenches, even as a spark, the river of
fire: this so strangles that worm, as naught else can do. ([Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="vi.xxii-p36.9"></span>.)
He that has this, shall not gnash his teeth. Of the water of this, let
there be dropped upon the chains, and it dissolves them: let it but
touch the firebrands, <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) it
quenches all.—A fountain does not give out streams for a while and anon
run dry,—else must it be no more a fountain,—but ever gushes: so let our
fountain give out more copiously of the streams of mercy (in alms). This
cheers him that receives: this is alms, to give out not only a copious,
but a perennial, stream. If thou wouldest that God rain down His mercy
upon thee as from fountains, have thou also a fountain. And <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) yet there is no comparison (between
God’s fountain and thine): for if thou open the mouths of this fountain,
such are the mouths of God’s Fountain as to surpass every abyss. God
does but seek to get an opportunity on our part, and pours forth from
His storehouses His blessings. When He expends, when He lavishes, then
is He rich, then is He affluent. Large is the mouth of that fountain:
pure and limpid its water. If thou stop not up the fountain here,
neither wilt thou stop up that fountain.—Let no unfruitful tree stand
beside it, that it may not waste its spray. Hast thou wealth? Plant not
poplars there: for such is luxury: it consumes much, and shows nothing
for it in itself, but spoils the fruit. Plant not a pine-tree—such is
wantonness in apparel, beautiful only to the sight, and useful for
nothing—nor yet a fir-tree, nor any other of such trees as consume
indeed, but are in no sort useful. Set it thick with young shoots: plant
all that is fruitful, in the hands of the poor, all that thou wilt.
Nothing richer than this ground. Though small the reach of the hand, yet
the tree it plants starts up to heaven and stands firm. This it is to
plant. For that which is planted on the earth will perish, though not
now, at any rate a hundred years hence. Thou plantest many trees, of
which thou shalt not enjoy the fruit, but ere thou canst enjoy it, death
comes upon thee. This tree will give thee its fruit then, when thou art
dead.—If thou plant, plant not in the maw of gluttony, that the fruit
end not in the draught-house: but plant thou in the pinched belly, that
the fruit may start up to heaven. Refresh the straightened soul of the
poor, lest thou pinch thine own roomy soul.—See you not, that the plants
which are over-much watered at the root decay, but grow when watered in
moderation? Thus also drench not thou thine own belly, that the root of
the tree decay not: water that which is thirsty, that it may bear fruit.
If thou water in moderation, the sun will not wither them, but if in
excess, then it withers them: such is the nature of the sun. In all
things, excess is bad; wherefore let us cut it off, that we also may
obtain the things we ask for.—Fountains, it is said, rise on the most
elevated spots. Let us be elevated in soul, and our alms will flow with
a rapid stream: the elevated soul cannot but be merciful, and the
merciful cannot but be elevated. For he that despises wealth, is higher
than the root of evils.—Fountains are oftenest found in solitary places:
let us withdraw our soul from the crowd, and alms will gush out with us.
Fountains, the more they are cleaned, the more copiously they flow: so
with us, the more we spend, the more all good grows.—He that has a
fountain, has nothing to fear: then neither let us be afraid. For indeed
this fountain is serviceable to us for drink, for irrigation, for
building, for everything. Nothing better than this draught: it is not
possible for this to inebriate. Better to possess such a fountain, than
to have fountains running with gold. Better than all gold-bearing soil
is the soul which bears this gold. For it advances us, not into these
earthly palaces, but into those above. The gold becomes an ornament to
the Church of God. Of this gold is wrought “the sword of the Spirit”
([Eph. vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xxii-p38.5"></span>), the sword by which the dragon is beheaded.
From this fountain come the precious stones which are on the King’s
head. Then let us not neglect so great wealth, but contribute our alms
with largeness, that we may be found worthy of the mercy of God, by the
grace and tender compassion of His only begotten Son, with Whom to the
Father and Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_521"></span>[i:522](1110027.htm#fr_521) <span
id="vi.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p5"></span> The conversion of Cornelius marks an
important step in the progress of the gospel. Hitherto Christianity had
been confined to Jews, Hellenists, and that mixed people—the Samaritans
(unless, as is improbable, the Ethiopian chamberlain formed an
exception). Now a beginning was made of receiving the Gentiles, and in
connection with that apostle to whom Christ had committed a certain
leadership and privilege of opening the doors to the Kingdom (ch. [Acts
xv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxii-p5.1"></span>).
The narrative is one of the important notices in the N.T. concerning the
gradual realization of Christ’s command to make disciples of all
nations, and shows, so far as it relates to Peter, with how great
difficulty the most enlightened of the early Christians conceived of
Christianity becoming free from the forms of Judaism. Cornelius was
doubtless a Roman who had become dissatisfied with the idolatrous
religion of his people and who had been attracted by the influences of
the Jewish religion to the worship of the true God. There is no
evidence, however, that he was a proselyte to the Jewish religion. He
could not have failed to hear of Jesus and his disciples. Probably
Philip, the deacon, was at this time residing in Cæsarea and Peter had
been preaching and working miracles in the neighboring towns. It is not
unlikely that the vision which he had, appealed to thoughts and
convictions concerning the gospel which had been growing stronger in his
own mind. To the vision of Cornelius, that of Peter forms the
complement. They symbolize the great facts that while God in his
providence was preparing his apostles for the larger truth of
Christianity for the world, he was also preparing the Gentile world for
the reception of the gospel. It is noticeable that the three centurions
who appear in the N.T. are favorably mentioned. ([Matt.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010), [Matt.
28:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#054), [Acts
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xxii-p5.2"></span>).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[i:523](1110027.htm#fr_522) <span
id="vi.xxii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p6.1"></span>καὶ τὸ, μηδὲ καιροῦ καλοῦντος</span>. As above
xix. p. 120, note 2, Chrys. remarks, that there was no festival which
required the presence of the eunuch at Jerusalem. Probably he was led to
this by the circumstance, that the incident of the eunuch occurs after
the Martyrdom of St. Stephen and the Conversion of St. Paul, i.e.
according to the Church Calendar, between the 26th of December and the
25th of January.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[i:524](1110027.htm#fr_523) <span
id="vi.xxii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p7"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p7.1"></span>Σπεῖρα</span> and *cohors* in Polyb. differ.
The Greeks call the cohort <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p7.2"></span>λόχος</span>, it contained about five hundred
men. Polyb. vi. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p7.3"></span>καὶ
μὲν μέρος ἕκαστον ἐκάλεσε καὶ τάγμα καὶ σπεῖραν καὶ σημεῖον</span>.
*Casaubon: Ac singulas partes appellant ordinem, manipulum, signum.*”
Downe ap. Sav.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[i:525](1110027.htm#fr_524) <span
id="vi.xxii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p8.2"></span>λλὰ πρὸς εὐτελῆ</span>. The innovator (E. Edd.)
having made Chrys. say above, Hom. xx. §1, that Ananias *was* a man of
note, here alters the text to: “But the Lord Himself appears: neither
does He send him to some one of the Twelve, but to Ananias.” Below <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p8.3"></span>καὶ οὐκ αὐτοὺς πέμπει πρὸς
αὐτὸν</span>: meaning, it seems, Cornelius and his hour. The same hand
substitutes (for explanation of the plural, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p8.4"></span>αὐτῶν τῇ ἀσθενεί& 139·</span>), “as He did
Philip to the eunuch, condescending to their infirmity.” And in the
following sentence; “Since Christ Himself is often seen going to them
that are ill, and in their own persons unable to come to Him.”

<span id="fn_525"></span>[i:526](1110027.htm#fr_525) <span
id="vi.xxii-p8.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p9"></span> The clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p9.1"></span>οὗτος λαλήσει σοι τί σε δεῖ ποιεῖν</span> is
not recognized by Chrys., nor by the leading authorities. See *infra,*
p. 145, note 6.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[i:527](1110027.htm#fr_526) <span
id="vi.xxii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.1"></span>τί ἐστιν ἔκστασις</span>. Because the word
also, and more commonly, means the being beside one’s self, amazed, or
stupefied by excess of grief, Chrys. explains that it denotes the being
rapt out of the bodily consciousness: it was not that Peter was out of
his mind, but his soul out of the body. (St. Augustin, *Serm.* 266, §6,
“*orantis mens alienata est; sed ab infimis ad superua; non ut deviaret,
sed ut videret.*”) Comp. *Exp. in Psa.* 115. t. v. p. 312, D. “In [Gen.
ii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xxii-p10.2"></span>. the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.4"></span>κστασις</span> which fell upon Adam denotes a
kind of insensibility, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.5"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.6"></span>κστ</span>. means <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.7"></span>τὸ ἔξω ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι</span>: and in <span
id="vi.xxii-p10.8"></span>[Acts x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxii-p10.9"></span> it
denotes <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p10.10"></span>κάρον τινα
καὶ τὸ ἔξω αἰσθήσεως γενέσθαι</span>: and everywhere <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p10.11"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p10.12"></span>κστασις</span> implies
this. It comes, either by the act of God: or because the excess of
calamity causes a kind of stupor, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.13"></span>κάρος</span>. For calamity likewise is wont
to occasion <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.14"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.15"></span>κστ</span>. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.16"></span>κάρος</span>.” Didymus (or some other author)
in the Catena: “They that have chosen to be disciples of frantic women,
I mean, they of Phrygia (the Montanists), affirm that the Prophets, when
possessed by the Holy Ghost, were not in a condition to be strictly
cognizant of their own thoughts, being borne away from themselves at the
instant of prophesying. And they think to confirm their error by this
Scripture, which says, that Peter <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.17"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.18"></span>ξεστακέναι</span>. But let these silly ones,
these indeed frantic persons, know that this is a word of many
significations. It denotes the amazement of wonder: and the being wrapt
above sensible objects, led on to spiritual things: and the being beside
one’s self (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.19"></span>παρακόπτειν</span>)—which is not be said
either of Peter, or of the Prophets. Nay Peter, in his trance, was
strictly cognizant, so as to report what he had seen and heard, and to
be sensible of what the things shown were symbolical. The same is to be
said of all the Prophets—that their consciousness kept pace with the
things presented to their view.” Comp. on this subject, *S. Epiphan.
adv. Hæres. Montan.* 2. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.20"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.21"></span>σα γὰρ οὶ προφῆται εἰρήκασι μετὰ συνέσεως
παρακολουθοῦντες ἐφθέγγοντο</span>. Euseb. H. E. v. 17. relates that
Miltiades wrote a treatise <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.22"></span>περὶ τοῦ μὴ δεῖν προφήτην ἐν ἐκστάσει
λαλεῖν</span>. See also *S. Heironym, Præf, in Esai.* “*Neque vero ut
Montanus cum insanis fœminis somniat, prophetæ in ecstasi locuti sunt,
ut nescirent quid loquerentur, et cum alios erudirent, ipsi ignorarent
quid dicerent.*” *Id. Prœm. in Nahum. Præf. in Abac.* and, on the
difference between the heathen <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.23"></span>μάντις</span> and the divinely inspired
Prophet, St. Chrysost. *Hom.* xxix. *in* 1 *Cor.* p. 259, C. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p10.24"></span>τοῦτο γὰρ μάντεως ἴδιον,
τὸ ἐξεστηκέναι κ. τ. λ</span>. and *Expos. in Psa.* xliv. p. 161. C.—The
clause <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p10.25"></span>τέσσαρσιν
ἀρχαῖς δεδεμένον</span>, before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p10.26"></span>σκεῦος τί</span>, (A. B. C ) agrees with the
Lat. of S. Hilar. p. 750, “*exquatuor principiis ligatum vas quoddam,*”
etc.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[i:528](1110027.htm#fr_527) <span
id="vi.xxii-p10.33"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p11"></span> St. Chrysostom’s exposition, as we gather
it from this and the following Homily, seems to be in substance as
follows: St. Peter was not ignorant of nor averse to, the counsel of God
in respect of the free admission of the Gentiles. He did not need
instruction on this point for himself, and the vision was not so much
intended for his instruction or assurance, as for reproof to the Jewish
believers who were not yet enlightened in this mystery. (Even the token
which was given in the descent of the Holy Ghost on Cornelius before
baptism, was for them, not for him.) He needed but a command to act upon
it without hesitation. But because this would certainly be regarded as a
flagrant offence by the weaker brethren, for their sakes this symbolical
lesson is given: and the circumstances are so contrived (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p11.1"></span>οἰκονομεῖται</span>) as to
silence their objections. It is so ordered, that the matter of
accusation is put by them in this form, “Thou didst go in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.” Had they said, “Thou didst
baptize such,” St. Peter could not have alleged that he did it
reluctantly: but to the charge of unclean eating he had his answer: “I
did object; I said, not so, Lord, for nothing common or unclean,” etc.
This carried with it his exculpation from the whole matter of offence:
for they would apply it thus—“he baptized these Gentiles, but not
without objecting to the command; not until his reluctance was
overruled,” though in fact St. Peter had no such reluctance.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[i:529](1110027.htm#fr_528) <span
id="vi.xxii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p12.1"></span>Τοῦτο πάνυ αὐτοῖς προσίστατο</span> (B. and
Sav. marg. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p12.2"></span>παρίστατο</span>) *Erasm. Et hoc illis valde
frequens erat. Ben. Et illis admodum cordi erat.* But Hom. xxiv. 2.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.3"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.4"></span>να μὴ προστῇ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.5"></span>(</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.6"></span>προσστῇ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.7"></span>)</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.8"></span>αὐτοῖς</span>, Ben.
remarks that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p12.9"></span>προσίστασθαι</span> in the sense “offendere”
is frequent in St. Chrysostom. It properly applies to food against which
the stomach rises: “to raise the gorge, to be nauseous, disgusting,
offensive.” See Field *Annotat. in Hom. ad Matt.* p. 319. B.—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p12.10"></span>Τοῦτο</span>, i.e. the
going in to men uncircumcised, and eating with them. Comp. *Hom.* li.
*in Matt.* p. 317. (Am. ed.) “Such was the strict observance in respect
of meats, that, even after the Resurrection, Peter said, ‘Not so, Lord,’
etc. For though ‘he said this for the sake of others, and so as to leave
himself a justification against those who should accuse him, and that he
may show that he did object,’ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p12.11"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p12.12"></span>τι καὶ ἀντεῖπον</span>), and for all this,
the point was not conceded to him, still it shows how much was made of
this matter.”

<span id="fn_529"></span>[i:530](1110027.htm#fr_529) <span
id="vi.xxii-p12.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p13"></span> Here besides the clause, “this was done
thrice,” something is wanting: e.g. “And observe how Peter relates the
matter, and justifies himself,” viz. in [Acts
11.8](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxii-p13.1"></span>,
“I said,” saith he, “Not so, Lord, for nothing common or unclean hath
ever entered my mouth.” Here for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p13.2"></span>εἶπον</span>, B. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p13.3"></span>εἶπεν</span>, which is adopted by the modern
text, in which the whole passage is refashioned thus: “Since then they
would all accuse him as a transgressor, and this was altogether
offensive to them, of necessity it is managed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p13.4"></span>οἰκον</span>.) that he says, “I never ate:”
not being himself afraid, God forbid! but, as I said, being managed
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p13.5"></span>οἰκονομούμενος</span>) by the Spirit, that he
may have a justification to those accusing him, namely, that he did
object: for they made a great point of keeping the Law. He was sent to
the Gentiles: therefore, that these also may not have to accuse him, as
I said before, these things are contrived, or also, that it may not seem
to be a fancy, ‘he said, Not so, Lord,’” etc.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[i:531](1110027.htm#fr_530) <span
id="vi.xxii-p13.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p14"></span> Peter’s vision fitly represents the
divine lesson concerning the destination of the gospel and the manner of
its progress. None of the apostles doubted that Christianity was for the
Gentiles: the great question was, whether it was to be preached to them
through the medium of Judaism. Should it still be held within Jewish
forms? Should circumcision and observance of the Mosaic law be required?
This was a great practical question in the days of transition from
Judaism to Christianity. Later Paul became the champion of the idea that
it was to be cut loose from the Jewish system. Peter and James came but
slowly to this idea. The destruction of Jerusalem and the fall of the
Jewish state brought the question to a decisive settlement. Apart from
this, however, the Pauline type of teaching on this point constantly
gained ground and influence. The vision of Peter takes its place in the
gradual development of the idea that Christianity was free from the
law—an idea on which he seems after this to have held a somewhat
uncertain and vacillating position, so that Paul “resisted him to the
face” for his declining to eat with the Gentiles at Antioch on account
of the presence of certain delegates from Jerusalem—a practice in which
he had, before their coming, engaged (<span
id="vi.xxii-p14.1"></span>[Gal. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)<span id="vi.xxii-p14.2"></span>).
It is not strange that perplexing questions arose concerning the
relations of the new system to the old at this time. The general line of
procedure was settled by the apostolic conference at Jerusalem ([Acts
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000), [Gal.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#000), [Gal.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="vi.xxii-p14.3"></span>.)
and was substantially determined by the apostle Paul. While as matter of
fact, the Church has always followed the lead of Paul in this matter,
the most diverse views still prevail among Christians as to the
relation, theoretically considered, of Christianity to Judaism and the
Old Testament Scriptures.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[i:532](1110027.htm#fr_531) <span
id="vi.xxii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p15"></span> St. Chrys. seems here to be controverting
a different exposition. He will not allow that the vision was meant for
instruction to St. Peter, as if he were in ignorance up to this time of
the counsel of God concerning the Gentiles. Let it not be said, that
like as God did tempt Abraham, so He was putting Peter to the proof
whether he would obey the call to the Gentiles, as if Peter understood
the vision in that sense. Had he so understood the command, “Kill and
eat,” he would not have objected; for he could not be either ignorant or
unwilling. But he did not so understand it, and his objection was solely
to the matter of eating. And as he needed not the lesson (it was
intended for others): so neither did God need to learn his willingness.
When God tempts, or proves, it is not to learn something that He did not
know before; as, when Christ said to Philip, “Whence shall we buy bread
that these may eat? this He said tempting, or, proving him, for He
Himself knew what He would do.” He put that question to Philip that he
might the more admire the greatness of the miracle which he was about to
work. (see note 2.) But nothing of the kind can be said here: the case
is not parallel: the command to baptize the Gentiles would not surprise
Peter: he expected no less from the beginning.—His objection, then, was
to the thing itself, the command, “kill and eat.” And no wonder, for the
same Lord had in the Law strictly commanded to distinguish between clean
and unclean, while there in the sheet were animals of all sorts
indiscriminately.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[i:533](1110027.htm#fr_532) <span
id="vi.xxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p16"></span> *Hom.*xlii. *in Ev. Joann.* §2. “What
meaneth, Tempting, or, proving him? was He ignorant what would be said
by him? This cannot be said, …We may learn the meaning from the Old
Testament. For there also it is said, After these things God did tempt
Abraham, etc. He did not say this in order to learn by the proof whether
he would obey or not—how should it be so? for He knoweth all things
before they come into existence: but on both occasions it is spoken
after the manner of men. As, when it is said, He searcheth the hearts of
men, it indicates the search, not of ignorance, but of perfect
knowledge; so when it is said, He tempted, tried, or proved, it means no
other than that He perfectly knew.—Or, it may mean, that He made the
person more approved: as Abraham there, so Philip by this question,
leading him into the sure knowledge of the sign:” i.e. bringing more
home to his mind the greatness of the miracle, by leading him in the
first place to estimate the utter inadequacy of the means.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[i:534](1110027.htm#fr_533) <span
id="vi.xxii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p17"></span> Either this refers to the clause, “This
was done thrice,” etc., which should be inserted; or, the connection may
be—This very circumstance of the clean and unclean being together in the
sheet (as in the Ark), might have led him to an apprehension of the
thing symbolized, viz., that he was not commanded to “kill and eat” the
unclean with the clean (by the same Lord who of old had commanded a
distinction of meats), but that the time was come to baptize all nations
without respect of persons. But, obvious as it may seem, St. Peter was
still ignorant what it meant: as the Writer adds, And while Peter was at
a loss to know what the vision should mean, etc.—In E. (Edd.) the whole
passage from “that this is thrice done, denotes baptism,” is refashioned
thus: “‘Not so, Lord, for I have never eaten aught common or unclean.’
And why, it may be asked, did he object? That none may say that God was
tempting him, as in the case of Abraham, when he was ordered to offer up
his son as a sacrifice: as in the case of Philip, when he was asked by
Christ, How many loaves have ye? not that he may learn, did He so ask,
but proving him. And yet in the Law Moses had distinctly enjoined
concerning clean and unclean, both of land and sea; and yet for all this
he knew not.”

<span id="fn_534"></span>[i:535](1110027.htm#fr_534) <span
id="vi.xxii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p18"></span> The letters *a, b, c, d,* denote the
order of the parts in the old text. But C. has the formula of
recapitulation, both in the beginning of (*a*), and again in (*d*),
before the verse, “And the Angel said,” etc.: E. D. F. Edd. retain it
only in the latter place.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[i:536](1110027.htm#fr_535) <span
id="vi.xxii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p20.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p20.2"></span>Αλλ᾽ ὅρα πόση ἀσφάλεια</span>, i.e. how it is
made infallibly certain, that it was the purpose of God to admit the
Gentiles without circumcision. It might indeed be inserted in (*b*),
after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p20.3"></span>συνδιαιτᾶται</span>: “he has no scruples—but
mark the greatness of the assurance he has received.” In the modern
text, the connection is, “He called them in, and lodged them. See what
security: (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p20.4"></span>Θέα πόση
ἀσφάλεια</span>) in order that they should take no harm, he calls them
in, and thenceforth without scruple,” etc. i.e. “how sure he feels that
he is doing right in receiving them: with what assuredness of mind he
does this.” But Sav. “See what security for them, in order that they
should take no harm.”

<span id="fn_536"></span>[i:537](1110027.htm#fr_536) <span
id="vi.xxii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p21.1"></span>Διὰ τοῦτο πάντα γίνεται</span>, A. B. C. N.
Cat. But Edd. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p21.2"></span>Διό
καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ πάντα ὁμοῦ οἰκονομεῖται</span>: “wherefore both in his
person at once all the circumstances are providentially ordered, and”
etc.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[i:538](1110027.htm#fr_537) <span
id="vi.xxii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p22"></span> Here after the clause, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p22.1"></span>οὕτως ἑαυτῷ
προσεῖχεν</span> (meaning, as afterwards explained, that he did not
notice the Angel until he spoke), A. B. C. have, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p22.2"></span>Λέγει δὲ ὁ ἄγγελος κ. τ.
λ</span>. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p22.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p22.4"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p22.5"></span>λλ᾽ ἴδωμεν ἄνωθεν τὰ εἰρημένα. Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ
ἄγγελος κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[i:539](1110027.htm#fr_538) <span
id="vi.xxii-p22.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p23"></span> The old text: “And thy prayers, saith he.
So far,” etc. Edd. “And send for Simon, who is called Peter. So far,
etc.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[i:540](1110027.htm#fr_539) <span
id="vi.xxii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p24"></span> The text is defective here. He seems to
be commenting upon the variations of the different narratives: viz. the
writer himself [Acts 10.6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xxii-p24.1"></span>. mentions only the command to send for Peter.
(p. 142, note 4.) The messengers [Acts
10.22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxii-p24.2"></span>
add, “And to hear words of thee.” Cornelius, [Acts
10.32](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#032)<span id="vi.xxii-p24.3"></span>,
“who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.” St. Peter [Acts
11.14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxii-p24.4"></span>,
“who shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be
saved.” “On the other hand,” he says, “neither does Peter, though he is
more full on this point, relate all that the Angel said, but gives only
the substance.” See the comment on [Acts
11.14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxii-p24.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[i:541](1110027.htm#fr_540) <span
id="vi.xxii-p24.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p25"></span> The modern text, omitting this clause,
and the comment, inserts the rest of the verse, “Peter went up,” etc.:
and has below, But that Peter may not be in perplexity too long, he
hears a voice saying, “Rise, Peter, kill and eat.” But the meaning is,
The Spirit caused the vision to take place when they were near the city,
that Peter might not be too long in doubt: as above, on the same clause,
“Observe how the Spirit connects the times,” etc.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[i:542](1110027.htm#fr_541) <span
id="vi.xxii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p26"></span> ᾽Εμοὶ δοκεῖ καὶ (om. A. B.) τὸ (om. Cat.)
κήρυγμα τοῦτο εἷναι (om. Cat.) ῞Οτι θεῖον ἦν τὸ γινόμενον τό τε ἄνωθεν
ἰδεῖν, τό τε ἐν ἐκστάσει γενέσθαι. (Here δηλοῖ, δείκνυσιν, or the like,
must be supplied. Œcumen. Δείκνυται δὲ ὅτι θεῖον κ. τ. λ. In the modern
text the wording is slightly altered, but the sense is the same. In the
latter part, for ὅτι ἀκαθαρτὰ ἦν ἐκεῖ, Œcumen. has ἐκεῖνα: the modern
text substitutes καὶ τὸ τρὶς τοῦτο γενέσθαι, καὶ τὸ οὐρανὸν ἀνεωχθῆναι,
καὶ τὸ ἐκεῖθεν κ. τ. λ. and at the end, τοῦ θεῖον εἶναι τὸ πρᾶγμα for
καθαρότητος.—Above, he had said that the sheet was a symbol of the
world; now he adds, that the command “Kill and eat” denotes the Gospel,
to be preached universally: that the descent of the sheet from heaven,
and the circumstance of Peter’s being in a spiritual trance, shows that
the thing was of God—not a φαντασία. Again: that it is all done thrice,
denotes baptism: thrice the Voice says, Kill and eat: thrice Peter
confesses that the creatures are unclean: thrice it is declared that God
hath cleansed them: nay, thrice these unclean creatures are let down
from heaven, and drawn up thither again: a mighty proof that they are
now clean, and of the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[i:543](1110027.htm#fr_542) <span
id="vi.xxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p27"></span> It was remarked above, that St.
Chrysostom’s exposition proceeds upon the assumption, that St. Peter did
not need the instruction for himself. Here the reporter has not fully
expressed his meaning: which should be to this effect. “Since it had
been said at the outset to Peter and the other Apostles, ‘Go not into
the way of the Gentiles,’ though after the Resurrection they were
commanded to ‘baptize all nations,’ it is no marvel that the less
enlightened brethren needed some strong assurance on this behalf. And if
at a later time, we find Paul, to conciliate the Jewish believers,
causing Timothy to be circumcised and himself offering sacrifice, much
more was some condescension to their infirmity needed now.”—Didymus in
the Catena puts the question, “How was it that Peter needed a revelation
in the matter of Cornelius, when the Lord after his Resurrection had
expressly ordered to ‘baptize all the nations?’ or how came it that the
Apostles in Jerusalem, having heard of the affair of Cornelius, disputed
with Peter?” To which he answers: “Peter did undoubtedly need the
revelation; for he knew not that the distinction of circumcision and
uncircumcision was to cease: knew not for certain that the Lord meant
the Gentiles to be baptized apart from the visible worship under the
Law, until the Lord manifested this mystery to him, convincing him both
by the emblem of the sheet, and by the faith and grace of the Holy
Spirit given to the Gentiles, that in Christ Jesus there is no
distinction of Jew and Greek: of which thing because the Apostles at
Jerusalem were ignorant, therefore they contended with Peter, until they
also learnt the hidden riches of God’s mercy over all mankind.” St.
Cyril, Alex., also, c. Julian. (ibid.) explains, that “Peter was fain to
dwell in the Jewish customs, and, in a manner, was loath to go on to the
better, because he was overawed by the types: therefore he is corrected
by this vision.”

<span id="fn_543"></span>[i:544](1110027.htm#fr_543) <span
id="vi.xxii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p28"></span> E. D. F. Edd. omit this clause, see note
x: and A. B. for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.1"></span>οὐδὲ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.2"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.4"></span>δέξατο</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.5"></span>οὐδὲν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.6"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p28.8"></span>δείξατο</span>, which is evidently corrupt.
“Neither did he at once receive these Gentiles: not until the Spirit
expressly commanded him.”

<span id="fn_544"></span>[i:545](1110027.htm#fr_544) <span
id="vi.xxii-p28.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p29"></span> So Cat. and the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxii-p29.1"></span>mss.</span> except E., which has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p29.2"></span>οὐ τοὺς γείτονας
ἠρώτων</span>, and so Œcumen. But the meaning seems to be, that not
expecting to find so mean a house, and thinking they might have come
wrong, they asked below, in the street, i.e. inquired of the neighbors.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[i:546](1110027.htm#fr_545) <span
id="vi.xxii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p30"></span> Here Edd. from E. have, “Wherefore did he
not receive them immediately, but asks this question?” but D. F. insert
it as above, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.2"></span>Ορα πῶς οὐκ εὐθέως αὐτοὺς ἐδέξατο</span>, with
the addition, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.4"></span>λλὰ πυνθάνεται</span>. In the next sentence:
A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p30.5"></span>εἶδεν
στρατιώτην, εἶδεν ἄνθρωπον·</span> i.e. Saw a soldier, saw him, as he
would have seen any common man, without fear. For this, D. F. have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p30.6"></span>εἶδε στρατιώτας
ἀνθρώπους</span>. E. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.7"></span>εἶδε στρατιώτας ὄντας τοὺς
ἐπιστάντας</span>.—Below, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.8"></span>καὶ ζητήσας</span> A. B. C. Cat. which the
other <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxii-p30.9"></span>mss.</span>
omit, we correct, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.10"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p30.11"></span>ν ἐζήτησαν</span>.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[i:547](1110027.htm#fr_546) <span
id="vi.xxii-p30.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p31"></span> In the old text, the last words of the
citation, [Acts 10.22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxii-p31.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.2"></span>εἰς τὸν οἶκον αὐτοῦ</span>. the rest being
lost, are joined on to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.3"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.4"></span>να ξενίσῃ</span>: Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p31.5"></span>εἰς τὸν οἶκον
αὐτούς</span>. Edd. from E. D. F. “But why do they say, ‘Sends for thee
into his house?’ Because he had given them this order. And perhaps also,
by way of apology, they as good as say, Do not find fault (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p31.6"></span>μηδὲν καταγνῷς·</span>)
not as of contempt has he sent, etc.” In A. B. C. Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p31.7"></span>μὴ καταφρονήσῃς</span>,
for which Sav. marg. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.8"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.9"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.10"></span>ἂν εἴποιεν, μὴ καταφρ</span>., is corrupt:
perhaps it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p31.11"></span>μὴ νομίσῃς, ὅτι κατεφρόνησέ σε· οὐχ ὡς κ. τ.
λ</span>.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[i:548](1110027.htm#fr_547) <span
id="vi.xxii-p31.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.2"></span>αλλ᾽</span> (A. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.3"></span>καὶ</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.5"></span>κεῖ πάροντος αὐτοῦ ἤκουσαν ἂν</span> (A. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p32.6"></span>ταῦτα ἀκούειν</span>). We
read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p32.7"></span>πάροντες</span>, and conjecture the meaning to
be, But they being there present, would have heard from Cornelius an
account of all that had happened to him. Edd. from E. D. F. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p32.8"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p32.9"></span>Αλλως δὲ καὶ ἐκεῖ πάροντες
μᾶλλον αὐτοῦ ἤκουσαν ἄν</span>. “And besides by being there present they
would the more hear him (Peter),” what he had to say.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[i:549](1110027.htm#fr_548) <span
id="vi.xxii-p32.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p33"></span> Here Edd. from E. have, “Wherefore did he
not receive them immediately, but asks this question?” but D. F. insert
it as above, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.2"></span>Ορα πῶς οὐκ εὐθέως αὐτοὺς ἐδέξατο</span>, with
the addition, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.4"></span>λλὰ πυνθάνεται</span>. In the next sentence:
A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p33.5"></span>εἶδεν
στρατιώτην, εἶδεν ἄνθρωπον·</span> i.e. Saw a soldier, saw him, as he
would have seen any common man, without fear. For this, D. F. have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p33.6"></span>εἶδε στρατιώτας
ἀνθρώπους</span>. E. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.7"></span>εἶδε στρατιώτας ὄντας τοὺς
ἐπιστάντας</span>.—Below, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.8"></span>καὶ ζητήσας</span> A. B. C. Cat. which the
other <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxii-p33.9"></span>mss.</span>
omit, we correct, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.10"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p33.11"></span>ν ἐζήτησαν</span>.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[i:550](1110027.htm#fr_549) <span
id="vi.xxii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p35"></span> The modern text: “and what is greater,
that he was such with all his house. So intent was he, and so set upon
this, that he not only well ordered his own affairs, but also over his
household (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p35.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p35.2"></span>πὶ τῆς οἰκετείας</span>) he did the same. For
not as we, who,” etc.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[i:551](1110027.htm#fr_550) <span
id="vi.xxii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p36"></span> A. B. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p36.1"></span>καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς οἰκετείας δὲ οὕτως. ᾽Αλλ᾽ οὗτος
οὐχ οὕτως, ἀλλὰ μετὰ τῆς οἰκίας ἁπάσης. & 244·σπερ γὰρ κ. τ. λ</span>.
C., <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p36.2"></span>καὶ ἐπὶ τ. οἰκ.
δὲ οὐκέτι κακῶς, ἀλλὰ δικαίως· ὥσπερ γὰρ κ. τ. λ</span>. Below, the
modern text has, “he feared God with all his house, as being the common
father, not only of all who were with him, but also of the soldiers
under him.” In the next sentence, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p36.3"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p36.4"></span>Ορα δὲ τί φησὶν καὶ αὐτός</span>, the meaning
seems to be, “Observe what is said of him by the soldier whom Cornelius
sent: ‘A just man, and one that feareth God:’ and then—for fearing (lest
Peter should refuse to come to him, as being a Gentile) he adds
this—‘and well reported of by all the nation of the Jews.” Edd. from E.
alone: “But hear also what they say besides: for of necessity that is
added, ‘Well reported of by all the nation,’ that none may say, What, if
he was uncircumcised? Even those, saith he, give him a good report. Why
then, there is nothing like alms; or rather great is the virtue of this
thing, when,” etc.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[i:552](1110027.htm#fr_551) <span
id="vi.xxii-p36.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p37.1"></span>κἂν εἰς τὰς λαμπάδας</span> (E. Edd., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p37.2"></span>καμίνους</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p37.3"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p37.4"></span>ψηται</span>(<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p37.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p37.6"></span>μπέσῃ</span>, E. D. F.
Edd.) In the next sentence, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p37.7"></span>Αὕτη ἡ πηγή κ. τ. λ</span>. the pronoun must
be omitted.—E. D. F., Edd., “As therefore the fountain in Paradise (or,
in a garden) does not give out streams,” etc.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[i:553](1110027.htm#fr_552) <span
id="vi.xxii-p37.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p38.1"></span>Καίτοιγε οὐδὲν ἴσον. & 174·Αν γὰρ σὺ ταύτης κ.
τ. λ</span>.—Edd., <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxii-p38.2"></span>Οὐδὲν ταύτης ἴσον. & 174·Αν σὺ ταύτης κ. τ.
λ</span>. “Nothing like this fountain. If then,” etc.—Below, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p38.3"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxii-p38.4"></span>Οταν ἀναλίσκῃ, ὅταν
δαπανᾷ, κ. τ. λ</span>. in itself, may perhaps be better referred to the
giver of alms: “when (one) expends, when one lavishes (alms),” etc. but
in that case the connection is obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIII on Acts x. 23, 24.](1110028)
