[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110047)  [Next](1110049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xliii"></span> <span id="vi.xliii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xliii-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIII.</span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p2"></span>[Acts XX.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p3"></span>“And after the uproar was ceased, Paul
called unto him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go
into Macedonia.”

<span id="vi.xliii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xliii-p4.1"></span>There</span> was need of much comforting after
that uproar. Accordingly, having done this, he goes into Macedonia, and
then into Greece. For, it says, “when he had gone over those parts, and
had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece, and there abode
three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to
sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.” ([Acts
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003)<span id="vi.xliii-p4.2"></span>..md)
Again he is persecuted by the Jews, and goes into Macedonia. “And there
accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians,
Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of
Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus. These going before tarried for us at
Troas.” ([Acts 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005)<span id="vi.xliii-p4.3"></span>..md)
But how does he call Timothy a man “of Thessalonica?” <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999.md) This is not his meaning, but, “Of
Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius: of Derbe,
Timothy,” <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000.md) etc., these, he
says, went before him to Troas, preparing the way for him. “And we
sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came
unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days.” ([Acts
20.6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p6.12"></span>.) For it seems to me that he made a point of
keeping the feasts in the large cities. “From Philippi,” where the
affair of the prison had taken place. This was his third coming into
Macedonia, and it is a high testimony that he bears to the Philippians,
which is the reason why he makes some stay there. “And upon the day of
the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until
midnight.” ([Acts 20.7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p6.13"></span>.) It was then the (season between Easter
and) Pentecost. <span id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001.md) See how
everything was subordinate to the preaching. It was also, it says, the
Lord’s day. <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002.md) Not even during
night-time was he silent, nay he discoursed the rather then, because of
stillness. Mark how he both made a long discourse, and beyond the time
of supper itself. But the Devil disturbed the feast—not that he
prevailed, however—by plunging the hearer in sleep, and causing him to
fall down. “And,” it says, “there were many lights in the upper chamber,
where they were gathered together. And there sat in a window a certain
young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul
was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the
third loft, and was taken up dead. And Paul went down, and fell on him,
and embracing him, said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.
When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten,
and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed. And
they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.”
([Acts 20.8-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p8.5"></span>.) But observe, I pray you, the theatre, how
crowded it was: and the miracle, what it was. “He was sitting in a
window,” at dead of night. Such was their eagerness to hear him! Let us
take shame to ourselves! “Aye, but a Paul” say you, “was discoursing
then.” Yes, and Paul discourses now, or rather not Paul, either then or
now, but Christ, and yet none cares to hear. No window in the case now,
no importunity of hunger, or sleep, and yet we do not care to hear: no
crowding in a narrow space here, nor any other such comfort. And the
wonderful circumstance is, that though he was a youth, he was not
listless and indifferent; and though (he felt himself) weighed down by
sleep, he did not go away, <span id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003.md)
nor yet fear the danger of falling down. It was not from listlessness
that he slumbered, but from necessity of nature. But observe, I beseech
you, so fervent was their zeal, that they even assembled in a third
loft: for they had not a Church yet. “Trouble not yourselves,” he says.
He said not, “He shall come to life again, for I will raise him up:” but
mark the unassuming way in which he comforts them: “for his life,” says
he, “is in him. When he was come up again, and had broken bread, and
eaten.” This thing cut short the discourse; it did no harm, however.
“When he had eaten,” it says, “and discoursed a long while, even till
break of day, so he departed.” Do you mark the frugality of the supper?
Do you observe how they passed the whole night? Such were their meals,
that the hearers came away sober, and fit for hearing. But we, in what
do we differ from dogs? Do you mark what a difference (between us and
those men)? “And they brought the young man alive, and,” it says, “were
not a little comforted,” both because they received him back alive, and
because a miracle had been wrought. <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004.md) “And we went before to ship, and
sailed unto Thasos, <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005.md) there
intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to
go afoot.” ([Acts 20.13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p11.6"></span>.) We often find Paul parting from the
disciples. For behold again, he himself goes afoot: giving them the
easier way, and himself choosing the more painful. He went afoot, both
that he might arrange many matters, and by way of training them to bear
a parting from him. <span id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006.md) “And when
he had joined us at Thasos, having taken him on board, we came to
Mytilene; and having sailed thence on the morrow, we come over against
Chios”—then they pass the island—“and on the next day we touched at
Samos, and having stopped at Trogylium, on the following day we came to
Miletus. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would
not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him,
to be in Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.” ([Acts
20.14-16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p12.15"></span>.) Why this haste? Not for the sake of the
feast, but of the multitude. At the same time, by this he conciliated
the Jews, as being one that did honor the feasts, wishing to gain even
his adversaries: at the same time also he delivers the word. <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007.md) Accordingly, see what great gain
accrued, from all being present. But that the interests of the people of
Ephesus might not be neglected on that account, he managed for this in a
different way. But let us look over again what has been said.

<span id="vi.xliii-p14"></span>(Recapitulation.) “And having embraced
them,” it says, “he departed for to go into Macedonia.” ([Acts
20.1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p14.1"></span>.) By this again he refreshed them (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p14.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p14.3"></span>νεκτήσατο</span>), giving
them much consolation. “And having exhorted” the Macedonians, “with much
discourse, he came into Greece.” ([Acts
20.2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p14.4"></span>.) Observe how we everywhere find him
accomplishing all by means of preaching, not by miracles. “And we,
sailed,” etc. The writer constantly shows him to us as hasting to get to
Syria; and the reason of it was the Church, and Jerusalem, but still he
restrained his desire, so as to set all right in those parts also. <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008.md) And yet Troas is not a large place:
why then do they pass seven days in it? Perhaps it was large as regarded
the number of believers. And after he had passed seven days there, on
the following day he spent the night in teaching: so hard did he find it
to tear himself away from them, and they from him. “And when we came
together” it says, “to break bread.” ([Acts
20.7-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p15.7"></span>.) At the very time (of breaking bread) the
discourse having taken its commencement,\* extended: <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009.md) as representing that they were
hungry, and it was not unseasonable: for the principal object (which
brought them together) was not teaching, but they came together “to
break bread;” discourse however having come up, he prolonged the
teaching. See how all partook also at Paul’s table. It seems to me, that
he discoursed while even sitting at table, teaching us to consider all
other things as subordinate to this. Picture to yourselves, I beseech
you, that house with its lights, with its crowd, with Paul in the midst,
discoursing, with even the windows occupied by many: what a thing it was
to see, and to hear that trumpet, and behold that gracious
countenance! <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010.md) But why did he
discourse during night time? Since “he was about to depart,” it says,
and was to see them no more: though this indeed he does not tell them,
they being too weak (to bear it), but he did tell it to the others. At
the same time too the miracle which took place would make them evermore
to remember that evening; so that the fall turned out to the advantage
of the teacher. Great was the delight of the hearers, and even when
interrupted it was the more increased. That (young man) was to rebuke
all that are careless (of the word), he whose death was caused by
nothing else than this, that he wished to hear Paul. “And we went before
to ship,” etc. ([Acts 20.13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p17.1"></span>.) Wherefore does the writer say where they
came, and where they went to? To show in the first place that he was
making the voyage more leisurely—and this upon human grounds—and sailing
past (some): also (for the same reason he tells) where he made a stay,
and what parts he sailed past; (namely,) “that he might not have to
spend the time in Asia.” ([Acts
20.16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p17.2"></span>.) Since had he come there, he could not have
sailed by; he did not like to pain those who would have begged him to
remain. “For he hasted,” it says, “if it were possible for him to keep
the day of Pentecost in Jerusalem:” and (this) was not possible (if he
stayed). Observe, how he is also moved like other men. For therefore it
is that all this is done, that we may not fancy that he was above human
nature: (therefore) you see him desiring (something), and hasting, and
in many instances not obtaining (his object): for those great and holy
men were partakers of the same nature with us; it was in the will and
purpose that they differed, and so it was that also they attracted upon
themselves the great grace they did. See, for instance, how many things
they order by an economy of their own. “That we give not offence” (<span
id="vi.xliii-p17.3"></span>[2 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003)<span id="vi.xliii-p17.4"></span>.md) to
those who wish (to take offence), and, “That our ministry be not
blamed.” Behold, both an irreproachable life and on the other hand
condescension. This is (indeed to be) called economy, to the (very)
summit and height (of it). <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011.md)
For he that went beyond the commandments of Christ, was on the other
hand more humble than all. “I am made all things to all men,” he says,
“that I might gain all.” ([1 Cor. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span id="vi.xliii-p18.14"></span>..md)
He cast himself also upon dangers, as he says in another place; “In much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments.” (<span id="vi.xliii-p18.15"></span>[2 Cor.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005)<span id="vi.xliii-p18.16"></span>..md)
And great was his love for Christ. For if there be not this, all else is
superfluous, both the economy (of condescending accommodation), and the
irreproachable life, and the exposing himself to dangers. “Who is weak,”
he says, “and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?” ([2 Cor.
xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p18.17"></span>.) These words let us imitate, and let us
cast ourselves upon dangers for our brethren’s sake. Whether it be fire,
or the sword, cast thyself on it, beloved, that thou mayest rescue (him
that is) thy member: cast thyself, be not afraid. Thou art a disciple of
Christ, Who laid down His life for His brethren: a fellow-disciple with
Paul, who chose to suffer numberless ills for his enemies, for men that
were warring against him; be thou filled with zeal, imitate Moses. He
saw one suffering wrong, and avenged him; he despised royal luxury, and
for the sake of those who were afflicted he became a fugitive, a
wanderer, lonely and deserted; he passed his days in a foreign land; and
yet he blamed not himself, nor said, “What is this? I despised royalty,
with all that honor and glory: I chose to avenge those who were wronged,
and God hath overlooked me: and not only hath He not brought me back to
my former honor, but even forty years am I passing in a foreign land.
Truly, handsomely <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012.md) have I
received my wages, have I not!” But nothing of the kind did he say or
think. So also do thou: be it that thou suffer any evil for doing good,
be it that (thou have to wait) a long time, be not thou offended, be not
discomposed: God will of a surety give thee thy reward. The more the
recompense is delayed, the more is the interest of it increased. Let us
have a soul apt to sympathize, let us have a heart that knows how to
feel with others in their sorrows: no unmerciful temper (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.12"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.13"></span>μόν</span>), no
inhumanity.

<span id="vi.xliii-p20"></span>Though thou be able to confer no relief,
yet weep thou, groan, grieve over what has happened: even this is not to
no purpose. If it behooves us to feel for those who are justly punished
by God, much more for those who suffer unjustly at the hands of men.
(They of) “Ænan,” <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013.md) it saith,
“came not forth to mourn for the house which was near her” ([Micah i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)<span id="vi.xliii-p21.4"></span>.md):
they shall receive pain, “in return for that they built for derision.”
And again, Ezekiel makes this an accusation against them, that they did
not grieve for (the afflicted). ([Ezek. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002)<span id="vi.xliii-p21.5"></span>..md)
What sayest thou, O Prophet? God punisheth, and shall I grieve for those
that He is punishing? Yea verily: for God Himself that punisheth wisheth
this: since neither does He Himself wish to punish, nay, even Himself
grieves when punishing. Then be not thou glad at it. You will say, “If
they are justly punished, we ought not to grieve.” Why, the thing we
ought to grieve for is this—that they were found worthy of punishment.
Say, when thou seest thy son undergoing cautery or the knife, dost thou
not grieve? and sayest thou not to thyself, “What is this? It is for
health this cutting, to quicken his recovery; it is for his deliverance,
this burning?” but for all that, when thou hearest him crying out, and
not able to bear the pain, thou grievest, and the hope of health being
restored is not enough to carry off the shock to nature. So also in the
case of these, though it be in order to their health that they are
punished, nevertheless let us show a brotherly feeling, a fatherly
disposition. They are cuttings and cauteries, the punishments sent by
God: but it is for this we ought to weep, that they were sick, that they
needed such a mode of cure. If it be for crowns that any suffer these
things, then grieve not; for instance, as Paul, as Peter suffered: but
when it is for punishment that one suffers justice, then weep, then
groan. Such was the part the prophets acted; thus one of them said, “Ah!
Lord, dost thou destroy the residue of Israel?” ([Ezek. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008)<span id="vi.xliii-p21.6"></span>..md)
We see men-slayers, wicked men, suffering punishment, and we are
distressed, and grieve for them. Let us not be philosophical beyond
measure: let us show ourselves pitiful, that we may be pitied; there is
nothing equal to this beautiful trait: nothing so marks to us the stamp
of human nature as the showing pity, as the being kind to our
fellow-men. In fact, therefore do the laws consign to public
executioners the whole business of punishment: having compelled the
judge to punish so far as to pronounce the sentence, thereafter they
call forth those to perform the act itself. So true is it, that though
it be justly done, it is not the part of a generous (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p21.7"></span>φιλοσόφου</span>) soul to
inflict punishment, but it requires another sort of person for this:
since even God punishes not by His own hand, but by means of the angels.
Are they then executioners, the angels? God forbid: I say not this, but
they are avenging powers. When Sodom was destroyed, the whole was done
by them as the instruments: when the judgments in Egypt were inflicted,
it was through them. For, “He sent,” it says, “evil angels among them.”
(<span id="vi.xliii-p21.8"></span>[Psalm lxxviii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050)<span id="vi.xliii-p21.9"></span>..md)
But when there is need of saying, God does this by Himself: thus, He
sent the Son:—(*b*) but, <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014.md) “He
that receiveth you, receiveth Me, and he that receiveth Me, receiveth
Him that sent Me.” ([Matt. x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p22.1"></span>.) (*a*) And again He saith, “Then will I say
unto the angels, Gather together them that do iniquity, and cast them
into the furnace.” ([Matt. 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030.md),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042)<span id="vi.xliii-p22.2"></span>..md)
But concerning the just, not so. (*c*) And again, “Bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into outer darkness.” ([Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span id="vi.xliii-p22.3"></span>..md)
Observe how in that case His servants minister: but when the point is to
do good, see Himself doing the good, Himself calling: “Come, ye blessed
of My Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.” ([Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vi.xliii-p22.4"></span>..md)
When the matter is, to converse with Abraham, then Himself comes to him:
when it is, to depart to Sodom, He sends His servants, like a judge
raising up those who are to punish. “Thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things” ([Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="vi.xliii-p22.5"></span>.md);
*I* (will make thee): but that other, not Himself, but His servants
bind. Knowing these things, let us not rejoice over those who are
suffering punishment, but even grieve: for these let us mourn, for these
let us weep, that for this also we may receive a reward. But now, many
rejoice even over those who suffer evil unjustly. But not so, we: let us
show all sympathy: that we also may have God vouchsafed us, through the
grace and mercy of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to the Father and
the Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_999"></span>[i:1000](1110048.htm#fr_999.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p5"></span> The phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p5.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p5.2"></span>χρι τῆς ᾽Ασίας</span> are omitted by <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="vi.xliii-p5.3"></span>א</span> and B. and are
now discarded in the leading critical editions. The residence of Timothy
is not given, as being well known. It was probably Lystra ([Acts xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p5.4"></span>).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[i:1001](1110048.htm#fr_1000.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p5.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p6"></span> St. Chrysostom’s reading of [Acts
20.4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p6.1"></span>
is peculiar, but does not appear in the vv. ll. of N. T. perhaps because
the Edd. of Chrys. conform it to the usual text, which is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p6.2"></span>Θεσσαλ. δὲ, ᾽Αρ. καὶ Σεκ.
καὶ Γά& 190·ος Δερβαῖος καὶ Τιμόθεος</span>, i.e. two Thessalonians, and
beside them Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, etc. But in the preceding
chapter, [Acts 19.29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p6.3"></span>, a Gaius was mentioned along with
Aristarchus, and both as Macedonians. Hence it seems St. Chrys. read it
with a stop after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p6.4"></span>Γά& 190·ος</span>, of Thessalonians,
Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius. In his remark, he seems to be giving
a reason for striking out <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p6.5"></span>καὶ</span> before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p6.6"></span>Τιμόθεος</span>: viz. “How does he call
Timothy a Thessalonian, (as a negligent reader might suppose to be the
case, viz., Of Thess. Ar. and Sec. and Gaius Derbæus and Timothy?) He
does not say this, but, of Thessalonians he mentions three, and then, of
Derbe, Timothy, cf. [Acts 16.1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p6.7"></span>., whereas Gaius was not of Derbe, but of
Macedonia, [Acts 19.29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p6.8"></span>.” The note of Œcumen. on the passage shows
that <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p6.9"></span>Δερβαῖος</span>
was supposed by some to be a proper name: “Of the rest, he tells us what
countries they were of: for Timothy he is content with the name, his
personal character was distinction enough, and besides he has already
told us where T. came from: viz. [Acts
16.1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p6.10"></span>.
But if <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p6.11"></span>Δερβαῖος</span> here is a noun of nation and
not a proper name, perhaps he has here also mentioned his country.”

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[i:1002](1110048.htm#fr_1001.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p6.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p7.1"></span>Πεντηκοστὴ</span>, meaning the whole of the
seven weeks. The scope of the remark is, Being met for celebration of
the Holy Eucharist, which followed the Sermon, and the discourse being
lengthened out until midnight, they were fasting all the time (for the
Eucharist was taken fasting, see *Hom.* xxvii. *in* 1 *Cor.*): so that,
though it was during the weeks after Easter, when there was no fast, and
not only so, but the Lord’s Day moreover, here was a fast protracted
till midnight.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[i:1003](1110048.htm#fr_1002.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p8"></span> That the religious observance of Sunday
is here alluded to has been generally assumed. Taken in connection with
[1 Cor. 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md), [Rev.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p8.1"></span>[1
Cor. xvi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p8.2"></span> and [Rev. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p8.3"></span>,
the passage renders it highly probable that at this time (about <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xliii-p8.4"></span>a.d.</span> 57) the first
day of the week was regularly observed by the Christians in memory of
the Lord’s resurrection, although it is certain that the Jewish
Christians still observed the Jewish Sabbath.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[i:1004](1110048.htm#fr_1003.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p8.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p9.1"></span>οὐκ ἀπέστη</span>, so as to lose the
opportunity of hearing, and forego the “breaking of bread,” which was to
follow the discourse. Comp. *Hom.* x. *in Gen. init.*

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[i:1005](1110048.htm#fr_1004.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p10"></span> The narrative requires the
interpretation of Chrys. that this was a case of restoration to life,
not merely of revival from suspended animation (as Olshausen, Ewald,
DeWette). This is established by the fact that Eutychus is said to have
seen taken up <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.1"></span>νεκρός</span>, not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.2"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.3"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.4"></span>νεκρός</span>. Moreover to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p10.5"></span>ἤ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p10.6"></span>ρθη νεκρός</span> ([Acts
20.9](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#009)<span id="vi.xliii-p10.7"></span>.md)
is opposed <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.8"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p10.9"></span>γαγον ζῶντα</span> ([Acts
20.12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p10.10"></span>). He was *dead;* they brought him *alive.*
It is true that the apostle says: “His life (soul) is in him,” but this
is said after he had fallen upon and embraced him, or this may have been
said from the standpoint of his confidence of a miraculous restoration,
as Jesus said of Jairus’ daughter: “The damsel is not dead, but
sleepeth,” meaning that from his standpoint and in view of his power she
still lived, although she was in reality dead.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[i:1006](1110048.htm#fr_1005.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p10.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p11"></span> Old text instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p11.1"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p11.2"></span>Ασσον</span>has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p11.3"></span>Θάσον</span>, a
misreading which appears in some <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xliii-p11.4"></span>mss.</span> and Versions of the Acts: Cat.,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p11.5"></span>Νάσον</span>.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[i:1007](1110048.htm#fr_1006.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.1"></span>παιδεύων τε αὐτοὺς χωρίζεσθαι αὐτοῦ</span>:
but mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.2"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.3"></span>μα καὶ παιδεύων αὐτοὺς μηδὲ χωρίζεσθαι
αὐτοῦ</span>. After this, old text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.5"></span>νήχθημέν, φησιν, εἰς τὴν Θάσον</span>
evidently confusing this clause of [Acts
20.13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p12.6"></span>, with the first of [Acts
20.14](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p12.7"></span>, then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.8"></span>εἶτα παρέχονται</span> (for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p12.9"></span>παρέρχ</span>.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p12.10"></span>τὴν νῆσον</span>,
followed by [Acts 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p12.11"></span>.
Mod. text, [Acts 20.15](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p12.12"></span>, followed by “See, how Paul being urgent,
they put to sea, and lose no time, but <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p12.13"></span>παρέρχονται τὰς νήσους</span>,” and [Acts
20.16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p12.14"></span>.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[i:1008](1110048.htm#fr_1007.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p12.16"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p13.1"></span>καὶ τοὺς ἐχθροὺς ἑλεῖν</span> (F. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.3"></span>λεεῖν</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.4"></span>βουλόμενος</span>,
wishing by this means to overcome (for their good) even those who hated
him. Then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p13.5"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p13.6"></span>μα καὶ τὸν λόγον καθίει</span>. Mod. text
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.7"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.8"></span>μα ἔσπευδε τὸν λόγον
καθεῖναι</span>. Mr. Field remarks on *Hom. in 2 Cor.* p. 553 B. where
we have <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.9"></span>παραίνεσιν
καθίησι</span>, that the much more usual expression is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.10"></span>εἴς τι καθεῖναι</span>,
and adds: “*semel tantum ap. Nostrum reperimus* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p13.11"></span>λόγον καθεῖναι</span>,
viz. t. ix. p. 236. E.”—our passage.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[i:1009](1110048.htm#fr_1008.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p15.2"></span>λλ᾽ ὅμως κατεῖχε τὸν πόθον καὶ τὰ ἐκεῖ
κατορθοῦν</span>. The infinitive requires <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p15.3"></span>βουλόμενος</span> or the like: i.e. “though
desirous to get to Jerusalem, he restrained his desire, and made a stay
at Troas of seven days, wishing, etc.:” but B. gives the same sense by
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p15.4"></span>κατορθῶν</span>, Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p15.5"></span>κατώρθου</span>. Mod.
text <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p15.6"></span>οὕτως εἶχε τὸν
πόθον καὶ τὰ ἐκεῖ κατορθοῦν</span>.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[i:1010](1110048.htm#fr_1009.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p15.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.1"></span>Πρὸς αὐτὸν τὸν καιρὸν, ἀρχὴν ὁ λόγος λαβὼν
παρέτεινεν ὡς ἐνδεικνύμενος πεινῆν· καὶ οὐκ ἦν ἄκαιρον· οὐ γὰρ
προηγουμένως εἰς διδασκαλίαν καθῆκεν</span>. This is evidently
mutilated; the verb to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.3"></span>λόγος</span> is wanting: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p16.4"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p16.5"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p16.6"></span>ἐνδεικ. πεινῆν</span>,
either “making a display of,” or, “pleading as excuse the being hungry,”
is unintelligible; so is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.7"></span>οὐκ ἦν ἄκ</span>. Mod. text attempts to make
sense by reading: “At the very time <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.8"></span>ᾦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p16.9"></span>ἐνεδείκνυτο πεινῆν, καὶ οὐκ ἦν ἄκαιρον, ἀρχὴν
ὁ λόγος λαβὼν παρετάθη, ὥστε οὐ προηγ</span>.”

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[i:1011](1110048.htm#fr_1010.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p16.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p17"></span> Mod. text “many occupying even the
windows, to hear that trumpet, and see that gracious countenance. What
must the persons taught have been, and how great the pleasure they must
have enjoyed!”

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[i:1012](1110048.htm#fr_1011.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p18.1"></span>Τοῦτο οἰκονομία λέγεται εἰς ἀκρότητα καὶ εἰς
ὕψος</span>. “This”—the blameless life and therewith <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.2"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>
described in [2 Cor. vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p18.3"></span> ff—"is what one may indeed call <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.4"></span>Οἰκονομία</span>—managing
or dispensing things for the good of others, so that they shall have
what is best for them in the best manner, without shocking their
prejudices. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p18.5"></span>Οἰκον</span>., in the moral sense of the
word, implies <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p18.6"></span>συγκατάβασοις</span>, letting one’s self down
to the level of others for their good. (Hence below, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.7"></span>καὶ τὰ τῆς οἰκονομίας,
καὶ (τὰ) τοῦ ἀλήπτου βίου</span>.) “Talk of ‘economy’—here you have it
at its very top and summit, in a degree not to be surpassed.” Instead of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.8"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.9"></span>ψος</span> the context
seems to require “the lowest depth.” Hence mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p18.10"></span>τὸ εἰς ἀκρότητα εἶναι
καὶ ὕψους ἀρετῆς, καὶ ταπεινοφροσύνης συγκαταβάσεως. Καὶ ἄκουε πῶς ὁ
ὑπερβαίνων</span>…“the being at the summit both of loftiness of virtue
and of lowliness of condescension.” In the next sentence St. Paul is
described as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p18.11"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p18.12"></span>ὑπερβαίνων τὰ παραγγέλματα τοῦ
Χριστοῦ</span>, namely, the precept “that they which preach the Gospel
should live by the Gospel,” [1 Cor. ix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.xliii-p18.13"></span>.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[i:1013](1110048.htm#fr_1012.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p18.18"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p19"></span> Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p19.1"></span>καλῶς γε· οὐ γὰρ τοὺς μισθοὺς
ἀπέλαβον</span>: as if it meant, “And well that it is so: for I have not
received my wages—therefore the reward is yet to come: not as it is with
those who <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p19.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p19.3"></span>πέχουσι τὸν μισθὸν αὐτῶν</span> in this life,
[Matt. vi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.xliii-p19.4"></span> ff.” If this were the meaning, the sentence
would be out of place; it should be, “He said nothing of the kind, but
would rather have repressed such thoughts with the consideration, It is
well: for I have not received my wages—they are yet to come.” But in
fact here as elsewhere the Edd. overlook the ironical interrogation
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.5"></span>οὐ γάρ</span>. Read
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.6"></span>καλῶς γε</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.7"></span>(</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.8"></span>οὐ γάρ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.9"></span>;)</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p19.10"></span>τοὺς μισθοὺς ἀπ
έλαβον</span> (or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p19.11"></span>καλούς γε</span>).

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[i:1014](1110048.htm#fr_1013.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliii-p21.1"></span>Αἰναν</span>. Sav. marg., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p21.2"></span>Σαινάν</span>. LXX. Edd.,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliii-p21.3"></span>Σενναάρ</span>.
Hebr., Zaanan.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[i:1015](1110048.htm#fr_1014.md) <span
id="vi.xliii-p21.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p22"></span> This clause is evidently misplaced, and
moreover requires to be completed. The meaning may be: “So in the
highest of all God’s saving acts, the mission of the Son; for he that
receiveth Him receiveth the Father.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLIV on Acts xx. 17-21.](1110049.md)
