[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110048)  [Next](1110050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xliv"></span> <span id="vi.xliv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xliv-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIV.</span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p2"></span>[Acts XX.
17-21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017)<span id="vi.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p3"></span>“And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and
called the elders of the Church. And when they were come to him, he said
unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what
manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all
humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me
by the lying in wait of the Jews: and how I kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly,
and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="vi.xliv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xliv-p4.1"></span>See</span> him, hasting to sail by, and yet not
overlooking them, but taking order for all. Having sent for the rulers,
through those he discourses to them (the Ephesians): but it is worthy of
admiration, how finding himself under a necessity of saying certain
great things about himself, he tries to make the least he can of it
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p4.2"></span>πειρἅτα
μετριάζειν</span>). “Ye know.” For just as Samuel, when about to deliver
up the government to Saul says in their presence, “Have I taken aught of
your hands? Ye are witnesses, and God also” (<span
id="vi.xliv-p4.3"></span>[1 Sam. 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#005)<span id="vi.xliv-p4.4"></span>);
(so Paul here). David also, when disbelieved, says, “I was with the
flock keeping my father’s sheep: and when the bear came, I scared her
away with my hands” (<span id="vi.xliv-p4.5"></span>[1 Sam.
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#035)<span id="vi.xliv-p4.6"></span>):
and Paul himself too says to the Corinthians, “I am become a fool; ye
have compelled me.” (<span id="vi.xliv-p4.7"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span id="vi.xliv-p4.8"></span>.)
Nay, God Himself also does the same, not speaking of himself upon any
and every occasion, but only when He is disbelieved, then He brings up
His benefits. Accordingly, see what Paul does here: first he adduces
their own testimony: that you may not imagine his words to be mere
boasting, he calls the hearers themselves as witnesses of the things he
says, since he was not likely to speak lies in their presence. This is
the excellence of a teacher, to have for witnesses of his merits those
who are his disciples. And what is wonderful, Not for one day nor for
two, says he, have I continued doing this. He wishes to cheer them for
the future, that they may bravely bear all things, both the parting from
him, and the trials about to take place—just as it was in the case of
Moses and Joshua. And see how he begins: “How I have been with you the
whole time, serving the Lord with all humility of mind.” Observe, what
most becomes rulers: “hating pride” (<span
id="vi.xliv-p4.9"></span>[Exod. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021)<span id="vi.xliv-p4.10"></span>,
LXX.), says (Moses): which (qualification) is especially in point for
rulers, because to them there is (almost) a necessity of becoming
arrogant. This (humility) is the groundwork of all that is good, as in
fact Christ saith, <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) “Blessed
are the poor in spirit.” ([Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="vi.xliv-p5.1"></span>.) And
(here) not simply, “with humility of mind,” but, “with all humility.”
For there are many kinds of humility, in word and in action, towards
rulers, and toward the ruled. Will you that I mention to you some kinds
of humility? There are some who are lowly towards those who are lowly,
and high towards the high: this is not the character of humility. <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) Some then are such. Then, that he
may not seem to be arrogant, he lays a foundation beforehand, removing
that suspicion: For, “if, says he, I have acted ‘with all humility of
mind,’ it is not from arrogance that I say the things I say.” Then for
his gentleness, ever with much condescension making them his fellows.
“With you,” he says, “have I been, serving the Lord;” he makes the good
works common to them with himself: none of it his own peculiar. “What?”
(you will say) “why, against God could he possibly bear himself
arrogantly?” And yet there are many who do bear themselves arrogantly
against God: but this man not even against his own disciples. This is
the merit of a teacher, by his own achievements of virtue to form the
character of his disciples. Then for his fortitude, upon which also he
is very concise. “With many tears,” he says, “and temptations which
befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews.” Do you see that he grieves
at their doings? But here too he seems to show how sympathizing he was:
for he suffered for those who were going to perdition, for the doers
themselves: what was done to himself, he even rejoiced at it; for he
belonged to that band which “rejoiced that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for that Name” ([Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="vi.xliv-p6.1"></span>):
and again he says, “Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you” (<span
id="vi.xliv-p6.2"></span>[Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="vi.xliv-p6.3"></span>):
and again, “For our light affliction, which is but for the moment,
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” (<span
id="vi.xliv-p6.4"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span id="vi.xliv-p6.5"></span>).
These things, however, he says, by way of making the least of his merits
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p6.6"></span>μετριάζων</span>).
But there he show his fortitude, not so much of daring, as of enduring:
“I,” says he, “have been evil entreated, but it was with you: and what
is indeed the grievous part of the business, at the hands of Jews.”
Observe, he puts here both love and fortitude. Mark, here, I pray you, a
character of teaching: “I kept back nothing,” he says, ungrudging
fulness, unshrinking promptness—“of what was profitable unto you:”
because there were things which they did not need to learn. For as the
hiding some things would have been like grudging, so the saying all
things would be folly. This is why he adds, “that was profitable unto
you. But have showed you, and have taught you:” have not only said, but
also taught: not doing this either as a mere matter of form. For that
this is what he means, observe what he says: “publicly, and from house
to house:” thereby representing the exceeding toil, the great
earnestness and endurance. “Both Jews, and Greeks.” Not (addressing
myself) to you alone. “Testifying:” here, the boldness of speech: and
that, even though we do no good, yet we must speak: for <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) this is the meaning of
“testifying,” when we speak to those who do not pay attention: and so
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p7.4"></span>διαμαρτύρασθαι</span> is for the most part
used. “I call heaven and earth to witness” ([Deut. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)<span id="vi.xliv-p7.5"></span>),
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p7.6"></span>διαμαρτύρομαι</span>,
Moses says: and now Paul himself, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p7.7"></span>Διαμαρτυρόμενος</span> “both to Jews and Greeks
repentance toward God.” What testifiest thou? That they should be
careful about their manner of life: that they should repent, and draw
near to God. “Both to Jews and Greeks”—for neither did the Jews know
Him—both <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018) by reason of their
works, he says, “repentance towards God,” and, by reason that they knew
not the Son, he adds, “and faith in the Lord Jesus.” To what end, then,
sayest thou these things? to what end dost thou put them in mind of
them? What has come of it? hast thou anything to lay to their charge?
Having first alarmed their feeling, then he adds, “And now, behold, I go
bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall
befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city,
saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might
finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of
the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.” ([Acts
20.22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xliv-p8.5"></span>). Wherefore says he this? By way of preparing
them to be always ready to meet dangers, whether seen or unseen, and in
all things to obey the Spirit. <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) He shows that it is for great
objects that he is led away from them. “Save that the Holy Ghost,” he
says, “in every city witnesseth to me saying”—to show that he departs
willingly; that (see Hom. xlv. p. 273) you may not imagine it any bond
or necessity, when he says, “bound in the Spirit—that in every city
bonds and afflictions await me.” Then also he adds this, “I count not my
life dear, until I shall have fulfilled my course and the ministry,
which I received of the Lord Jesus.” Until I shall have finished my
course, says he, with joy. Do you mark how (clearly) these were the
words not of one lamenting, but of one who forbore to make the most (of
his troubles) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p9.3"></span>μετριάζοντος</span>), of one who would instruct
those (whom he addressed), and sympathize with them in the things which
were befalling He says not, “I grieve indeed, <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) but one must needs bear it:” “but,”
says he, “of none of those things do I make account, neither do I have,”
i.e. account “my life dear to me.” Why this again? not to extol himself,
but to teach them, as by the former words, humility, so by these,
fortitude and boldness: “I have it not precious,” i.e. “I love it not
before this: I account it more precious to finish my course, to
testify.” And he says not, “to preach,” “to teach”—but what says he? “to
testify (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p10.10"></span>διαμαρτύρασθαι</span>)—the Gospel of the
grace of God.” He is about to say something more uncomfortable (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.11"></span>φορτικώτερον</span>),
namely, “I am pure from the blood of all men (because on my part) there
is nothing lacking:” he is about to lay upon them the whole weight and
burden: so he first mollifies their feelings by saying, “And now behold
I know that ye shall see my face no more.” The consolation <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) is twofold: both that “my face ye
shall see no more,” for in heart I am with you: and that it was not they
alone (who should see him no more): for, “ye shall see my face no more,
ye all, among whom I have gone about preaching the Kingdom.” <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) So that he may well (say),
"Wherefore I take you to record (read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p12.5"></span>διὸ μαρτ</span>. for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p12.6"></span>διαμαρτ</span>.),—seeing I shall be with you
no more—“that I am pure from the blood of all men.” ([Acts
20.26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xliv-p12.7"></span>.) Do you mark how he terrifies them, and
troubled and afflicted as their souls are, how hard he rubs them (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p12.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p12.9"></span>πιτρίβει</span>)? But it
was necessary. “For I have not shunned,” he says, “to declare unto you
all the counsel of God.” ([Acts
20.27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xliv-p12.10"></span>.) Why then, he who does not speak, has blood
to answer for: that is, murder! Nothing could be more terrifying than
this. He shows that they also, if they *do* it not, have blood to answer
for. So, whereas he seems to be justifying himself, in fact he is
terrifying them. “Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers (or,
bishops) to feed the Church of God (see note 3), which He hath purchased
with His own blood.” ([Acts 20.28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xliv-p12.11"></span>.) Do you mark? he enjoins them two things.
Neither success in bringing others right of itself is any gain—for, I
fear, he says, “lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a cast-away” (<span id="vi.xliv-p12.12"></span>[1 Cor.
ix. 27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xliv-p12.13"></span>); nor the being diligent for one’s self
alone. For such an one is selfish, and seeks his own good only, and is
like to him who buried his talent. “Take heed to yourselves:” this he
says, not because our own salvation is more precious than that of the
flock, but because, when we take heed to ourselves, then the flock also
is a gainer. “In which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God.” See, it is from the Spirit ye have your ordination.
This is one constraint: then he says, “To feed the Church of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) Lo! another
obligation: the Church is the Lord’s. <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) And a third: “which He hath
purchased with His own blood.” It shows <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025) how precious the concern is; that
the peril is about no small matters, seeing that even His own blood He
spared not. He indeed, that he might reconcile those who were enemies,
poured out even His blood: but thou, even when they are become thy
friends, art not able to retain them. “For I know this, that after my
departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock.” ([Acts 20.29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xliv-p15.3"></span>.) Again he engages (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p15.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p15.5"></span>πιστρέφει</span>) them from another quarter,
from the things which should come after: as when he says, “We wrestle
not against flesh and blood. After my departing,” he says, “grievous
wolves shall enter in among you” ([Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="vi.xliv-p15.6"></span>);
twofold the evil, both that he himself would not be present, and that
others would assail them. “Then why depart, if thou knowest this
beforehand?” The Spirit draws me, he says. Both “wolves,” and “grievous,
not sparing the flock;” and what is worse, even “from among your own
selves:” the grievous thing (this), when the war is moreover an
intestine war. The matter is exceeding serious, for it is “the Church of
the Lord:” great the peril for with blood He redeemed it: mighty the
war, and twofold. “Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.” ([Acts
20.30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xliv-p15.7"></span>.) “How then? what comfort shall there be?”
“Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.” ([Acts
20.31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xliv-p15.8"></span>.) See how many strong expressions are here:
“with tears,” and “night and day,” and “every one.” For it was not that
if he saw many, <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) then he came
in (to the work), but even were it for a single soul, he was capable of
doing everything (for that one soul). So it was, in fact, that he
compacted them together (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p16.6"></span>συνεκρότησεν</span>) (so firmly as he did).
“Enough done on my part: three years have I remained:” they had
establishing enough, he says; enough of roofing. “With tears,” he says.
Seest thou that the tears were on this account? The bad man grieves not:
grieve thou: perhaps he will grieve also. As, when the sick man sees his
physician partaking of food, he also is incited to do the same: so
likewise here, when he sees thee weeping, he is softened: he will be a
good and great man. <span id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027)

<span id="vi.xliv-p18"></span>(Recapitulation.) “Not knowing,” he says,
“the things that shall befall me.” ([Acts
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023)<span id="vi.xliv-p18.1"></span>.)
Then is this why thou departest? By no means; on the contrary (I know
that), “bonds and afflictions await me.” That (there are) trials, I
know, but of what kind I know not: which was more grievous. “But none of
these things move me” ([Acts
20.24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xliv-p18.2"></span>): for do not suppose that I say these things
as lamenting them: for “I hold not my own life dear.” It is to raise up
their minds that he says all this, and to persuade them not only not to
flee, but also to bear nobly. Therefore it is that he calls it a
“course” and a “ministry,” on the one hand, showing it to be glorious
from its being a race, on the other, showing what was due from it, as
being a ministry. I am a minister: nothing more. Having comforted them,
that they might not grieve that he was so evil entreated, and having
told them that he endured those things “with joy,” and having shown the
fruits of them, then (and not before) he brings in that which would give
them pain, that he may not overwhelm their minds. “And <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) now behold,” etc. “Wherefore I take
you to record, that I am pure from the blood of all men, because I have
not shrunk from declaring unto you the whole counsel of God” ([Acts
20.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xliv-p19.8"></span>): \* \* \* that (counsel) which concerns the
present matter. “For I know this,” etc. ([Acts
20.29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xliv-p19.9"></span>.) “What then,” someone might say, “thinkest
thou thyself so great? if thou shouldest depart, are we to die?” I say
not this, he replies, that my absence causeth this: but what? That there
should rise up against you certain of another sort: he says not,
“because of my departing,” but “after my departing:” that is, after his
going on his journey.—And yet this thing has happened already: much more
(then will it happen) hereafter. Then we have the cause, “to draw away
disciples after them.” ([Acts
20.30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xliv-p19.10"></span>). That there are heresies, this is the
cause, and no other than this. Then comes also consolation. But if He
“purchased” it “with His own blood,” He will assuredly stand forward in
its defence. “Night and day,” he says, “I cease not to warn with tears.”
([Acts 20.31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xliv-p19.11"></span>.) This might well be said in our case also:
and though the speech seems to refer peculiarly to the teachers, it is
common also to the disciples. For what, though I speak and exhort and
weep night and day, while the disciple obeys not? Therefore <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029) it is that he says, “I take you to
record:” since also himself says, “I am pure from the blood of all men:
for I have not shunned to declare unto you.” ([Acts
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span id="vi.xliv-p20.1"></span>.)
Why then, this only is to be a teacher, to declare, to preach, to
instruct, shrink from nothing, to exhort night and day: but if, while
one is doing all this, nothing comes of it, ye know what remains. Then
ye have another justification: “I am pure from the blood of all men.”
Think not that these words are spoken to us only: for indeed this speech
is addressed to you also, that ye should attend to the things spoken,
that ye should not start away from the hearing. What can I do? Lo! each
day I rend myself with crying out, “Depart from the theatres:” and many
laugh at us: “Desist from swearing, from covetousness:” numberless are
our exhortations, and there is none to hear us. But I do not discourse
during night? Fain would I do this also in the night time, and at your
tables, if it were possible that one could be divided into ten thousand
pieces, so as to be present with you and discourse. But if once in the
week we call to you, and ye shrink back, and some of you do not even
come here, and you that do come, depart having received no profit,—what
shall we do? Many I know even sneer at us, that we are forever
discoursing about the same things: so wearisome are we become to you by
very satiety. But for this not we are to blame, but the hearers may
thank themselves. For he indeed who is making good progress, rejoices to
hear the same things always; it seems to be his praises that he hears
spoken: but he who does not wish to get on, seems even to be annoyed,
and though he hear the same thing but twice, it seems to him that he is
hearing it often.

<span id="vi.xliv-p21"></span>“I am pure,” he says, “from the blood of
all men.” ([Acts 20.26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xliv-p21.1"></span>.) This was fit and proper for Paul to say,
but we dare not say it, conscious as we are of numberless faults.
Wherefore for him the ever vigilant, ever at hand, the man enduring all
things for the sake of the salvation of his disciples, it was fit and
proper to say this: but we must say that of Moses, “The Lord was wroth
with me for your sakes” ([Deut. iii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)<span id="vi.xliv-p21.2"></span>),
because ye lead us also into many sins. For when we are dispirited at
seeing you make no progress, is not the greater part of our strength
struck down? For what, I ask you has been done? Lo! by the grace of God
we also have now passed the space of three years, <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) not indeed night and day exhorting
you, but doing this, often every third day, or every seventh. What more
has come of it? We accuse, we rebuke, we weep, we are in anguish,
although not openly, yet in heart. But those (inward) tears are far more
bitter than these (outward ones): for these indeed bring a kind of
relief to the feelings of the sorrowful, whereas those aggravate it, and
bind it fast. Since when there is any cause of grief, and one cannot
give vent to the sorrow, lest he should seem to be vainglorious, think
what he suffers! Were it not that people would tax me with excessive
love of display, you would see me each day shedding fountains of tears:
but to those my chamber is witness, and my hours of solitude. For
believe me I have (at times) despaired of my own salvation, but from my
mourning on your account, I have not even leisure to bemoan my own
evils: so entirely are ye all in all to me. And whether I perceive you
to be advancing, then, for very delight, I am not sensible of my own
evils: or whether I see you not advancing, such is my grief, I again
dismiss my own cares from my thoughts: brightening up on account of your
good things, though I myself have evils without number, and saddened on
account of your painful things, though my own successes are without
number. For what hope is there for the teacher, when his flock is
destroyed? What kind of life, what kind of expectation is there for him?
With what sort of confidence will he stand up before God? what will he
say? For grant that he has nothing laid to his charge, has no punishment
to suffer, but is “pure from the blood of all men:” yet even so will he
suffer a grief incurable: since fathers also though they be not liable
to be called to account for their children’s sins, nevertheless have
grief and vexation. And this profits them nothing, <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) nor shields them (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p23.2"></span>προίσταται</span>). “For
it is they that watch for our souls, as those that must give account.”
([Heb. xiii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xliv-p23.3"></span>.) This seems to be a fearful thing: to me
this gives no concern after your destruction. For whether I give
account, or not, it is no profit to me. Might it be, that ye were saved,
and I to give account because of you: ye saved, and I charged with not
having fulfiled my part! For my anxiety is not that you should be saved
through me as the means, but only that you should be saved, no matter by
what person as the instrument. Ye know not the pangs of spiritual
childbirth, how overpowering they are; how he who is in travail with
this birth, would rather be cut into ten thousand pieces, than see one
of those to whom he has given birth perishing and undone. Whence shall
we persuade you? By no other argument indeed, but by what has been done,
in all that regards you we shall clear ourselves. <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032) We too shall be able to say, that
in nothing have we “shrunk from declaring” to you the whole truth:
nevertheless we grieve: and that we do grieve, is manifest from the
numberless plans we lay and contrivances we devise. And yet we might say
to ourselves, What matters it to me? I have done my part, “I am pure
from” (their) “blood:” but this is not enough for comfort. If we could
tear open our heart, and show it to you, ye would see with what
largeness it holds (you) within it, both women and children and men; for
such is the power of love, that it makes the soul more spacious than the
heaven. “Receive us,” says (Paul): “we have wronged no man, ye are not
straitened in us.” (<span id="vi.xliv-p24.9"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)<span id="vi.xliv-p24.10"></span>;
vi. 12.) He had all Corinth in his heart, and says, “Ye are not
straitened: be ye also enlarged” (<span id="vi.xliv-p24.11"></span>[2
Cor. vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xliv-p24.12"></span>); but I myself could not say this, for I
well know, that ye both love me and receive me. But what is the profit
either from my love or from yours, when the things pertaining to God
thrive not in us? It is a ground for greater sorrow, an occasion of
worse mischief (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.13"></span>λύμης</span>, al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.14"></span>λύπης</span>). I have nothing to lay to your
charge: “for I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would
have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.” ([Gal. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#015)<span id="vi.xliv-p24.15"></span>.)
“We yearn not only to give you the Gospel, but also our own souls.”
(<span id="vi.xliv-p24.16"></span>[1 Thess. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#008)<span id="vi.xliv-p24.17"></span>.)
We are loved and we love (you): but this is not the question. But let us
love Christ, “for the first commandment is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God: and the second is like unto it, And thy neighbor as thyself.”
([Matt. xxii. 37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xliv-p24.18"></span>.) We have the second, we need the first:
need the first, exceedingly, both I and you. We have it, but not as we
ought. Let us love Him: ye know how great a reward is laid up for them
that love Christ: let us love Him with fervor of soul, that, enjoying
his goodwill, we may escape the stormy waves of this present life, and
be found worthy to obtain the good things promised to them that love
Him, through the grace and mercy of His only-begotten Son, with whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[i:1016](1110049.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="vi.xliv-p4.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p5"></span> i.e. putting this foremost of the
Beatitudes.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[i:1017](1110049.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="vi.xliv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p6"></span> Something more ought to follow, but the
report is imperfect. Mod. text “Others again there are who are not such
as these, but who in the case of both characters preserve according to
the occasion both the lowly and the high bearing: which thing indeed
above all is characteristic of humility. Since then he is about to teach
them such things, lest he should seem to be arrogant,” etc.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[i:1018](1110049.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="vi.xliv-p6.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p7.1"></span>Τὸ γὰρ διαμαρτύρασθαι τοῦτό ἐστιν,
ὅταν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p7.2"></span>..…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p7.3"></span>Τὸ γὰρ διαμαρτύρασθαι ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ τοῦτό
ἐστιν</span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[i:1019](1110049.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="vi.xliv-p7.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p8"></span> Old text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p8.1"></span>διά τε τὰ ἔργα, διά τε τὸν Υἱ& 232·ν ἀγνοεῖν·
καὶ πίστιν τὴν εἰς τὸν Κ. ᾽Ι</span>. as if all this were said in
explanation of the preceding <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p8.2"></span>Οὐδὲ γὰρ ᾽Ιουδαῖοι ᾔδεσαν αὐτόν</span>. But
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p8.3"></span>δία τε τὰ ἔργα</span>
explains the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p8.4"></span>τὴν εἰς τὸν Θεὸν μετάνοιαν</span>, which
requires to be inserted as in the Translation. Mod. text “both because
they were ignorant of the Son, and because of their works, and their not
having faith in the Lord Jesus.”

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[i:1020](1110049.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="vi.xliv-p8.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p9"></span> Chrys. understands “bound in the spirit”
to mean constrained by the Holy Spirit (so Theophylact, Beza, Calvin,
Wordsworth *et al.*). The fact that the Holy Spirit is mentioned in the
next verse ([Acts 20.23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xliv-p9.1"></span>) in such a way as to be distinguished
apparently from “the spirit” here mentioned, has led most critics to
believe that “the spirit” was Paul’s own spirit (so Meyer, Lechler,
Lange, DeWette, Ewald, Alford, Hackett, Gloag). <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p9.2"></span>Δεδεμένος</span> should not
be taken as meaning bound with chains in prospect, i.e., as seen in his
spirit in advance (as Bengel, Conybeare and Howson), but rather
constrained, inwardly constrained.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[i:1021](1110049.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="vi.xliv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p10"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xliv-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> Cat. and Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.3"></span>λγῶμεν</span> “let us
grieve:” but Savile, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p10.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p10.5"></span>λγῶ μέν</span>. The next clause <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.7"></span>λλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἡγοῦμαι</span>,
or, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p10.9"></span>λλ᾽ οὐδὲ, ῾Ηγοῦμαι</span>,
requires something to make sense of it, as in the Translation.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[i:1022](1110049.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="vi.xliv-p10.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p11.1"></span>Διπλῆ ἡ παραμυθία</span>. The meaning is, “It
was his face that they would see no more: he chooses that expression by
way of softening matters, implying that in spirit he would be present:
and again, all ye, not they only, so that the grief was not peculiar to
them:” but this being rather obscure, A. substitutes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p11.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p11.3"></span>θυμία</span>, and mod.
text <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p11.4"></span>Διπλῆ ἡ
λύπη</span>, i.e. “the dejection (or, the sorrow) was twofold, both the
being to see his face no more, and the, All of them.”

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[i:1023](1110049.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="vi.xliv-p11.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p12"></span> Neither of the two ideas which Chrys.
draws from [Acts 20.25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xliv-p12.1"></span>—(*a*) that though absent in body, he would be
present with them in spirit; (*b*) that the “all” addressed refers to
the whole company—comes naturally from the text. The apostle states his
firm conviction that he shall not again visit Ephesus. Whether he ever
did so or not, we do not know. The probabilities in the case would
depend upon the question of a release from his Roman imprisonment. He
hoped for such a release and intended to visit Colossæ ([Philem.
22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022)<span id="vi.xliv-p12.2"></span>).
On the supposition of such a release and on the consequent supposition
of the Pauline authorship of the Pastoral Epistles, a visit after this
time to Ephesus becomes very probable, especially since we find the
apostle (<span id="vi.xliv-p12.3"></span>[2 Tim.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020)<span id="vi.xliv-p12.4"></span>)
at Troas and Miletus.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[i:1024](1110049.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="vi.xliv-p12.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p13"></span> Hence it appears that St. Chrys. reads
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p13.1"></span>Κυρίου</span> not
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p13.2"></span>Θεοῦ</span> in this
text, though in the citation the Scribes give it according to the other
reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p13.3"></span>Θεοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[i:1025](1110049.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="vi.xliv-p13.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p14"></span> It is an interesting fact that in this
passage where the reading vacillates between <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.1"></span>Κυρίου</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.2"></span>θεοῦ</span>, while the report of the Homily
has given us <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.3"></span>θεοῦ</span>, the citation of the N. T. text
favors the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.4"></span>Κυρίου</span>. The great majority of <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.5"></span>mss.</span> read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.6"></span>τοῦ Κυρίου</span>: <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.7"></span>א</span> and B. have
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.8"></span>τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (the
usual Pauline formula). Many critics hold that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.9"></span>Κυρ</span>. was changed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.10"></span>θ</span>. in accordance
with Pauline usage in the Epistles. The idea of the “blood of God” is
against the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.11"></span>θεοῦ</span>. Modern critics are nearly
equally divided. Alford, Westcott and Hort, read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p14.12"></span>θεοῦ</span>; Meyer,
Tischendorf, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p14.13"></span>Κυρίου</span>; to us the latter seems
decidedly preferable.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[i:1026](1110049.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="vi.xliv-p14.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p15.1"></span>δείκνυσι τίμιον τὸ πρᾶγμα, ὅτι</span>. Mod.
text. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p15.2"></span>πολὺ δείκν. δἰ
ὧν εἶπε τίμιον τὸ πρ</span>. So Edd. *Multum ostendit dum dicit
pretiosam rem.* Ben.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[i:1027](1110049.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="vi.xliv-p15.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p16.1"></span>Οὐ γὰρ εἰ πολλοὺς εἶδε τότε ἐφείσατο</span>
(mod. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p16.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p16.3"></span>φείδετο</span>). *Non enim
si multos vidisset, eis pepercisset,* Ben. But Cat. has preserved the
true reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p16.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p16.5"></span>φίστατο</span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[i:1028](1110049.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="vi.xliv-p16.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p17.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p17.2"></span>Εσται χρηστὸς καὶ μέγας ἀνήρ</span>. The
second epithet, being evidently unsuitable, mod. text gives, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p17.3"></span>χρηστὸς ἀνὴρ καὶ πρᾶος
γενήσεται</span>. But perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p17.4"></span>χ. ἀ. καὶ μ</span>. belongs to the next
sentence, as an exclamation on [Acts
20.22](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022)<span id="vi.xliv-p17.5"></span>.
“A good and great man!” and for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p17.6"></span>μαλάσσεται· ἔσται</span> we may read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p17.7"></span>μαλαχθήσεται</span>.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[i:1029](1110049.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="vi.xliv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p19"></span> Old text: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p19.1"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p19.2"></span>να μὴ καταχώσῃ αὐτῶν τὴν διάνοιαν</span>,
followed by the latter part of [Acts
20.27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span id="vi.xliv-p19.3"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p19.4"></span>Τοῦ ἀναγγεῖλαι ὑμῖν
κ. τ. λ</span>. But the connection may also be, “I have not shrunk—of
course in due order and proportion” (or something of that kind) “that he
may not overwhelm their minds, from declaring,” etc. It might seem,
however, from the comment which follows, viz <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p19.5"></span>τὴν περὶ τοῦ παρόντος πράγματος</span>, that
Chrys. is here proposing an interpretation of [Acts
20.27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span id="vi.xliv-p19.6"></span>
different from what was implied in the first exposition, p. 269, and
from that of [Acts 20.20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xliv-p19.7"></span>: i.e. “painful as it is, I have not shrunk
from announcing to you all the counsel of God, to wit, as touching the
present matter, my separation from you, so that ye shall see my face no
more.” But this being very unsatisfactory, it is better to take the
connection thus: Nor does he now shrink from declaring to them the whole
counsel of God concerning the coming events, and their duty and
responsibility therein. (We have therefore placed the mark of an hiatus
before this clause.)—Mod. text substitutes, “But what is this (that he
adds), ‘Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things.’ What then,” etc.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[i:1030](1110049.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="vi.xliv-p19.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p20"></span> The text is evidently confused or
defective here. Mod. text “For that none may fancy it plea enough for
his justification, that he is a disciple while yet he does not yield,
therefore having said, I take you to record, he adds, for I have not
shunned,” etc.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[i:1031](1110049.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="vi.xliv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p22"></span> St. Chrysostom succeeded Nectarius in the
Archbishopric of Constantinople, 26th Feb. Coss. Honorius iv. and
Eutychianus <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xliv-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398. Socrat. vi. 2.—From the
following passage it appears that these Homm. though begun after Easter,
perhaps of <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xliv-p22.2"></span>a.d.</span>
400, extended over a considerable period of time, not being preached
every day.—Below, mod. text spoils the sense by altering <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p22.3"></span>πικρότερα</span> into
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p22.4"></span>κουφότερα</span>.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[i:1032](1110049.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="vi.xliv-p22.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p23"></span> Mod. text inserts a <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xliv-p23.1"></span>φησίν</span>, and makes
the sentence interrogative. “And does this, you will say, profit them
nothing nor shield them, that they watch for our souls? But then they
watch as they that must give an account: and to some indeed this seems
to be terrible.” The meaning in general seems to be: “If they perish,
yet surely you can comfort yourself with the thought, that you at least
are pure from their blood. No, this thought avails nothing to ward off
(that sorrow). “Because they watch,” etc.—this seems a fearful thing.
But if you be lost, it is not the thought of my accountability that
gives me most concern—it is the thought of your perishing. Oh! that I
might in the last day find you saved though not through me, yea, though
I myself thereafter were called to account as not having done my part by
you!”

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[i:1033](1110049.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="vi.xliv-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.2"></span>Ετέρωθεν μὲν οὐδαμόθεν, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν
γενομένων</span>) meaning perhaps, “From what has been done by us in our
ministry: we will endeavor to persuade you by reminding you of all our
care and pains for our salvation:”) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.3"></span>τὰ καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς πάντα ἀπολυσόμεθα.
᾽Απολύεσθαι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.4"></span>(</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.6"></span>γκλήματα</span>), is frequent in Chrys., often
confused with ἀπολούεσθαι and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xliv-p24.8"></span>ποδύεσθαι</span>. See Mr. Field’s *Index and
Annotat. in Hom. Matth.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLV on Acts xx. 32.](1110050)
