[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110059)  [Next](1110061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.lv"></span> <span id="vi.lv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.lv-p1.1"></span>Homily LV.</span>

<span id="vi.lv-p2"></span>[Acts XXVIII.
17-20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017.md)<span id="vi.lv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p3"></span>“And it came to pass, that after three days
Paul called the chief of the Jews together: and when they were come
together, he said unto them, Men and brethren, though I have committed
nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I
delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. Who,
when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there was no
cause of death in me. But when the Jews spake against it, I was
constrained to appeal unto Cæsar; not that I had aught to accuse my
nation of. For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you,
and to speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound
with this chain.”

<span id="vi.lv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.lv-p4.1"></span>He</span> wished to exculpate both himself and
others; himself, that they might not accuse him, and by so doing hurt
themselves; and those (others), that it might not seem that the whole
thing was of their doing. For it was likely that a report was prevalent,
that he had been delivered up by the Jews; and this was enough to alarm
them. He therefore addresses himself to this, and defends himself as to
his own conduct. <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171.md) “How then is
it reasonable,” it might be said, “that they should deliver thee up
without a cause?” The Roman governors, he says, bear me witness, who
wished to let me go. “How was it then that they did not let (thee) go?”
“When the Jews spake against it,” he says. Observe how he extenuates (in
speaking of) their charges against him. <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172.md) Since if he had wished to aggravate
matters, he might have used them so as to bear harder upon them.
Wherefore, he says, “I was constrained to appeal unto Cæsar:” so that
his whole speech is of a forgiving nature. What then? didst thou this,
that thou mightest accuse them? No, he says: “Not that I had aught to
accuse my nation of:” but that I might escape the danger. For it is for
your sakes “that I am bound with this chain.” So far am I, he says, from
any hostile feeling towards you. Then they also were so subdued by his
speech, that they too apologized for those of their own nation: “And
they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea concerning
thee, neither any of the brethren that came showed or spake any harm of
thee.” ([Acts 28.21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p6.3"></span>.) Neither through letters, nor through men, have
they made known any harm of thee. Nevertheless, we wish to hear from
thyself: “But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest” ([Acts
28.22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022)<span id="vi.lv-p6.4"></span>.md):
and then forestalled him by showing their own sentiments. “For as
concerning this sect, it is known to us, that everywhere it is spoken
against. And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him
into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out
of the Prophets, from morning till evening. And some believed the things
which were spoken, and some believed not.” ([Acts
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024)<span id="vi.lv-p6.5"></span>..md)
They said not, we speak against it, but “it is spoken against.” Then he
did not immediately answer, but gave them a day, and they came to him,
and he discoursed, it says, “both out of the Law of Moses, and out of
the Prophets. And some believed, and some believed not. And when they
agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken
one word, Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our
fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear,
and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive: for
the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them.” ([Acts
28.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p6.6"></span>.) But when they departed, as they were opposed
to each other, then he reproaches them, not because he wished to
reproach those (that believed not), but to confirm these (that
believed). “Well said Esaias,” says he to them. So that to the Gentiles
it is given to know this mystery. No wonder then, if they did gainsay:
this was foretold from the first. Then again he moves their jealousy (on
the score) of them of the Gentiles. “Be it known therefore unto you,
that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will
hear it. And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had
great reasoning among themselves. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his
own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, preaching the
kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus
Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him. Amen.” ([Acts
28.28-31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#028.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p6.7"></span>.) It shows the freedom he had now: without
hindrance in Rome, he who had been hindered in Judea; and he remained
teaching there for two years. What of the (years) after these? <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173.md)

<span id="vi.lv-p8"></span>(Recapitulation.) (*d*) “Who having examined
me,” says he, “found nothing in me” ([Acts
28.18](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#018)<span id="vi.lv-p8.1"></span>.md).
When those ought to have rescued, they “delivered (him) into the hands
of the Romans.” And such the superabundance, <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174.md) \* \* because those had not power
to condemn but delivered him prisoner. “Not as having aught to accuse my
nation of,” ([Acts 28.19](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p9.3"></span>) am I come. See what friendliness of expression
“my nation:” he does not hold them as aliens. He does not say, I do not
accuse, but, “I have not (whereof) to accuse:” although he had suffered
so many evils at their hands. But nothing of all this does he say, nor
make his speech offensive: neither does he seem to be sparing them as
matter of favor. For this was the main point, to show that they
delivered him prisoner to the Romans, <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175.md) when those ought to have condemned
him. (*a*) “For this cause,” he says, “I wished to see you” ([Acts
28.20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020)<span id="vi.lv-p10.4"></span>.md):
that it might not be in any man’s power to accuse me, and to say what
(naturally) might suggest itself (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p10.5"></span>τὰ παριστάμενα</span>), that having escaped
their hands I have come for this: not to bring evils upon others, but
myself fleeing from evils. “I was compelled to appeal unto Cæsar.”
Observe them also speaking more mildly to him. “We beg,” say they: and
wish to speak in exculpation of those (at Jerusalem). (*e*) Whereas they
ought to accuse them, they plead for them: by the very fact of their
exonerating them, they do in fact accuse them. <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) (*b*.md) For this very thing was a
proof that they knew themselves exceedingly in the wrong. Had they been
confident, they would at any rate have done this, so that he should not
have it in his power to make out his story in his own way, and besides
they shrank from coming. And by their many times attempting they showed
\* \* (*f*) “As for this sect, it is known to us,” say they, “that it is
everywhere spoken against.” ([Acts
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p11.29"></span>.) <span id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md)
True, but (people) are also everywhere persuaded (as, in fact, here),
“some were persuaded, and some believed not. And when they had appointed
him a day,” etc. ([Acts 28.23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p12.5"></span>.) See again how not by miracles but by Law and
Prophets he puts them to silence, and how we always find him doing this.
And yet he might also have wrought signs; but then it would no longer
have been matter of faith. In fact, this (itself) was a great sign, his
discoursing from the Law and the Prophets. Then that you may not deem it
strange (that they believed not), he introduces the prophecy which
saith, “Hearing ye shall hear and not understand,” more now than then:
“and ye shall see and not perceive” ([Acts
28.26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span id="vi.lv-p12.6"></span>.md)
more now than then. This is not spoken for the former sort, but for the
unbelievers. How then? Was it contrary to the prophecy, that those
believed? (“Go,”) it says, “unto this people” (that is), to the
unbelieving people. He did not say this to insult them, but to remove
the offence. “Be it known then,” he says, “unto you, that unto the
Gentiles is sent the salvation of God. They,” says he, “will hear it
too.” ([Acts 28.28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#028.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p12.7"></span>.) Then why dost thou discourse to us? Didst
thou not know this? Yes, but that ye might be persuaded, and that I
might exculpate myself, and give none a handle (against me). (*c*) The
unbelieving were they that withdrew. But see how they do not now form
plots against him. For in Judea they had a sort of tyranny. Then
wherefore did the Providence of God order that he should go thither, and
yet the Lord had said, “Get thee out quickly from Jerusalem?” ([Acts
22.18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#018)<span id="vi.lv-p12.8"></span>..md)
That both their wickedness might be shown and Christ’s prophecy made
good, that they would not endure to hear him: and so that all might
learn that he was ready to suffer all things, and that the event might
be for the consolation of those in Judea: for there also (the brethren)
were suffering many grievous evils. But if while preaching the Jewish
doctrines, he suffered thus, had he preached the doctrines of the glory
of Christ, how would they have endured him? While “purifying himself”
([Acts 21.26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#026.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p12.9"></span>) he was intolerable, and how should he have
been tolerable while preaching? What <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md) lay ye to his charge? What have ye
heard? He spoke nothing of the kind. He was simply seen, and he
exasperated all against him. Well might he then be set apart for the
Gentiles: well might he be sent afar off: there also destined to
discourse to the Gentiles. First he calls the Jews, then having shown
them the facts he comes to the Gentiles. ([Acts
24.18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018)<span id="vi.lv-p13.2"></span>..md)
“Well spake the Holy Ghost,” etc. But this saying, “The Spirit said,” is
nothing wonderful: for an angel also is said to say what the Lord saith:
but <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) He (the Spirit.md) not so.
When one is speaking of the things said by the angel, one does not say,
Well said the angel, but, Well said the Lord. “Well said the Spirit:” as
much as to say, It is not me that ye disbelieve. But God foreknew this
from the first. “He discoursed,” it says, “with boldness, unhindered”
([Acts 28.31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#031.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p14.19"></span>): for it is possible to speak with boldness,
yet hindered. His boldness nothing checked: but in fact he also spoke
unhindered. (*c*) “Discoursed, <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180.md) ” it says, “the things concerning
the kingdom of God:” mark, nothing of the things of sense, nothing of
the things present. (*f*) But of his affairs after the two years, what
say we? (*b*) (The writer) leaves the hearer athirst for more: the
heathen authors do the same (in their writings), for to know everything
makes the reader dull and jaded. Or else he does this, (*e*) not having
it in his power to exhibit it from his own personal knowledge. (*a*)
Mark the order of God’s Providence, <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181.md) “I have been much hindered from
coming unto you…having a great desire these many years to come unto
you.” (<span id="vi.lv-p16.4"></span>[Rom.
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023)<span id="vi.lv-p16.5"></span>..md)
(*d*) But he fed them with hopes. (*g*) I am in haste to go to Spain,
and “I hope,” says he, “to see you in my journey, and to be brought
thitherward on my journey by you, if first I be filled with your company
in some measure.” ([Rom. 15.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p16.6"></span>.) (*i*) Of this he says, I will come and rest
together with you “in the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel” ([Rom.
15.29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029)<span id="vi.lv-p16.7"></span>.md):
and again “I am going to Jerusalem to minister to the saints” ([Rom.
15.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span id="vi.lv-p16.8"></span>.md):
this is the same that he has said here, “To do alms to my nation I
came.” (<span id="vi.lv-p16.9"></span>[Acts xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017)<span id="vi.lv-p16.10"></span>..md)
(*h*) Do you mark how he did not foresee everything—that sacred and
divine head, the man higher than the heavens, that had a soul able to
grasp all at once, the holder of the first place—Paul? The man whose
very name, to them that know him, suffices for rousing of the soul, for
vigilance, for shaking off all sleep! Rome received him bound, coming up
from the sea, saved from a ship-wreck—and was saved from the shipwreck
of error. Like an emperor that has fought a naval battle and overcome,
he entered into that most imperial city. (*k*) He was nearer now to his
crown. Rome received him bound, and saw him crowned and proclaimed
conqueror. There he had said, I will rest together with you: but this
was the beginning of a course once more, and he added trophies to
trophies, a man not to be overcome. Corinth kept him two years, and Asia
three, and this city two for this time; a second time he again entered
it, when also he was consummated. Thus he escaped then, and having
filled the whole world, he so brought his life to a close. Why didst
thou wish to learn what happened after these two years? Those too are
such as these: bonds, tortures, fightings, imprisonments, lyings in
wait, false accusations, deaths, day by day. Thou hast seen but a small
part of it? How much soever thou hast seen, such is he for all the rest.
As in the case of the sky, if thou see one part of it, go where thou
wilt thou shalt see it such as this: as it is with the sun, though thou
see its rays but in part, thou mayest conjecture the rest: so is it with
Paul. His Acts thou hast seen in part; such are they all throughout,
teeming with dangers. He was a heaven having in it the Sun of
Righteousness, not such a sun (as we see): so that that man was better
than the very heaven. Think you that this is a small thing—when you say
“The Apostle,” immediately every one thinks of him (as), when you say
“The Baptist,” immediately they think of John? To what shall one compare
his words? To the sea, or even to the ocean? But nothing is equal to
them.

<span id="vi.lv-p17"></span>More copious than this (sea) are (his)
streams; purer and deeper; so that one would not err in calling Paul’s
heart both a sea and a heaven, the one for purity, the other for depth.
He is a sea, having for its voyagers not those who sail from city to
city, but those from earth to heaven: if any man sail in this sea, he
will have a prosperous voyage. On this sea, not winds, but instead of
winds the Holy and Divine Spirit wafts the souls which sail thereon: no
waves are here, no rock, no monsters: all is calm. It is a sea which is
more calm and secure than a haven, having no bitter brine, but a pure
fountain both sweeter than \* \*, and brighter and more transparent than
the sun: a sea it is, not having precious stones, nor purple dye as
ours, but treasures far better than those. He who wishes to descend into
this sea, needs not divers, needs not oil, but much loving-kindness
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p17.1"></span>φιλανθρωπίας</span>):
he will find in it all the good things that are in the kingdom of
Heaven. He will even be able to become a king, and to take the whole
world into his possession, and to be in the greatest honor; he who sails
on this sea will never undergo shipwreck, but will know all things well.
But as those who are inexpert in this (our visible sea) are suffocated
(in attempting to dive therein), so is it in that other sea: which is
just the case with the heretics, when they attempt things above their
strength. It behooves therefore to know the depth, or else not to
venture. If we are to sail on this sea, let us come well-girded. “I
could not,” he says, “speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal.” ([1 Cor. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p17.2"></span>.) Let no one who is without endurance sail on
this sea. Let us provide for ourselves ships, that is, zeal,
earnestness, prayers, that we may pass over the sea in quiet. For indeed
this is the living water. Like as if one should get a mouth of fire,
such a mouth does that man get who knows Paul well: like as if one
should have a sharp sword, so again does such an one become invincible.
And for the understanding of Paul’s words there is needed also a pure
life. For therefore also he said: “Ye are become such as have need of
milk, seeing ye are dull of hearing.” (<span
id="vi.lv-p17.3"></span>[Heb. 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="vi.lv-p17.4"></span>..md)
For there is, there is an infirmity of hearing. For as a stomach which
is infirm could not take in wholesome food (which it finds) hard of
digestion, so a soul which is become tumid and heated, unstrung and
relaxed, could not receive the word of the Spirit. Hear the disciples
saying, “This is a hard saying: who can hear it” ([John vi.
60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)<span id="vi.lv-p17.5"></span>.md)? But
if the soul be strong and healthy, all is most easy, all is light: it
becomes more lofty and buoyant: it is more able to soar and lift itself
on high. Knowing then these things, let us bring our soul into a healthy
state: let us emulate Paul,and imitate that noble, that adamantine soul:
that, advancing in the steps of his life, we may be enabled to sail
through the sea of this present life, and to come unto the haven wherein
are no waves, and attain unto the good things promised to them that love
Him, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to
the Father and Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[i:1172](1110060.htm#fr_1171.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p5"></span> Paul’s prompt summoning of the unbelieving
Jews was due as Chrys. reminds us, to his desire to conciliate them and
thus to prevent the rise of new obstacles to the progress of the gospel.
The apostle might naturally suppose that the Jews of Jerusalem, who were
bent upon destroying him, had lodged information against him with their
brethren at Rome and that his appearance as a prisoner might still
further excite their prejudice and opposition. This view of Paul’s
action removes the objection that he could not have given attention to
the Jews before making the acquaintance of the Christian church
(Zeller). He had, however, made their acquaintance; the brethren had
gone out to meet him on his approach to the city and he had probably
spent the most of the three days referred to in their company. Zeller
has objected still more zealously to Paul’s statement. “I have done
nothing against this people or the customs of the fathers.” Paul’s
meaning, however, is, that he had never sought the destruction or
subversion of the Jewish law and customs, but had ever labored in the
line of the Messianic fulfilment of them. Meyer fitly says: “His
antagonism to the law was directed against *justification* by the Law.”

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[i:1173](1110060.htm#fr_1172.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p6"></span> viz. by saying only <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p6.2"></span>ντιλεγόντων τῶν
᾽Ιουδ</span>., whereas they had shown the utmost malignity against him,
accusing him of crimes which they could not prove, and “saying that he
was not fit to live:” but he is so forbearing, that though he might have
turned all this against them, he sinks the mention of it, etc.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[i:1174](1110060.htm#fr_1173.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p6.8"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p7.1"></span>Τί δὴ τὰ μετὰ ταῦτα</span>; For the answer to
this question, see the Recapitulation.—The remainder of the Exposition
had fallen into extreme confusion, in consequence of the original
redactor’s having read the notes in the order 2, 4, 6: 1, 3, 5: 7: and
this is followed by another series of trajections. The restoration of
the true order here, and in the numerous cases of the like kind in the
former homilies, was no easy matter; but being effected, it speaks for
itself. Later scribes (of the old text) have altered a few words here
and there: but the framer of the mod. text has endeavored to make it
read smoothly, in point of grammar, little regarding the sense and
coherence of the whole.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[i:1175](1110060.htm#fr_1174.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p9.1"></span>Καὶ τοσαύτη ἡ περιουσία</span>, i.e. not only the
Jews could prove nothing against him, but the Romans also, to whom they
delivered him, after strict and repeated examinations, found nothing in
him worthy of death. So *ex abundanti,* enough and more than enough, was
his innocence established. Mod. text adds <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p9.2"></span>τῆς ἐλευθερίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[i:1176](1110060.htm#fr_1175.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p10"></span> This clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p10.1"></span>τὸ δεῖξαι ὅτι Ρωμαίοις παρέδωκαν δέσμιον</span>
is wanting in A. C. In the next clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p10.2"></span>δέον ἐκείνους καταδικάσαι</span>, “whereas, had
I been guilty, *those,* the Jews at Jerusalem, ought to have condemned
me, instead of that, ‘they delivered me prisoner to the Romans,’ and the
consequence was, that ‘I was compelled to appeal unto Cæsar.’” But this
clause being followed by *e*, mod. text connects thus: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p10.3"></span>τοὺς δὲ καταδικάσαι δέον
ἐκείνους, δέον κατηγορῆσαι</span>: but whereas *these* (the Jews at
Rome) ought to have condemned those (the Jews at Jerusalem), ought to
have accused them, they rather apologize for them, etc.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[i:1177](1110060.htm#fr_1176.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p10.6"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.1"></span>δέον ἐκείνων κατηγορῆσαι· ἀπολογοῦνται δἰ ὧν
κατηγοροῦσιν αὐτῶν</span>. We restore it thus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.3"></span>πολογοῦνται· δἰ ὧν ἀπολογοῦνται, κατηγοροῦσιν
αὐτῶν</span>. And in (*b*), <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.4"></span>Τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸ</span> for—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.5"></span>αὐτοῦ</span>. “This very
thing,” i.e. their neither sending letters concerning him to Rome, nor
coming themselves; ‘if they had been confident of their cause (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.7"></span>θάρρουν</span>), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.8"></span>κἂν τοῦτο ἐποίησαν</span>,
they would at any rate have sent letters concerning him, if they did not
come themselves. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.9"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.10"></span>στε μὴ δυνηθῆναι συναρπάσαι με</span>, Erasmus,
who here makes his version from the old text, *ita ne possent me simul
rapere.* The mod. text “for if they had been confident, they would at
least have done this and come together, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.11"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.12"></span>στε αὐτὸν συναρπάσαι</span>, *ut ipsum secum
attraherent.*” (Ben.) It does not appear what <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.13"></span>με</span>has to do here, unless the words,
defectively reported, are put in St. Paul’s mouth: “if,” he might say,
“they were confident, they would have done this, so that I should not be
able <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.14"></span>συναρπάσαι</span>.” The expression <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.15"></span>συναρπάσαι</span> (sc.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.16"></span>τὸ ζητούμενον</span>)
is a term of logic, “to seize to one’s self as proved some point which
is yet in debate and not granted by the opponent:” therefore a *petitio
principii.* Above, p. 321, we had <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.17"></span>συναρπαγή</span> in the sense of “jumping
hastily to a conclusion.” Later authors also use it in the sense, “to
suppress.” See above, p. 209, note 5. Here, “they would at any rate have
written letters concerning him (or, me), that so he (or, I) might not be
able to have it all his (or, my) own way:” to beg the point in dispute,
and run off with his own justification.—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.18"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.19"></span>λλως τε καὶ ἐλθεῖν ὤκνησαν</span>, “especially
as they shrunk from coming: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.20"></span>καὶ τὸ πολλάκις ἐπιχειρίσαι ἔδειξαν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.21"></span>, Α.,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.22"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.23"></span>πιχῆραι ἔδεισαν</span>.”
Read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.24"></span>καὶ τῷ π.
ἐπιχειρῆσαι</span> “by their repeated attempts (to slay him?)” <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.25"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p11.26"></span>δειξαν ὅτι οὐκ
ἐθάρρουν</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.27"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p11.28"></span>τι ἔδεισαν</span>. Mod. text. “But now, not
being confident they shrunk from coming; especially as by their frequent
attempting, they showed that they were not confident.”

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[i:1178](1110060.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p11.30"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p12"></span> Needless difficulties have been found in
[Acts 28.22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p12.1"></span>. It is said that the Jews speak as if they had
heard of the Christian Church at Rome, which some years before is
represented by Paul’s Epistle to the Romans as large and flourishing
(<span id="vi.lv-p12.2"></span>[Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="vi.lv-p12.3"></span>.md), only
from hearsay, and that Luke must have represented them as so speaking in
order to represent Paul as the founder of the Roman Church. For the
reserve of the Jews, however, plausible and sufficient reasons can be
given, if the fact that they say no more than they do requires
explanation. To us it does not seem to require any. The Jews do not
state that they know *nothing* concerning the Roman Christians. They
speak of the “sect” in general, but do not say that they know of it only
by hearsay. They simply state one thing which they know, not *how* they
know it, nor that it is *all* that they know. This statement served
their purpose to commit themselves in no way against Paul concerning
whom they had received no official information from Jerusalem ([Acts
28.21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021)<span id="vi.lv-p12.4"></span>.md)
as also the purpose to encourage Paul to explain himself and defend his
cause fully and frankly to them.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[i:1179](1110060.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p12.10"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p13"></span> i.e. “You say, He is accused of preaching
everywhere against the Law—but of what do ye accuse him? what have you
heard him say? Not a word of the kind did he speak. They did but see him
in the Temple, [Acts 21.27](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.lv-p13.1"></span>, and straightway stirred up all the people
against him.”

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[i:1180](1110060.htm#fr_1179.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.2"></span>λλ᾽ ἐκεῖνος οὐκέτι</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.3"></span>. Α.,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.5"></span>κείνων</span>. Cat., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.7"></span>κεῖνο</span>. Mod. text
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.9"></span>λλ᾽ ἐνταῦθα μὲν οὕτως, κεῖ
δὲ οὐκέτι. & 169·Αλλως δὲ καὶ</span>—. He makes this an argument against
those who affirmed the Holy Ghost to be a created Angel. There are many
places where an Angel speaks in the name of the Lord, and what the Angel
says, is the Lord’s saying. But in speaking of such a communication, one
would not say, Well spake the Angel, but, Well spake the Lord. So here,
if the Spirit were but an Angel, St. Paul would not have said, “Well
spake the Holy Spirit: he would have said, Well spake the Lord. Hence
the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.11"></span>λλ᾽ ἐκεῖνος</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.12"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.13"></span>κεῖνο</span> (sc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.14"></span>τὸ Πν</span>.) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.15"></span>οὐκέτι</span> means, “But not so the Spirit,”
i.e. What has been said of the case of an Angel speaking in the name of
the Lord, does not apply here: the Holy Spirit speaks in His own name.
The sense is obscured by the insertion of the clause <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p14.16"></span>καλῶς εἶπε, φ., τὸ Πν. τὸ
῞Α</span>. (which we omit) before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.17"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.lv-p14.18"></span>λλ᾽ ἐκεῖνος οὐκέτι</span>.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[i:1181](1110060.htm#fr_1180.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p14.20"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p15"></span> Here follows another series of trajections:
the parts, as it seems, having been transcribed from the notes in this
order, 5, 3, 1: 6, 4, 2: 7, 9: 8, 10. Mod. text inserts here: “But
Paul,” it says, “dwelt two whole years in his own hired house.” So
without superfluity was he, rather so did he imitate his Master in all
things, since he had even his dwelling furnished him, not from the
labors of others, but from his own working: for the words, “in his own
hired house,” signify this. But that the Lord also did not possess a
house, hear Him saying to the man who had not rightly said, “I will
follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest: The foxes” said He “have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of Man hath not where
to lay His head.” Thus did He from His own self teach that we should
possess nothing, nor be exceedingly attached to things of this life.
“And he received,” it says, “all that came in unto him, preaching the
kingdom of God.” See him speaking nothing of the things of sense;
nothing concerning the present things, but all concerning the kingdom of
God.” And below after *b,* in place of *c—g,* the same has: “But he does
this, and tells not what things came afterwards, deeming it would be
superfluous for those who would take in hand the things he had written,
and who would learn from these how to add on to the narration: for what
the things were which went before, such doubtless he found these which
came after. Hear too what he says, writing after these things (?) to the
Romans, “Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you.”

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[i:1182](1110060.htm#fr_1181.md) <span
id="vi.lv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p16"></span> The report is very defective, but the
meaning in general is this: See how his desire of coming to Rome is
accomplished, but not in the way which he proposed. Hence in (*h*) we do
not hesitate to supply the negative which is omitted in the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.lv-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> and the printed
text. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p16.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.lv-p16.3"></span>Ορᾷς πῶς ΟΥ πάντα
προεώρα</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homilies of St. John Chrysostom on Paul's Epistle to the
Romans](1110061.md)
