[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110009)  [Next](1110011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v"></span> <span id="vi.v-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>[Acts II.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014)<span id="vi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>“Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words.”

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span>\[“<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem,”\] whom the writer above described as strangers. Here he
directs his discourse to those others, the mockers, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) and while he seems to reason with
those, he sets these right. For indeed it was divinely ordered that
“some mocked,” that he might have a starting-point for his defence, and
by means of that defence, might teach. \[“And all ye that dwell in
Jerusalem.”\] It seems they accounted it a high encomium to dwell in
Jerusalem too. <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) “Be this,” says
he, “known unto you, and hearken unto my words.” In the first instance
he made them more disposed to attend to him. “For not as ye <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) suppose,” says he, “are these
drunken.” Do you observe the mildness of his defence? ([Acts
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015)<span id="vi.v-p7.5"></span>.)
Although having the greater part of the people on his side, he reasons
with those others gently; first he removes the evil surmise, and then he
establishes his apology. On this account, therefore, he does not say,
“as ye mock,” or, “as ye deride,” but, “as ye suppose;” wishing to make
it appear that they had not said this in earnest, and for the present
taxing them with ignorance rather than with malice. “For these are not
drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.” And
why this? Is it not possible at the third hour to be drunken? But he did
not insist upon this to the letter; for there was nothing of the kind
about them; the others said it only in mockery. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) Hence we learn that on unessential
points one must not spend many words. And besides, the sequel is enough
to bear him out on this point: so now the discourse is for all in
common. “But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel, And it
shall come to pass in the last days, saith the Lord God. ([Acts
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017), [Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>.)
Nowhere as yet the name of Christ, nor His promises but the promise is
that of the Father. Observe the wisdom: observe the considerate
forbearance: (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p8.2"></span>συγκατάβασιν</span>.) He did not pass on to speak
at once of the things relating to Christ; that He had promised this
after His Crucifixion; truly that would have been to upset all. And yet,
you will say, here was sufficient to prove His divinity. True, it was,
if believed (and the very point was that it should be believed); but if
not believed, it would have caused them to be stoned. “And I will pour
out of My Spirit upon all flesh.” He offers even to them excellent
hopes, if they would have them. And so far, he does not leave it to be
regarded as the exclusive advantage of himself and his company; which
would have made them be looked upon with an evil eye; thus cutting off
all envious feeling. “And your sons shall prophesy.” And yet, he says,
not yours this achievement, this distinction; the gift has passed over
to your children. Himself and his company he calls their sons, and those
\[whom he is addressing\] he calls his and their fathers. “And your
young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and on
My servants and on My handmaidens I will pour out in those days of My
Spirit; and they shall prophesy.” So far he shows that he and his have
found favor, in that they had received (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p8.3"></span>καταξιωθέντας</span>) \[the Spirit\]; not so they
whom he is addressing; for that they had crucified \[the Lord\]. So
Christ also, willing to mitigate their wrath, said, “By whom do your
sons cast out devils?” ([Matt. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027)<span id="vi.v-p8.4"></span>.) He
did not say, My disciples; for indeed it seemed a flattering mode of
expression. And so Peter also did not say, ‘They are not drunk, but
speak <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) by the Spirit:’ but he
takes refuge with the prophet, and under shelter of him, so speaks. As
for the accusation \[of drunkenness\], he cleared himself of that by his
own assertion; but for the grace, he fetches the prophet as witness. “I
will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh.” \[“And your sons,” etc.\] To
some the grace was imparted through dreams, to others it was openly
poured forth. For indeed by dreams the prophets saw, and received
revelations.

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>Then he goes on with the prophecy, which has
in it also something terrible. “And I will show wonders in heaven above,
and signs” \[“in the earth beneath”\]. ([Acts
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#019)<span id="vi.v-p10.1"></span>.) In
these words he speaks both of the judgment to come, and of the taking of
Jerusalem. “Blood and fire, and vapor of smoke.” Observe how he
describes the capture. “The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood.” ([Acts 2.20](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#020)<span
id="vi.v-p10.2"></span>.) This results from the (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p10.3"></span>διαθέσεως</span>) internal
affection of the sufferers. It is said, indeed, that many such phenomena
actually did occur in the sky, as Josephus attests. At the same time the
Apostle strikes fear into them, by reminding them of the darkness which
had lately occurred, and leading them to expect things to come. “Before
that great and notable day of the Lord come.” For be not confident, he
means to say, because at present you sin with impunity. For these things
are the prelude of a certain great and dreadful day. Do you see how he
made their souls to quake and melt within them, and turned their
laughter into pleading for acquittal? <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) For if these things are the prelude of
that day, it follows that the extreme of danger is impending. But what
next? He again lets them take breath, adding, “And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved.” ([Rom. x. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)<span
id="vi.v-p11.5"></span>.) This is said concerning Christ, as Paul
affirms, but Peter does not venture as yet to reveal this.

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>Well, let us look over again what has been
said. It is well managed, that as against men laughing and mocking, he
starts up and begins with, “Be this known unto you all and hearken unto
my words.” But he begins by saying, “Ye men of Judea.” By the expression
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p12.2"></span>Ιουδαἵοι</span>, I take him
to mean those that lived in Judea.—And, if you please, let us compare
those expressions in the Gospel, that you may learn what a sudden change
has taken place in Peter. “A damsel,” it is written, “came out unto him,
saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.” And, says he, “I know
not the Man.” And being again questioned, “he began to curse and to
swear.” ([Matt. xxvi. 69-72](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)<span
id="vi.v-p12.3"></span>.) But see here his boldness, and his great
freedom of speech.—He did not praise those who had said, “We do hear
them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God;” but by his
severity towards those others, he made these more earnest, and at the
same time his address is clear from all appearance of adulation. And it
is well to remark, on all occasions, however the Apostles may condescend
to the level of their hearers (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p12.4"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>), their language is clear
from all appearance both of adulation and of insolence: which is a
difficult point to manage.

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span>Now that these things should have occurred at
“the third hour,” was not without cause. For <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) the brightness of this fire is shown
at the very time when people are not engaged in their works, nor at
dinner; when it is bright day, when all are in the market-place. Do you
observe also the freedom which fills his speech? “And hearken to my
words.” And he added nothing, but, “This,” says he, “is that which was
spoken by the prophet Joel; And it shall come to pass in the last days.”
He shows, in fact, that the consummation is nigh at hand, and the words,
“In the last days,” have a kind of emphasis. \[“I will pour out,” etc.\]
And then, that he may not seem to limit the privilege to the sons only,
he subjoins, “And your old men shall dream dreams.” Mark the sequence.
First sons; just as David said, “Instead of thy fathers, were begotten
thy sons.” ([Ps. xlv. 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017)<span
id="vi.v-p14.5"></span>.) And again Malachi; “They shall turn the hearts
of the fathers to the children. And on my handmaidens, and on my
servants.” (<span id="vi.v-p14.6"></span>[Mal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="vi.v-p14.7"></span>.) This
also is a token of excellence, for we have become His servants, by being
freed from sin. And great is the gift, since the grace passes over to
the other sex also, not as of old, it was limited to just one or two
individuals, as Deborah and Huldah. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) He did not say that it was the Holy
Ghost, neither did he expound the words of the prophet; but he merely
brings in the prophecy to fight its own battle. As yet also he has said
nothing about Judas; and yet it was known to all what a doom and
punishment he had undergone; for nothing was more forcible than to argue
with them from prophecy: this was more forcible even than facts. For
when Christ performed miracles, they often contradicted Him. But when
Christ brought forward the prophet, saying, “The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit Thou on my right hand,” they were silent, and “no man,” we read,
“was able to answer Him a word.” (<span id="vi.v-p15.11"></span>[Ps. xc.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="vi.v-p15.12"></span>.) And
on all occasions He Himself also appealed to the Scriptures; for
instance, “If he called them gods to whom the word of God came.” (<span
id="vi.v-p15.13"></span>[John x.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035)<span id="vi.v-p15.14"></span>.) And
in many places one may find this. On this account here also Peter says,
“I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh;” that is, upon the
Gentiles also. But he does not yet reveal this, nor give
interpretations; indeed, <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) it was
better not to do so (as also this obscure saying, “I will show wonders
in heaven above,” put them the more in fear because it was obscure.) And
it would have been more an offence, had it been interpreted from the
very first. Then besides, even as plain, he passes over it, wishing to
make them regard it as such. But after all, he does interpret to them
anon, when he discourses to them upon the resurrection, and after he has
paved the way by his discourse. (*infra* v. 39.) For <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) since the good things were not
sufficient to allure them, \[it is added, “And I will show wonders,
etc.”\]. Yet <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) this has never been
fulfilled. For none escaped then \[in that former judgment\], but now
the faithful did escape, in Vespasian’s time. And this it is that the
Lord speaks of, “Except those days had been shortened, not all flesh
should be saved.”—\[“Blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.”\] ([Matt.
xxiv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)<span
id="vi.v-p18.1"></span>.) The worst to come first; <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) namely, the inhabitants to be taken,
and then the city to be razed and burnt. Then he dwelt upon the
metaphor, bringing before the eyes of the hearers the overthrow and the
taking. “The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood.” What means, the moon turned into blood? It denotes the excess of
the slaughter. The language is fraught with helpless dismay. (*supra* p.
32.) “And it shall come to pass, every one who shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved. Every one,” he says: though he be priest
(but he does not vet reveal the meaning), though bond, though free.
For <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) there is no male nor female
in Christ Jesus, no bond, no free. ([Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="vi.v-p20.3"></span>.) Well
may it be so, for all these are but shadow. For if in king’s palaces
there is no high-born nor low-born, but each appears according to his
deeds; and in art, each is shown by his works; much more in that school
of wisdom (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p20.4"></span>φιλοσοφια</span>). “Every one who shall invoke.”
Invoke: not any how, for it is written, “Not every one that saith unto
Me, Lord, Lord:” but with (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p20.5"></span>διαθέσεως</span>) inward earnest affection, with
a life more than commonly good, with the confidence which is meet. Thus
far, however, he makes the discourse light, by introducing that which
relates to faith, and that terrible which relates to the
punishment. <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) For in the
invocation is the salvation.

<span id="vi.v-p22"></span>What, I pray you, is this you say? Do you
talk of salvation for them after the Cross? Bear with me a little. Great
is the mercy of God. And this very fact does, no less than the
resurrection, prove him to be God, yea, no less than His miracles—the
fact that He calls these to Him. For surpassing goodness is, above all
things, peculiarly God’s own. Therefore also He says, “None is good save
one, that is, God.” (<span id="vi.v-p22.1"></span>[Luke xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#019)<span id="vi.v-p22.2"></span>.) Only
let us not take this goodness for an occasion of negligence. For He also
punishes as God. In fact, the very punishments here spoken of, He
brought them to pass, even He who said, “Every one who shall call on the
name of the Lord, shall be saved.” I speak of the fate of
Jerusalem; <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) that intolerable
punishment: of which I will tell you some few of the particulars, useful
to us in our contest, both with the Marcionites and many other heretics.
For, since they distinguish between Christ a good God, and that evil God
\[of the Old Testament\], let us see who it was that effected these
things. The evil God, taking vengeance for Christ? or not so? How then
alien to Him? But was it the good God? Nay, but it is demonstrated that
both the Father and the Son did these things. The Father in many places;
for instance, when He says in the parable of the vineyard, <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) \[“He will miserably destroy those
wicked husbandmen” ([Matt. xxi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#041)<span id="vi.v-p24.4"></span>);
again in the parable of the marriage feast, the King is said\] to send
His armies ([Matt. 22.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007)<span
id="vi.v-p24.5"></span>): and the Son, when He says, “But those Mine
enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither,
and slay them before Me.” (<span id="vi.v-p24.6"></span>[Luke xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)<span id="vi.v-p24.7"></span>.) \*
\* \*. <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) And they sent, saying, We
will not have Thee to reign over us. Would you like then to hear the
things which actually came to pass? Moreover, Christ Himself also speaks
of the future tribulations, than which never any thing more dreadful
came to pass; never any thing more ruthless, my beloved, than the deeds
then done! <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) And He Himself
declared it. For what could you wish to see more grievous than these? \*
\* \*—probed them with their daggers! <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) — \* \* \* But shall I relate to you
the shocking case of the woman, that tragic tale? \* \* \* (Joseph. B.
J. vi. 3. 4.) Did not the actual events cast all misery into the shade?
But shall I tell you of famines and pestilences? One might speak of
horrors without number: nature was unknown; law unknown; they outdid
wild beasts in ferocity. True, these miseries came by the fate of wars;
but because God, because Christ so willed it to be. These facts will
apply both against the Marcionites and against those who do not believe
that there is a hell: for they are sufficient to silence their
impudence. Are not these calamities more severe than the
Babylonian? <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) Are not these
sufferings more grievous than the famines of that time? Yes, for
\[“never was the like from the beginning of the world”\] “no, nor ever
shall be such.” ([Matt. xxiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span
id="vi.v-p28.3"></span>.) And this was Christ’s own declaration. In what
sense then, think ye, is it said that Christ remitted them their
sin? <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) Perhaps it seems a
commonplace question: but do ye solve it.—It is not possible to show
anywhere, even in fiction, any thing like what the reality was here. And
had it been a Christian that wrote this history, the matter might be
regarded with suspicion: but if he was a Jew, and a Jewish zealot, and
after the Gospel, how can the meaning of the facts be otherwise than
palpable to all men? For you will see the man, how, everywhere, he
always extols the concerns of the Jews.—There is therefore a hell, O
man! and God is good.—Aye, did you shudder at hearing these horrors? But
these, which take place here, are nothing in comparison with what shall
be in that world. Once more I am compelled to seem harsh, disagreeable,
stern. But what can I do? I am set to this: just as a severe
schoolmaster is set to be hated by his scholars: so are we. For would it
not be strange indeed, that, while those who have a certain post
assigned them by kings do that which is appointed them, however
disagreeable the task may be, we, for fear of your censure, should leave
our appointed task undone? Another has a different work. Of you, many
have it for their work, to show mercy, to act humanely, to be pleasant
and agreeable to the persons to whom you are benefactors. But to those
to whom we do good, we seem stern and severe, troublesome and
disagreeable. For we do good, not by the pleasure we give, but by the
pain we inflict. So it is also with the physician: though he indeed is
not excessively disagreeable, for the benefit afforded by his art is had
immediately; ours hereafter. So again the magistrate is odious to the
disorderly and seditious; so the legislator is vexatious to them for
whom he makes laws. But not so he that invites to enjoyment, not so he
that prepares public festivities and entertainments, and puts all the
people in garlands: no, these are men that win acceptance, feasting, as
they do, whole cities with all sorts of spectacles; contributing
largely, bearing all the cost. And therefore those whom they have
treated, requite them for these enjoyments with words of welcome and
benediction, with hanging (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p29.2"></span>παραπετάσματα</span>) of tapestries, and a blaze
of lamps, and with wreaths, and boughs, and brilliant garments. Whereas,
at the sight of the physician, the sick become sad and downcast: at
sight of the magistrate, the rioters become subdued: no running riot
then, no gambolling, except when he also goes over into their
ranks. <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) Let us see, then, which
render the best service to their cities; those who provide these
festivities, and banquetings, and expensive entertainments, and manifold
rejoicings; or those who restrain all those doings, bearing before them
stocks, scourges, executioners, dreaded soldiers, and a voice fraught
with much terror: and issuing orders, and making men hang down their
heads, and with the rod dispersing the idlers in the market-place. Let
us see, I say; these are the disagreeable, those the beloved: let us see
where the gain rests. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p30.5"></span>λήλει</span>.) What comes then of your
pleasure-givers? A kind of frigid enjoyment, lasting till the evening,
and to-morrow vanished; mirth ungoverned, words unseemly and dissolute.
And what of these? Awe, sobriety, subdued thoughts; reasonableness of
mind, an end of idleness; a curb on the passions within; a wall of
defence, next to God, <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) against
assailants from without. It is by means of these we have each our
property but by those ruinous festivities we dissipate it. Robbers
indeed have not invaded it, but vainglory together with pleasure acts
the part of robber. Each sees the robber carrying off everything before
his eyes, and is delighted at it! A new fashion of robbery, this, to
induce people to be glad when one is plundering them! On the other part,
there is nothing of the kind: but God, as the common Father, has secured
us as by a wall against all \[depredators\], both seen and unseen. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) For, “Take heed,” saith He, “that ye
do not your alms before men.” ([Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="vi.v-p32.4"></span>.) The
soul learns from the one, \[excess; <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) from the other\] to flee injustice.
For injustice consists not merely in grasping at more wealth than
belongs to us, but in giving to the belly more than its needful
sustenance, in carrying mirth beyond its proper bounds, and causing it
to run into frantic excesses. From the one, it learns sobriety; from the
other, unchastity. For it is unchastity, not merely to have carnal
intercourse with women, but even to look upon a woman with unchaste
eyes. From the one, it learns modesty; from the other, conceited
self-importance. For, “All things,” says the Apostle, “are lawful for
me, but not all things expedient.” (<span id="vi.v-p33.13"></span>[1
Cor. vi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)<span
id="vi.v-p33.14"></span>.) From the one, decent behavior; from the other
unseemliness. For, as to the doings in the theatres, I pass these. But
to let you see that it is not even a pleasure either, but a grief, show
me, but a single day after the festival, both those who spent their
money in giving it, and those who were feasted with spectacles: and you
shall see them all looking dejected enough, but most of all him, your
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.15"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.16"></span>κεἵνον</span>) famous man
that has spent his money for it. And this is but fair: for, the day
before, he delighted the common man, and the common man indeed was in
high good humor and enjoyment, and rejoiced indeed in the splendid
garment, but then not having the use of it, and seeing himself stripped
of it, he was grieved and annoyed; and wanted to be the great man,
seeing even his own enjoyment to be small compared with his. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) Therefore, the day after, they change
places, and now he, the great man, gets the larger share in the
dejection.

<span id="vi.v-p35"></span>Now if in worldly matters, amusements are
attended with such dissatisfaction, while disagreeable things are so
beneficial, much more does this hold in things spiritual. Why is it that
no one quarrels with the laws, but on the contrary all account that
matter a common benefit? For indeed not strangers from some other
quarter, nor enemies of those for whom the laws are made, came and made
these orders, but the citizens themselves, their patrons, their
benefactors: and this very thing, the making of laws, is a token of
beneficence and good-will. And yet the laws are full of punishment and
restraint, and there is no such thing as law without penalty and
coercion. Then is it not unreasonable, that while the expositors of
those laws are called deliverers, benefactors, and patrons, we are
considered troublesome and vexatious if we speak of the laws of God?
When we discourse about hell, then we bring forward those laws: just as
in the affairs of the world, people urge the laws of murder, highway
robbery, and the like, so do we the penal laws: laws, which not man
enacted, but the Only-Begotten Son of God Himself. Let him that hath no
mercy, He says, be punished ([Matt. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023)<span id="vi.v-p35.1"></span>); for
such is the import of the parable. Let him that remembereth injuries,
pay the last penalty. Let him that is angry without cause, be cast into
the fire. Let him that reviles, receive his due in hell. If you think
these laws which you hear strange, be not amazed. For if Christ was not
intended to make new laws, why did He come? Those other laws are
manifest to us; we know that the murderer and adulterer ought to be
punished. If then we were meant only to be told the same things over
again, where was the need of a heavenly Teacher? Therefore He does not
say, Let the adulterer be punished, but, whoso looketh on with unchaste
eyes. And where, and when, the man will receive punishment, He there
tells us. And not in fine public monuments, nor yet somewhere out of
sight, <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) did He deposit His laws;
not pillars of brass did He raise up, and engrave letters thereon, but
twelve souls raised He up for us, the souls of the Apostles, and in
their minds has He by the Spirit inscribed this writing. This cite we to
you. If this was authorized to Jews, that none might take refuge in the
plea of ignorance, much more is it to us. But should any say, “I do not
hear, therefore have no guilt,” on this very score he is most liable to
punishment. For, were there no teacher, it would be possible to take
refuge in this plea; but if there be, it is no longer possible. Thus see
how, speaking of Jews, the Lord deprives them of all excuse; “If I had
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:” (<span
id="vi.v-p36.7"></span>[John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="vi.v-p36.8"></span>): and
Paul again, “But I say, have they not heard? Nay, but into all the earth
went forth their sound.” ([Rom. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="vi.v-p36.9"></span>.) For
then there is excuse, when there is none to tell the man; but when the
watchman sits there, having this as the business of his life, there is
excuse no longer. Nay, rather, it was the will of Christ, not that we
should look only upon these written pillars, but that we should
ourselves be such. But since we have made ourselves unworthy of the
writing, at least let us look to those. For just as the pillars threaten
others, but are not themselves obnoxious to punishment, nor yet the
laws, even so the blessed Apostles. And observe; not in one place only
stands this pillar, but its writing is carried round about in all the
world. Whether you go among the Indians, you shall hear this: whether
into Spain, or to the very ends of the earth, there is none without the
hearing, except it be of his own neglect. Then be not offended, but give
heed to the things spoken, that ye may be able to lay hold upon the
works of virtue, and attain unto the eternal blessings in Christ Jesus
our Lord, with Whom to the Father and Holy Ghost together be glory,
power, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[i:123](1110010.htm#fr_122) <span
id="vi.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.2"></span>κεῖνοι</span>, if the old text be correct, are the
mockers, but these are not “the devout men out of every nation under
heaven,” therefore <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.3"></span>οὕς
ξένους εἶπεν ἀνωτέρω</span> can hardly be meant to refer to the
following clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.5"></span>νταῖθα πρὸς ἐκείνους κ. τ. λ</span>. The omission
of the text-words, and the seeming antithesis of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.7"></span>νωτέρω</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.9"></span>νταῦθα</span>, caused a
confusion which the modern text attempts to remedy by transposing <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.10"></span>τοὺς διαχλ</span>. to the
place of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.11"></span>τούτους</span>. “Whom the writer above called
strangers, to those Peter here directs his speech, and he seems indeed
to discourse with those, but corrects the mockers.” This just inverts
Chrysostom’s meaning, which is clear enough from the following context.
He says: “The ‘dwellers in Jerusalem’ are especially the devout men out
of every nation mentioned above, and to instruct these (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p5.12"></span>τούτους</span>) is the real
aim of the discourse, which however is addressed in the first instance
to the others (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.13"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p5.14"></span>κείνους</span>), whose mockery gave occasion to
it. St. Peter stands up apparently for the purpose of defending himself
and his brethren: but this is in fact quite a secondary object, and the
apology becomes a sermon of doctrine.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[i:124](1110010.htm#fr_123) <span
id="vi.v-p5.15"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p6.1"></span>Καὶ τὸ ἐν ῾Ι. οἰκεῖν</span>. Below he explains
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p6.3"></span>νδρες ᾽Ιουδαῖοι</span> to
mean, “dwellers in Judea:” therefore the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p6.4"></span>καὶ</span> seems to mean, “to be not only such,
but dwellers in Jerusalem also.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[i:125](1110010.htm#fr_124) <span
id="vi.v-p6.5"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span> Here our leading <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>ms</span>. after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p7.2"></span>οὐ γαρ ὡς ὑμεῖς</span>, has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p7.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p7.4"></span>ποπληροῦται, φησὶ, καὶ
ὑπολαμβάνεται ὅτι μεθύουσιν</span>. “For not as ye.”—It is fulfilled (he
says) and it is supposed that they are drunken!” which may have been
said by Chrys., but certainly not in this place.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[i:126](1110010.htm#fr_125) <span
id="vi.v-p7.6"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> There is no reason to doubt that the company
who witnessed the scenes at Pentecost really supposed the Christians to
be intoxicated. To this opinion they were, of course, the more readily
inclined because of their prejudice against the new sect. The force of
Peter’s refutation of the charge of drunkenness: “Seeing it is but the
third hour, etc.,” lies partly in the fact that 9 a.m. was too early for
any such general intoxication, and still more in the fact that the third
hour was the first hour of prayer, at which time it would have been
sacrilege to drink to excess.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[i:127](1110010.htm#fr_126) <span
id="vi.v-p8.5"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span> Here the innovator, again mistaking his
author’s meaning, as if it were—Peter did not say, “These are not
drunk,” but what he did say was, “They speak by the Spirit”—finds it
necessary to add, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>Καὶ
οὐχ ἁπλῶς</span>, And not merely so, but, etc.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[i:128](1110010.htm#fr_127) <span
id="vi.v-p10.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p11.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p11.2"></span>πολογίαν</span>, as in <span
id="vi.v-p11.3"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="vi.v-p11.4"></span>. “Yea,
what clearing of yourselves.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[i:129](1110010.htm#fr_128) <span
id="vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span> i.e. The brightness of the miraculous fire
appears at a time when there would be many to see it, people not being
engaged in their works, nor within their houses at their noontide meal.
Œcumenius evidently had the old text before him, for he gives the same
sense with the slightest verbal alterations. In the Catena the sense is
altered by omission of the negatives. “When people are about their work,
when about their dinner,” etc. The innovator (followed by Edd.) makes it
“For when the brightness of the light is shown, then men are not
occupied in the business of dinner (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p14.1"></span>οὐ περὶ ἔργα</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p14.2"></span>τὰ περὶ ἄριστον</span>), then the day is cheerful
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p14.3"></span>φαιδρὰ</span>, the
brisk and stirring time of day), then all are in the market.” By <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p14.4"></span>τὸ λαμπρὸν τοῦ φῶτος</span>
he seems to mean bright daylight.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[i:130](1110010.htm#fr_129) <span
id="vi.v-p14.8"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span> Here, after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p15.1"></span>εἰς δευτέραν</span>, C. has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p15.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p15.3"></span>Ολδὰν</span> (marg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p15.4"></span>γρ. καὶ Λοβνὰν. οἷον Δεβ. καὶ
Λοβνάν</span>. B. after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p15.5"></span>Δεβ. καὶ ᾽Ολδὰν</span> adds <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p15.6"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p15.7"></span>Λοβνάν</span>) It does not
appear who is meant by this Lobna, unless it originates in some strange
misconception of <span id="vi.v-p15.8"></span>[2 Kings xxiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031)<span id="vi.v-p15.9"></span>,
“daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah,” LXX. Θ. ῾<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p15.10"></span>Ι. ἐκ Λοβνά</span>. Clem. Alex. *Str.* i. §.
136. has no such name in his list of Old Testament prophetesses.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[i:131](1110010.htm#fr_130) <span
id="vi.v-p15.15"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span> Edd. “For it was not expedient, because this
also was obscure. I will show, etc. For it frightened them more, being
obscure. But if he had interpreted, it would even have offended them
more.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[i:132](1110010.htm#fr_131) <span
id="vi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p17"></span> What follows in the edited text is obscure
and perplexed. The original text seems to labor under some defects,
besides the omission of the passages commented upon.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[i:133](1110010.htm#fr_132) <span
id="vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p18"></span> Something seems wanting here: e.g. as above,
“There were signs in heaven, as Josephus relates. This however, in the
full sense, has never been fulfilled.” And then, a reference to the
Babylonian compared with the Roman judgment.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[i:134](1110010.htm#fr_133) <span
id="vi.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p19"></span> First blood, i.e. the taking and slaughter
of the inhabitants: then, fire, etc., i.e. the burning of the city.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[i:135](1110010.htm#fr_134) <span
id="vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p20"></span> As B. has this sentence, which is in fact
necessary to the sense, the omission of it in C. A. may be referred to
the homœoteleuton, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p20.2"></span>λεύθερος</span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[i:136](1110010.htm#fr_135) <span
id="vi.v-p20.6"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.1"></span>καὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.2"></span>(=</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.3"></span>καίπερ</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.4"></span>εἰ καὶ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.5"></span>?)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.6"></span>φοβερὸν τὸ τῆς κολάσεως</span>. i.e. he
alleviates the severity of his discourse by speaking of the effects of
faith, at the same time that he shows the fearfulness of the punishment.
Edd. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p21.7"></span>καὶ οὐ φοβ.
κρύπτων τὸ τῆς κολάσεως</span>, i.e. light…and not fearful, by
withdrawing out of sight what relates to the punishment: which however
Ben. renders as if it were <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p21.8"></span>οὐ τὸ φοβ</span>. And not concealing the
fearfulness, etc.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[i:137](1110010.htm#fr_136) <span
id="vi.v-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p23"></span> It is extremely doubtful if Peter understood
by “the great and terrible day of the Lord” (20) the destruction of
Jerusalem. (Chrys.) It probably refers to the *Parousia* which is
thought of as imminent. The “last days” then would be the days preceding
the Messianic age which is to begin at the *Parousia.* This view
harmonizes with the Jewish conception and with the Christian expectation
that the then existing period (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p23.1"></span>αἴων οὕτος</span>) was soon to pass into a new
age (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p23.2"></span>αἰ& 241·ν
μέλλων</span>). The scenes of Pentecost were thought to be the
harbingers of this consummation and were so significant both of the joys
and woes of the impending crisis, that the bold imagery of the prophet
Joel is applied to them. Cf. the prophetic terms in which the
destruction of Jerusalem is foretold—an event closely associated with
the personal return of our Lord in [Matt.
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000)<span
id="vi.v-p23.3"></span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[i:138](1110010.htm#fr_137) <span
id="vi.v-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p24.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p24.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p24.3"></span>ὅταν λέγῃ ἐν τῷ ἀμπελῶνι πέμπειν τὰ στρατεύματα
αὐτοῦ</span>. Chrys. is misreported here, for the sending forth of the
armies belongs to the parable of the marriage of the king’s son.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[i:139](1110010.htm#fr_138) <span
id="vi.v-p24.8"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p25"></span> Something must have been omitted here: viz.
a brief exposition of the parable here referred to. The innovator
endeavors to mend the text, by leaving out the following sentence.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[i:140](1110010.htm#fr_139) <span
id="vi.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p26.1"></span>῟</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p26.2"></span>Ω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p26.3"></span>ν οὐδὲν ὠμότερον γέγονεν, ἀγαπητοὶ, τῶν τότε
πεπραγμένων πραγμάτων</span>. This may be explained as a negligent
construction, but perhaps some words are omitted. The next sentence,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p26.4"></span>Καὶ αὐτὸς
ἀπεφήνατο</span> (which phrase is repeated below), refers to [Matt.
xxiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span id="vi.v-p26.5"></span>.
“There shall be great tribulation, such as has not been from the
beginning of the world to this time.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[i:141](1110010.htm#fr_140) <span
id="vi.v-p26.6"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.2"></span>Οβεγίσκοις</span> (dagger-blades, or spear-heads,
or spits) <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.3"></span>αὐτοὺς
διέπειραν</span>. In Hom. vi. p. 43. *infra,* we have the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.4"></span>τίνες ὀβελίσκοι πεπυρωμένοι
διέπειραν σῶμα</span>. It is evident that something is omitted, and no
more probable supposition presents itself, than that Chrys. here read
out from Josephus or Eusebius the description of the famine among the
besieged (which the reporter of the sermon omitted at the time,
intending to insert it at his leisure); and that the short sentence in
the text is the preacher’s own parenthetical explanation of some part of
the description. Thus, B. J. vi. 3. 3. speaking of the cruelties
practised upon dying wretches suspected of having food concealed about
their persons, Josephus says: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.6"></span>Αλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἐκπνέοντας οἱ λῄσται διηρεύνων,
μήτις ὑπὸ κόλπον ἔχων τροφὴν σκήπτοιτο τὸν θάνατον αὑτῷ</span>. Perhaps
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.7"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.8"></span>βελίσκοις αὐτοὺς
διέπειραν</span> is C.’s comment upon <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.9"></span>διηρεύνων</span>.—Or, in like manner, it may
refer to the description in B. J. v. 12. 3. how the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.10"></span>λῃσταὶ</span>, after
ransacking the bodies of the dead, tried the edges of their swords upon
them, etc. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p27.11"></span>Τάς τε
ἀκμὰς τῶν ξιφῶν ἐδοκιμάζον ἐν τοῖς πτώμασι, καί τινας τῶν ἐρριμμένων ἔτι
ζῶντας διήλαυνον ἐπὶ πείρᾳ τοῦ σιδήρου</span>. Perhaps, however, the
expression may be taken in a metaphorical sense as in the phrase above
cited: “they pierced themselves (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.12"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.13"></span>αυτοὺς</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p27.14"></span>αὐτοὺς</span>) as with spits or lancets.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[i:142](1110010.htm#fr_141) <span
id="vi.v-p27.15"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p28"></span> Against the Marcionites, he says: You say
that the God of the Old Testament is a cruel God; whereas Christ, the
good God, is all mildness. Yet was not the Roman judgment upon the Jews
inflicted by Him? And was it not beyond comparison more ruthless (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p28.1"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p28.2"></span>μότερον</span>, above) than
the Babylonian or any former judgment, inflicted, as you say, by the God
of the Old Testament?

<span id="fn_142"></span>[i:143](1110010.htm#fr_142) <span
id="vi.v-p28.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p29.1"></span>Πῶς οὖν φατὲ φησίν</span>, i.e. as it is said in
the text, “Every one that calleth on the name of the Lord shall be
saved.” The question is the same as was put in the beginning of this
section: “What? do you speak of salvation for them after crucifying the
Lord? And this, when you have shown us how fearfully that sin was
visited?” This question, as a very simple one, he leaves the hearers to
answer for themselves, by distinguishing between believers and
unbelievers, the penitent and the hardened.—The innovator quite alters
the sense; “How then say some that Christ remitted them their sin?”
which makes the next sentence idle.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[i:144](1110010.htm#fr_143) <span
id="vi.v-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p30.1"></span>Πλὴν ὅταν κἀκεῖνος εἰς ἐκείνην μεταστῇ τὴν
τάξιν</span> The meaning is obscure: for it may be either, that he is
displaced from office (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p30.2"></span>μεταστῆναι, μετάστασις</span> are common in this
sense), and makes one of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p30.3"></span>στασιάζοντες</span>; or, that he lays aside the
magistrate and demeans himself to take part in their excesses. (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p30.4"></span>Τάξις</span> is the
expression for the attendants of any high official, and may perhaps be
taken in that sense here). Erasmus goes wide of the text: *nec exultant
eo quod et ille ad hoc opus ordinatus est:* and so Montf. *nec
exultantes quod ille ad hoc officium sit constitutus.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[i:145](1110010.htm#fr_144) <span
id="vi.v-p30.6"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p31.1"></span>μετὰ τὸν Θεὸν</span>, omitted in the modern text.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[i:146](1110010.htm#fr_145) <span
id="vi.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p32"></span> *Hom. in Matt.* lxxi. p. 699. C. Chrys.
describes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p32.1"></span>κενοδοξία</span> (vainglory) in almsgiving, as
the thief that runs away with the treasure laid up in heaven. And
something of this sort seems to have been in his thoughts here, where
however his meaning is evidently very imperfectly expressed. The texts
cited show that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p32.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p32.3"></span>κεῖ, ἐκεῖθεν</span>, refer to something more
than, as above, good laws and government in general; for here he speaks
of the Gospel discipline of the inner man. “Where this restraint is, no
dissipation of our temporal or spiritual wealth has place: for God, as
common Father, has raised a wall to keep out all robbers both seen and
unseen, from all our possessions: from the former He guards us, by law
and good government; from the latter, by the Gospel prohibition of all
vainglory: “Take heed that ye do not your alms,” etc.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[i:147](1110010.htm#fr_146) <span
id="vi.v-p32.5"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p33.1"></span>Μανθάνει ψυχὴ ἐντεῦθεν</span>, opp. to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.3"></span>κεῖθεν</span> as in the
following sentences: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p33.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p33.5"></span>κεῖθεν σωφροσύνην μανθάνει, ἐντεῦθεν
ἀκολασίαν</span>—& 157·<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p33.6"></span>κ. ἐπιείκειαν, ἐντ. τῦφον</span>—& 157·<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.7"></span>κ. κοσμίοτητα, ἐντ.
ἀσχημοσύνην</span>. Therefore either something is wanting: e.g. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.8"></span>πλεονεξίαν· ἐκεῖθεν</span>,
or for <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.10"></span>ντ</span>. we must read
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.11"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p33.12"></span>κεῖθεν</span>.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[i:148](1110010.htm#fr_147) <span
id="vi.v-p33.17"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p34"></span> The old text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.1"></span>καὶ ἐβούλετο ἐκεῖνος ὁ ἀναλίσκων καὶ τὴν οἰκείαν
εὐπραγίαν μικρὰν ὁρᾷν τρὸς τὴν ἐκεῖνου</span>, evidently requires
correction, and the emendation assumed in the translation is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.2"></span>καὶ ἐβ. ἐκεῖνος εἶναι</span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.4"></span>ἀναλ</span>. may perhaps be
rejected as a gloss) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.5"></span>καὶ τὴν οἰκείαν εὐπρ. μ. ὁρῶν π. τ.
ἐκείνου</span>. Thus the whole passage, from <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.6"></span>καὶ ὁ μὲν ἰδιωτὴς</span>, refers to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.7"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.8"></span>δ</span>. or person feasted,
and <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.10"></span>κεῖνος</span> throughout is
the entertainer. The edited text has: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.11"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.12"></span>Εκεῖνος δὲ ὁ ἀναλ. καὶ τὴν οἰκείαν εὐπρ. μικρὰν
ὁρᾷν ἐδόκει π. τ. ἐκείνου</span>: of which Erasm. makes, *Ille autem qui
sumptus impendit et suam felicitatem parvam cum ea quam ex sumptu
habebat conspicere putabat.* But even if this sense lay in the words, it
is not easy to see the connection of the following sentence, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.13"></span>Διὰ τοῦτο</span>, etc.,
Montf. translates, *Qui vero sumptus fecit, suam præ illius felicitate
parvam putabat,* as if <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.14"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.15"></span>κεῖνος</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.16"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.17"></span>κείνου</span> in the same sentence referred to
two different and contrasted persons. The meaning of the passage is, As,
on the day before, the entertainer had <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.18"></span>τὸ πλέον τῆς εὐθυμίας</span>, it is but fair
that on the following day <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.19"></span>τὸ πλέον τῆς ἀθυμίας</span> should be
transferred to him. This is expressed by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.20"></span>Διὰ τοῦτο τῇ ὑστ. ἀντιδιδόασιν</span>: which
however, Erasmus renders, *Ideireo sequenti die reddunt sibi vestes
iterum:* Montf. *redduntur vestes.* (Perhaps there is an allusion to the
legal phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.21"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p34.22"></span>ντίδοσις</span>. v. Isocrat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p34.23"></span>περὶ ἀντιδ</span>).

<span id="fn_148"></span>[i:149](1110010.htm#fr_148) <span
id="vi.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p36.1"></span>Εἰς ἀναθήματα οὐδὲ εἰς κρύβδην</span>. The modern
text has <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v-p36.2"></span>εἰς ἄξονας
οὐδὲ εἰς, κύρβεις</span>, alluding to the peculiar form of tables on
which the laws of Athens were written. On critical grounds we retain the
reading of the old text, which, as being the more difficult one, is not
likely to have been substituted for the other. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p36.3"></span>Οὐκ εἰς ἀναθήματα</span>; “not on public
monuments for display.” Laws of an Emperor, for instance, engraved on
handsome monuments, may be called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p36.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p36.5"></span>ναθήματα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v-p36.6"></span>Οὐδὲ εἰς κρύβδην</span>, (also an unusual
expression), ‘nor yet where no one would see them.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI on Acts ii. 22.](1110011)
