[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110042)  [Next](1110044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxxviii"></span> <span id="vi.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p2"></span>[Acts
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p3"></span>“Now while Paul waited for them at
Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given
to idolatry. Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and
with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with
him.”

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>Observe</span> how he meets with greater
trials among the Jews than among the Gentiles. Thus in Athens he
undergoes nothing of this kind; the thing goes as far as ridicule, and
there an end: and yet he did make some converts: whereas among the Jews
he underwent many perils; so much greater was their hostility against
him.—“His spirit,” it says, “was roused within him when he saw the city
all full of idols.” Nowhere else were so many objects <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) of worship to be seen. But again “he
disputed with the Jews in the synagogue, and in the market daily with
them that met with him. Then certain of the philosophers of the Stoics
and Epicureans encountered him.” ([Acts
17.18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p5.4"></span>.) It is a wonder the philosophers did not
laugh him to scorn, speaking in the way he did. “And some said, What
does this babbler mean to say?” insolently, on the instant: <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) —this is far from philosophy. “Other
some said, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods,” from the
preaching, because he had no arrogance. They did not understand, nor
comprehend the subjects he was speaking of—how should they? affirming as
they did, some of them, that God is a body; others, that pleasure is the
(true) happiness. <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) “Of strange
gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the Resurrection:” for in
fact they supposed “Anastasis” (the Resurrection) to be some deity,
being accustomed to worship female divinities also. <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) “And having taken him, they brought
him to the Areopagus” ([Acts
17.19](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p8.3"></span>)—not to punish, but in order to learn <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) —“to the Areopagus” where the trials
for murder were held. Thus observe, in hope of learning (they ask him),
saying, “May we know what is this new doctrine spoken of by thee? For
thou bringest certain strange matters to our ears” ([Acts
17.20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.15"></span>): everywhere novelty is the charge: “we
would fain know therefore, what these things may mean.” It was a city of
talkers, that city of theirs. “For all the Athenians and strangers which
were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to
hear some new thing. Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars hill, and
said, Ye men of Athens, I look upon you as being in all things” ([Acts
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.16"></span>)—he puts it by way of encomium: (the word)
does not seem to mean anything offensive—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.17"></span>δεισιδαιμονεστέρους</span>, that is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p9.18"></span>εὐλαβεστέρους</span>,
“more religiously disposed. For as I passed by, and beheld your
devotions, I found an altar with his inscription, <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p9.19"></span>To an Unknown God</span>.
What therefore ye ignorantly worship, this declare I unto you.” ([Acts
17.23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.20"></span>.)—“On which was inscribed, To an Unknown
God.” The Athenians, namely, as on many occasions they had received gods
from foreign parts also—for instance, the temple of Minerva, Pan, and
others from different countries—being afraid that there might be some
other god not yet known to them, but worshipped elsewhere, for more
assurance, forsooth, erected an altar to that god also: and as the god
was not known, it was inscribed, “To an Unknown God.” This God then, he
tells them, is Christ; or rather, the God of all. <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) “Him declare I unto you.” Observe how
he shows that they had already received Him, and “it is nothing
strange,” says he, “nothing new that I introduce to you.” All along,
this was what they had been saying: “What is this new doctrine spoken of
by thee? For thou bringest certain strange matters to our ears.”
Immediately therefore he removes this surmise of theirs: and then says,
“God that made the world and all things therein, He being Lord of heaven
and earth”—for, that they may not imagine Him to be one of many, he
presently sets them right on this point; adding, “dwelleth not in
temples made with hands” ([Acts
17.24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.13"></span>), “neither is worshipped with men’s
hands, as though he needed anything”—do you observe how, little by
little, he brings in the philosophy? how he ridicules the heathen error?
“seeing it is He that giveth to all life, and breath, and all things;
and hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the
face of the earth.” This is peculiar to God. Look, then, whether these
things may not be predicated of the Son also. “Being Lord,” he saith,
“of heaven and earth”—which they accounted to be God’s. Both the
creation he declares to be His work, and mankind also. <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) “Having determined,” he says, “the
times <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) assigned to them, and the
bounds of their habitation,” ([Acts
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>), “that they should seek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after Him, and find Him, though He be not far from
every one of us: for in Him we live, and move, and have our being: as
certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also His
offspring.” ([Acts 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p12.3"></span>.) This is said by Aratus the poet. Observe
how he draws his arguments from things done by themselves, and from
sayings of their own. “Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, graven by art.” ([Acts
17.29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p12.4"></span>.) And yet for this reason we ought. <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) By no means: for surely we are not
like (to such), nor are these souls of ours. “And imagination of man.”
How so? \* \* But some person might say, “We do not think this.” But it
was to the many that he was addressing himself, not now to Philosophy.
How then did they think so unworthily of Him? Again, putting it upon
their ignorance, he says, “Now the times of ignorance God overlooked.”
Having <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) agitated their minds by
the fear, he then adds this: and yet he says, “but now he commandeth all
men everywhere to repent.” ([Acts
17.30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.9"></span>.) “Because He hath appointed a day, in the
which He will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom He hath
ordained; whereof He hath given assurance unto all men, in that He hath
raised Him from the dead.” ([Acts
17.31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.10"></span>.) But let us look over again what has
been said.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p15"></span>(Recapitulation.) (*b*) “And while Paul
waited,” etc. ([Acts 17.16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>.) It is providentially ordered that
against his will he stays there, while waiting for those others. (*a*)
“His spirit,” it says, “within him” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>παρωξύνετο</span>. It does not mean there
anger or exasperation: just as elsewhere it says, “There was <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p15.3"></span>παροξυσμὸς</span>
between them.” ([Acts 15.30](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p15.4"></span>.) (*c*) Then what is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p15.5"></span>παρωξύνετο</span>? Was
roused: for the gift is far removed from anger and exasperation. He
could not bear it, but pined away. <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) “He reasoned therefore in the
synagogue,” etc. ([Acts 17.17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p16.4"></span>.) Observe him again reasoning with Jews.
By “devout persons” he means the proselytes. For the Jews were dispersed
everywhere before (mod. text “since”) Christ’s coming, the Law indeed
being henceforth, so to say, in process of dissolution, but at the same
time (the dispersed Jews) teaching men religion. <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) But those prevailed nothing, save only
that they got witnesses of their own calamities. (*e*) “And certain
philosophers,” etc. ([Acts 17.18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.18"></span>.) How came they to be willing to confer
with him? (They did it) when they saw others reasoning, and the man
having repute (in the encounter). And observe straightway with
overbearing insolence, “some said, What would this babbler say? For the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit.” ([1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.19"></span>.) Other some, He seemeth to be a
setter-forth of strange deities: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.20"></span>δαιμονίων</span>, for so they called their
gods. “And having taken him, they brought him,” etc. ([Acts
17.19](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.21"></span>.) (*a*) The Athenians no longer enjoyed
their own laws, but were become subject to the Romans. (*g*) (Then) why
did they hale him to the Areopagus? Meaning to overawe him—(the place)
where they held the trials for bloodshed. “May we know, what is this new
doctrine spoken of by thee? For thou bringest certain strange things to
our ears; we would fain know therefore what these things mean. For all
the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing
else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.” ([Acts
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.22"></span>.) Here the thing noted is, that though
ever occupied only in this telling and hearing, yet they thought those
things strange—things which they had never heard. “Then Paul standing in
the midst of the Areopagus said, Ye men of Athens, I look upon you as
being in all things more religiously disposed” ([Acts
17.22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.23"></span>): (*f*) for the cities were full of gods
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.24"></span>δαιμόνων</span>, al. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.25"></span>εἰδώλων</span>): (*h*)
this is why he says <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.26"></span>δεισιδαιμονεστέρους</span>. For as I
passed by and viewed the objects of your worship —he does not say simply
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.27"></span>τοὺς
δαίμονας</span> (the demons, or deities), but paves the way for his
discourse: “I beheld an altar,” etc. ([Acts
17.23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.28"></span>.) This is why he says, “I look upon you
as being more religiously disposed,” viz. because of the altar. “God,”
he says, “that made the world.” ([Acts
17.24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.29"></span>.) He uttered one word, by which he has
subverted all the (doctrines) of the philosophers. For the Epicureans
affirm all to be fortuitously formed and (by concourse) of atoms, the
Stoics held it to be body and fire (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.30"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.31"></span>κπύρωσιν</span>). “The world and all that
is therein.” Do you mark the conciseness, and in conciseness, clearness?
Mark what were the things that were strange to them: that God made the
world! Things which now any of the most ordinary persons know, these the
Athenians and the wise men of the Athenians knew not. “Seeing He is Lord
of heaven and earth:” for if He made them, it is clear that He is Lord.
Observe what he affirms to be the note of Deity—creation. Which
attribute the Son also hath.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p18"></span>For the Prophets everywhere affirm
this, that to create is God’s prerogative. Not as those affirm <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) that another is Maker but not Lord,
assuming that matter is uncreated. Here now he covertly affirms and
establishes his own, while he overthrows their doctrine. <span
id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) “Dwelleth not in temples made with
hands.” For He does indeed dwell in temples, yet not in such, but in
man’s soul. He overthrows the corporeal worship. What then? Did He not
dwell in the temple at Jerusalem? No indeed: but He wrought therein.
“Neither is worshipped by men’s hands.” ([Acts
17.25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.3"></span>.) How then was He worshipped by men’s
hands among the Jews? Not by hands, but by the understanding. “As though
He needed anything:” since even those (acts of worship) He did not in
this sort seek, “as having need. Shall I eat,” saith He, “the flesh of
bulls, or drink the blood of goats?” ([Ps. l.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.4"></span>.) Neither is this enough—the having need
of naught—which he has affirmed: for though this is Divine, yet a
further attribute must be added. “Seeing it is He that giveth unto all,
life and breath and all things.” Two proofs of Godhead: Himself to have
need of naught, and to supply all things to all men. Produce here Plato
(and) all that he has philosophized about God, all that Epicurus has:
and all is but trifling to this! “Giveth,” he says, “life and breath.”
Lo, he makes Him the Creator of the soul also, not its begetter. See
again how he overthrows the doctrine about matter. “And made,” he says,
“of one blood every nation of men to dwell upon all the face of the
earth.” ([Acts 17.26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.5"></span>.) These things are better than the former:
and what an impeachment both of the atoms and of matter, that (creation)
is not partial (work), nor the soul of man either. <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) But this, which those say, is not to
be Creator. <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) —But by the mind and
understanding He is worshipped.—“It is He that giveth,” etc. He not the
partial (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>μερικοὶ
δαίμονες</span>) deities. “And all things.” It is “He,” he saith.—How
man also came into being. <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) —First
he showed that “He dwelleth not,” etc., and then declared <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) that He “is not worshipped as though
He had need of aught.” If God, <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884)
He made all: but if He made not, He is not God. Gods that made not
heaven and earth, let them perish. He introduces much greater doctrines,
though as yet he does not mention the great doctrines; but he discoursed
to them as unto children. And these were much greater than those.
Creation, Lordship, the having need of naught, authorship of all
good—these he has declared. But <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885)
how is He worshipped? say. It is not yet the proper time. What equal to
this sublimity? Marvellous is this also—of one, to have made so many:
but also, having made, Himself sustains them (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p26.2"></span>συγκρατεἵ</span>) in being, “giving life
and breath and all things. (*b*) And hath determined the times
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek
God, if haply they might feel after Him and find Him.” ([Acts
17.27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p26.3"></span>.) (*a*) It means either this, that He did
not compel them to go about and seek God, but according to the
bounds <span id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) of their habitation:
(*c*) or this, that He determined their seeking God, yet not determined
this (to be done) continually, but (determined) certain appointed times
(when they should do so): showing <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) now, that not having sought they had
found: for since, having sought, they had not found, he shows that God
was now as manifest as though He were in the midst of them palpably
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>ψηλαφώμενος</span>). (*e*) “Though He be
not far,” he saith, “from every one of us,” but is near to all. See
again the power (or, “what it is to be God,”) of God. What saith he? Not
only He gave “life and breath and all things,” but, as the sum and
substance of all, He brought us to the knowledge of Himself, by giving
us these things by which we are able to find and to apprehend Him. But
we did not wish to find Him, albeit close at hand. “Though He be not far
from every one of us.” Why look now, He is near to all, to every one all
the world over! What can be greater than this? See how he makes clear
riddance of the parcel deities (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.2"></span>τοὺς μερικούς</span>)! What say I, “afar
off?” He is so near, that without Him we live not: “for in Him we live
and move and have our being.” ([Acts
17.28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.3"></span>.) “In him;” to put it by way of corporeal
similitude, even as it is impossible to be ignorant of the air which is
diffused on every side around us, and is “not far from every one of us,”
nay rather, which is in us. (*d*) For it was not so that there was a
heaven in one place, in another none, nor yet (a heaven) at one time, at
another none. So that both at every “time” and at every “bound” it was
possible to find Him. He so ordered things, that neither by place nor by
time were men hindered. For of course even this, if nothing else, of
itself was a help to them—that the heaven is in every place, that it
stands in all time. (*f*) See how (he declares) His Providence, and His
upholding power (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.4"></span>συγκράτησιν</span>); the existence of all
things from Him, (from Him) their working (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.5"></span>τὸ ἐνεργεἵν</span>), (from Him their
preservation) that they perish not. And he does not say, “Through Him,”
but, what was nearer than this, “In him.”—That poet said nothing equal
to this, “For we are His offspring.” He, however, spake it of Jupiter,
but Paul takes it of the Creator, not meaning the same being as he, God
forbid! but meaning what is properly predicated of God: just as he spoke
of the altar with reference to Him, not to the being whom they
worshipped. As much as to say, “For certain things are said and done
with reference to this (true God), but ye know not that they are with
reference to Him.” For say, of whom would it be properly said, “To an
Unknown God?” Of the Creator, or of the demon? Manifestly of the
Creator: because Him they knew not, but the other they knew. Again, that
all things are filled (with the presence)—of God? or of Jupiter—a wretch
of a man, a detestable impostor! But Paul said it not in the same sense
as he, God forbid! but with quite a different meaning. For he says we
are God’s offspring, i.e. God’s own, <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) His nearest neighbors as it were.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p30"></span>For lest, when he says, “Being the
offspring of God” ([Acts 17.29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p30.1"></span>), they should again say, Thou bringest
certain strange things to our ears, <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) he produces the poet. He does not say,
“Ye ought not to think the Godhead like to gold or silver,” ye accursed
and execrable: but in more lowly sort he says, “We ought not.” For what
(says he)? <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) God is above this?
No, he does not say this either: but for the present this—“We ought not
to think the Godhead like unto such,” for nothing is so opposite to men.
“But we do not affirm the Godhead to be like unto this, for who would
say that?” Mark <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) how he has
introduced the incorporeal (nature of God) when he said, “In Him,” etc.,
for the mind, when it surmises body, at the same time implies the notion
of distance. (Speaking) to the many he says, “We ought not to think the
Godhead like unto gold, or silver, or stone, the shaping of art,” <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) for if we are not like to those as
regards the soul, much more God (is not like to such). So far, he
withdraws them from the notion. But neither is the Godhead, he would
say, subjected to any other human conception. For <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) if that which art or thought has
found—this is why he says it thus, “of art or imagination of man”—if
that, then, which human art or thought has found, is God, then even in
the stone (is) God’s essence.—How comes it then, if “in Him we live,”
that we do not find Him? The charge is twofold, both that they did not
find Him, and that they found such as these. The (human) understanding
in itself is not at all to be relied upon.—But when he has agitated
their soul by showing them to be without excuse, see what he says: “The
times of ignorance God overlooked, but now commands all men everywhere
to repent.” ([Acts 17.30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.11"></span>.) What then? Are none of these men to be
punished? None of them that are willing to repent. He says it of these
men, not of the departed, but of them whom He commands to repent. He
does not call you to account, he would say. He does not say, Took no
notice (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.12"></span>παρεἵδεν</span>); does not say, Permitted:
but, Ye were ignorant. “Overlooked,” i.e. does not demand punishment as
of men that deserve punishment. Ye were ignorant. And he does not say,
Ye wilfully did evil; but this he showed by what he said above. <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) —“All men everywhere to repent:” again
he hints at the whole world. Observe how he takes them off from the
parcel deities! “Because He has appointed a day, in the which He will
judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained,
whereof He hath given assurance to all men, in that He raised Him from
the dead.” ([Acts 17.31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p36.3"></span>.) Observe how he again declares the
Passion. Observe the terror again: for, that the judgment is true, is
clear from the raising Him up: for it is alleged in proof of that. That
all he has been saying is true, is clear from the fact that He rose
again. For He did give <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) this
“assurance to all men,” His rising from the dead: this (i.e. judgment),
also is henceforth certain.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p38"></span>These words were spoken indeed to the
Athenians: but it were seasonable that one should say to us also, “that
all men everywhere must repent, because he hath appointed a day, in the
which He will judge the world.” See how he brings Him in as Judge also:
Him, both provident for the world, and merciful and forgiving and
powerful and wise, and, in a word possessing all the attributes of a
Creator. “Having given assurance to all men,” i.e. He has given proof in
the rising (of Jesus) from the dead. <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) Let us repent then: for we must
assuredly be judged. If Christ rose not, we shall not be judged: but if
he rose, we shall without doubt be judged. “For to this end,” it is
said, “did He also die, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living.” ([Rom. xiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p39.1"></span>.) “For we shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to that he
hath done.” ([Rom. 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010), [2 Cor.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p39.2"></span>[Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxxviii-p39.3"></span>,
and [2 Cor. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p39.4"></span>.) Do not imagine that these are but words.
Lo! he introduced also the subject of the resurrection of all men; for
in no other way can the world be judged. And that, “In that He hath
raised Him from the dead,” relates to the body: for that was dead, that
had fallen. Among the Greeks, as their notions of Creation, so likewise
of the Judgment, are children’s fancies, ravings of drunken men. But let
us, who know these things accurately, do something that is to the
purpose: let us be made friends unto God. How long shall we be at enmity
with Him? How long shall we entertain dislike towards Him? “God forbid!”
you will say: “Why do you say such things?” I would wish not to say the
things I say, if ye did not do the things ye do: but as things are, what
is the use now in keeping silence from words, when the plain evidence of
deeds so cries aloud? How then, how shall we love Him? I have told you
thousands of ways, thousands of times: but I will speak it also now. One
way I seem to myself to have discovered, a very great and admirable way.
Namely, <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) after acknowledging to
Him our general obligations,—what none shall be able to express (I
mean), what has been done for each of us in his own person, of these
also let us bethink ourselves, because these are of great force: let
each one of us reckon them up with himself, and make diligent search,
and as it were in a book let him have the benefits of God written down;
for instance, if at any time having fallen into dangers he has escaped
the hands of his enemies; if ever having gone out on a journey at an
untimely hour, he has escaped danger; if ever, having had an encounter
with wicked men, he has got the better of them; or if ever, having
fallen into sickness, he has recovered when all had given him over: for
this avails much for attaching us to God. For if that Mordecai, when the
services done by him were brought to the king’s remembrance, found them
to be so available, that he in return rose to that height of splendor
([Esther vi. 2-11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p40.3"></span>): much more we, if we call to mind, and
make diligent enquiry of these two points, what sins we have committed
against God, and what good He has done to us, shall thus both be
thankful, and give Him freely all that is ours. But no one gives a
thought to any of these things: but just as regarding our sins we say
that we are sinners, while we do not enquire into them specifically, so
with regard to God’s benefits (we say), that God has done us good, and
do not specifically enquire, where, and in how great number and at what
time. But from this time forth let us be very exact in our reckoning.
For if any one can recall even those things which happened long ago, let
him reckon up all accurately, as one who will find a great treasure.
This is also profitable to us in keeping us from despair. For when we
see that he has often protected us, we shall not despair, nor suppose
that we are cast off: but we shall take it as a strong pledge of His
care for us, when we bethink us how, though we have sinned, we are not
punished, but even enjoy protection from Him. Let me now tell you a
case, which I heard from a certain person, in which was a child, and it
happened on a time that he was in the country with his mother, being not
yet fifteen years old. Just then there came a bad air, in consequence of
which a fever attacked them both, for in fact it was the autumn season.
It happened that the mother succeeded in getting into the town before
(they could stop her); but the boy, when the physicians on the
spot <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) ordered him, with the fever
burning within him, to gargle his throat, resisted, having forsooth his
own wise view of the matter, and thinking he should be better able to
quench the fire, if he took nothing whatever, therefore, in his
unseasonable spirit of opposition, boy-like, he would take nothing. But
when he came into the town, his tongue was paralyzed, and he was for a
long time speechless, so that he could pronounce nothing articulately;
however, he could read indeed, and attended masters for a long time,
but <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) that was all, and there was
nothing to mark his progress. So all his hopes (in life) were cut off,
and his mother was full of grief: and though the physicians suggested
many plans, and many others did so too, yet nobody was able to do him
any good, until the merciful God loosed the string of his tongue (cf.
<span id="vi.xxxviii-p42.6"></span>[Mark vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p42.7"></span>), and then he recovered, and was restored
to his former readiness and distinctness of speech. His mother also
related, that when a very little child, he had an affection in the nose,
which they call a polypus: and then too the physicians had given him
over and his father cursed him (for the father was then living), and
(even) his mother prayed for him to die; <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) and all was full of distress. But he
on a sudden having coughed, owing to the collection of mucus, by the
force of the breath expelled the creature (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p43.3"></span>τὸ θηρίον</span>) from his nostrils, and
all the danger was removed. But this evil having been extinguished, an
acrid and viscid running from the eyes formed such a thick gathering of
the humors (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p43.4"></span>τὰς
λήμας</span>), that it was like a skin drawn over the pupil, and what
was worse, it threatened blindness, and everybody said this would be the
issue. But from this disease also was he quickly freed by the grace of
God. So far what I have heard from others: now I will tell you what I
myself know. Once on a time a suspicion of tyrants was raised in our
city—at that time I was but a youth—and all the soldiers being set to
watch without the city as it chanced, they were making strict <span
id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) inquisition after books of sorcery and
magic. And the person who had written the book, had flung it unbound
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p44.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p44.4"></span>κατασκέυαστον</span>)
into the river, and was taken, and when asked for it, was not able to
give it up, but was carried all around the city in bonds: when, however,
the evidence being brought home to him, he had suffered punishment, just
then it chanced that I, wishing to go to the Martyrs’ Church, was
returning through the gardens by the riverside in company with another
person. He, seeing the book floating on the water at first thought it
was a linen cloth, but when he got near, perceived it was a book, so he
went down, and took it up. I however called shares in the booty, and
laughed about it. But let us see, says he, what in the world it is. So
he turns back a part of the page, and finds the contents to be magic. At
that very moment it chanced that a soldier came by: \* \* \* then having
taken from within, <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) he went off.
There were we congealed with fear. For who would have believed our story
that we had picked it up from the river, when all were at that time,
even the unsuspected, under strict watch? And we did not dare to cast it
away, lest we should be seen, and there was a like danger to us in
tearing it to pieces. God gave us means, and we cast it away, and at
last we were free for that time from the extreme peril. And I might
mention numberless cases, if I had a mind to recount all. And even these
I have mentioned for your sakes, so that, if any have other cases,
although not such as these, let him bear them in mind constantly: for
example, if at any time a stone having been hurled, and being about to
strike thee, has not struck thee, do thou bear this ever in thy mind:
these things produce in us great affection towards God. For if on
remembering any men who have been the means of saving us, we are much
mortified if we be not able to requite them, much more (should we feel
thus) with regard to God. This too is useful in other respects. When we
wish not to be overmuch grieved, let us say: “If we have received good
things at the hand of the Lord, shall not we endure evil things?” ([Job
ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.7"></span>.) And when Paul told them from whence he
had been delivered, (<span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.8"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.9"></span>)
the reason was that he might put them also in mind. See too how Jacob
kept all these things in his mind: wherefore also he said: “The Angel
which redeemed me from my youth up” (<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.10"></span>[Gen. xlviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.11"></span>); and not only that he redeemed him, but
how and for what purpose. See accordingly how he also calls to mind the
benefits he had received in particular. “With my staff,” he says, “I
passed over Jordan.” (<span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.12"></span>[Gen. xxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.13"></span>.) The Jews also always remembered the
things which happened to their forefathers, turning over in their minds
the things done in Egypt. Then much more let us, bearing in mind the
special mercies which have happened to us also, how often we have fallen
into dangers and calamities, and unless God had held his hand over us,
should long ago have perished: I say, let us all, considering these
things and recounting them day by day, return our united thanks all of
us to God, and never cease to glorify Him, that so we may receive a
large recompense for our thankfulness of heart, through the grace and
compassion of His only begotten Son, with Whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_866"></span>[i:867](1110043.htm#fr_866) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p5"></span> The old text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>πειρασμοὺς</span>,
perhaps for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>σεβασμούς</span>. Mod. text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p5.3"></span>τοσαῦτα εἴδωλα</span>.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[i:868](1110043.htm#fr_867) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p5.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p6"></span> Old text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>οὕτως αὐτοῦ φθεγγομένου ὑβριστικῶς
εὐθέως</span> (comp. Recapitulation) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>μακρὰν τοῦτο φιλοσοφίας· ἀπὸ τοῦ κηρύγματος.
ὅτι οὐδένα τῦφον εἶχεν</span>. Hence Mod. text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.3"></span>οὐδὲ ἀπεπήδησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ
κηρ., εἰπόντες· μακρὸν τοῦτο φιλ. & 169·Οτι οὐδ. τ. εἶχεν· ἄλλως δὲ ὅτι
οὐκ ἐνόουν κ. τ. λ</span>. The insertion of the texts removes some of
the difficulties. Perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.5"></span>πὸ τοῦ κηρ</span>. is opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.6"></span>εὐθέως</span>: the one
sort straightway expressed their disdain, with a supercilious, “What
does this <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.7"></span>σπερμολόγος</span> mean to say?” the other
sort did listen, and condescended to comment on the matter of the
preaching, having heard it—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.9"></span>πὸ τοῦ κηρ</span>. (as in the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.11"></span>πὸ τοῦ
δειπνοῦ</span>)—saying, “He seemeth,” etc. Of these Chrys. may have
said, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.12"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.13"></span>τι οὐδένα τῦφον εἶχον</span>, opp. to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.14"></span>ὐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.15"></span>βριστικῶς</span>. But
all the <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p6.16"></span>mss.</span>
have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.17"></span>εἶχεν</span>, and so we have rendered it.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[i:869](1110043.htm#fr_868) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.18"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p7"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> have the text [Acts
17.18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p7.2"></span> after “female divinities also.”

<span id="fn_869"></span>[i:870](1110043.htm#fr_869) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p8"></span> The view of Chrys. that the Greeks
supposed Paul to designate by the Anastasis some goddess, has been
shared by many more recent interpreters, but seems very improbable. The
apostle could hardly have spoken so abstractly of the resurrection as to
give rise to such a misapprehension. Paul doubtless spoke of Jesus’ own
resurrection and of its relation to that of believers (vid. [1 Cor.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>.), although in the text the absence of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p8.2"></span>αὐτοῦ</span>
permits us to find only the idea of the general resurrection
*expressed.*—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[i:871](1110043.htm#fr_870) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p9"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p9.2"></span>οὐχ ὥστε μαθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽
ὥστε κολάσαι</span>. But this cannot be Chrysostom’s meaning: for in the
opening of the Hom. he remarks, that there was nothing of persecution
here (comp. the opening of Hom. xxxix.), and in the Recapitulation, that
the Athenians at this time were under Roman Law. Also in the following
sentence, he explains that their questions were prompted by the hope of
learning, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.3"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.4"></span>Ορα γοῦν</span> (i. e. to show that this was
their meaning) <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p9.5"></span>καὶ
ἐν ἐλπίδι τοῦ μαθεῖν</span>. In the Recapitulation indeed, he says, they
brought him <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.6"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.7"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.8"></span>καταπλήξοντες</span>, but this is a
different thing from <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.9"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.10"></span>στε κολάσαι</span>. Therefore we have
transposed the order of the words. The clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.11"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.12"></span>νθα αἱ φονικαὶ δίκαι</span> (and in the
Recapitulation <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.13"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.14"></span>νθα τὰς φ. δ. ἐδίκαζον</span>, which we
retain from B.), seems to be meant to show that they did not bring him
there for trial.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[i:872](1110043.htm#fr_871) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p9.21"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p10"></span> The principal points to be noted for
the interpretation of [Acts 17.23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.1"></span> are as follows: (1) Pausanias (<span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>a.d.</span> 174) and
Philostratus (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.3"></span>a.d.</span> 244) testify to the existence
at Athens of altars with the inscription: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.5"></span>γνώστῳ θεῷ</span>. (2) “Upon important
occasions, when the reference to a god known by name was wanting, as in
public calamities of which no definite god could be assigned as the
author, in order to honor or propitiate the god concerned by sacrifice,
without lighting on a wrong one, altars were erected which were destined
and designated <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.7"></span>γνώστῳ θέ& 254·</span>.” (Meyer.) (3) By
these inscriptions the Athenians referred to no particular divinities,
but to supposed benefactors or avengers to whom they, in their religious
system, could attach no name. (4) No reference is to be found in these
inscriptions to the God of the Jews. The true text: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.8"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.9"></span>οὖν ἀγνοοῦντες
εὐσεβεῖτε, τοῦτο ἐγὼ καταγγέλω ὑμῖν</span> (instead of the masculine
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.10"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.11"></span>ν</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.12"></span>τοῦτον</span> of the
cursives and the T. R.) does not require the supposition of such a
reference. They acknowledged *an unknown*—lying beyond their pantheon.
Paul declares what this is: the true God as revealed in Jesus Christ.
They would only partially and gradually understand his full
meaning.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[i:873](1110043.htm#fr_872) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p10.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>προστετ</span>. E.V. “before appointed”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>προτετ</span>).

<span id="fn_873"></span>[i:874](1110043.htm#fr_873) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p12"></span> Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>καὶ τὴν δημιουργίαν ἐδήλωσε καὶ τοὺς
ἀνθρώπους.</span> Comp. Recapitulation, whence it appears that he means
“Both heaven and earth, and mankind also were created, not generated or
emanated.”

<span id="fn_874"></span>[i:875](1110043.htm#fr_874) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>Καὶ μὴν διὰ τοῦτο ὀφείλομεν</span>. Mod.
text inserts a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.2"></span>φησὶν</span>, to make this an
interlocution, in the sense, “Nay but for this reason, viz., being His
offspring, we ought to think of Him as in the likeness of man.” But this
cannot be Chrysostom’s meaning. Perhaps Chrys. said, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.3"></span>οὐδὲ τοῦτο</span>,
viz., after the following sentence, so that the sense will be, “We ought
not to think the Godhead like unto gold, etc., the graven work of man’s
art. By no means: for certainly we ourselves, our souls, are not like
unto such. Nay, more, we ought not to think even this, that the Godhead
is like unto aught that man’s imagination can conceive, as the Apostle
adds, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.4"></span>καὶ
ἐνθυμήσεως ἀνθρώπου τὸ Θεῖον εἶκαι ὅμοιον</span>.” (See the
Recapitulation.) He proceeds: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.5"></span>τί δήποτε</span>; i.e. Why having said
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.6"></span>χαράγματι
τέχνης</span> does he add <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.7"></span>καὶ ἐνθυμ. ὀνθρ</span>.? The answer, not
expressed here, is, “Because neither is it subject to any other human
conception,” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.8"></span>διανοί& 139·</span>, Recapitulation). Then,
the old text has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.9"></span>οὐκ ἐστι πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν· πῶς οὖν πάλιν τὸ
ζητούμενον· τοὺς μὲν οὖν χρον. κ. τ. λ</span>. Here we insert from the
Recapitulation a sentence, which, where it stands, is superfluous (p.
236, note 6): <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.10"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.11"></span>Αλλ᾽ εἴποι ἄν τις, Οὐ τοῦτο νομίζομεν.
᾽Αλλὰ πρὸς τοὺς πολλοὺς ὁ λόγος ἦν αὐτῷ</span>, and then, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.12"></span>οὔκετι</span> (so we
correct <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.13"></span>οὐκ
ἐστι</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.14"></span>πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν</span>. i.e. “Philosophers
may say, We do not so think of the Godhead. But he is not dealing with
Philosophy, but <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.15"></span>πρὸς τοὺς πολλούς. Πῶς οὖν οὐχ
εὗρον</span>; or the like; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.16"></span>Πάλιν τὸ ζητούμενον</span>. Again coming
to the question in hand (An ‘Unknown’ God, Whom ye ‘ignorantly worship,
he says). Now the times of ignorance,” etc.—Mod. text. “Why did he not
immediately come (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.17"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.18"></span>στη</span>) to Philosophy, and say, God is
incorporeal by nature, invisible and without form? Because it seemed
superfluous at present to say these things to men who had not yet (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p13.19"></span>μήπω</span> om. E.)
learned that there is but one God. Therefore leaving those matters, he
addresses himself (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.20"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.21"></span>σταται</span>) to the matter in hand, and
says, Now the times,” etc.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[i:876](1110043.htm#fr_875) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p13.22"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p14"></span> Old text inserts here the whole of
[Acts 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>, then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.2"></span>καίτοιγέ φησιν, ὥρισεν ἡμ. ἀναστήσας αὐτὸν
ἐκ νεκρῶν. Κατασείσας αὐτῶν τὴν διανοίαν τῷ φόβῳ, τότε ἐπάγει
τοῦτο</span>. It appears from the Recapitulation that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p14.3"></span>κατ. τῷ φ</span>.
refers to the preceding verses, being explained by <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p14.4"></span>δείξας
ἀναπολογήτους</span>: and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.6"></span>πάγει τοῦτο</span> to the first clause of
[Acts 17.30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.7"></span>, the overlooking of the times of
ignorance. We have arranged the matter accordingly.—Mod. text, [Acts
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p14.8"></span>. “See, having agitated their minds by
saying, ‘He hath appointed a day,’ and terrified them, then he
seasonably adds this, ‘Having raised Him from the dead.’” Which is
clearly not Chrysostom’s meaning.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[i:877](1110043.htm#fr_876) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p15.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>οὐκ ἔφερεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐτήκετο</span>. The latter
word seems incongruous, unless there be a reference to what St. Paul
says of the state of his mind while waiting at Athens, in <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>[1 Thess. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001)<span id="vi.xxxviii-p16.3"></span>.
q.d. this is not the state of feeling in which one is apt to give way to
anger and irritation.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[i:878](1110043.htm#fr_877) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p16.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>μα μὲν τοῦ νόμου λυομένου φησὶν λοιπὸν, ἅμα
δὲ διδάσκοντες εὐσέβειαν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους</span>. i.e. “of which
dispersion the consequence was indeed a breaking down, it may be said,
of the Law (by intermarriages, etc.), but withal a spreading of the true
religion among men.” Mod. text, having mistakenly changed <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.3"></span>πρὸ</span> to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.5"></span>πὸ</span>, inserts
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.7"></span>ξ ἐκείνου</span> “from
that time” before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.8"></span>τοῦ νόμου</span>: and also omits <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.9"></span>φησὶν λοιπὸν</span>,
which the innovator did not understand.—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.10"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.11"></span>Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲν ἴσχυσαν</span> (mod. text,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.12"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.13"></span>κέρδαναν</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.14"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.15"></span>κεῖνοι</span>. But
those Jews, for all their success in spreading their religion, availed
nothing, save that they got (more) witnesses (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p17.16"></span>μαρτυρίας</span> perhaps should be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p17.17"></span>μάρτυρας</span>) of
their own proper calamities (when the wrath came upon them to the
uttermost), i.e. they prepared the way for the Gospel. but for
themselves they availed nothing, but only to increase the number of
those who should bear witness to the truth of God’s judgment upon them
for their unbelief.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[i:879](1110043.htm#fr_878) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p19"></span> This, as it stands seems to be meant
rather for the Manichæans than the heathen philosophers, to whom, he has
just before said, the very notion of creation was strange. But the whole
exposition is most inadequately given, through the carelessness or
incompetency of the reporter. To be referred to the heathen, it should
be <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>λλον μὲν εἶναι
κύριον</span> (as Jupiter) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p19.3"></span>οὐ ποιητὴν δέ</span>: and this is favored,
perhaps, by the unnecessary <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p19.4"></span>τὴν δὲ</span> (omitted by A. B.) as
remaining from <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p19.5"></span>οὐ
ποιητὴν δὲ ἀγέννητον ὕλην ὑποτίθεντες</span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[i:880](1110043.htm#fr_879) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p19.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>Ενταῦθα λοιπὸν αἰνιγματωδῶς εἶπε τὸ αὐτοῦ
καὶ ἔστησε</span>—i.e. in speaking of God, he at the same time hints at
the coequal Godhead of the Son: for He also is Creator and Lord. See p.
233 in the comments on v. 23, and v. 25, 26.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[i:881](1110043.htm#fr_880) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p20.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p21.2"></span>τι οὐκ ἔστι μερικὴ, οὐδὲ ψυχὴ τοῦ
ἀνθρώπου</span>. “This is very obscure, and seems remote from the matter
in hand. Hales ap. Sav. thinks it has come into the text from some other
place. I should rather think the passage either mutilated or corrupt.”
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p21.3"></span>Ben</span>. “There
is nothing either obscure or corrupt in the passage.” <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p21.4"></span>Ed. Par</span>. The
meaning seems to be, As the whole creation is the work of One God, not
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p21.5"></span>μερικῶς</span>
but <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p21.6"></span>τὸ
καθόλου</span>, so are all mankind, universally, His work; the soul too,
as well as the body.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[i:882](1110043.htm#fr_881) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p21.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p22"></span> This and the following sentences seem
to be fragments belonging to the preceding exposition. But the whole is
too confused and mangled to admit of any satisfactory restoration.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[i:883](1110043.htm#fr_882) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>Πῶς καὶ ἄνθρωπος γέγονε</span>. Or (see
note 2.) “How He (the Son) became man”—as belonging to some other place;
e.g. after <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p23.2"></span>οὐδέπω
τὰ μέγαλα εἶπεν</span>. Or this may be put in the place of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p23.3"></span>πῶς θεραπεύεται</span>,
note 8. Mod. text. “Having before shown, how the heaven was made, then
he declared,” etc.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[i:884](1110043.htm#fr_883) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p24.2"></span>πεφήνατο</span>: above, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p24.3"></span>το μηδένος δεῖσθαι,
ὅπερ ἀπεφήνατο</span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[i:885](1110043.htm#fr_884) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p25"></span> This also may be part of the argument
against the Arians, which Chrys. seems to have brought into his
exposition. See note 2.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[i:886](1110043.htm#fr_885) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p26"></span> This is clearly out of place. Perhaps
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>πῶς καὶ ἄνθρωπος
γέγονε</span> (note 5.) belongs here.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[i:887](1110043.htm#fr_886) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p26.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>Κατὰ τὰς ὁροθεσίας</span>. Perhaps Chrys.
may have read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>κατὰ τὰς ὁρ</span>. in his copy of the
Acts: as Cod. Bezæ and S. Irenæus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p27.3"></span>κατὰ τὴν ὁροθεσίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[i:888](1110043.htm#fr_887) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p28"></span> Mod. text spoiling the sense; “And
this he says showing that not even now had they, having sought, found:
although He was as plain to be found as anything would be that was (set)
in the midst to be handled.”

<span id="fn_888"></span>[i:889](1110043.htm#fr_888) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p28.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p29"></span> Old text: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>Τουτέστιν, οἰκείους, ἐγγυτάτους ὥσπερ
παροίκους καὶ γείτονας ὅταν λέγῃ</span>: so Cat. The two last words are
out of place; we insert them with the text-words after <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p29.3"></span>Ινα γὰρ μὴ</span>. The
sense is: He does not mean, with the heathen poet, that mankind came
from God by generation or emanation: but that we are very near to Him.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[i:890](1110043.htm#fr_889) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p31"></span> Here <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p31.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd, have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p31.2"></span>οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτως
ἀνθρώποις ἐναντίον</span>, as if it meant, “nothing so goes against men
as strangeness.” We place it in what seems a more suitable connection:
“We ought not to think,” etc. for so far from “the Godhead” being “like
unto such,” nothing is so much the reverse of like unto men, who “are
his offspring.”

<span id="fn_890"></span>[i:891](1110043.htm#fr_890) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.1"></span>τί γάρ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.2"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.3"></span>ὑπὲρ τοῦτο Θεός</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p32.4"></span>;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p32.5"></span>οὐδὲ τοῦτο· ἀλλὰ τέως
τοῦτο·</span> A. B. C , <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.6"></span>τί γὰρ τὸ ὑπὲρ τοῦτο θεός· οὐδὲ κ. τ.
λ</span>. Cat. om. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.7"></span>τί γὰρ τὸ</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p32.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p32.9"></span>λλὰ τέως τοῦτο</span>.
Mod. text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.11"></span>λλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τοῦτο. τί δαὶ τὸ ὑπὲρ
τοῦτο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.12"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.13"></span>Θεός· ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τοῦτο, ἐνεργείας γάρ ἐστιν
ὄνομα· ἀλλὰ τέως τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[i:892](1110043.htm#fr_891) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p32.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p33"></span> Possibly the connection may be, “He is
not addressing himself to the notions of philosophers, (*supra,* note 1,
p. 234). for them he insinuated <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p33.1"></span>τὸ ἀσώματον</span> by the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p33.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p33.3"></span>Εν αὐτῷ ζῶμεν</span>,
the intimate presence of Deity, the denial of body by the denial of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p33.4"></span>διάστημα</span>
which is necessarily implied in the notion of body. But he speaks to the
many, and puts it to them in this way, We, being in respect of the soul,
akin to God, ought not to think,” etc.—Mod. text omits <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p33.5"></span>πρὸς τοὺς
πολλούς</span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[i:893](1110043.htm#fr_892) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p33.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p34"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p34.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. have the sentence
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p34.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p34.3"></span>λλ᾽ εἴποι ἄν
τις</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p34.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p34.5"></span>λόγος αὐτῷ</span>, which we have
transferred above, p. 234, note 1. In the next sentence, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p34.6"></span>εἰ γὰρ ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἐσμεν
ὅμοιοι ἐκείνοις τὸ κατὰ ψυχήν</span>, A. B. C. omit the negative, which
Cat. and mod. text retain.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[i:894](1110043.htm#fr_893) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p34.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.1"></span>Εἰ γὰρ ἢ τέχνη ἢ διάνοια εὗρε</span>, A. B.
C. but Cat. om. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.2"></span>εἰ γὰρ</span>, mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p35.3"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p35.4"></span>γὰρ τέχνη ἢ δ. εὗρε.
Διὰ τοῦτο οὕτως εἶπεν</span>: A. also has this last clause, which is
unknown to B. C. Cat. In the translation we assume the reading to be,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p35.5"></span>Εἰ γὰρ ὅπερ ἢ τ.
ἢ δ. εὗρε</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.6"></span>διὰ τοῦτο οὕτως</span> “<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p35.7"></span>τέχν. ἢ ἐνθ.
ἀ.</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.8"></span>”</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.9"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.10"></span>περ οὖν ἢ τ. ἢ δ. ἀ. εὗρε, τοῦτο ὁ Θεὸς,
καὶ ἐν λίθω οὐσία θεοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[i:895](1110043.htm#fr_894) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p35.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p36"></span> i.e. in [Acts
17.27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p36.1"></span>. “that they should seek the Lord…being, as
He is, not far from every one of us.” But text refers it to the
following clause, by adding <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p36.2"></span>εἰπών</span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[i:896](1110043.htm#fr_895) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p37.1"></span>Πᾶσι γὰρ ταύτην παρεῖχε πίστιν</span>, i.e.
God; but C. and mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p37.2"></span>παρεῖχον</span>, as if it meant “the
Apostles gave assurance of Christ’s resurrection,” overlooking the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p37.3"></span>πίστιν παρασχὼν</span>
of the text.’

<span id="fn_896"></span>[i:897](1110043.htm#fr_896) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p39"></span> Mod. text “The things spoken have
given proof of His rising from the dead.”

<span id="fn_897"></span>[i:898](1110043.htm#fr_897) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p40"></span> A. B. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p40.1"></span>μετὰ γὰρ ταῦτα καθολικὰς εἰδέναι
αὐτῷ</span>. The sense would be satisfied by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p40.2"></span>μετὰ τὸ τὰς καθ. εἰδέναι αὐτῷ
χάριτας</span>. Mod. text. “Together with the reckoning up of what God
has done for us in common (benefits), so many that none is able even to
number them, and giving Him thanks for all these, let us all bethink us
of what has been done for each one of us, and reckon them up day by day.
Since then these,” etc.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[i:899](1110043.htm#fr_898) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p40.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.1"></span>τῶν ἰατρῶν τῶν ἐκεῖ</span>. Mod. text omits
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.2"></span>τῶν</span>, and
adds <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.3"></span>μένειν,
καὶ</span>: “the physicians ordering him to stay there.” The <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.4"></span>mss.</span>, except A.
which has preserved the true reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.5"></span>εἴρξατο</span>, have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.6"></span>ἤ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.7"></span>ρξατο</span>, whence
Erasm. Ben. *cœpit gargarizare*—just what the boy refused to do. He
would not take the gargle, nor any other medicine or food.—For <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.8"></span>σβέννυται</span> we
restore with mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.9"></span>σβεννύναι</span> —<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.10"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.11"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.12"></span>δῆθεν φιλοσοφῶν</span> either as above, or
“to show his strength of mind forsooth.”—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.13"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.14"></span>πὲρ φιλονεικίας</span>, B. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p41.15"></span>φιλοτιμίας</span>.
(Erasmus’ translation is altogether wide of the sense.)

<span id="fn_899"></span>[i:900](1110043.htm#fr_899) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p41.16"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p42.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p42.2"></span>πλῶς δὲ</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p42.3"></span>καὶ</span> mod. text.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p42.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p42.5"></span>σημα</span>. Meaning
perhaps, “being speechless, he read and heard, but could not give tokens
of understanding what he learned.”

<span id="fn_900"></span>[i:901](1110043.htm#fr_900) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p42.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p43"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p43.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p43.2"></span>καὶ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτῷ κατηρᾶτο, καὶ τελευτῆσαι
ηὔχετο καὶ ἡ μητήρ· ἔτι γὰρ ἔτυχε ζῶν ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ</span>. Mod. text.
“His mother prayed for him to die, and his father cursed him, for he was
yet living.”

<span id="fn_901"></span>[i:902](1110043.htm#fr_901) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p44.1"></span>τυχὸν ἀπλάστως ζητούντων</span>: meaning
perhaps, in earnest, not for form’s sake. The occasion of this
strictness was doubtless the affair of Theodorus the Sicilian, see t. i.
343 B. and 470 D. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p44.2"></span>Πρὸ δέκα τούτων ἐτῶν ἑαλωσαν ἐπὶ τυραννίδι
τινές κ. τ. λ</span>.) For the history of the treasonable and magical
practices against Valens at Antioch, in which Theodorus was implicated,
and of the severities exercised in consequence of that attempt, see
Ammianus Marcell. xxix. init. Comp. Zosimus iv. 13, 3, Sozomen vi. 35,
Socrates iv. 19.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[i:903](1110043.htm#fr_902) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p44.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.1"></span>εἶτα ἔνδοθεν λαβὼν ἀπῄει· ἀπεπάγη τῷ
δέει</span> It is not easy to see what this means, unless the sense
intended be, “the soldier paced backward and forward, so that we were
intercepted between his walk and the river.”—Mod. text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.2"></span>εἶτα ἔ. λ, ἀπῄει καὶ
ἀπεπήγει τῷ δέει</span> Erasm. *qui hoc animadvertens abiit, et timere
nos fecit.* Ben. Hinc. *vero socius. illo occultato abiit et timore
tabescebat.* We must certainly read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p45.4"></span>πεπάγην</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxviii-p45.6"></span>πεπάγημεν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIX on Acts xvii. 32-34. xviii. 1.](1110044)
