[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110087)  [Next](1110089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxvii"></span> <span id="vii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXV.</span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p2"></span>[Rom.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p3"></span>“Him that is weak in the faith receive
ye, but not to doubtful disputations. For one believeth that he may eat
all things; another, who is weak, eateth herbs.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>I Am</span> aware that to most what is here
said is a difficulty. And therefore I must first give the subject of the
whole of this passage, and what he wishes to correct in writing this.
What does he wish to correct then? There were many of the Jews which
believed, who adhered of conscience to the Law, and after their
believing, still kept to the observance of meats, as not having courage
yet to quit the service of the Law entirely. Then that they might not be
observed if they kept from swine’s flesh only, they abstained in
consequence from all flesh, and ate herbs only, that what they were
doing might have more the appearance of a fast than of observance of the
Law. <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) Others again were
farther advanced, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.5"></span>τελειότεροι</span>) and kept up no one thing
of the kind, who became to those, who did keep them, distressing and
offensive, by reproaching them, accusing them, driving them to
despondency. Therefore the blessed Paul, out of fear lest, from a wish
to be right about a trifle, they should overthrow the whole, and from a
wish to bring them to indifferency about what they ate, should put them
in a fair way for deserting the faith, and out of a zeal to put
everything right at once, before the fit opportunity was come, should do
mischief on vital points, so by this continual rebuking setting them
adrift from their agreement in (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.6"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.7"></span>μολογίας εἰς</span>) Christ, and so they
should remain not righted in either respect: observe what great judgment
he uses and how he concerns himself with both interests with his
customary wisdom. For neither does he venture to say to those who
rebuke, Ye are doing amiss, that he may not seem to be confirming the
other in their observances; nor again, Ye are doing right, lest he
should make them the more vehement accusers: but he makes his rebuke to
square with each. And in appearance he is rebuking the stronger, but he
pours forth all he has to say <span id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586)
against the other in his address to these. For the kind of correction
most likely to be less grating is, when a person addresses some one
else, while he is striking a blow at a different person, since this does
not permit the person rebuked to fly into a passion, and introduces the
medicine of correction unperceived. See now with what judgment he does
this, and how well-timed he is with it. For after saying, “make not
provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof,” then he proceeds
to the discussion of these points, that he might not seem to be speaking
in defence of those who were the rebukers, and were for eating of
anything. For the weaker part ever requires more forethought. Wherefore
he aims his blow against the strong, immediately saying as follows, “Him
that is weak in the faith.” You see one blow immediately given to him.
For by calling him weak (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.3"></span>σθενοὕντα</span>), he points out that he is
not healthy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.4"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.5"></span>ρρωστον</span>). Then he adds next,
“receive,” and point out again that he requires much attention. And this
is a sign of extreme debility. “Not to doubtful disputations.” <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) See, he has laid on a third stripe.
For here he makes it appear that his error is of such a nature, that
even those who do not transgress in the same manner, and who
nevertheless admit him to their affection, and are earnestly bent upon
curing him, are at doubt. <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) You
see how in appearance he is conversing with these, but is rebuking
others secretly and without giving offence. Then by placing them beside
each other, one he gives encomiums, the other accusations. For he goes
on to say, “One believeth that he may eat all things,” commending him on
the score of his faith. “Another who is weak, eateth herbs,” disparaging
this one again, on the score of his weakness. Then since the blow he had
given was deadly (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p8.2"></span>καιρίαν</span>, used hyperbolically), he
comforts him again in these words,

<span id="vii.xxvii-p9"></span>[Rom.
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>.
“Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p10"></span>He does not say, let him alone, nor does
he say, do not blame him, nor yet, do not set him right; but do not
reproach him, do not “despise” him, to show they were doing a thing
perfectly ridiculous. But of this he speaks in other words. “Let not him
which eateth not, judge him that eateth.” For as the more advanced made
light of these, as of little faith, and falsely healed, and spurious,
and still Judaizers, so they too judged these as law-breakers, or as
given to gluttony. And of these it is likely that many were of the
Gentiles too. Wherefore he proceeds, for God hath received him. But in
the other’s case he does not say this. And yet to be despised was the
eater’s share, as a glutton, but to be judged, his that did not eat, as
of little faith. But he has made them change places, to show that he not
only does not deserve to be despised, but that he can even despise. But
do I condemn him? he means. By no means. For this is why he proceeds,
“for God hath received him.” Why then speakest thou to him of the law,
as to a transgressor? “For God hath received him:” that is, has shown
His unspeakable grace about him, and hath freed him from all charges
against him; then again he turns to the strong.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p11"></span>[Rom.
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>. “Who art thou that judgest another man’s
servant?”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p12"></span>Whence it appears that they too judged,
and did not despise only. “To his own Master he standeth or falleth.”
See here is another stroke. And the indignation seems to be against the
strong man, and he attacks him. When he says, “Yea, he shall be holden
up,” he shows that he is still wavering, and requireth so much attention
as to call in God as a physician for this, “for God,” he says, “is able
to make him stand.” And this we say of things we are quite in despair
about. Then, that he may not despair he both gives him the name of a
servant when he says, “Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant?”
And here again he secretly attacks him. For it is not because he does
things worthy to exempt him from being judged, that I bid you not judge
him, but because he is Another’s servant, that is, not thine, but God’s.
Then to solace him again he does not say, “falleth,” but what? “standeth
or falleth.” But whether it be the latter or the former, either of these
is the Master’s concernment, since the loss also goes to Him, if he does
fall, as the riches too, if he stand. And this again if we do not attend
to Paul’s aim in not wishing them to be rebuked before a fitting
opportunity, is very unworthy of the mutual care becoming for
Christians. But (as I am always saying) we must examine the mind with
which it is spoken, and the subject on which it is said and the object
he would compass when he says it. But he makes them respectful by no
slight motive, when he says this: for what he means is, if God, Who
undergoeth the loss, hitherto doth nothing, how can you be else than
ill-timed and out of all measure exact, when you seize on (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p12.2"></span>γκων</span>, throttle)
him and annoy him?

<span id="vii.xxvii-p13"></span>[Rom.
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>. “One man esteemeth one day above another,
another esteemeth every day alike.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p14"></span>Here he seems to me to be giving a
gentle hint about fasting. For it is not unlikely that some who fasted
were always judging those who did not, or among the observances it is
likely that there were some that on fixed days abstained, and on fixed
days did not. <span id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589) Whence also he
says, “Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.” And in this
way he released those who kept the observances from fear, by saying that
the thing was indifferent, and he removed also the quarrelsomeness of
those who attacked them, by showing that it was no very desirable (or
urgent, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.5"></span>περισπούδαστον</span>) task to be always
making a trouble about these things. Yet it was not a very desirable
task, not in its own nature, but on account of the time chosen, and
because they were novices in the faith. For when he is writing to the
Colossians, it is with great earnestness that he forbids it, saying,
“Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after
the traditions of men, after the elements of the world, and not after
Christ.” (<span id="vii.xxvii-p15.6"></span>[Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxvii-p15.7"></span>,
see p. 4.) And again, “Let no man judge you in meat or in drink” ([Col.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.8"></span>), and, “let no man beguile you of your
reward.” ([Col. 2.18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.9"></span>.) And when writing to the Galatians with
great precision, he exacts of them Christian spirit and perfectness in
this matter. But here he does not use this vehemency, because the faith
was lately planted in them. Let us therefore not apply the phrase, “Let
every man be persuaded in his own mind,” to all subjects. For when he is
speaking of doctrines, hear what he says, “If any one preacheth unto you
any gospel other than that ye have received, let him be accursed” ([Gal.
i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.10"></span>), “even” if it be “an angel.” And again,
“I fear lest by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted.” (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.11"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxvii-p15.12"></span>.)
And in writing to the Philippians, he says, “Beware of dogs, beware of
evil workers, beware of the concision.” (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.13"></span>[Phil. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxvii-p15.14"></span>.)
But with the Romans, since it was not yet the proper time for setting
things of this sort right, “Let every man,” he says, “be fully persuaded
in his own mind.” For he had been speaking of fasting. It was to clear
away the vanity of the others and to release these from fear then, that
he said as follows:

<span id="vii.xxvii-p16"></span>[Rom.
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p16.1"></span>. “He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth
not regard it.” And, “He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth
God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and
giveth God thanks.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p17"></span>He still keeps to the same subject. And
what he means is about this. The thing is not concerned with
fundamentals. For the thing requisite is, if this person and the other
are acting for God’s sake, the thing requisite is (these words are
repeated 3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p17.1"></span>mss.</span>), if both terminate in
thanksgiving. For indeed both this man and that give thanks to God. If
then both do give thanks to God, the difference is no great one. But let
me draw your notice to the way in which here also he aims unawares a
blow at the Judaizers. For if the thing required be this, the “giving of
thanks,” it is plain enough that he which eateth it is that “giveth
thanks,” and not “he which eateth not.” For how should he, while he
still holds to the Law? As then he told the Galatians, “As many of you
as are justified by the Law are fallen from grace” ([Gal. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxvii-p17.2"></span>);
so here he hints it only, but does not unfold it so much. For as yet it
was not time to do so. But for the present he bears with it (see p.
337): but by what follows he gives it a further opening. For where he
says,

<span id="vii.xxvii-p18"></span>[Rom.
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxvii-p18.1"></span>.
“For none of us liveth unto himself, and no man dieth unto himself. For
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord,” by this too he makes the same clearer. For how can he that
liveth unto the Law, be living unto Christ? But this is not the only
thing that he effects by this, he also holds back the person who was in
so much haste for their being set right, and persuades him to be
patient, by showing that it is impossible for God to despise them, but
that in due time He will set them right. What is the force then of “none
of us liveth to himself?” It means, We are not free, we have a Master
who also would have us live, and willeth not that we die, and to whom
both of these are of more interest than to us. For by what is here said
he shows that he hath a greater concern for us than we have ourselves,
and considereth more than we do, as well our life to be wealth, as our
death to be a loss. For we do not die to ourselves alone, but to our
Master also, if we do die. But by death here he means that from the
faith. However, this were enough to convince us that He taketh care for
us, in that it is to Him we live, and to Him we die. Still he is not
satisfied with saying this, but proceeds further. For after saying,
“Whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s,” and passing
from that death to the physical one, that he may not give an appearance
of harshness to his language, he gives another very great indication of
His care for us. Now of what kind is this?

<span id="vii.xxvii-p19"></span>[Rom.
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p19.1"></span>. “For to this end Christ both died, and
rose, and revived, that He might be Lord both of the dead and living.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p20"></span>And so let us at least convince thee,
that He is thoughtful for our salvation. For had He not had this great
care for us, where were the need of the Dispensation (or Incarnation,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p20.1"></span>οἰκονομίας</span>)? He then that hath shown
so much anxiety about our becoming His, as to take the form of a
servant, and to die, will He despise us after we have become so? This
cannot be so, assuredly it cannot! Nor would He choose to waste so much
pains. “For to this end (he says) he also died,” as if any one were to
say, Such an one will not have the heart to despise his servant. For he
minded his own purse. (Cf. <span id="vii.xxvii-p20.2"></span>[Ex. xxi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxvii-p20.3"></span>.)
For indeed we are not so much in love with money, as is He with our
salvation. Wherefore it was not money, but His own Blood that He gave as
bail for us. And for this cause He would not have the heart to give them
up, for whom He had laid down so great a price. See too how he shows
that His power also is unspeakable. For he says, “to this end He both
died and revived, that He might be Lord both of the dead and the
living.” And above he said, “for whether we live or die, we are His.”
See what a wide extended Mastery! see what unconquerable might! see what
exact providence over us! For tell me not, he means, of the living. Even
for the departed He taketh care. But if He doth of the departed, it is
quite plain that He doth of the living also. For He hath not omitted any
point for this Mastery, making out for Himself more claims than men do,
and especially beside <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) all
other things in order to take care of us. For a man puts down money, and
for this clings strongly to his own slave. But He Himself paid down His
death; and the salvation of one who was purchased at so great a price,
and the Mastery over whom He had gained with so much anxiety and
trouble, He is not likely to count of no value. But this he says to make
the Judaizer abashed, and to persuade him to call to mind the greatness
of the benefit, and how that when dead he had come to be alive, and that
there was nothing that he gained from the Law, and how that it would be
the last degree of unfeelingness, to leave Him Who had shown so much
care toward him, and run away back to the Law. After attacking him then
sufficiently, he relaxes again, and says,

<span id="vii.xxvii-p22"></span>[Rom.
14.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p22.1"></span>. “But why dost thou judge thy brother? or
why dost thou set at nought thy brother?”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p23"></span>And so he seems to be setting them upon
a level, but from that he has said, he shows that the difference between
them is great. First then by the appellation of “brother” he does away
with disputatiousness, and then also by calling that awful day to their
mind. For after saying, “Why dost thou set at nought thy brother?” he
proceeds, “For we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p24"></span>And he seems indeed to be again rebuking
the more advanced in saying this, but he is putting the mind of the
Judaizer to confusion by not only calling for his reverence to the
benefit that had been done him, but also making him afraid of the
punishment to come. “For we shall all,” he says, “stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p25"></span>[Rom.
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxvii-p25.1"></span>.
“For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to
Me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall
give account of himself to God.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p26"></span>See how he again puts his mind into
confusion, while he seems to be rebuking the other. For he intimates
some such thing, as if he had said, How does it affect you? Are you to
be punished for him? But this he does not say, but hints at it by
putting it in a milder form, and saying, “For we shall all stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ:” and, “So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God.” And he introduces the prophet <span
id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) in witness of the subjection of all
to Him, yea a subjection extended even to those in the Old Testament,
and of all absolutely. For he does not barely say every one shall
worship, but “shall confess,” that is, shall given an account of what he
has done. Be in anxiety then as seeing the Master of all sitting on his
judgment-seat, and do not make schisms and divisions in the Church, by
breaking away from grace, and running over to the Law. For the Law also
is His. And why say I so of the Law? Even those in the Law and those
before the Law are His. And it is not the Law that will demand an
account of thee, but Christ, of thee and of all the human race. See how
he has released us from the fear of the Law. Then that he may not seem
to be saying this to frighten them for the occasion, but to have come to
it in the course he had proposed himself, he again keeps to the same
subject, and says,

<span id="vii.xxvii-p28"></span>[Rom.
14.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p28.1"></span>. “Let us not therefore judge one another
any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling-block or an
occasion to fall in his brother’s way.”

<span id="vii.xxvii-p29"></span>This does not apply to one less than the
other: wherefore it may well fit with both, both the advanced man that
was offended at the observance of meats, and the unadvanced that
stumbled at the vehement rebuke given him. But consider, I pray you, the
great punishment we shall suffer, if we give offence at all. For if in a
case where the thing was against law, yet, as they rebuked unseasonably,
he forbade their doing it, in order that a brother might not be made to
offend and stumble; when we give an offence without having anything to
set right even, what treatment shall we deserve? For if not saving
others be a crime (and that it is so, he who buried the talent proves),
what will be the effect of giving him offence also? But what if he gives
himself the offence, you may say, by being weak? Why this is just why
thou oughtest to be patient. For if he were strong, then he would not
require so much attention. But now, since he is of the feebler sort, he
does on this ground need considerable care. Let us then yield him this,
and in all respects bear his burdens, as it is not of our own sins only
that we shall have to give an account, but for those also wherein we
cause others to offend. For if that account, were even by itself hard to
pass, when these be added too, how are we to be saved? And let us not
suppose, that if we can find accomplices in our sins, that will be an
excuse; as this will prove an addition to our punishment. Since the
serpent too was punished more than the woman, as was the woman likewise
more than the man ([1 Tim. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p29.1"></span>); and Jezebel also was punished more
severely than Ahab, who had seized the vineyard; for it was she that
devised the whole matter, and caused the king to offend. ([1 Kings
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#023),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#025),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p29.2"></span>.) And therefore thou, when thou art the
author of destruction to others, wilt suffer more severely <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) than those who have been subverted
by thee. For sinning is not so ruinous as leading others also into the
same. Wherefore he speaks of those who “not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them.” ([Rom. i.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)<span id="vii.xxvii-p30.2"></span>.)
And so when we see any sinning, let us, so far from thrusting them on,
even pull them back from the pit of iniquity, that we may not have to be
punished for the ruin of others besides ourselves. And let us be
continually in mind of the awful judgment-seat, of the stream of fire,
of the chains never to be loosed, of the darkness with no light, the
gnashing of teeth, and the venomous worm. “Ah, but God is merciful!” Are
these then mere words? and was not that rich man punished for despising
Lazarus? Are not the foolish <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593)
virgins cast out of the Bride-chamber? Do not they who did not feed Him
go away into “the fire prepared for the devil?” ([Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="vii.xxvii-p31.2"></span>.)
Will not he that hath soiled garments be “bound hand and foot” ([Matt.
22.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p31.3"></span>), and go to ruin? Will, not he that
demanded the hundred pence to be paid, be given over to the tormentors?
Is not that said of the adulterers <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594) true, that “their worm shall not
die, nor their fire be quenched?” <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595) (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p39.1"></span>[Mark ix.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043)<span id="vii.xxvii-p39.2"></span>.)
Are these but mere threats then? Yea, it is answered. And from what
source pray dost thou venture to make such an assertion, and that too
when thou passest judgment of thine own opinion? Why, I shall be able to
prove the contrary, both from what He said, and from what He did. (See
[John v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p39.3"></span>.) For if you will not believe by the
punishments that are to come, at least believe by those that have
happened already. For what have happened, and have come forth into
reality, surely are not threats and words. Who then was it that flooded
the whole world, and affected that baleful wreck, and the utter
destruction of our whole race! Who was it that after this hurled those
thunders and lightnings upon the land of Sodom? Who that drowned all
Egypt in the sea? Who that consumed the six hundred thousand men in the
wilderness? Who that burnt up the synagogue of Abiram? Who that bade the
earth open her mouth for the company of Core and Dathan, and swallow
them up? Who that carried off the threescore and ten thousand at one
sweep in David’s time? Shall I mention also those that were punished
individually! Cain, who was given up to a continual vengeance? (the son
of) Charmi, <span id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596) who was stoned
with his whole family? Or him, that suffered the same thing for
gathering sticks on the sabbath? The forty children who were consumed by
those beasts, and obtained no pardon even on the score of their age? And
if you would see these same things even after the times of grace, just
consider what great suffering the Jews had, how the women ate their
children, some roasting them, and some consuming them in other
ways: <span id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597) how after being given
up to irremediable famine, and wars varied and severe, they threw all
previous catastrophes into the shade by the exceeding greatness of their
own calamities. For that it was Christ Who did these things unto them,
hear Him declaring as much, both by parables, and clearly and
explicitly. By parables, as when He says, “But those that would not that
I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them” (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p41.1"></span>[Luke xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)<span id="vii.xxvii-p41.2"></span>);
and by that of the vineyard, and that of the marriage. But clearly and
explicitly, as when He threatens that they shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led away captive into the nations, and there shall
be upon the earth “distress of nations with perplexity, at the roaring
of the sea and waves; <span id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598) men’s
hearts failing them for fear.” ([Luke
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p42.2"></span>.) “And there shall be tribulation, such as
there never was, no, nor ever shall be.” ([Matt. xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxvii-p42.3"></span>.)
And what a punishment Ananias too and Sapphira suffered, for the theft
of a few pieces of money, ye all know. Seest thou not the daily
calamities also? Or have these too not taken place? Seest thou not now
men that are pining with famine? those that suffer elephantiasis, or are
maimed in body? those that live in constant poverty, those that suffer
countless irreparable evils? Now then will it be reasonable for some to
be punished, and some not? For if God be not unjust (and unjust He is
not), thou also wilt assuredly suffer punishment, if thou sinnest. But
if because He is merciful He doth not punish, then ought not these
either to have been punished. But now because of these words of yours,
God even here punisheth many, that when ye believe not the words of the
threatening, the deeds of vengeance ye may at least believe.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p43"></span>And since things of old do not affright
you so much, by things which happen in every generation, He correcteth
those that in every generation are growing listless. And what is the
reason, it may be said, why He doth not punish all here? That He may
give the others an interval <span id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599)
for repentance. Why then does He not take vengeance upon all in the next
world? <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600) It is lest many should
disbelieve in His providence. How many robbers are there who have been
taken, and how many that have left this life unpunished? Where is the
mercy of God then? it is my turn now to ask of thee. For supposing no
one at all had vengeance taken upon him, then you might have taken
refuge in this. But now that some are punished, and some are not, though
they be the worse sinners, how can it be reasonable that there be not
the same punishments for the same sins? How can those punished appear to
be else than wronged? What reason is there then why all are not punished
here? Hear His own defence for these things. For when some had died by
the falling of a tower on them: He said to those who raised a question
upon this, “Suppose ye that they were sinners above all men? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish” (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p45.1"></span>[Luke
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxvii-p45.2"></span>);
so exhorting us not to feel confident when others suffer punishment, and
we ourselves, though we have committed many transgressions, do not. For
except we change our conduct, we assuredly shall suffer. And how, it may
be said, is it that we are to be punished without end for sinning a
short time here? how, I ask, is it that in this world, <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601) those who in a short moment of time
have done one murder, are condemned to constant punishment in the mines?
“But it is not God that does this,” it may be said. How then came He to
keep the man with a palsy for thirty and eight years in so great
punishments? For that it was for sins that He punished him, hear what He
says, “Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more.” ([John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxvii-p46.1"></span>.)
Still it is said, he found a release. But the case is not so with the
other life. For that there, there will never be any release, <span
id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) hear from His own mouth, “Their
worm will not die, nor their fire be quenched.” ([Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="vii.xxvii-p47.4"></span>.)
And “these shall go into everlasting life, but these into everlasting
punishment.” ([Matt. xxv. 46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.5"></span>.) Now if the life be eternal, the
punishment is eternal. Seest thou not how severely He threatened the
Jews? Then have the things threatened come to pass, or were those that
were told them a mere talk? “One stone shall not remain upon another.”
([Luke xxi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.6"></span>.) And has it remained? But what, when He
says, “There shall be tribulation such as hath not been?” ([Matt. xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxvii-p47.7"></span>.)
Has it not come then? Read the history of Josephus, and thou wilt not be
able to draw thy breath even, at only hearing what they suffered for
their doings. This I say, not that I may pain you, but that I may make
you secure, and lest by having humored you overmuch, I should but make a
way for the endurance of sorer punishments. For why, pray, dost thou not
deem it right thou shouldest be punished for sinning? Hath He not told
thee all beforehand? Hath He not threatened thee? not come to thy
aid? <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603) not done things even
without number for thy salvation’s sake? Gave He thee not the laver of
Regeneration, and forgave He not all thy former sins? Hath He not after
this forgiveness, and the laver, also given thee the succor of
repentance if thou sin? Hath He not made the way to forgiveness of sins,
even after all this, easy <span id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) to
thee? Hear then what He hath enjoined: “If thou forgive thy neighbor, I
also will forgive thee” ([Matt.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.3"></span>), He says. What hardship is there in this?
“If ye judge the cause of the fatherless, and see that the widow have
right, come and let us converse together,” He saith, “and if your sins
be as purple, I will make them white as snow.” ([Isa.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.4"></span>.) What labor is there here? “Tell thy sins,
that thou mayest be justified.” (<span id="vii.xxvii-p49.5"></span>[Is.
xliii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.6"></span>. LXX.) What hardship is there in this?
“Redeem thy sins with alms.” ([Dan. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxvii-p49.7"></span>.)
What toilsomeness is there in this? The Publican said, “Be merciful to
me a sinner,” and “went down home justified.” (<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.8"></span>[Luke
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.9"></span>.) What labor is it to imitate the Publican?
And wilt thou not be persuaded even after this that there is punishment
and vengeance? At that rate thou wilt deny that even the devil is
punished. For, “Depart,” He says, “into the fire prepared for the devil
and his angels.” ([Matt. xxv. 41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.10"></span>.) Now if there be no hell, then neither is
he punished. But if he is punished, it is plain that we shall also. For
we also have disobeyed, even if it be not in the same way. And how
comest thou not to be afraid to speak such daring things? For when thou
sayest that God is merciful, and doth not punish, if He should punish he
will be found in thy case to be no longer merciful. See then unto what
language the devil leadeth you? And what are the monks that have taken
up with the mountains, and yield examples of such manifold
self-denial, <span id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) to go away
without their crown? For if the wicked are not to be punished, and there
is no recompense made to any one, some one else will say, perhaps, that
neither are the good crowned. Nay, it will be said, For this is suitable
with God, that there should be a kingdom only, and not a hell. Well
then, shall the whoremonger, and the adulterer, and the man who hath
done evils unnumbered, enjoy the same advantages with the man who has
exhibited soberness and holiness, and Paul is to stand with Nero, or
rather even the devil with Paul? For if there be no hell and yet there
will be a Resurrection of all, then the wicked will attain to the same
good things! And who would say this? Who even of men that were quite
crazed? or rather, which of the devils even would say this? For even
they confess that there is a hell. Wherefore also they cried out and
said, “Art Thou come hither to torment us before the time?” ([Matt.
8.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p50.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p51"></span>How then comest thou not to fear and
tremble, when even the devils confess what thyself art denying? Or how
is it that thou dost not see who is the teacher of these evil doctrines?
For he who deceived the first man, and under the pretext of greater
hopes, threw them out even of the blessings they had in possession, he
it is who now suggests the saying and fancying of these things. And for
this reason he persuades some to suspect there is no hell, that he may
thrust them into hell. As God on the other hand threateneth hell, and
made hell ready, that by coming to know of it thou mightest so live as
not to fall into hell. And yet if, when there is a hell, the devil
persuades thee to these things, how came the devils to confess it, if it
did not exist, <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) whose aim and
desire it is that we should not suspect anything of the kind, that
through fearlessness we might become the more listless, and so fall with
them into that fire? How then (it will be said) came they to confess it?
It was through their not bearing the compulsion laid upon them. Taking
all these things into consideration then, let those who talk in this way
leave off deceiving both themselves and others since even for these
words of theirs they will be punished for detracting (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p52.1"></span>διασύροντες</span>) from
those awful things, and relaxing the vigor <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) of many who are minded to be in
earnest, and do not even do as much as those barbarians, for they,
though they were ignorant of everything, when they heard that the city
was to be destroyed, were so far from disbelieving, that they even
groaned, and girded themselves with sackcloth, and were confounded, and
did not cease to use every means until they had allayed the wrath.
([Jonah iii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p53.2"></span>.) But dost thou, who hast had so great
experience of facts and of teaching, make light of what is told thee?
The contrary then will be thy fate. For as they through fear of the
words had not to undergo the vengeance in act, so thou who despisest the
threatening by words, wilt have to undergo the punishment in very deed.
And if now what thou art told seems a fable to thee, it will not,
however, seem so when the very things convince thee, in that Day. Have
you never noticed what He did even in this world? How when He met with
two thieves, He counted them not worthy of the same estate, but one He
led into the Kingdom, and the other He sent away into Hell? And why
speak I of a robber and murderer? For even the Apostle He did not spare,
when he had become a traitor, but even when He saw him rushing to the
halter, and hanging, and bursting asunder in the midst (for he did
“burst asunder, and all his bowels gushed out”) ([Acts i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxvii-p53.3"></span>),
still when He foresaw all these things, He let him suffer all the same,
giving thee from the present a proof of all that is in the other world
also. Do not then cheat yourselves, through being persuaded of the
devil. These devices are his. For if both judges, and masters, and
teachers, and savages, respect the good, and punish the evil, with what
reason is the contrary to be the case with God, while the good man and
he who is not so are deemed worthy of the same estate? And when will
they leave off their wickedness? For they who now are expecting
punishment, and are amongst so many terrors, those from the judges and
from the laws, and yet do not for this depart from iniquity; when on
their departing this life they are to lay aside even this fear, and are
not only not to be cast into hell, but are even to obtain a kingdom;
when will they leave doing wickedly? Is this then mercy, pray? to add to
wickedness, to set up rewards for iniquity, to count the sober and the
unchastened, the faithful and the irreligious, Paul and the devil, to
have the same deserts? But how long am I to be trifling? Wherefore I
exhort you to get you free from this madness, and having grown to be
your own masters, persuade your souls to fear and to tremble, that they
may at once be saved from the hell to come, and may, after passing the
life in this world soberly, attain unto the good things to come by the
grace and love towards man, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[i:1586](1110088.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p5"></span> Chrys. adopts the view which was common
in antiquity as to who the “weak” here mentioned were. He regards them
as judaizing Christians who were over-zealous for the Mosaic law and
even went beyond its explicit requirements to abstain from swine’s flesh
and abstained from meat altogether. Another class of interpreters have
supposed that the scruples of the “weak” concerning meat had the same
ground as in [1 Cor. 8:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#000), [1 Cor.
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor.
viii.](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#000)<span id="vii.xxvii-p5.2"></span>
and 1 Cor. x., viz., the fear of eating flesh and drinking wine that had
been used in the heathen sacrificial worship (So Rückert, Philippi,
Neander). The chief objection to the former view is that they could not
have derived their doctrine of entire abstinence from meat and wine from
the Mosaic law, which prohibits only the flesh of certain unclean
animals and does not prohibit wine at all except in particular cases.
The difficulty with the second view is that the whole passage has no
allusion to heathen sacrifices, which could hardly have been the case if
they had been the ground of the scruple. On the contrary in [Rom.
14.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxvii-p5.3"></span>
Paul in correcting these ascetic notions declares his conviction that
nothing is “unclean *of itself,*” showing that their view was that flesh
and wine possessed *in themselves* some power of pollution. The
difficulties connected with these explanations have led many recent
scholars to different explanations. Baur regarded the “weak” as
Ebionitic Christians, but the Ebionites abstained from flesh as
inherently sinful and it would seem that if this had been the opinion of
the “weak” that Paul could hardly have treated it so mildly. Since the
Ebionites date from about 70 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.4"></span>a.d.</span>, these ascetics at Rome could
have been Ebionitic only in the sense of having the germs of subsequent
Ebionism. An opinion similar to this has been advocated by Ritschl,
Meyer and Mangold. In their view the root of this asceticism was
Essenic. There was certainly a Judeo-Christian minority in the Roman
church. The ideas of the Essenes were widely disseminated among the Jews
at the time. It is natural to suppose that among the Roman Jews there
were Essenes or those of Essenic tendencies who upon their conversion
would associate their rigorous asceticism with the Christian doctrine of
the subjugation of the flesh. This view best meets the requirements of
the passage. The Essenes abstained wholly from wine and practised a
supra-legal regimen in regard to food. They would have no occasion to
array themselves against the apostle’s doctrine and he therefore treats
their scruples not in a polemic but in a cautious and conciliatory
spirit.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[i:1587](1110088.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p5.8"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>κενοῖ</span>, i.e. so as not to have to say
anything against them directly. St. Chrysostom turns the passage in that
way more than Theodoret. See on v. 4, which Theod. applies directly
against the Judaizers. His general remarks on the rhetoric of the
passage are independent of this question.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[i:1588](1110088.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p7"></span> [Rom.
14.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>
counsels receiving to Christian fellowship those affected by these
ascetic scruples but <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.2"></span>μὴ εἰς διακρίσεις διαλογισμῶν</span>. These
words have been variously rendered: (1) “not to doubtful disputations”
(A.V., R.V.); (2) “for decisions of doubts” (marg. R.V.); (3) not to
judgings of thoughts (Meyer); “not to discussions of opinions” (Godet).
It is clear that the apostle exhorts the church against allowing the
scruples in question to be matter of debate and division but whether he
means to place a limitation upon the church’s duty to receive the weak
brethren or whether he exhorts them to refrain from making the opinions
of the weak a matter of discussion and judgment, is a question still
unsettled. The following consideration deserve attention in the decision
of the question (1) Paul treats the “weak” throughout with great
forbearance and tenderness. (2) The church is the party exhorted. (3) It
is probably that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.3"></span>διακρίσεις διαλογισμῶν</span> refer to
actions or judgments which the church would be in danger of exercising
toward the weak. (4) It is likely that the question of eating meats or
herbs only ([Rom. 14.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.4"></span>) is a specimen of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p7.5"></span>διαλογισμοί</span>
referred to. (5) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.6"></span>Διακρίσις</span> means an act of
distinguishing things that differ, i.e. a logical or moral judgment. (6)
The question remains whether <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.7"></span>διαλογισμός</span> means a *doubt,* or a
*thought,* an *opinion.* The latter is the primary meaning and seems
preferable here. Then the meaning would be: receive these persons to
fellowship and abstain from criticisms and judgments upon their
conscientious opinions. The translation of our Eng. vs. “not to doubtful
disputations” is as ambiguous as the original phrase is in Greek, and
is, therefore, a faithful rendering in respect of ambiguity. These
translators seem to take <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.8"></span>διακρίσεις</span> as meaning “doubts”—a
meaning which that word cannot be shown to bear.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[i:1589](1110088.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p7.9"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p8"></span> He seems to mean, “are at doubt whether
they may acknowledge such.” So Œcumenius seems to take it, who
paraphrases this comment, and adds <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>καὶ χωρίζεσθαι</span>, “and separate
themselves.”

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[i:1590](1110088.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.2"></span>χομένους</span>, here opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p15.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvii-p15.4"></span>πεχομένους</span>.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[i:1591](1110088.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p21.1"></span>χωρὶς</span>: The construction seems
imperfect: the Translator suggests <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p21.2"></span>χωρισθεὶς</span>, “separating Himself from
all others.” If the passage be not corrupt, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p21.3"></span>χωρὶς τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων</span> is merely =
*in primis;* and so Field.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[i:1592](1110088.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p27"></span> Some <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p27.1"></span>mss.</span> and edd. “with all attesting the
subjection to Him.” The passage is found <span
id="vii.xxvii-p27.2"></span>[Is. xlv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxvii-p27.3"></span>,
probably the reading of the LXX., till it was corrected to suit the
Hebrew. See Parsons *ad loc.*

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[i:1593](1110088.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p30"></span> Sav. Mar. and one <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xxvii-p30.1"></span>ms.</span> end the
sentence, “having punishment exacted of the for those who have been made
by thee to offend.”

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[i:1594](1110088.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p31"></span> The oil representing especially deeds
of mercy. Hil. ad. 1. See St. Chrys. on [Rom. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxvii-p31.1"></span>.
p. 485.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[i:1595](1110088.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p32"></span> See [Matt.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028), [2 Pet.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p32.1"></span>[Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxvii-p32.2"></span>,
and [2 Pet. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p32.3"></span>. And with respect to giving cause of
offence to others, [Mark. ix. 44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p32.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[i:1596](1110088.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p32.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p33"></span> Field’s punctuation will give the
sense, “These then are mere words—the rich man is not punished, nor the
foolish virgins cast out, etc., but these are only threats!” which is
perhaps more vigorous. Compare Hom. xxxi. p. 496: also Browning’s
*Heretic’s Tragedy.*

<span id="vii.xxvii-p34"></span>“Who maketh God’s menace an idle word?

<span id="vii.xxvii-p35"></span>Saith, it no more means what it
proclaims

<span id="vii.xxvii-p36"></span>Than a damsel’s threat to her wanton
bird?

<span id="vii.xxvii-p37"></span>—For she too prattles of ugly names.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p38"></span>Saith, he knoweth but one thing—what he
knows?

<span id="vii.xxvii-p39"></span>That God is good and the rest is
breath.”

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[i:1597](1110088.htm#fr_1596) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p39.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p40"></span> Most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p40.1"></span>mss.</span> have “Charmi” or “Charmin;” one
“Achar,” one “Achar the son of Charmi.”

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[i:1598](1110088.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p41"></span> Josephus, B. J. vi., vii. c. 8., Euseb.
H. E. iii. 6.

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[i:1599](1110088.htm#fr_1598) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p42"></span> So most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p42.1"></span>mss.</span> of St. Chrysostom, and the best
of the N.T.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[i:1600](1110088.htm#fr_1599) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p44.1"></span>προθεσμίαν</span>, lit. a set time. He has
used the term before with especial view to the length of the time.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[i:1601](1110088.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p45"></span> i.e. so as to spare all in this.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[i:1602](1110088.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p46"></span> See Butler’s *Anal.* i. 2. “But all
this,” and i. 3. iii.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[i:1603](1110088.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p47"></span> So <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.2"></span>λύσιν</span>. Sav. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.3"></span>λῆξιν</span>, cessation: see 383, note 3.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[i:1604](1110088.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p47.8"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p48"></span> So Field: Vulg. “made thee afraid.”

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[i:1605](1110088.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p49"></span> St. Chrysostom must not be understood
here as making light of the labor of an effectual repentance, nor as
excluding the office of the Church in accepting the Penitent. His object
is to show that there is no such difficulty in repentance, as need be an
objection to our belief in eternal punishment. He is speaking of
repentance in the lowest degree, and he certainly held that different
degrees of it would obtain different degrees of benefit. As of
almsgiving on [Rom. xi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.1"></span>, p. 485. etc. “It is possible to gain
approval by thy last will, not indeed in such way as in thy lifetime,”
and more generally *ad Theodorum Lapsum,* t. i. p. 11, 12. Ben. where he
represents it as difficult, though not so much so as it might seem to
those who did not try it, and know its consolations: and Hom i. *de S.
Pentec. fin.* he says, “It is possible by diligence, prayer, and
exceeding watchfulness, to wipe out all our sins that are written down.
This then let us make our business all our days, that when we depart
thither, we may obtain some forgiveness, and all escape irrevocable
punishments.” Of confession he speaks strongly, *de Cruce et Latrone,*
Hom. i. t. 2, 407; B. *ad Pop. Ant.* Hom. 3, p. 42 E. on the Statues, p.
66 O.T. and of the power of the Priesthood to absolve, *de Sac.,* c. 3,
§5, t. i. p. 384 E. quoting [Jas.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxvii-p49.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[i:1606](1110088.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p49.11"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p50.1"></span>μυρίαν ἄσκησιν</span>: the term asceticism
is an insufficient translation of *ascesis,* since its termination takes
off the reality. The word “crown” hints at a play on its secular sense,
of gymnastic training.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[i:1607](1110088.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p52"></span> This sentence may be read so as to
avoid the fault in reasoning; he breaks off the supposition as too
absurd, and after a pause gives the true account of the case, which he
in fact assumes in the first clause. The whole passage is rhetorical,
and the first mention of the devils is introduced with tremendous power,
as almost any one must have felt in reading it.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[i:1608](1110088.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p53"></span> Or “undoing the awe,” as edd. before
Field, and some <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p53.1"></span>mss.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVI on Rom. xiv. 14.](1110089)
