[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110094)  [Next](1110096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxiv"></span> <span id="vii.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p2"></span>[Rom.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p3"></span>“Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them
which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Again</span> an exhortation, and prayer after
the exhortation. For after telling them to “mark them which cause <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) divisions,” and not to listen to
them, he proceeds, “And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly:” and, “The grace of our Lord be with you.” And notice how
gently too he exhorts them: doing it not in the character of a
counsellor, but that of a servant, and with much respect. For he calls
them brethren, and supplicates them likewise. For, “I beseech you,
brethren,” (he says). Then he also puts them on the defensive by showing
the deceitfulness of those who abused them. For as though they were not
at once to be discerned, he says, “I beseech you to mark,” that is, to
be exceedingly particular about, and to get acquainted with, and to
search out thoroughly—whom, pray? why, “those that cause divisions and
offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned.” <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) For this is, if anything the
subversion of the Church, the being in divisions. This is the devil’s
weapon, this turneth all things upside-down. For so long as the body is
joined into one, he has no power to get an entrance, but it is from
division that the offence cometh. And whence is division? From opinions
contrary to the teaching of the Apostles. And whence come opinions of
this sort? From men’s being slaves to the belly, and the other passions.
For “such,” he says, “serve not the Lord, but their own belly.” And so
there would be no offence, there would be no division, unless some
opinion were thought of contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles. And
this he here points out by saying, “contrary to the doctrine.” And he
does not say which we have taught, but “which ye have learned,” so
anticipating them, and showing that they were persuaded of and had heard
them and received them. And what are we to do to those who make mischief
in this way? He does not say have a meeting and come to blows, but
“avoid them.” For if it was from ignorance or error that they did this,
one ought to set them right. But if they sin willingly, spring away from
them. And in another place too he says this. For he says, “Withdraw from
every brother that walketh disorderly” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.4"></span>[2 Thess. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.5"></span>):
and in speaking to Timothy about the coppersmith, he gives him the like
advice, and says, “Of whom be thou ware also.” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.6"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.7"></span>.)
Then also to lash (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.8"></span>κωμῳδὥν</span>) those who dare to do such
things, he mentions also the reason of their devising this division.
“For they that are such,” he says, “serve not our Lord Christ, but their
own belly.” And this he said too when he wrote to the Philippians,
“Whose god is their belly.” ([Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.9"></span>.)
But here he appears to me to intimate those of the Jews, whom he ever
uses particularly to find fault with as gluttonous. For in writing to
Titus too, he said of them, “Evil beasts, slow bellies.” ([Titus
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.10"></span>[Tit. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.11"></span>,
see v. 10.) And Christ also blames them on this head: “Ye devour widows’
houses” ([Matt. xxiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.12"></span>), He says. And the Prophets accuse them of
things of the kind. For, “My beloved,” He says, “hath waxen fat and
gross, and hath kicked” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.13"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.14"></span>).
Wherefore also Moses exhorted them, and said, “When thou hast eaten and
drunken and art full, remember the Lord thy God.” ([Deut.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.15"></span>.) And in the Gospels, they who say to
Christ, “What sign showest thou unto us?” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.16"></span>[John vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#030)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.17"></span>)
pass over everything else, and remember the manna. So do they everywhere
appear to be possessed with this affection. How then comest thou not to
be ashamed at having slaves of the belly for thy teachers, when thou art
a brother of Christ? Now the ground of the error is this, but the mode
of attack is again a different disorder, viz. flattery. For it is by
“fair speeches,” he says, “that they deceive the hearts of the simple.”
For their attention reaches only to words; but their meaning is not
such, for it is full of fraud. And he does not say that they deceive
you, but “the hearts of the simple.” And even with this he was not
satisfied, but with a view to making this statement less grating, he
says,

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p7"></span>[Rom.
16.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>. “For your obedience is come abroad unto all
men.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p8"></span>This he does, not to leave them free to
be shameless, but to win them beforehand with encomiums, and the number
of his witnesses, to arrest their attention. For neither is it I alone
that am the witness, but the whole world. And he does not say for your
understanding, but, “your obedience:” that is, their compliance, which
was evidence of much meekness in them. “I am glad therefore on your
behalf.” And this is no small encomium too. Then, after the praise,
admonition. For lest, after liberating them from any charges against
them, he should make them the more listless, as not being observed; he
gives them another hint in the words,

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p9"></span>“I would have you wise unto that which is
good, and simple concerning evil.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p10"></span>You see then how he attacks them again,
and that without their suspecting it. For this looks like intimating
that some of them were apt to be led astray.

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p11"></span>[Rom.
16.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>. “And the God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p12"></span>For since he had spoken of those who
“caused divisions and offences among them,” he has mentioned “the God of
peace” also, that they might feel hopeful about the riddance of these
evils. For he that rejoiceth in this (i.e., peace) will put an end to
that which makes havoc of it. And he does not say, will subject, but
“will bruise” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>),
which is a stronger expression. And not those people only, but also him
who was the general over them herein, Satan. And not “will bruise”
merely, but “under your feet,” so that they may obtain the victory
themselves, and become noble by the trophy. And the time again is made a
ground of comfort. For he adds, “shortly.” And this was prayer and
prophecy as well at once. “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p13"></span>That greatest weapon; that impregnable
wall; that tower unshaken! For he reminds them of the grace, that he may
give them the more alacrity. Because if ye have been freed from the ills
more grievous by far, and freed by grace only, much more will ye be
freed from the lesser, now ye have become friends too, and contribute
your own share likewise. You see how he neither puts prayer without
works, nor works without prayer. For after giving them credit for their
obedience, than he prays; to show that we need both, our own part as
well as God’s part, if we are to be duly saved. For it was not before
only, but now too, even though we be great and in high esteem, we need
grace from Him.

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p14"></span>[Rom.
16.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>. “Timotheus my work-fellow saluteth you.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p15"></span>Observe the customary encomiums again.
“And Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p16"></span>This Jason Luke also mentions, and sets
before us his manliness also, when he says, that “they drew” him “to the
rulers of the city, crying,” etc. (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p16.2"></span>.)
And it is likely that the others too were men of note. For he does not
mention relations barely, unless they were also like him in
religiousness.

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p17"></span>[Rom.
16.22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>. “I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle, salute
you.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p18"></span>This too is no small encomium, to be
Paul’s amanuensis. Still it is not to pass encomiums on himself that he
says this, but that he might attach a warm love to him on their part,
for this ministration.

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p19"></span>[Rom.
16.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>. “Gaius mine host (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiv-p19.2"></span>ξένος</span>), and of
the whole Church, saluteth you.”

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p20"></span>See what a crown he has framed for him
by bearing witness to such great hospitality in him, and brought in the
entire Church into this man’s house! For by the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>ξένον</span>, used here,
he means a host, not a guest. But when you hear that he was Paul’s host,
do not admire him for his munificence only, but also for his strictness
of life. For except he were worthy of Paul’s excellency, he would never
have lodged there, since he, who took pains to go beyond <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) many of Christ’s commands, would
never have trespassed against that law, which bids us be very particular
about who receive us, and about lodging with “worthy” persons. ([Matt.
x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p21.3"></span>.) “Erastus, the chamberlain of the city,
salutes you, and Quartus a brother.” There is a purpose in his adding
“the chamberlain of the city,” for as he wrote to the Philippians, “They
of Cæsar’s household salute you” ([Phil. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p21.4"></span>),
that he might show that the Gospel had taken a hold upon great folk, so
here too he mentions the title with a view to the same object, and to
show that, to the man who gives heed, neither riches are a hindrance,
nor the cares of government, nor anything else of the kind.

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p22"></span>[Rom.
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#024)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>. “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.” <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699)

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p24"></span>See what we ought to begin and to end
with everywhere! For in this he laid the foundation of the Epistle, and
in this he putteth on the roof, at once praying for the mother of all
good things for them, and calling the whole of his loving-kindness to
their mind. For this is the best proof of a generous teacher, to benefit
his learners not by word only, but likewise by prayer, for which cause
also one said, “But let us give ourselves continually to prayers, and to
the ministry of the word.” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p24.1"></span>[Acts vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p25"></span>Who is there then to pray over us, since
Paul hath departed? These who <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700)
are the imitators of Paul. Only let us yield ourselves worthy of such
intercession (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>συνηγορίας</span>), that it may not be that
we hear Paul’s voice here only, but that hereafter, when we are
departed, we may be counted worthy to see the wrestler of Christ. <span
id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) Or rather, if we hear him here, we
shall certainly see him hereafter, if not as standing near him, yet see
him we certainly shall, glistening near the Throne of the king. <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) Where the Cherubim sing the glory,
where the Seraphim are flying, there shall we see Paul, with Peter, and
as a chief <span id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) and leader of the
choir of the Saints, and shall enjoy his generous love. For if when here
he loved men so, that when he had the choice of departing and being with
Christ, he chose to be here, much more will he there display a warmer
affection. I love Rome even for this, although indeed one has other
grounds for praising it, both for its greatness, and its antiquity, and
its beauty, and its populousness, and for its power, and its wealth, and
for its successes in war. But I let all this pass, and esteem it blessed
on this account, that both in his lifetime he wrote to them, and loved
them so, and talked with them whiles he was with us, and brought his
life to a close there. <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704)
Wherefore the city is more notable upon this ground, than upon all
others together. And as a body great and strong, it hath as two
glistening eyes the bodies of these Saints. Not so bright is the heaven,
when the sun sends forth his rays, as is the city of Rome, sending out
these two lights into all parts of the world. From thence will Paul be
caught up, from thence Peter. Just bethink you, and shudder (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.2"></span>φρίξατε</span>) at the
thought of what a sight Rome will see, when Paul ariseth suddenly from
that deposit, together with Peter, and is lifted up to meet the Lord.
(<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.3"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.4"></span>.)
What a rose will Rome send up to Christ! ([Is. xxxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.5"></span>)
what two crowns will the city have about it! what golden chains will she
be girded with! what fountains possess! Therefore I admire the city, not
for the much gold, not for the columns, not for the other display there,
but for these pillars of the Church. ([1 Cor. xv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#038)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.6"></span>.)
Would that it were now given me to throw myself round (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.7"></span>περιχυθἥναι</span>) the
body of Paul, and be riveted to the tomb, and to see the dust of that
body that “filled up that which was lacking” after “Christ” ([Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.8"></span>),
that bore “the marks” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.9"></span>στίγματα</span>,) (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.10"></span>[Gal. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.11"></span>)
that sowed the Gospel everywhere yea, the dust of that body through
which he ran to and fro everywhere! the dust of that body through which
Christ spoke, and the Light shone forth more brilliant than any
lightning, and the voice started out, more awful than any thunder to the
devils! through which he uttered that blessed voice, saying, “I could
wish that myself were accursed, for my brethren” ([Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.12"></span>),
through which he spake “before kings, and was not ashamed!” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.13"></span>[Ps. cxix.
46](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#046)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30.14"></span>)
through which we come to know Paul through which also Paul’s Master! Not
so awful to us is the thunder, as was that voice to the demons! For if
they shuddered at his clothes ([Acts xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.15"></span>), much more did they at his voice. This
led them away captive, this cleansed out the world, this put a stop to
diseases, cast out vice, lifted the truth on high, had Christ
riding <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) upon it, and
everywhere went about with Him; and what the Cherubim were, this was
Paul’s voice, for as He was seated upon those Powers, so was He upon
Paul’s tongue. For it had become worthy of receiving Christ, by speaking
those things only which were acceptable to Christ, and flying as the
Seraphim to height unspeakable! for what more lofty than that voice
which says, “For I am persuaded that neither Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus?” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p31.2"></span>.) What pinions doth not this discourse seem
to thee to have? what eyes? (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p31.3"></span>[Ez. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p31.4"></span>.)
It was owing to this that he said, “for we are not ignorant of his
devices.” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p31.5"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p31.6"></span>.)
Owing to this did the devils flee not only at hearing him speak, but
even at seeing his garments. This is the mouth, the dust whereof I would
fain see, through which Christ spake the great and secret things, and
greater than in His own person, (for as He wrought, so He also spake
greater things by the disciples, <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) ) through which the Spirit gave
those wondrous oracles to the world! For what good thing did not that
mouth effect? Devils it drave out, sins it loosed, tyrants it muzzled,
philosophers’ mouths it stopped, the world it brought over to God,
savages it persuaded to learn wisdom, all the whole order of the earth
it altered. Things in Heaven too it disposed what way it listed (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.3"></span>[1 Cor.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p32.4"></span>),
binding whom it would, and loosing in the other world, “according unto
the power given unto it.” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p32.5"></span>[2 Cor.
xiii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.6"></span>.) Nor is it that mouth only, but the heart
too would fain see the dust of, which a man would not do wrong to call
the heart of the world, and a fountain of countless blessings, and a
beginning, and element of our life. For the spirit of life was furnished
out of it all, and was distributed through the members of Christ, not as
being sent forth by arteries, but by a free choice of good deeds. This
heart was so large, as to take in entire cities, and peoples, and
nations. “For my heart” he says, “is enlarged.” ([2 Cor.
6.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.7"></span>.) Yet even a heart thus large, did this
very charity that enlarged it many a time straiten and oppress. For he
says, “Out of much affliction (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.8"></span>θλίψεως</span>) and anguish (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiv-p32.9"></span>συνοχἥς</span>) of heart
I wrote unto you.” ([2 Cor. 2.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.10"></span>.) I were desirous to see that heart even
after its dissolution, which burned at each one that was lost, which
travailed a second time with the children that had proved abortions
(<span id="vii.xxxiv-p32.11"></span>[Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.12"></span>), which saw God, <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) (“for the pure in heart,” He says,
“shall see God,”) ([Matt. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p33.1"></span>) which became a Sacrifice, (“for a
sacrifice to God is a contrite heart,”) (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p33.2"></span>[Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p33.3"></span>)
which was loftier than the heavens, which was wider than the world,
which was brighter than the sun’s beam, which was warmer than fire,
which was stronger than adamant, which sent forth rivers, (“for rivers,”
it says, “of living water shall flow out of his belly,”) ([John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p33.4"></span>)
wherein was a fountain springing up, and watering, not the face of the
earth, but the souls of men, whence not rivers only, but even fountains
of <span id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) tears, issued day and
night, which lived the new life, not this of ours, (for “I live,” he
says, “yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,” ([Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.6"></span>)
so Paul’s heart was His heart, and a tablet of the Holy Spirit, and a
book of grace); which trembled for the sins of others, (for I fear, he
says, lest by any means “I have bestowed labor upon you in vain; ([Gal.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.7"></span>) lest as the serpent beguiled Eve; (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.8"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.9"></span>)
lest when I come I should find you not such as I would;”) ([2 Cor.
12.20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.10"></span>) which both feared for itself, and was
confiding too, (for I fear, he says, “lest by any means after having
preached to others I myself should be a castaway,” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.11"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.12"></span>)
And, “I am persuaded that neither angels nor powers shall be able to
separate us;”) (alluding to [Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.13"></span>)
which was counted worthy to love Christ as no other man loved Him: which
despised death and hell, yet was broken down by brothers’ tears, (for he
says, “what mean ye to weep and to break mine heart?”) (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.14"></span>[Acts xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.15"></span>)
which was most enduring, and yet could not bear to be absent from the
Thessalonians by the space of an hour! (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.16"></span>[1 Thess. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.17"></span>;
iii. 10.) Fain would I see the dust of hands that were in a chain,
through the imposition of which the Spirit was furnished, through which
the divine writings were written, (for “behold how large a letter I have
written unto you with mine own hand:” ([Gal. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.18"></span>)
and again, “The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand,”) (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.19"></span>[1 Cor. xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.20"></span>)
of those hands at the sight of which the serpent “fell off into the
fire.” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.21"></span>[Acts xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.22"></span>.)
Fain would I see the dust of those eyes which were blinded gloriously,
which recovered their sight again for the salvation of the world; which
even in the body were counted worthy to see Christ, which saw earthly
things, yet saw them not, which saw the things which are not seen, which
saw not sleep, which were watchful at midnight, which were not effected
as eyes are. <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) I would also see
the dust of those feet, which ran through the world and were not weary;
which were bound in the stocks when the prison shook, which went through
parts habitable or uninhabited, which walked on so many journeys. And
why need I speak of single parts? Fain would I see the tomb, where the
armor of righteousness is laid up, the armor of light, the limbs which
now live, but which in life were made dead; and in all whereof Christ
lived, which were crucified to the world, which were Christ’s members,
which were clad in Christ, were a temple of the Spirit, an holy
building, “bound in the Spirit,” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.2"></span>[Acts xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p35.3"></span>)
riveted to the fear of God, which had the marks of Christ. This body is
a wall to that City, which is safer than all towers, and than thousands
of battlements. And with it is that of Peter. For he honored him while
alive. For he “went up to see Peter,” (<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.4"></span>[Gal. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p35.5"></span>)
and therefore even when departed grace deigned to give him the same
abode with him. Fain would I see the spiritual Lion. For as a lion
breathing (Gr. sending,) ([Song of Sol.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.6"></span>) forth fire (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.7"></span>πὕρ ἀφιεὶς</span>) upon the herds of foxes,
so rushed he upon the clan of demons and philosophers, and as the burst
of some thunderbolt, was borne down into the host of the devil. ([Luke
xiii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.8"></span>.) For he did not even come to set the
battle in array against him, since he feared so and trembled at him, as
that if he saw his shadow, and heard his voice, he fled even at a
distance. And so did he deliver over to him the fornicator, though at a
distance, and again snatched him out of his hands ([1 Cor.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005), [2 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.9"></span>); and so others also, that they might be
taught “not to blaspheme.” (<span id="vii.xxxiv-p35.10"></span>[1 Tim.
i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.11"></span>.) And consider how he sent forth his own
liegemen against him, rousing them, suppling them. And at one time he
says to the Ephesians, “We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers.” ([Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.12"></span>.) Then too he puts our prize in heavenly
places. For we struggle not for things of the earth, he says, but for
Heaven, and the things in the Heavens. And to others, he says, “Know ye
not that we shall judge Angels? how much more the things of this life?”
([1 Cor. vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.13"></span>.) Let us then, laying all this to heart,
stand nobly; for Paul was a man, partaking of the same nature with us,
and having everything else in common with us. But because he showed such
great love toward Christ, he went up above the Heavens, and stood with
the Angels. And so if we too would rouse ourselves up some little, and
kindle in ourselves that fire, we shall be able to emulate that holy
man. For were this impossible, he would never have cried aloud, and
said, “Be ye imitators of me, as I am of Christ.” ([1 Cor. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p35.14"></span>.)
Let us not then admire him only, or be struck with him only, but imitate
him, that we too may, when we depart hence, be counted worthy to see
him, and to share the glory unutterable, which God grant that we may all
attain to by the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom, and with Whom, be glory to the Father, with the Holy
Ghost, now and evermore. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[i:1697](1110095.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p5"></span> Field with most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> omits <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>ποιοῦντας</span>; of course it is to be
supplied from the context.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[i:1698](1110095.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6"></span> At Rome also there were, as in so many
other places, those who, either within or in contact with the church,
made divisions and perverted the true Christian teaching. The Epistle to
the Romans deals but to a small extent directly with these persons. It
is, in the main, constructive. Galatians is a letter on similar lines of
teaching but more polemic in character. In the case of how few of the
churches to which the apostle wrote could he spare himself the
unpleasant task of warning them against heretics or immoral tendencies
of life. In Corinth the abuses were chiefly of a moral and practical
character. In Colossæ and perhaps in Ephesus, there was a Judeo-Gnostic
theosophy which threatened the Christian faith of the people. The Roman
church was, probably, predominantly Gentile and was a Pauline church, in
the sense, that, though not founded by Paul, it had been trained in the
Pauline “gospel,” the type of doctrine more or less peculiar to that
apostle. The extended refutation of Jewish claims to special divine
favor in [Rom. 2:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#000), [Rom.
3:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#000)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.
as well as the consideration of the problem offered by the lapse of the
Jews in [Rom. 9:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#000), [Rom.
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#000), [Rom.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>., shows that there was an reportant Jewish
element in the church, while these concluding warnings ([Rom.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p6.3"></span>)
intimate the presence of Judaizing heretics who sought to conceal their
real wickedness by smooth and plausible language and thus to lead
innocent and unsuspecting Christians astray.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[i:1699](1110095.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p21.2"></span>περβαίνειν</span>, see p. 441.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[i:1700](1110095.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p23"></span> The <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>mss.</span> authorities and vss. strongly
favor the omission of [Rom. 16.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#024)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p23.2"></span> (as, A, B, C, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p23.3"></span>א</span>, Copt., Eth., Vulg.) It appears to
be a repetition of the benediction in [Rom.
16.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p23.4"></span> and is omitted by most critics.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[i:1701](1110095.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p26"></span> Field thinks he points to the Bishop
and clergy present.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[i:1702](1110095.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p27"></span> The following passage strongly
illustrates what St. Chrysostom says, in the first page of the
Introduction, of his affectionate intimacy with the Apostle, through
meditation on his writings.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[i:1703](1110095.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p28"></span> The Martyrs were thought to be admitted
to the Beatific Vision at once. See Tertullian *de Anima,* 55, but this
is a subject on which the Fathers speak with caution.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[i:1704](1110095.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>κορυφαῖον</span>, not of the Apostles, but
of the Saints in general. The manner in which St. Paul is coupled with
St. Peter, is remarkable, as in the Roman Breviary, *Vesp. et Laud.
Commem. Com. de Apost.* “Peter the Apostle, and Paul the Teacher of the
Gentiles, these taught us Thy Law, O Lord. R. Thou shalt make them
princes over all the earth.” In the York Breviary, *F. SS. App. Petr. et
Paul, ad Vesp.* Hymn, St. 2. “These are the two olive trees before the
Lord ([Zech. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p29.2"></span>), and the candlesticks beaming with light,
the two bright luminaries of Heaven.” And again, *non impar Paulus
huic.* St. Augustin observes, *ad Bonif. cont. du. Ep. Pelag.* 1, 3, c.
3, Ben. t. 10. “When one says, ‘The Apostle,’ without saying what
Apostle, no one understands any but Paul, because he is best known from
the number of his Epistles, and because he labored most.” St. Maximus,
Hom. 5, *de Nat. Petr. et Paul,* “Therefore the blessed Peter and Paul
are eminent among all, and have a kind of peculiar precedency, but
between themselves, which is to be preferred to the other, is uncertain.
For I think they are equal in merits because they are equal in
suffering.” He also says in the same Homily, “To Peter, as to a good
Steward, He gave the key of the Kingdom of Heaven. On Paul, as on an
able Teacher, He enjoined the mastership in the teaching of the Church;
that is, that whom the one has instructed unto salvation, the other may
receive into rest; that whose hearts Paul hath opened by the teaching of
his words, to their souls Peter may open the Kingdom of Heaven. For Paul
too did also in a manner receive the key of knowledge from Christ.” And
St. Gregory, 1, 1 *Dial*. c. 12. “The Apostle Paul is brother in
Apostolical preëminence (*principatu*) to Peter, the first of the
Apostles.” See also St. Chrys. on [Gal. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p29.3"></span>,
p. 25 O.T. where he says, “equal in dignity with him, for at present I
will say no more,” and [Gal. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p29.4"></span>,
p. 34 O.T.; Tertull. *adv. Marcion.* 1, 5, and others, consider him
especially intended in Jacob’s blessing of Benjamin. St. Cyr. *Hier.
Cat.* vi. p. 68, O.T. speaks of “That goodly pair, Peter and Paul, the
Rulers of the Church.” Many more passages might be cited, but these may
suffice to show in what esteem St. Paul was held among the Fathers, and
at the same time that this did not interfere with their view of the
prerogatives of St. Peter.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[i:1705](1110095.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p29.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p30"></span> Some <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>mss.</span> add, “and they still possess his
sacred body.”

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[i:1706](1110095.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p30.16"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p31"></span> See Macarius, Hom. 1. and 7, also
Schaare *Orah. ap. Knorrium, Kabbala Denudata,* t. l. p. 507, where this
interpretation is carried farther.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[i:1707](1110095.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p31.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p32"></span> Alluding to <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>[John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p32.2"></span>;
xvi. 12.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[i:1708](1110095.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p32.13"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p33"></span> St. Augustin *de Gen. ad Lit.* xii. 35.
He has many passages on “seeing God.”

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[i:1709](1110095.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p33.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34"></span> [Acts
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#019), [2 Cor.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004), [Luke
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007), [Ps.
134:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>[Acts xx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.2"></span>;
[2 Cor. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.3"></span> cf. [Luke xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxxiv-p34.4"></span>,
[Ps. cxxxiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[i:1710](1110095.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="vii.xxxiv-p34.23"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiv-p35"></span> So all <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiv-p35.1"></span>mss</span>. Sav. τῶν ὀφθαλμιώντων, and so
Ben. translating it “as the envious,” which must be the meaning if it is
the true reading.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Subjects](1110096)
