[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110038)  [Next](1110040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxxiv"></span> <span id="vi.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIV.</span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p2"></span>[Acts XV.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p3"></span>“Paul also and Barnabas continued in
Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others
also.”

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Observe</span> again their humility, how they
let others also take part in the preaching. “And some days after Paul
said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city
where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. And
Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark. But
Paul thought not good (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>ξίου</span> see note 3, p. 213) to take him
with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them
to the work. And the contention (or exasperation) was so sharp between
them, that they departed asunder one from the other.” ([Acts
15.36-39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>.) And already indeed Luke has described to us
the character of the Apostles, <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790)
that the one was more tender and indulgent, but this one more strict and
austere. For the gifts are diverse—(the gifts, I say), for that this is
a gift is manifest—but the one befitting one, the other another set of
characters, and if they change places, harm results instead of good.
(*b*) In the Prophets <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) too we
find this: diverse minds, diverse characters: for instance, Elias
austere, Moses meek. So here Paul is more vehement. And observe for all
this, how gentle he is. “Thought not good,” it says, “to take him with
them that had departed from them from Pamphylia.” (*a*) And there seems
indeed to be exasperation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>παροξυσμός</span>), but in fact the whole
matter is a plan of the Divine Providence, that each should receive his
proper place: and it behooved that they should not be upon a par, but
the one should lead, and the other be led. “And so Barnabas took Mark,
and sailed unto Cyprus; and Paul chose Silas, and departed, being
recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. And he went through
Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches.” ([Acts
15.39-41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>.) And this also is a work of Providence. For
the Cyprians had exhibited nothing of the like sort as they at Antioch
and the rest: and those needed the softer character, but these needed
such a character as Paul’s. “Which <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) then,” say you, “did well? he that
took, or he that left?” \*\*\* (*c*) For just as a general would not
choose to have a low person always to his baggage-bearer, so neither did
the Apostle. This corrected the other’s, and instructed (Mark) himself.
“Then did Barnabas ill?” say you. “And how is it not amiss (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.8"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.9"></span>τοπον</span>), that upon
so small a matter there should arise so great an evil?” In the first
place then, no evil did come of it, if, sufficing each for whole
nations, they were divided the one from the other, but a great good. And
besides, they would not readily have chosen to leave each other. But
admire, I pray you, the writer, how he does not conceal this either.
“But at any rate,” say you, “if they must needs part, let it be without
exasperation.” Nay, but if nothing more, observe this, that in this too
is shown what was of man <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) (in the
preaching of the Gospel). For if the like behooved to be shown (even) in
what Christ did, much more here. And besides, the contention cannot be
said to be evil, when each disputes for such objects (as here) and with
just reason. I grant you, if the exasperation were in seeking his own,
and contending for his own honor, this might well be (reproved): but if
wishing, both the one and the other, to instruct and teach, the one took
this way and the other that, what is there to find fault with? For in
many things they acted upon their human judgment; for they were not
stocks or stones. And observe how Paul impeaches (Mark), and gives the
reason. For of his exceeding humility <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) he reverenced Barnabas, as having been
partner with him in so great works, and being with him: but still he did
not so reverence him, as to overlook (what was necessary). Now which of
them advised best, it is not for us to pronounce: but thus far (we may
affirm), that it was a great arrangement of Providence, if these <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) were to be vouchsafed a second
visitation, but those were not to be visited even once. <span
id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796)

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p12"></span>(*a*) “Teaching and preaching the word of
the Lord.” ([Acts 15.35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.) They <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) did not simply tarry in Antioch, but
taught. What did they “teach,” and what “preach” (evangelize)? They both
(taught) those that were already believers, and (evangelized) those that
were not yet such. “And some days after,” etc. ([Acts
15.36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>.) For because there were offences without
number, their presence was needed. (*d*) “How they do,” he says. And
this he did not know: naturally. See him ever alert, solicitous, not
bearing to sit idle, though he underwent dangers without end. Do you
mark, it was not of cowardice that he came to Antioch? He acts just as a
physician does in the case of the sick. And the need of visiting them he
showed by saying, “In which we preached the word. And Barnabas
determined,” etc. ([Acts 15.37-40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>.) (So) Barnabas <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) “departed, and went not with (him).”
(*b*) The point to be considered, is not that they differed in their
opinions, but that they accommodated themselves the one to the other
(seeing), that thus it was a greater good their being parted: <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) and the matter took a pretext from
this. What then? did they withdraw in enmity? God forbid! In fact you
see after this Barnabas receiving many encomiums from Paul in the
Epistles. There was “sharp contention,” it says, not enmity nor
quarrelling. The contention availed so far as to part them. “And
Barnabas took Mark,” etc. And with reason: for what each supposed to be
profitable, he did not forego <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800)
thereafter, because of the fellowship with the other. Nay, it seems to
me that the parting took place advisedly (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p16.5"></span>κατὰ σύνεσιν</span>), and that they said one
to another, “As I wish not, and thou wishest, therefore that we may not
fight, let us distribute the places.” So that in fact they did this,
altogether yielding each to the other: for Barnabas wished Paul’s plan
to stand, therefore withdrew; on the other hand, Paul wished the other’s
plan to stand, therefore he withdrew. Would to God we too made such
separations, as to go forth for preaching. A wonderful man this is; and
exceedingly great! To Mark this contest was exceedingly beneficial. For
the awe inspired by Paul converted him, while the kindness of Barnabas
caused that he was not left behind: so that they contend indeed, but the
gain comes to one and the same end. For indeed, seeing Paul choosing to
leave him, he would be exceedingly awed, and would condemn himself, and
seeing Barnabas so taking his part, he would love him exceedingly: and
so the disciple was corrected by the contention of the teachers: so far
was he from being offended thereby. For if indeed they did this with a
view to their own honor, he might well be offended: but if for his
salvation, and they contend for one and the same object, to show that he
who honored him \* \* \* had well determined, <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) what is there amiss (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p17.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p17.5"></span>τοπον</span>) in it?

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p18"></span>(*e*) “But Paul,” it says, “departed,
having chosen Silas, and being commended to the grace of God.” What is
this? They prayed it says: they besought God. See on all occasions how
the prayer of the brethren can do great things. And now he journeyed by
land, wishing even by his journeying to benefit those who saw (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>τοὺς ὁρὥντας</span>) him.
For when indeed they were in haste they sailed, but now not so. (*c*)
“And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches. Then
came he to Derbe and Lystra.” ([Acts
15.41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p18.2"></span>.) Mark the wisdom of Paul: he does not go to
other cities before he has visited them which had received the Word. For
it is folly to run at random. This let us also do: let us teach the
first in the first place, that these may not become an hindrance to them
that are to come after.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p19"></span>“And, behold a certain disciple was
there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewess,
and believed; but his father was a Greek: which was well reported of by
the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. Him would Paul have to go
forth with him; and took and circumcised him because of the Jews which
were in those quarters; for they knew all that his father was a Greek.”
([Acts 16.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>.) It is indeed amazing, the wisdom of Paul!
He that has had so many battles about circumcision, he that moved all
things to this end, and did not give over until he had carried his
point, now that the decree is made sure, circumcises the disciple. He
not only does not forbid others, but himself does this thing. (*b*)
“Him,” it says, “he would have to go forth with him.” And the wonder is
this, that he even took him unto him. <span
id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) “Because of the Jews,” it says, “which
were in those parts:” for they would not endure to hear the word from
one uncircumcised. (*a*) Nothing could be wiser. So that in all things
he looked to what was profitable: he did nothing upon his own preference
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p20.3"></span>προλήψει</span>).
(*c*) And what (then)? Mark the success: he circumcised, that he might
take away circumcision: for he preached the decrees of the Apostles.
“And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees
for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and elders which were at
Jerusalem. And so were the Churches established in the faith, and
increased in number daily.” ([Acts
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p20.4"></span>.)
Dost thou mark fighting, and by fighting, edification? Not warred upon
by others, but themselves doing contrary things, so they edified the
Church! They introduced a decree not to circumcise, and he circumcises!
“And so were the Churches,” it says, “established in the faith,” and in
multitude: “increased,” it says, “in number daily.” Then he does not
continue to tarry with these, as having come to visit them: but how? he
goes further. “Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region
of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in
Asia,” ([Acts 16.6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.5"></span>.) having left Phrygia and Galatia, they
hastened into the interior. For, it says, “After they were come to
Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them
not.” ([Acts 16.7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.6"></span>.) Wherefore they were forbidden, he does not
say, but that they were “forbidden,” he does say, teaching us to obey
and not ask questions, and showing that they did many things as men.
“And the Spirit,” it says, “suffered them not: but having passed by
Mysia they came down to Troas.” ([Acts
16.8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.7"></span>.) “And a vision appeared to Paul in the
night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over
into Macedonia, and help us.” ([Acts
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.8"></span>.) Why a vision, and not the Holy Ghost?
because He forbade the other. <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) He
would even in this way draw them over: since to the saints also He
appeared in a dream, and in the beginning (Paul) himself saw a vision,
“a man coming in and laying his hands upon him.” ([Acts
9.12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p21.6"></span>.) In <span id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804)
this manner also Christ appears to him, saying, “Thou must stand before
Cæsar.” Then for this reason also He draws him thither, that the
preaching may be extended. This is why he was forbidden to tarry long in
the other cities, Christ urging him on. For these were to enjoy the
benefit of John for a long time, and perhaps did not extremely need him
(Paul), but thither he behooved to go. And now he crosses over and goes
forth. “And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavored to
go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for
to preach the Gospel unto them.” ([Acts
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p22.5"></span>.) Then the writer mentions also the places,
as relating a history, and showing where he made a stay (namely), in the
greater cities, but passed by the rest. “Therefore loosing from Troas,
we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to
Neapolis; and from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that
part of Macedonia, and a colony.” ([Acts
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p22.6"></span>.)
It is a high distinction for a city, the being a colony. “And in this
city we were tarrying certain days.” But let us look over again what has
been said.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p23"></span>(Recapitulation.) “And after some days,
Paul said,” etc. ([Acts 15.36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>.) He put to Barnabas a necessity for their
going abroad, saying “Let us visit the cities in which we preached the
word.” “But Paul begged,” etc. ([Acts
15.38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p23.2"></span>.) And yet no need for him to beg, who had to
make an accusation presently. This <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) happens even in the case where God and
men are the parties: the man requests, God is wroth. For instance, when
He saith, “If her father had spit in her face” (<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p24.1"></span>[Num. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p24.2"></span>):
and again, “Let me alone, and in Mine anger I will blot out this
people.” (<span id="vi.xxxiv-p24.3"></span>[Ex. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p24.4"></span>.)
And Samuel when he mourns for Saul. (<span id="vi.xxxiv-p24.5"></span>[1
Sam. xv. 35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p24.6"></span>.) For by both, great good is done. Thus also
here: the one is wroth, the other not so. The same happens also in
matters where we are concerned. And the sharp contention with good
reason, that Mark may receive a lesson, and the affair may not seem mere
stage-playing. For it is not to be thought that he <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) who bids, “Let not the sun go down
upon your wrath,” ([Eph. iv. 26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.12"></span>) would have been wroth because of such a
matter as this: nor that he who on all occasions gave way would not have
given way here, he who so greatly loved Paul that before this he sought
him in Tarsus, and brought him to the Apostles, and undertook the alms
in common with him, and in common the business relating to the decree.
But they take themselves so as to instruct and make perfect by their
separation them that need the teaching which was to come from them. And
he rebukes others indeed, but bids do good to all men. As in fact he
does elsewhere, saying, “But ye, be not weary in well-doing.” (<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.13"></span>[2 Thess. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p25.14"></span>.)
This we also do in our common practice. Here it seems to me that others
also were alike displeased with Paul. And thereupon taking them also
apart, he does all, and exhorts and admonishes. Much can concord do,
much can charity. Though it be for a great matter thou askest; though
thou be unworthy, thou shalt be heard for thy purpose of heart: fear
not.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p26"></span>“He went,” it says, “through” the cities
“And, behold, there was a disciple, by name Timothy, who had a good
report of the brethren which were in Lystra and Iconium.” ([Acts
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041), [Acts
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>.) Great was the grace of Timothy. When
Barnabas departed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p26.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p26.3"></span>πέστη</span>), he finds another, equivalent
to him. Of him he saith, “Remembering thy tears and thy unfeigned faith,
which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice.”
([2 Tim. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p26.4"></span>.) His father continued to be a
Gentile, <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) and therefore it was
that (Timothy) was not circumcised. (*a*) Observe the Law already
broken. Or if not so, I suppose he was born after the preaching of the
Gospel but this is perhaps not so. (*c*) He was about to make him a
bishop, and it was not meet that he should be uncircumcised. *(e)* And
this was not a small matter, seeing it offended after so long a
time: <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) (*b*) “for from a child,”
he says, “thou hast known the Holy Scriptures.” ([2 Tim.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>.) (*d*) “And as they went through the
cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep.” ([Acts
16.4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p28.2"></span>.) For until then, there was no need for the
Gentiles to keep any such. The beginning of the abrogation was the
Gentiles’ not keeping these things, and being none the worse for it: nor
having any inferiority in respect of faith: anon, of their own will they
abandoned the Law. (*f*) Since therefore he was about to preach, that he
might not smite the Jews a double blow, he circumcised Timothy. And yet
he was but half (a Jew by birth), <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) his father being a Greek: but yet,
because that was a great point carried in the cause of the Gentiles, he
did not care for this: for the Word must needs be disseminated:
therefore also he with his own hands circumcised him. <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) “And so were the churches established
in the faith.” Do you mark here also how from going counter (to his own
object) a great good results? “And increased in number daily.” ([Acts
16.5](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.3"></span>.) Do you observe, that the circumcising not
only did no harm, but was even of the greatest service? “And a vision
appeared unto Paul in the night.” ([Acts
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.4"></span>.) Not now by Angels, as to Philip, as to
Cornellius, but how? By a vision it is now shown to him: in more human
sort, not now as before (i.e., [Acts
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30.5"></span>)
in more divine manner. For where the compliance is more easy, it is done
in more human sort; but where great force was needed, there in more
divine. For since he was but urged to preach, to this end it is shown
him in a dream: but to forbear preaching, he could not readily endure:
to this end the Holy Ghost reveals it to him. Thus also it was then with
Peter, “Arise, go down.” ([Acts
10.20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.6"></span>.) For of course the Holy Spirit did not work
what was otherwise easy: but (here) even a dream sufficed him. And to
Joseph also, as being readily moved to compliance, the appearance is in
a dream, but to the rest in waking vision. ([Matt.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020), [Matt.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30.7"></span>.)
Thus to Cornelius, and to Paul himself. “And lo, a man of Macedonia,”
etc. and not simply enjoining, but “beseeching,” and from the very
persons in need of (spiritual) cure. ([Acts
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003), [Acts
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30.8"></span>.)
“Assuredly gathering,” it says, “that the Lord had called us.” ([Acts
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.9"></span>), that is, inferring, both from the
circumstance that Paul saw it and none other, and from the having been
“forbidden by the Spirit,” and from their being on the borders; from all
these they gathered. “Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a
straight course,” etc. ([Acts
16.11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.10"></span>.) That is, even the voyage made this
manifest: for there was no tardiness. It became the very root of
Macedonia. <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) It was not always in
the way of “sharp contention” that the Holy Spirit wrought: but this so
rapid progress (of the Word) was a token that the thing was more than
human. And yet it is not said that Barnabas was exasperated, but,
“Between them there arose a sharp contention.” ([Acts
15.39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.11"></span>.) If the one was not exasperated neither
was the other.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p32"></span>Knowing this, let us not merely pick out
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p32.2"></span>κλέγωμεν</span>) these
things, but let us learn and be taught by them: for they were not
written without a purpose. It is a great evil to be ignorant of the
Scriptures: from the things we ought to get good from, we get evil. Thus
also medicines of healing virtue, often, from the ignorance of those who
use them, ruin and destroy: and arms which are meant to protect, are
themselves the cause of death unless one know how to put them on. But
the reason is, that we seek everything rather than what is good for
ourselves. And in the case of a house, we seek what is good for it, and
we would not endure to see it decaying with age, or tottering, or hurt
by storms: but for our soul we make no account: nay, even should we see
its foundations rotting, or the fabric and the roof, we make no account
of it. Again, if we possess brute creatures, we seek what is good for
them: we call in both horse-feeders and horse-doctors, and all
besides: <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) we attend to their
housing, and charge those who are entrusted with them, that they may not
drive them at random or carelessly, nor take them out by night at
unseasonable hours nor sell away their provender; and there are many
laws laid down by us for the good of the brute creatures: but for that
of our soul there is no account taken. But why speak I of brute
creatures which are useful to us? There are many who keep small birds
(or “sparrows”) which are useful for nothing except that they simply
amuse, and there are many laws even about them, and nothing is neglected
or without order, and we take care for everything rather than for our
own selves. Thus we make our selves more worthless than all. And if
indeed a person abusively call us “dog,” we are annoyed: but while we
are opprobrious to ourselves, not in word, but in deed, and do not even
bestow as much care on our soul as on dogs, we think it no great harm.
Do you see how all is full of darkness? How many are careful about their
dogs, that they may not be filled with more than the proper food, that
so they may be keen and fit for hunting, being set on by famine and
hunger: but for themselves they have no care to avoid luxury: and the
brute creatures indeed they teach to exercise philosophy, while they let
themselves sink down into the savageness of the brutes. The thing is a
riddle. “And where are your philosophic brutes?” There are such; or,
say, do you not take it to be philosophy, when a dog gnawed with hunger,
after having hunted and caught his prey, abstains from the food; and
though he sees his meal ready before him, and with hunger urging him on,
yet waits for his master? Be ashamed of yourselves: teach your bellies
to be as philosophic. You have no excuse. When you have been able to
implant such philosophic self-command in an irrational nature, which
neither speaks nor hears reason, shall you not much more be able to
implant it in yourself? For that it is the effect of man’s care, not of
nature is plain: since otherwise all dogs ought to have this habit. Do
you then become as dogs. For it is you that compel me to fetch my
examples thence: for indeed they should be drawn from heavenly things;
but since if I speak of those, you say, “Those are (too) great,”
therefore I speak nothing of heavenly things: again, if I speak of Paul,
you say, “He was an Apostle:” therefore neither do I mention Paul: if
again I speak of a man, you say, “That person could do it:” therefore I
do not mention a man even, but a brute creature; a creature too, that
has not this habit by nature, lest you should say that it effected this
by nature, and not (which is the fact) from choice: and what is
wonderful, choice not self-acquired, but (the result of) your care. The
creature does not give a thought to the fatigue, the wear and tear it
has undergone in running down the prey, not a thought to this, that by
its own proper toil it has made the capture: but casting away all these
regards, it observes the command of its master, and shows itself
superior to the cravings of appetite. “True; because it looks to be
praised, it looks to get a greater meal.” Say then to yourself, that the
dog through hope of future pleasure, despises that which is present:
while you do not choose for hope of future good things to despise those
which are present; but he indeed knows, that, if he tastes of that food
at the wrong time and against his master’s will, he will both be
deprived of that, and not get even that which was apportioned to him,
but receive blows instead of food: whereas you cannot even perceive
this, and that which he has learnt by dint of custom, you do not succeed
in acquiring even from reason. Let us imitate the dogs. The same thing
hawks also and eagles are said to do: what the dogs do with regard to
hares <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) and deer, the same do
those with regard to birds; and these too act from a philosophy learnt
from men. These facts are enough to condemn us, these enough to convict
us. To mention another thing:—they that are skilled in breaking horses,
shall take them, wild, fierce, kicking, biting, and in a short time so
discipline them, that though the teacher be not there, it is a luxury to
ride them, their paces are so thoroughly well-ordered: but the paces of
the soul may be all disordered, and none cares for it: it bounds, and
kicks, and its rider <span id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) is dragged
along the ground like a child, and makes a most disgraceful figure, and
yet no one puts curbs on her, and leg-ties, and bits, nor mounts upon
her the skilful rider—Christ, I mean. And therefore it is that all is
turned upside down. For when you both teach dogs to master the craving
of the belly, and tame the fury in a lion, and the unruliness of horses,
and teach the birds to speak plainly, how inconsistent must it not be—to
implant achievements of reason in natures that are without reason, and
to import the passions of creatures without reason into natures endowed
with reason? There is no excuse for us, none. All who have succeeded (in
mastering their passions) will accuse us, both believers and
unbelievers: for even unbelievers have so succeeded; yea, and wild
beasts, and dogs, not men only: and we shall accuse our own selves,
since we succeed, when we will, but when we are slothful, we are dragged
away. For indeed many even of those who live a very wicked life, have
oftentimes changed themselves when they wished. But the cause is, as I
said, that we go about seeking for what is good for other things, not
what is good for ourselves. If you build a splendid house, you know what
is good for the house, not what is good for yourself: if you take a
beautiful garment, you know what is good for the body, not for yourself:
and if you get a good horse, it is so likewise. None makes it his mark
how his soul shall be beautiful; and yet, when that is beautiful, there
is no need of any of those things: as, if that be not beautiful, there
is no good of them. For like as in the case of a bride, though there be
chambers hung with tapestry wrought with gold, though there be choirs of
the fairest and most beautiful women, though there be roses and
garlands, though there be a comely bridegroom, and the maidservants and
female friends, and everybody about them be handsome, yet, if the bride
herself be full of deformity, there is no good of all those; as on the
other hand if she were beautiful, neither would there be any loss
arising from (the want of) those, nay just the contrary; for in the case
of an ugly bride, those would make her look all the uglier, while in the
other case, the beautiful would look all the more beautiful: just so,
the soul, when she is beautiful, not only needs none of those adjuncts,
but they even cast a shade over her beauty. For we shall see the
philosopher shine, not so much when in wealth, as in poverty. For in the
former case many will impute it to his riches, that he is not superior
to riches: <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) but when he lives
with poverty for his mate, and shines through all, and will not let
himself be compelled to do anything base, then none claims shares with
him in the crown of philosophy. Let us then make our soul beauteous, if
at least we would fain be rich. What profit is it, when your mules
indeed are white and plump and in good condition, but you who are drawn
by them are lean and scurvy and ill-favored? What is the gain, when your
carpets indeed are soft and beautiful, full of rich embroidery and art,
and your soul goes clad in rags, or even naked and foul? What the gain,
when the horse indeed has his paces beautifully ordered, more like
dancing than stepping, while the rider, together with his choral <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) train and adorned with more than
bridal ornaments, is more crooked than the lame, and has no more command
over hands and feet than drunkards and madmen? Tell me now, if some one
were to give you a beautiful horse, and to distort your body, what would
be the profit? Now you have your soul distorted, and care you not for
it? Let us at length, I beseech you, have a care for our own selves. Do
not let us make our own selves more worthless than all beside. If anyone
insult us with words, we are annoyed and vexed: but insulting ourselves
as we do by our deeds, we do not give a thought to it. Let us, though
late, come at last to our senses, that we may be enabled by having much
care for our soul, and laying hold upon virtue, to obtain eternal good
things, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom
to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor,
now and evermore, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_790"></span>[i:791](1110039.htm#fr_790) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p5"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. after <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>τῶν ἀποστόλων</span> add
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p5.3"></span>τῶν λοιπῶν</span>,
which we omit as evidently out of place: for “the Apostles” here are
Paul and Barnabas. Possibly it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p5.4"></span>διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν</span>, “by the rest of the
particulars related on former occasions,” but if so, this must be placed
after <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p5.5"></span>τῶν ἀπ. τὸ
ἦθος</span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[i:792](1110039.htm#fr_791) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p5.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p6"></span> The notes of this Homily have fallen into
extreme confusion, and we have but partially succeeded in restoring the
true order.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[i:793](1110039.htm#fr_792) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p7"></span> Mod. text omits this question: C. for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>φεὶς</span> has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p7.4"></span>φεθεὶς</span>, “he that
was left, or, dismissed.” Part of the answer has dropped out, “Paul did
well: for” etc. The interlocutor rejoins: “Then if Paul did well,
Barnabas did ill?” Here Edd. and all our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p7.5"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p7.6"></span>οὐκοῦν, φησὶ, κακὸς ὁ Βαρνάβας</span>; to
which mod. text adds, “By no means: but it is even exceedingly absurd to
imagine this. And how is it not absurd to say, that for so small a
matter this man became evil?” We restore <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p7.7"></span>οὐκοῦν κακῶς ὁ Βαρνάβας</span>;

<span id="fn_793"></span>[i:794](1110039.htm#fr_793) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p7.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>μάλιστα μὲν οὖν καὶ ἐντεῦθεν</span> (as by
other instances of human infirmity, so by this also) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>δείκνυται τὰ
ἀνθρώπινα</span>, i.e. we are shown what in the preaching of the Gospel
proceeded from man: that man, as man, did his part, which part is
betokened by the ordinary characters of human nature. If even in Christ
it behooved that He should not do all as God, but that His Human Nature
should also be seen working, much more was it necessary that the
Apostles, being but men, should work as men, not do all by the immediate
power of the Spirit.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[i:795](1110039.htm#fr_794) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p9"></span> This refers to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>ξίου</span> in the sense “he begged,” as he
says below, in the beginning of the Recapitulation, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p9.3"></span>καίτοι οὐκ ἔδει ἀξιοῦν
αὐτὸν ἔχοντα κατηγορεῖν μετὰ ταῦτα</span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[i:796](1110039.htm#fr_795) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p10"></span> If this sentence be in its place,
something is wanting for connection: e.g. (It was a great <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>) for the
more extended preaching of the word: since on Barnabas’s plan these “at
Cyprus” were to have a second visitation, but those “in Asia” not even
once. But it may be suspected that this part is altogether misplaced:
and that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>οὗτοι</span> are the brethren “in the cities
where we have preached,” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p10.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p10.4"></span>κεῖνοι</span> the people of Macedonia," etc.
See end of Recap. where Chrys. says, had it not been for this parting,
the word would not have been carried into Macedonia.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[i:797](1110039.htm#fr_796) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p11"></span> Chrys. has treated the dissension of
Paul and Barnabas with discrimination, without, however, placing quite
the emphasis upon <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p11.2"></span>ξίου</span>—“he thought good not to”—“he
determined not to”—and upon <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p11.3"></span>τον ἀποστάντα</span>—“who had fallen away
from—apostatized from,”—which those terms seem to require. The conduct
of Mark in returning to Jerusalem from Pamphylia ([Acts xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p11.4"></span>)
was clearly regarded as reprehensible by Paul, apparently as an example
of fickleness in the service of Christ. It is not strange that Barnabas,
Mark’s cousin ([Col. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p11.5"></span>) should have been more lenient in his
judgment of his conduct. It is certain that this difference of opinion
regarding Mark did not lead to any estrangement of Paul and Mark, for in
his imprisonment the apostle speaks of Mark as a trusted fellow-worker
(<span id="vi.xxxiv-p11.6"></span>[Col. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p11.7"></span>;
[2 Tim. iv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p11.8"></span>).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[i:798](1110039.htm#fr_797) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p13"></span> The method of the derangement here is,
that there being five portions, these were taken alternately, in the
order 1, 3, 5, and then 2, 4.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[i:799](1110039.htm#fr_798) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p14"></span> So Edd. and all our <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p14.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p14.3"></span>πέστη ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ὁ
Βαρνάβας</span>: which may mean, “And so the same may now be said of
Barnabas, viz. that he departed (from Paul),” etc. The same word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p14.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p14.5"></span>πέστη</span> is applied
to Barnabas below, p. 216.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[i:800](1110039.htm#fr_799) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p14.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>συγκατέβησαν ἀλλήλοις οὕτω μεῖζον ἀγαθὸν
εἶναι τὸ χωρισθῆναι</span>. The meaning is as below, that they parted
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p15.2"></span>κατὰ
σύνεσιν</span>. Mod. text “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p15.3"></span>συγκατ. ἀλλ. ἰδεῖν</span>. The point required
is to see that,” etc. Then, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p15.4"></span>Οὕτω μ. ἀ. γέγονε τὸ χωρ</span>. “Thus their
being parted became a greater good,” etc.—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p15.5"></span>Καὶ πρόφασιν ἐκ τούτου τὸ πρᾶγμα
ἔλαβε</span>, i.e. “They saw that it was best to part viz.: that so the
word would be more extensively preached, and this difference gave a
pretext for so doing.” He means that the contention was <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p15.6"></span>οἰκονομία</span> (see the
Recap.), the object being, partly this which is here mentioned, partly a
lesson to Mark.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[i:801](1110039.htm#fr_800) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p15.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p16"></span> Edd. and <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p16.2"></span>οὐ προσήκατο</span>, against the sense of the
passage, whence Œcum. omits the negative, not much improving it. The
Catena has preserved the true reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p16.3"></span>οὐ προήκατο</span>. See instances of
confusion the other way in Mr. Field’s Index to *Hom. in Matt.* s. v.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p16.4"></span>προσίημι</span>.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[i:802](1110039.htm#fr_801) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p16.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p17.2"></span>στε δεῖξαι τὸν τιμήσαντα αὐτὸν καλῶς
βεβουλευμένον</span>. The sense requires <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p17.3"></span>τὸν τιμ. αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν μὴ τιμήσαντα καλῶς
βεβ</span>. or the like: “that both Barnabas and Paul had taken the
course which was for his (Mark’s) own good.”

<span id="fn_802"></span>[i:803](1110039.htm#fr_802) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.2"></span>τι καὶ ἐπήγετο αὐτόν</span>. The meaning
seems to be, (but the confusion into which the text has fallen, leaves
it very uncertain), “The wonder is that he took Timothy, being as he was
the son of a heathen father, and uncircumcised.”

<span id="fn_803"></span>[i:804](1110039.htm#fr_803) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p20.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p21.2"></span>τι ἐκεῖνο ἐκώλυσεν</span>. Mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p21.3"></span>καὶ μὴ τὸ Πν. τὸ</span>
A. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p21.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p21.5"></span>κέλευσεν</span>; But see
the Recap. where the question is explained, viz., How is it that when
they were to be kept from preaching, the Holy Ghost spoke to them, but
here a vision, and that in a dream, is all?

<span id="fn_804"></span>[i:805](1110039.htm#fr_804) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p21.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p22"></span> In the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>mss.</span> this sentence is placed before
“And now he crosses over,” etc. [Acts
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p22.2"></span>.—“In this manner:” i.e. in a night-vision or
dream; the allusion is to [Acts
23.11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p22.3"></span>, “the Lord stood by him,” confused with
[Acts 27.23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p22.4"></span>, “the Angel of the Lord.”

<span id="fn_805"></span>[i:806](1110039.htm#fr_805) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p24"></span> i.e. just displeasure on the one side;
lenity, compassion, intercession, etc. on the other. Thus God is wroth
with Miriam, Moses pleads for her, and so in the other cases.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[i:807](1110039.htm#fr_806) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p24.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p25"></span> Mod. text omits this clause relating to
St. Paul, as in the old text it is incomplete, the remainder of the
sentence (“would not have been wroth,” etc.) having been transposed to
the end of what relates to Barnabas, after “relating to the
decree.”—Below, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.2"></span>λλὰ λαμβάνουσιν ἑαυτοὺς</span>, may perhaps
be <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p25.3"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p25.4"></span>αυτοῖς</span>, sc. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p25.5"></span>τοὺς δεομένους</span>
below, i.e. choose their spheres of action where each was most needed.
But the context rather seems to require this sense: “There is no
animosity between them, but they take their parts in this dispute for
the good of those who, as Mark, need the instruction which was to be
derived from the gentleness of Barnabas, and the severity of Paul’s
character. Paul indeed is stern, but his object is to do good: as <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.6"></span>[2 Thess. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p25.7"></span>,
where (comp. the context) rebuking, and enjoining severity to be shown
to the disorderly, he says, “And be not weary in well-doing.” We have
changed the order of the two sentences, “And he rebukes,” etc. and, “As
he does elsewhere,” etc.—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.8"></span>Τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τῇ συνηθεί& 139·
ποιοῦμεν</span>. i.e. this putting on a show of anger, to do good to one
whom we would correct: or perhaps, of altercation, as when, for
instance, father and mother take opposite parts, the one for punishing,
the other for sparing an erring child—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.9"></span>συναγανακτῆσαι τῳ Παυλῷ</span>.
Ben.*indignati esse in Paulum.* But whether it means this, or “to have
had indignation together with Paul,” there is nothing to show: nor is it
clear what is the reference of the following sentences; unless it be,
But he would not allow these persons who were indignant along with, or
at, him, to retain this feeling: he takes them apart, makes them see the
thing in its right light, and so departs in peace, “being commended by
the brethren to the grace of God,” with the prayers of concord and
charity. Great is the power of such prayer. (See the former comment on
this verse, p. 214.)—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.10"></span>Κἂυ ὑπὲρ μεγάλου ἀξιοῖς, κἂν ἀνάξιος
ᾖς</span>. Perhaps it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p25.11"></span>ᾖ</span>, “Whether it be on behalf of a
great man (as Paul), or whether the person be unworthy,” etc.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[i:808](1110039.htm#fr_807) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p26.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p27"></span> So in Gen. *Serm.* ix. text iv. 695. D.
Chrys. infers from this passage with <span id="vi.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>[2
Tim. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xxxiv-p27.2"></span>, that the father <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p27.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p27.4"></span>μεινεν ἐν τῇ ἀσεβεία καὶ οὐ
μετεβάλλετο</span>. *Hom.* i. *in* 2 *Tim.* p. 660. E. “Because of his
father who was a Gentile, and because of the Jews he took and
circumcised him. Do you mark how the Law began to be dissolved, in the
taking place of these mixed marriages?” (so here <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p27.5"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p27.6"></span>ρα ἤδη τὸν νόμον
λυόμενον</span>.) In the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p27.7"></span>mss.</span> all this is extremely confused by
transpositions (the method; 1, 4: 2, 5: 3, 6) and misplacing of the
portions of sacred text (where these are given). Thus here, “And
therefore because of the Jews which were in those parts he circumcised
him. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p27.8"></span>Οὐκ ἦν
ἐμπερίτομος</span>.”—Mod. text “thy mother Eunice. And he took and
circumcised him. And wherefore, he himself goes on to say: Because of
the Jews, etc. For this reason then he is circumcised. Or also because
of his father: for he continued to be a Greek. So then he was not
circumcised. Observe the Law already broken. But some think he was
born,” etc. He is commenting on the fact, that Timothy was
uncircumcised: viz., because his father was a heathen. Here then was a
devout man, who from a child had known the Holy Scriptures, and yet
continued uncircumcised. So that in these mixed marriages we see the Law
already broken, independently of the Gospel. It may be indeed that he
was born after the conversion of his mother to the faith, and therefore
she was not anxious to circumcise him. But this (he adds) is not likely.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[i:809](1110039.htm#fr_808) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p27.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p28"></span> For Timothy from a child had been
brought up religiously as a Jew, yet now it was an offence that he
should continue uncircumcised.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[i:810](1110039.htm#fr_809) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p29"></span> Therefore he might have been exempt by
the Apostles’ decree. St. Paul, however, having carried his point in
securing the immunity of the Gentile converts, did not care to insist
upon this in behalf of Timothy.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[i:811](1110039.htm#fr_810) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30"></span> Our author correctly apprehends the
ground on which Paul circumcised Timothy—an act which has often been
thought to be inconsistent with his steadfast resistance to the
imposition of the Jewish law. It is noticeable that he did not allow
Titus to be circumcised (<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>[Gal. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p30.2"></span>)
when the Jewish-Christian faction desired it. The two cases are
materially different in the following particulars: (1) Titus was a
Gentile; Timothy was born of a Jewish mother. (2) The circumcision of
Titus was demanded by the Judaizers; that of Timothy was performed for
prudential reasons as a concession to unbelieving Jews in order that
Paul might the better win them to Christ. (3) The question of
circumcising Titus was a doctrinal question which was not the case in
the instance before us. Meyer well says: “Paul acted according to the
principle of wise and conciliatory accommodation, not out of concession
to the Judaistic dogma of the necessity of circumcision for obtaining
the Messianic salvation.”—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[i:812](1110039.htm#fr_811) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p30.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p31"></span> A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.1"></span>εἰς αὐτὴν τὴν ῥ& 176·ζαν τῆς Μακεδονίας
ἐγένετο</span> (Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.3"></span>γένοντο</span>). <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.4"></span>Οὐκ ἀεὶ</span> (Cat., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p31.5"></span>οὐκ ἂν εἰ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p31.6"></span>κατὰ παροξυσμὸν ἐνήργησε
τὸ Πν. τὸ ῞Α</span>. The former sentence may possibly mean, that
Philippi became the root of the Churches in Macedonia. But it is more
probable that the text is mutilated here, and that Chrys. speaks of the
parting of Paul and Barnabas, as having become the very root or cause of
the extension of the Gospel (into Macedonia and Greece). In the next
sentence, the reading of Cat. may perhaps deserve the preference. “Not,
if (they had parted) in a state of exasperation, would the Holy Ghost
have (thus) wrought.”—Mod. text “And besides, even the voyage showed
this: for there was no long time ere they arrive at the very root of
Macedonia (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.7"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.8"></span>θεν εἰς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.9"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p31.10"></span>παραγίνονται</span>). So that the sharp
contention is providentially ordered to be for the best. For (otherwise)
the Holy Ghost would not have wrought, Macedonia would not have received
the Word. But this so rapid progress,” etc.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[i:813](1110039.htm#fr_812) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p33.1"></span>καὶ πάντα καλοῦμεν</span>. Mod. text
substitutes the proverbial expression, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p33.2"></span>καὶ πάντα κάλων κινοῦμεν</span>, “we put
every rope in motion,” which is hardly suitable here, and not at all
necessary. “We call to our aid horse-feeders, and doctors, and every one
else who can help us.”

<span id="fn_813"></span>[i:814](1110039.htm#fr_813) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p34"></span> Our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>mss.</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p34.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p34.3"></span>λόγων</span>: Savile (from N.?) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p34.4"></span>λαγῶν</span>, which we
adopt.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[i:815](1110039.htm#fr_814) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p34.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p35.1"></span>καὶ σύρεται χάμαι καθάπερ παιδίον, καὶ
ἀσχημονεῖ μυρία</span>: this cannot be meant for the horse, but for the
rider. Perhaps <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p35.2"></span>καὶ
οὐδεὶς, κἂν σύρεται κ τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[i:816](1110039.htm#fr_815) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p36.1"></span>καὶ τὸ</span> but Sav. Marg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p36.2"></span>καὶ τῷ μὴ κρείττονα
χρημάτων εἶναι</span>: some slight emendation is necessary, but it is
not clear whether it should be, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p36.3"></span>καὶ μὴ τῷ</span>.…“and not to his being above
wealth:” i.e. good in spite of his riches: or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p36.4"></span>καὶ τὸ μὴ</span>…with some verb supplied,
i.e. “and make it a reproach to him that (though a good man) he is not
above riches,” seeing he does not abandon his wealth.—Mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p36.5"></span>καὶ τῷ μὴ ἐνδεᾶ χρημάτων
εἶναι·</span>

<span id="fn_816"></span>[i:817](1110039.htm#fr_816) <span
id="vi.xxxiv-p36.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p37.1"></span>μᾶλλον μετὰ τῆς πορείας καὶ κόσμῳ
κεκοσμημένος νυμφικῷ· ὁ δὲ ἐπικαθ. κ. τ. λ</span>. The passage is
corrupt: perhaps, as in the Translation, it should be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.2"></span>μᾶλλον ἢ νυμφικῷ</span>,
but this as a description of the horse is evidently out of place. For
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.3"></span>πορ</span>., we
read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.4"></span>χορείας</span>
as in mod. text (which has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p37.5"></span>καὶ μετὰ τῆς χορείας κόσμω κεκ. ᾖ
νυμφικῷ</span>.) Then transposing this, we read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.6"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.7"></span>δὲ ἐπικαθ., μετὰ τῆς
χορ., καὶ</span>.—Below, B. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p37.8"></span>ἂ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p37.9"></span>ν σκολιάζῃ</span>: A. and mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxxiv-p37.11"></span>σκωλιάζῃ</span>—alluding
to the game of leaping on greased bladders or skins, *unctos salire per
utres;* which does not suit <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxxiv-p37.12"></span>τῶν χωλῶν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXV on Acts xvi. 13, 14.](1110040)
