[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110030)  [Next](1110032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xxvi"></span> <span id="vi.xxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVI.</span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p2"></span>[Acts
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p3"></span>“Now at that time Herod the King stretched
forth his hands to vex certain of the Church. And he killed James the
brother of John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased the Jews,
he proceeded further to take Peter also. Then were the days of
unleavened bread.”

<span id="vi.xxvi-p4"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p4.1"></span>At</span> that time,” of course meaning the
time immediately following: for <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612)
this is the custom of Scripture. And he well says that Herod “the king”
(did this): this was not he of Christ’s time. Lo, a different sort of
trial—and mark what I said in the beginning, how things are blended, how
rest and trouble alternate in the whole texture of the history—not now
the Jews, nor the Sanhedrim, but the king. Greater the power, the
warfare more severe, the more it was done to obtain favor with the Jews.
“And,” it says, “he slew James the brother of John with the sword:”
(taking him) at random and without selection. But, should any raise a
question, why God permitted this, we shall say, that it was for the sake
of these (Jews) themselves: thereby, first, convincing them, that even
when slain (the Apostles) prevail, just as it was in the case of
Stephen: secondly, giving them opportunity, after satiating their rage,
to recover from their madness; thirdly, showing them that it was by His
permission this was done. “And when he saw,” it says, “that it pleased
the Jews, he proceeded further to seize Peter also. O excessive
wickedness! On whose behalf was it, that he gratified them by doing
murders thus without plan or reason? “And it was the day of unleavened
bread.” Again, the idle preciseness of the Jews: to kill indeed they
forbade not, but <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) at such a time
they did such things! “Whom having arrested, he put in ward, having
delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers.” ([Acts
12.4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004)<span id="vi.xxvi-p6.6"></span>.)
This was done both of rage, and of fear. “He slew,” it says, “James the
brother of John with the sword.” Do you mark their courage? For, that
none may say that without danger or fear of danger they brave death, as
being sure of God’s delivering them, therefore he permits some to be put
to death, and chief men too, Stephen and James, thereby convincing their
slayers themselves, that not even these things make them fall away, and
hinder them. “Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made
without ceasing of the Church unto God for him.” ([Acts
12.5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxvi-p6.7"></span>.)
For the contest was now for life and death: both the slaying of the one
made them fearful, and the casting of the other into prison. “And when
Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping
between two soldiers, bound with two chains; and the keepers before the
door kept the prison. And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him,
and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from
his hands.” ([Acts 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxvi-p6.8"></span>.) In
that night He delivered him. “And a light shined in the prison,”
that <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) he might not deem it fancy:
and none saw the light, but he only. For if, notwithstanding this was
done, he thought it a fancy, because of its unexpectedness; if this had
not been, much more would he have thought this: so <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) prepared was he for death. For his
having waited there many days and not being saved caused this. Why then,
say you, did He not suffer him to fall into the hands of Herod, <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) and then deliver him? Because that
would have brought people into astonishment, whereas this was
credible: <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) and they would not
even have been thought human beings. But in the case of Stephen, what
did He not do? Did He not show them his face as it had been the face of
an angel? But what in short did He leave undone here also? “And the
angel said to him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals.” ([Acts
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxvi-p10.4"></span>.)
Here again it shows, that it was not done of craft: for one that is in
haste and wishes to break out (of prison), is not so particular as to
take his sandals, and gird himself. “And he did so. And he said unto
him, Put on thy cloak, and follow me. And he went out, and followed him;
and wist not that it was true which was done by the Angel; but thought
he saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second ward, they
came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them
of its own accord.” ([Acts 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxvi-p10.5"></span>.)
Behold, a second miracle. “And they went out, and passed on through one
street; and forthwith the angel departed from him. And when Peter was
come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath
sent His Angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from
all the expectation of the people of the Jews.” ([Acts
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011)<span id="vi.xxvi-p10.6"></span>.)
When the angel departed, then Peter understood: “Now I perceive,” says
he, not then. But why is this so, and why is Peter not sensible of the
things taking place, although he had already experienced a like
deliverance when all were released? ([Acts
5.18](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#018)<span id="vi.xxvi-p10.7"></span>.)
(The Lord) would have the pleasure come to him all at once, and that he
should first be at liberty, and then be sensible of what had happened.
The circumstance also of the chains having fallen off from his hands, is
a strong argument of his not having fled. <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) “And when he had considered the thing,
he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark;
where many were gathered together praying.” ([Acts
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p11.5"></span>.) Observe how Peter does not immediately
withdraw, but first brings the good tidings to his friends. “And as
Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named
Rhoda. And when she knew Peter’s voice, she opened not the gate for
gladness,”—Mark even the servant-girls, how full of piety they are,—“but
ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.” ([Acts
12.13-15](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p11.6"></span>.) But they, though it was so, shook their
heads (incredulously): “And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she
constantly affirmed that it was even so. And they said, It is his angel.
“But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and
saw him, they were astonished. But he, beckoning unto them with the hand
to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out
of the prison. And he said, Go show these things unto James, and to the
brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.” ([Acts
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxvi-p11.7"></span>.)
But let us review the order of the narrative.

<span id="vi.xxvi-p12"></span>(Recapitulation.) “At that time,” it says,
“Herod the king stretched forth his hands to afflict certain of the
Church.” ([Acts 12.1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.) Like a wild beast, he attacked all
indiscriminately and without consideration. This is what Christ said:
“My cup indeed ye shall drink, and with the baptism wherewith I am
baptized, shall ye be baptized.” ([Mark x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#039)<span id="vi.xxvi-p12.2"></span>.)
(*b*) “And <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) he killed James the
brother of John.” ([Acts 12.2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p13.4"></span>.) For there was also another James, the
brother of the Lord: therefore to distinguish him, he says, “The brother
of John.” <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) Do you mark that the
sum of affairs rested in these three, especially Peter and James? (*a*)
And how was it he did not kill Peter immediately? It mentions the
reason: “it was the day of unleavened bread:” and he wished rather to
make a display (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.11"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.12"></span>κπομπεὕσαι</span>) with the killing of him.
“And when he saw it pleased the Jews.” ([Acts
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#003)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.13"></span>.) For their own part, they now in
consequence of Gamaliel’s advice, abstained from bloodshedding: and
besides, did not even invent accusations; but by means of others they
compassed the same results. (*c*) This (counsel of Gamaliel’s) above all
was their condemnation: for the preaching was shown to be no longer a
thing of men. “He proceeded further to kill Peter also.” ([Acts
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#008), [Acts
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#003)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.14"></span>.) In very deed was that fulfilled, “We are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter.” (<span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.15"></span>[Psa. xliv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.16"></span>.)
“Seeing,” it says, “it was a pleasing thing to the Jews.” ([Rom. viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.17"></span>.)
A pleasing thing, bloodshed, and unrighteous bloodshed, wickedness,
impiety! <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) He ministered to their
senseless (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.7"></span>τόποις</span>) lusts: for, whereas he ought to
have done the contrary, to check their rage, he made them more eager, as
if he were an executioner, and not a physician to their diseased minds.
(And this) though he had numberless warnings in the case of both his
grandfather and his father Herod, how the former in consequence of his
putting the children to death suffered the greatest calamities, and the
latter by slaying John raised up against himself a grievous war.
But <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) as they thought \* \* He
feared lest Peter, in consequence of the slaying of James, should
withdraw; and wishing to have him in safe keeping, he put him in prison:
“and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers” ([Acts
12.4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004)<span id="vi.xxvi-p16.2"></span>):
the stricter the custody, the more wondrous the display. “Peter
therefore was kept in prison.” ([Acts
12.5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005)<span id="vi.xxvi-p16.3"></span>.)
But this was all the better for Peter, who was thereby made more
approved, and evinced his own manly courage. And it says, “there was
earnest prayer making.” It was the prayer of (filial) affection: it was
for a father they asked, a father mild. “There was,” it says, “earnest
prayer.” Hear how they were affected to their teachers. No factions, no
perturbation: <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) but they betook
them to prayer, to that alliance which is indeed invincible, to this
they betook them for refuge. They did not say, “What? I, poor
insignificant creature that I am, to pray for him!” for, as they acted
of love, they did not give these things a thought. And observe, it was
during the feast, that (their enemies) brought these trials upon them,
that their worth might be the more approved. “And when Herod,” etc.
([Acts 12.6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.5"></span>.) See Peter sleeping, and not in distress or
fear! That same night, after which he was to be brought forth, he slept,
having cast all upon God. “Between two soldiers, bound with two chains.”
(comp. [1 Pet. v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.6"></span>.) Mark, how strict the ward! “And says,
Arise.” ([Acts 12.7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.7"></span>.) The guards were asleep with him, and
therefore perceived nothing of what was happening. “And a light shined.”
What was the light for? In order that Peter might see as well as hear,
and not imagine it to be all fancy. And the command, “Arise
quickly, <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) ” that he may not be
remiss. He also smote him; so deeply did he sleep. (*a*) “Rise,” says
he, “quickly:” this is not to hurry him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.13"></span>θορυβοὕντος</span>) but to persuade him not
to delay. (*c*) “And” immediately “his chains fell off from his hands.”
(*b*) How? answer me: where are the heretics?—let them answer. “And the
Angel said unto him,” etc. ([Acts
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#008)<span id="vi.xxvi-p18.14"></span>)
by this also convincing him that it is no fancy: to this end he bids him
gird himself and put on his shoes, that he may shake off his sleep, and
know that it is real. (*a*) (*e*) “And he wist not that it was true that
was done by the Angel, but thought he saw a vision” ([Acts
12.9](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.15"></span>): (*e*) well he might, by reason of the
excessive greatness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.16"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.17"></span>περβολὴν</span>) of the things taking place.
Do you mark what a thing it is for a miracle to be excessive (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.18"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.19"></span>περβολὴ σημείου</span>)?
how it amazes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.20"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.21"></span>κπλήττει</span>) the beholder? how it will
not let the thing be believed? <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625)
For if Peter “thought he saw a vision,” though he had girded himself and
put on his shoes, what would have been the case with another? “And,” it
says, “when they had passed the first and the second ward, they came to
the iron gate, which opened unto them of its own accord” ([Acts
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.3"></span>): and yet the things that had happened within
(the prison) were more marvellous: but this was now more after the
manner of man. “And having gone out, they went along one street and
immediately (all ‘until’) the Angel departed from him.” ([Acts
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.4"></span>.) When there was no hindrance, then the Angel
departed. For Peter would not have gone along (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.5"></span>προἥλθεν</span>), there being so many
hindrances. “And when he came to himself:” for in very truth, it was
indeed an amazement (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.6"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.7"></span>κπληξις</span>). “Now,” saith he, “I
know”—now, not then, when I was in the prison,—“that the Lord hath sent
His Angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod and from all
the expectation of the people of the Jews. And when he had considered”
([Acts 12.12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.8"></span>), it says: viz. where he was, or, that he
must not without more ado depart but requite his Benefactor: “he came to
the house of Mary the mother of John.” Who is this John? Probably <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) he that was always with them: for this
is why he adds his distinctive name (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.6"></span>τὸ παράσημον</span>), “whose surname was
Mark.” But observe, “praying” in the night, how much they got by it:
what a good thing affliction is; how wakeful it made them! Do you see
how great the gain resulting from the death of Stephen? do you see how
great the benefit accruing from this imprisonment? For it is not by
taking vengeance upon those who wronged them that God shows the
greatness of the Gospel: but in the wrong-doers themselves, <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) without any harm happening to those,
he shows what a mighty thing the afflictions in themselves are, that we
may not seek in any wise deliverance from them, nor the avenging of our
wrongs. And mark how the very servant-girls were henceforth upon an
equality with them. “For joy,” it says, “she opened not.” ([Acts
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxvi-p21.12"></span>.)
This too is well done, that they likewise may not be amazed by seeing
him at once, and that they may be incredulous, and their minds may be
exercised. “But ran in,” etc. just as we are wont to do, she was eager
to be herself the bringer of the good tidings, for good news it was
indeed. “And they said unto her, Thou art mad: but she constantly
affirmed that it was even so: then said they, It is his Angel.” ([Acts
12.15](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.13"></span>.) This is a truth, that each man has an
Angel. <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) And what would the
Angel? <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) It was from the time (of
night) that they surmised this. But when he “continued knocking, and
when they had opened, and saw him, they were astonished. But he
beckoning to them with his hand” ([Acts
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxvi-p23.2"></span>),
made them keep quiet, to hear all that had happened to him. He was now
an object of more affectionate desire to the disciples, not only in
consequence of his being saved, but by his sudden coming in upon them
and straightway departing. Now, both his friends learn all clearly; and
the aliens also learn, if they had a mind, but they had not. The same
thing happened in the case of Christ. “Tell these things,” he says, “to
James, and to the brethren.” How free from all vainglory! Nor did he
say, Make known these things to people everywhere, but, “to the
brethren. And he withdrew to another place:” for he did not tempt God,
nor fling himself into temptation: since, when they were commanded to do
this, then they did it. “Go,” it was said, “speak in the temple to the
people.” ([Acts 5.20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p23.3"></span>.) But this the Angel said not (here); on the
contrary, by silently removing him and bringing him out by night, he
gave him free permission to withdraw—and this too is done, that we may
learn that many things are providentially brought about after the manner
of men—so that he should not again fall into peril.—For that they may
not say, “It was his Angel,” <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630)
after he was gone, they say this first, and then they see himself
overthrowing their notion of the matter. Had it been the Angel, he would
have knocked at the door, would not have retired to another place.
And <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) what followed in the day,
make them sure.

<span id="vi.xxvi-p26"></span>“So Peter was kept in the prison,” etc.
([Acts 12.5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p26.1"></span>.) They, being at large, were at prayer: he,
bound, was in sleep. “And he wist not that it was true.” ([Acts
12.9](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#009)<span id="vi.xxvi-p26.2"></span>.)
If he thought it was true that was happening, he would have been
astonished, he would not have remembered <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) (all the circumstances): but now,
seeming to be in a dream, he was free from perturbation. “When,” it
says, “they were past the first and the second ward”—see also how strong
the guard was—“they came unto the iron gate.” ([Acts
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.4"></span>.) “Now know I that the Lord hath sent His
Angel.” ([Acts 12.11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.5"></span>.) Why is not this effected by
themselves? <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) (I answer,) By this
also the Lord honors them, that by the ministry of His Angels he rescues
them. Then why was it not so in the case of Paul? There with good
reason, because the jailer was to be converted, whereas here, it was
only that the Apostle should be released. ([Acts
16.25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p28.3"></span>.) And God disposes all things in divers ways.
And there too, it is beautiful, that Paul sings hymns, while here Peter
was asleep. “And when he had considered, he came to the house of Mary,”
etc. ([Acts 12.12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p28.4"></span>.) Then let us not hide God’s marvels, but for
our own good let us study to display these abroad for the edifying of
the others. For as he deserves to be admired for choosing to be put into
bonds, so is he worthy of more admiration, that he withdrew not until he
had reported all to his friends. “And he said, Tell James and the
brethren.” ([Acts 12.17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p28.5"></span>.) That they may rejoice: that they may not be
anxious. Through these <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) those
learn, not those through him: such thought had he for the humbler part!—

<span id="vi.xxvi-p30"></span>Truly, nothing better than affliction not
above measure (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p30.1"></span>συμμέτρου</span>). What think you must have
been their state of mind—how full of delight! Where now are those women,
who sleep the whole night through? Where are those men, who do not even
turn themselves in their bed? Seest thou the watchful soul? With women,
and children, and maid-servants, they sang hymns to God, made purer than
the sky by affliction. But now, if we see a little danger, we fall back.
Nothing ever was more splendid than that Church. Let us imitate these,
let us emulate them. Not for this was the night made, that we should
sleep all through it and be idle. To this bear witness the artisans, the
carriers, and the merchants (to this), the Church of God rising up in
the midst of the night. Rise thou up also, and behold the quire of the
stars, the deep silence, the profound repose: contemplate with awe the
order (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p30.2"></span>οἰκονομίαν</span>) of thy Master’s household.
Then is thy soul purer: it is lighter, and subtler, and soaring
disengaged: the darkness itself, the profound silence, are sufficient to
lead thee to compunction. And if also thou look to the heavens studded
with its stars, as with ten thousand eyes, <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) if thou bethink thee that all those
multitudes who in the daytime are shouting, laughing, frisking, leaping,
wronging, grasping, threatening, inflicting wrongs without number, lie
all one as dead, thou wilt condemn all the self-willedness of man. Sleep
hath invaded and defeated (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p31.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p31.2"></span>λεγξεν</span>) nature: it is the image of
death, the image of the end of all things. If <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) thou (look out of window and) lean
over into the street, thou wilt not hear even a sound: if thou look into
the house, thou wilt see all lying as it were in a tomb. All this is
enough to arouse the soul, and lead it to reflect on the end of all
things.

<span id="vi.xxvi-p33"></span>Here indeed my discourse is for both men
and women. Bend thy knees, send forth groans, beseech thy Master to be
merciful: He is more moved by prayers in the night, when thou makest the
time for rest a time for mourning. Remember what words that king
uttered: “I have been weary with my groaning: every night will I wash my
bed, I will water my couch with my tears.” (<span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.1"></span>[Ps. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="vi.xxvi-p33.2"></span>.)
However delicate a liver thou mayest be, thou art not more delicate than
he: however rich thou mayest be, thou art not richer than David. And
again the same Psalmist saith, “At midnight I rose to give thanks unto
Thee for the judgments of Thy righteousness.” (<span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.3"></span>[Ps. cxix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062)<span id="vi.xxvi-p33.4"></span>.)
No vainglory then intrudes upon thee: how can it, when all are sleeping,
and not looking at thee? Then neither sloth nor drowsiness invades thee:
how can they, when thy soul is aroused by such great things? After such
vigils come sweet slumbers and wondrous revelations. Do this, thou also
the man, not the woman only. Let the house be a Church, consisting of
men and women. For think not because thou art the only man, or because
she is the only woman there, that this is any hindrance. “For where
two,” He saith, “are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the
midst of them.” ([Matt. xviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.5"></span>.) Where Christ is in the midst, there is a
great multitude. Where Christ is, there needs must Angels be, needs must
Archangels also and the other Powers be there. Then ye are not alone,
seeing ye have Him Who is Lord of all. Hear again the prophet also
saying, “Better is one that doeth the will of the Lord, than ten
thousand transgressors.” (comp. [Ecclesiasticus
16.3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003)<span id="vi.xxvi-p33.6"></span>.)
Nothing more weak than a multitude of unrighteous men, nothing more
strong than one man who lives according to the law of God. If thou hast
children wake up them also, and let thy house altogether become a Church
through the night: but if they be tender, and cannot endure the
watching, let them stay for the first or second prayer, and then send
them to rest: only stir up thyself, establish thyself in the habit.
Nothing is better than that storehouse which receives such prayers as
these. Hear the Prophet speaking: “If I remembered Thee upon my bed, I
thought upon Thee in the dawn of the morning.” ([Ps. lxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxvi-p33.7"></span>.)
But you will say: I have labored much during the day, and I cannot. Mere
pretext this and subterfuge. For however much thou hast labored, thou
wilt not toil like the smith, who lets fall such a heavy hammer from a
great height upon the (metal flying off in) sparks, and takes in the
smoke with his whole body: and yet at this work he spends the greater
part of the night. Ye know also how the women, if there is need for us
to go into the country, or to go forth unto a vigil, watch through the
whole night. Then have thou also a spiritual forge, to fashion there not
pots or cauldrons, but thine own soul, which is far better than either
coppersmith or goldsmith can fashion. Thy soul, waxen old in sins, cast
thou into the smelting-furnace of confession: let fall the hammer from
on high: that is, the condemnation of thy words (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p33.8"></span>τὥν ῥημάτων τὴν
κατάγνωσιν</span>): light up the fire of the Spirit. Thou hast a far
mightier craft (than theirs). Thou art beating into shape not vessels of
gold, but the soul, which is more precious than all gold, even as the
smith hammers out his vessel. For it is no material vessel that thou art
working at, but thou art freeing thy soul from all imaginations
belonging to this life. Let a lamp be by thy side, not that one which we
burn, but that which the prophet had, when he said, “Thy law is a lamp
unto my feet.” ([Ps. cxix. 105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.9"></span>.) Bring thy soul to a red heat, by prayer:
when thou seest it hot enough, draw it out, and mould it into what shape
thou wilt. Believe me, not fire so effectual to burn off rust, as night
prayer to remove the rust of our sins. Let the night-watchers, if no one
else, shame us. They, by man’s law, go their rounds in the cold,
shouting loudly, and walking through lanes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.10"></span>στενωπὥν</span>) and alleys, oftentimes
drenched with rain and (all) congealed with cold, for thee and for thy
safety, and the protection of thy property. There is he taking such care
for thy property, while thou takest none even for thy soul. And yet I do
not make thee go thy rounds in the open air like him, nor shout loudly
and rend thy sides: but in thy closet itself, or in thy bedchamber, bend
thy knees, and entreat thy Lord. Why did Christ Himself pass a whole
night on the mountain? Was it not, that He might be an ensample to us?
Then is it that the plants respire, in the night, I mean: and then also
does the soul take in the dew even more than they. What the sun has
parched by day becomes cool again at night. More refreshing than all
dew, the tears of the night descend upon our lusts and upon all heat and
fever of the soul, and do not let it be affected in any such way. But if
it do not enjoy the benefit of that dew, it will be burnt up in the
daytime. But God forbid (it should be so <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) )! Rather, may we all, being
refreshed, and enjoying the mercy of God, be freed from the burden of
our sins, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory, might, honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_612"></span>[i:613](1110031.htm#fr_612) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p5"></span> The modern text (E. D. F. Edd.) “But here
it is said in this sense, elsewhere in a different sense. For when
Matthew says, ‘In those days cometh John preaching,’ he speaks it not as
meaning the days immediately following, but ‘those’ in which the things
he relates were about to take place. For it is the custom of Scripture
to use this mode of speech, and at one time to expound in their sequence
the things successively taking place, at another to relate as in
immediate succession the things about to take place afterwards. And he
well says that Herod the king did this, for this was not he of Christ’s
time:” as if Chrys. meant, He does right to call him king, for this was
not the tetrarch of the Gospel history. But this is merely a parenthetic
remark: the point to which the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p5.1"></span>καλῶς λέγει</span> refers is this—that the
persecution is now raised by a king, not by the Jews: “he does well to
designate Herod as the king, thereby showing that the trial here was of
a different kind, more severe, as the power wielded against them was
greater.”

<span id="fn_613"></span>[i:614](1110031.htm#fr_613) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p6.2"></span>ν δὲ καιρῷ τοιούτῳ τοιαῦτα ἔπραττον</span>. So
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xxvi-p6.3"></span>mss.</span> and Edd.
But the Catena has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p6.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p6.5"></span>ν δὲ καιρῷ τοιούτῳ πράττειν οὐκ ἤθελον</span>.
“They had no objection to killing, but they had rather not do it at such
a time.”

<span id="fn_614"></span>[i:615](1110031.htm#fr_614) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p6.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p7"></span> This seems more suitable to the clause,
“And his chains fell off from his hands:” but see below in the
recapitulation, p. 170.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[i:616](1110031.htm#fr_615) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p8"></span> i.e. so unexpected was it, so entirely had
he made up his mind that he was to be put to death, that he thought it
all a dream.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[i:617](1110031.htm#fr_616) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p9"></span> i.e. on the morrow, to be led out to
execution, and then and there deliver him.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[i:618](1110031.htm#fr_617) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p10.1"></span>τοῦτο δὲ πιστὸν ἐγένετο</span>. That would
have astonished: this was calculated to obtain belief. E. D. F. Edd.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p10.2"></span>τοῦτο δὲ ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν
εγένετο</span>. “But this was done for their sakes for they would not
have been counted human beings, if he had done all after the manner of
God, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p10.3"></span>εἰ θεοπρεπῶς
πάντα ἐποίει</span>.”

<span id="fn_618"></span>[i:619](1110031.htm#fr_618) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p10.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p11"></span> In the old text this sentence and the
next are transposed. The mod. text has restored the true order, but for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p11.1"></span>ἡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p11.2"></span>δονὴν</span> has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p11.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p11.4"></span>παλλαγὴν</span>, “his
deliverance to come to him all at once.”—The connection may be thus
supplied, “When he came to himself, he found himself there at large, and
with his hands no longer chained. And this circumstance again is a
strong evidence that he had not fled.”

<span id="fn_619"></span>[i:620](1110031.htm#fr_619) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p13"></span> The order in <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p13.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. is *a, b, c.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p13.2"></span>Αὕτη</span>, in the
beginning of (*c*) evidently refers to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p13.3"></span>τῆς παραινέσεως τῆς Γαμ</span>. in (*a*).

<span id="fn_620"></span>[i:621](1110031.htm#fr_620) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p13.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p14"></span> James the brother of John was the son of
Zebedee, commonly called the “elder” James. He was the first of the
apostles to suffer martyrdom. The other James, called “the Lord’s
brother” ([Gal. 1.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.) mentioned in [Acts
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.2"></span>
(cf. <span id="vi.xxvi-p14.3"></span>[Acts xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.4"></span>;
xxi. 18) was the Bishop of Jerusalem, a man of much importance and
influence in the apostolic church, whom Paul reckons among the “pillars”
(<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.5"></span>[Gal. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.6"></span>).
Chrys. gives no opinion here concerning him. Three views have prevailed
in the church: (1) that he was the same as the apostle, James the son of
Alphæus and is called the “brother” of Jesus in the loose sense of that
word in which it is taken as equivalent to “relative.” (2) That he was
the son of Joseph by a former marriage. (3) That he was the son of
Joseph and Mary—the real brother of Jesus and is called an apostle in
<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.7"></span>[Gal. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.8"></span>, in
the more comprehensive sense which that word acquired according to which
it was applied also to Paul and Barnabas ([Acts xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.9"></span>).
This view seems to me the correct one. There were also other brothers
([Matt. 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046), [Matt.
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055),
[56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056)<span id="vi.xxvi-p14.10"></span>)
Joses, Simon and Judas, and sisters who are not personally named. Chrys.
seems to have held view (2) in his earlier writings, but to have adopted
view (1), following Jerome. (Cf. Lightfoot on Galatians, pp. 289,
290).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[i:622](1110031.htm#fr_621) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p14.18"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p15"></span> A. B. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.1"></span>κακία, ἀσέβεια</span>. Cat <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p15.2"></span>φονος ἄδικος
κακίας</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.3"></span>;</span>ἀ<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.4"></span>σέβεια ταῖς κ. τ. λ</span>. Mod. text
substitutes for these two words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.5"></span>Πολλὴ ἡ ἄνοια τοῦ ῾Ηρώδου</span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[i:623](1110031.htm#fr_622) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p15.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p16.1"></span>Καθὼς δὲ ᾤοντο</span> A. B. C. Either this is
out of its place, or the sentence is incomplete. The mod. text
substitutes, “And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison.”

<span id="fn_623"></span>[i:624](1110031.htm#fr_623) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p16.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.1"></span>οὐκ ἐστασίασαν, οὐκ ἐθορυβήθησαν</span>:
alluding perhaps to the factious and turbulent proceedings, which in his
time often ensued when a Bishop was removed or at the point of death.
But possibly <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.3"></span>στασ</span>. is corrupt.—Below, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p17.4"></span>Τοῦτο δὲ ἦν ὑπὲρ
Πέτρου</span>, etc. the meaning seems to be, “That Herod was permitted
to do this, and that Peter was delivered into his hands, not withdrawing
upon the death of James, was all the better for Peter: it gave fresh
proof of his worth, it showed how courageous he was in himself,
independently of supernatural aid.”

<span id="fn_624"></span>[i:625](1110031.htm#fr_624) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p17.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p18"></span> A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.1"></span>καὶ τὸ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.2"></span>“</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.4"></span>ν τάχει,</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.5"></span>”</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.6"></span>ὥστε μη ῥαθυμησαι· καὶ ἔπληξεν αὐτόν·</span>
(C. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.7"></span>καὶ ἔκπληξις ἦν
εἰς αὐτόν</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.8"></span>οὕτω βαθέως ἐκάθευδεν</span>. Perhaps C. has
preserved the true reading, see on v. 11. If so, it should be transposed
with the part marked (*a*), viz. “—by the Angel: and it was an amazement
to him, so deeply did he sleep: but he thought he saw a vision.” The
letters as usual denote the order of parts in the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.9"></span>mss.</span> Before (*b*),
the clause, “And he passed the first and second ward,” is inserted. It
is not easy to see what can be the reference of the question, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.10"></span>Πῶς</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.11"></span>;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p18.12"></span>ποῦ εἰσὶν οἱ
αἱρετικοί</span>; it can hardly be meant for the mention of the sandals
and cloak, v. 8, for the persons who objected to the Christians, that,
according to Christ’s command, they ought to have no shoes, nor two
coats, etc. were not heretics, but heathens: see *Hom. in illud,
Salutate Prisc. et Aq*. t. iii. 181. and *Hom*. ix. *in Philip*. t. xi.
272 (the latter cited in the Catena here).

<span id="fn_625"></span>[i:626](1110031.htm#fr_625) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p18.22"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p19"></span> A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.2"></span>πιστηθῆναι</span>, “be disbelieved?” But this
is evidently corrupt.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[i:627](1110031.htm#fr_626) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p19.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.1"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.2"></span>σως ἐκεῖνος ὁ ἀεὶ αὐτοῖς συνών</span>. Œcumen.
may have read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p20.3"></span>οὐκ
ἐκεῖνος</span>, for he has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.4"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.5"></span>να δείξῃ ὅτι οὐ τοῦ ἀεὶ συνόντος αὐτοῖς
᾽Ιωάννου τὴν μήτερα φησίν</span>: “to show that he does not mean the
mother of John (the Apostle) who was always with them, he adds his
distinctive name.”

<span id="fn_627"></span>[i:628](1110031.htm#fr_627) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p20.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.2"></span>ν αὐτοῖς τοῖς ἀδικοῦσιν</span>. Perhaps it may
mean, He brings it home to the conviction of the wrong-doers themselves,
etc. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p21.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p21.4"></span>Εκείνων</span>, i.e. the
enemies. But <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.6"></span>δικουμένοις</span> would suit the meaning
better than <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.8"></span>δικοῦσιν</span>, and then <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p21.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p21.10"></span>κείνων</span> would be
right: otherwise it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.11"></span>αὐτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[i:629](1110031.htm#fr_628) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p21.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p22"></span> The interpretation of Chrys. regarding
the idea of the company assembled in Mary’s house expressed by: “It is
his angel,” is doubtless correct. Others interpret: “It is his
messenger”—a messenger sent by Peter to them, but it is said that Rhoda
recognized Peter’s voice ([Acts
12.14](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p22.1"></span>). Others understand *angel* in the sense of
*spirit*—a view which is not sanctioned by linguistic usage. Their idea
was that Peter’s guardian angel who had taken on his form and appearance
was before the door. The belief in guardian angels attending individuals
was common in later Jewish theology as well as in the Greek and Roman
religions. It was doubtless stimulated in the early church by the saying
of Jesus concerning children: “In heaven their angels do always behold
the face of my Father who is in heaven” ([Matt. xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010)<span id="vi.xxvi-p22.2"></span>),
which seems to sanction the idea (cf. [Heb. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p22.3"></span>).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[i:630](1110031.htm#fr_629) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p22.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p23.1"></span>καὶ τὶ βουλεται ὁ ἄγγελος</span>; A. B. C.
Cat. The mod. text substitutes, “And whence did it come into their minds
at that time to surmise that it was an Angel?”

<span id="fn_630"></span>[i:631](1110031.htm#fr_630) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p24"></span> i.e. It was so ordered (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p24.1"></span>ᾠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p24.2"></span>κονόμητο</span>) that the
notion of its being his Angel came into their minds before they saw him,
in order that it might not be possible for them to think this after he
was gone.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[i:632](1110031.htm#fr_631) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p25.1"></span>Πιστοῦται δὲ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὸ ἐν ἡμέρα
γενόμενον</span>. i.e. “When it was day there was no small stir among
the soldiers,” etc. [Acts 12.18](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p25.2"></span>. The innovator, not perceiving the meaning,
substitutes <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p25.3"></span>καὶ τὸ
μὴ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ γενεσθαι</span>, “And its not happening by day, confirms
their belief.”

<span id="fn_632"></span>[i:633](1110031.htm#fr_632) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.2"></span>μνημονευσεν</span>. i.e. astonishment would
have deprived him of the power of remembering, and afterwards relating
the circumstances, [Acts 12.17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[i:634](1110031.htm#fr_633) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p27.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p28"></span> Here, and on former occasion, [Acts
12.19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxvi-p28.1"></span>.
Hence the plural <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p28.2"></span>δἱ
εαυτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[i:635](1110031.htm#fr_634) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p28.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p29.1"></span>διὰ τούτων</span> (the persons assembled in
the house of Mary) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p29.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p29.3"></span>κεῖνοι</span> (James and the brethren), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p29.4"></span>οὐκ ἐκεῖνοι διὰ
τούτου</span>. This is corrupt, but the meaning is, James and the more
important of the brethren learn the particulars through these inferior
persons, not these through those, but through Peter himself. Mod. text,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p29.5"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p29.6"></span>να διὰ τούτων ἐκεῖνοι
μανθάνωσιν, οὐκ αὐτοὶ δἰ ἐκείνων</span>

<span id="fn_635"></span>[i:636](1110031.htm#fr_635) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p31"></span> Mod. text adds, “thou wilt enjoy all
pleasure, being led forthwith to reflect on the Creator.”

<span id="fn_636"></span>[i:637](1110031.htm#fr_636) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p32.1"></span>῍</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p32.2"></span>Αν διακύψῃς εἰς τὸν στενωπόν</span>. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xxvi-p32.3"></span>στενωποὶ</span>,
*angiportus* or *vici* are the lanes or alleys in the quarters formed by
intersection of the broad streets, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p32.4"></span>πλατεῖαι</span>.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[i:638](1110031.htm#fr_637) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p33.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p34"></span> Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p34.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xxvi-p34.2"></span>λλὰ μὴ γένοιτο μηδένα ὑμῶν ὑπέκκαυμα τοῦ πυρὸς
ἐκείνου γενέσθαι</span>: “God forbid that any of you should become the
fuel of that fire.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVII on Acts xii. 18, 19.](1110032)
