[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110071)  [Next](1110073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xi"></span> <span id="vii.xi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>[Rom. IV.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#023)<span id="vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>“Now it was not written for his sake alone,
that it was imputed to him for righteousness; but for us also, to whom
it shall be imputed, if we believe on Him that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead.”

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xi-p4.1"></span>After</span> saying many great things of
Abraham, and his faith, and righteousness, and honor before God, lest
the hearer should say, What is this to us, for it is he that was
justified? he places us close to the Patriarch again. So great is the
power of spiritual words. For of one of the Gentiles, one who was
recently come near, one who had done no work, he not only says that he
is in nothing inferior to the Jew who believes (i.e. as a Jew), but not
even to the Patriarch, but rather, if one must give utterance to the
wondrous truth, even much greater. For so noble is our birth, that his
faith is but the type of ours. And he does not say, If it was reckoned
unto him, it is probable it will be also to us, that he might not make
it matter of syllogism. But he speaks in authentic words of the divine
law, and makes the whole a declaration of the Scripture. For why was it
written, he says, save to make us see that we also were justified in
this way? For it is the same God Whom we have believed, and upon the
same matters, if it be not in the case of the same persons. And after
speaking of our faith, he also mentions God’s unspeakable love towards
man, which he ever presents on all sides, bringing the Cross before us.
And this he now makes plain by saying,

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span>[Rom.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="vii.xi-p5.1"></span>.
“Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification.”

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span>See how after mentioning the cause of His
death, he makes the same cause likewise a demonstration of the
resurrection. For why, he means, was He crucified? Not for any sin of
His own. And this is plain from the Resurrection. For if He were a
sinner, how should He have risen? But if He rose, it is quite plain that
He was not a sinner. But <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) if
He was not a sinner, how came He to be crucified?—For others,—and if for
others, then surely he rose again. Now to prevent your saying, How, when
liable for so great sins, came we to be justified? he points out One
that blotteth out all sins, that both from Abraham’s faith, whereby he
was justified, and from the Saviour’s Passion, whereby we were freed
from our sins, he might confirm what he had said. And after mentioning
His Death, he speaks also of His Resurrection. For the purpose of His
dying was not that He might hold us liable to punishment and in
condemnation, but that He might do good unto us. For for this cause He
both died and rose again, that He might make us righteous.

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span>[Rom.
5.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="vii.xi-p8.1"></span>.
“Therefore being justified by faith, let us <span
id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326)  <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="vii.xi-p11"></span>What does “Let us have peace” mean? Some
say, “Let us not be at variance, through a peevish obstinacy for
bringing in the Law.” But to me he seems to be speaking now of our
conversation. For after having said much on the subject of faith, he had
set it before righteousness which is by works, to prevent any one from
supposing what he said was a ground for listlessness, he says, “let us
have peace,” that is, let us sin no more, nor go back to our former
estate. For this is making war with God. And “how is it possible,” saith
one, “to sin no more?” How <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328)
was the former thing possible? For if when liable for so many sins we
were freed from all by Christ, much more shall we be able through Him to
abide in the estate wherein we are. For it is not the same thing to
receive peace when there had been none, and to keep it when it has been
given, since to acquire surely is harder than to keep. Yet nevertheless
the more difficult hath been made easy, and carried out into effect.
That which is the easier thing then will be what we shall easily succeed
in, if we cling to Him who hath wrought even the other for us. But here
it is not the easiness only which he seems to me to hint at, but the
reasonableness. For if He reconciled us when we were in open war with
Him, it is reasonable that we should abide in a state of
reconciliation, <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) and give unto
Him this reward for that He may not seem to have reconciled untoward and
unfeeling creatures to the Father.

<span id="vii.xi-p14"></span>[Rom.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)<span id="vii.xi-p14.1"></span>.
“By Whom also we have access,” he says, “by faith unto this grace. (7
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xi-p14.2"></span>mss.</span> add, unto,
etc.)

<span id="vii.xi-p15"></span>If then He hath brought us near to Himself,
when we were far off, much more will He keep us now that we are near.
And let me beg you to consider how he everywhere sets down these two
points; His part, and our part. On His part, however, there be things
varied and numerous and diverse. For He died for us, and farther
reconciled us, and brought us to Himself, and gave us grace unspeakable.
But we brought faith only as our contribution. And so he says,” “by
faith, unto this grace.” What grace is this? tell me. It is the being
counted worthy of the knowledge of God, the being forced from error, the
coming to a knowledge of the Truth, the obtaining of all the blessings
that come through Baptism. For the end of His bringing us near was that
we might receive these gifts. For it was not only that we might have
simple remission of sins, that we were reconciled; but that we might
receive also countless benefits. Nor did He even pause at these, but
promised others, namely, those unutterable blessings that pass
understanding alike and language. And this is why he has set them both
down also. For by mentioning grace he clearly points at what we have at
present received, but by saying, “And we rejoice in hope of the glory of
God,” he unveils the whole of things to come. And he had well said,
“wherein also we stand.” For this is the nature of God’s grace. It hath
no end, it knows no bound, but evermore is on the advance to greater
things, which in human things is not the case. Take an instance of what
I mean. A person has acquired rule and glory and authority, yet he does
not stand therein continuously, but is speedily cast out of it. Or if
man take it not from him, death comes, and is sure to take it from him.
But God’s gifts are not of this kind; for neither man, nor occasion, nor
crisis of affairs, nor even the Devil, nor death, can come and cast us
out of them. But when we are dead we then more strictly speaking have
possession of them, and keep going on enjoying more and more. And so if
thou feel in doubt about those to come; from those now present, and what
thou hast already received, believe in the other also. For this is why
he says, “And we rejoice (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p15.1"></span>καυχώμεθα</span>) in hope of the glory of God,”
that you may learn, what kind of soul the faithful ought to have. For it
is not only for what hath been given, but for what is to be given, that
we ought to be filled with confidingness, as though it were already
given. For one “rejoices” in what is already given. Since then the hope
of things to come is even as sure and clear as that of what is given, he
says that in that too we in like manner “rejoice.” For this cause also
he called them glory. For if it contributeth unto God’s glory, come to
pass it certainly will, though it do not for our sakes, yet for Him it
will. And why am I saying (he means) that the blessings to come are
worthy of being gloried in (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p15.2"></span>καυχήσεως</span>)? Why even the very evils of
this time present are able to brighten up our countenances, and make us
find in them even our repose. Wherefore also he added,

<span id="vii.xi-p16"></span>[Rom.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="vii.xi-p16.1"></span>.
“And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also.”

<span id="vii.xi-p17"></span>Now, consider how great the things to come
are, when even at things that seem to be distressful we can be elated;
so great is God’s gift, and such a nothing any distastefulness in them!
For in the case of external goods, the struggle for them brings trouble
and pain and irksomeness along with it; and it is the crowns and rewards
that carry the pleasure with them. But in this case it is not so, for
the wrestlings have to us no less relish than the rewards. For since
there were sundry temptations in those days, and the kingdom existed in
hopes, the terrors were at hand, but the good things in expectation, and
this unnerved the feebler sort, even before the crowns he gives them the
prize now, by saying that we should “glory even in tribulations.” And
what he says is not “you should glory,” but we glory, giving them
encouragement in his own person. Next since what he had said had an
appearance of being strange and paradoxical, if a person who is
struggling in famine, and is in chains and torments, and insulted, and
abused, ought to glory, he next goes on to confirm it. And (what is
more), he says they are worthy of being gloried in, not only for the
sake of those things to come, but for the things present in themselves.
For tribulations are in their own selves a goodly thing. How so? It is
because they anoint us unto patient abiding. Wherefore after saying we
glory in tribulations, he has added the reason, in these words, “Knowing
that tribulation worketh patience.” Notice again the argumentative
spirit of Paul, how he gives their argument an opposite turn. For since
it was tribulations above all that made them give up the hopes of things
to come, and which cast them into despondency, he says that these are
the very reasons for confidingness, and for not desponding about the
things to come, for “tribulation,” he says, “worketh patience.”

<span id="vii.xi-p18"></span>[Rom.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="vii.xi-p18.1"></span>.
“And patience experience, and experience hope; and hope maketh not
ashamed.” <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330)

<span id="vii.xi-p20"></span>Tribulations, that is, are so far from
confuting these hopes, that they even prove them. For before the things
to come are realized, there is a very great fruit which tribulation
hath—patience; <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) and the making
of the man that is tried, experienced. And it contributes in some degree
too to the things to come, <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332)
for it gives hope a vigor within us, since there is nothing that so
inclines a man to hope for blessings as a good conscience. Now no man
that has lived an upright life is unconfiding about things to come, as
of those who have been negligent there are many that, feeling the burden
of a bad conscience, wish there were neither judgment nor retribution.
What then? do our goods lie in hopes? Yes, in hopes—but not mere human
hopes, which often slip away, and put him that hoped to shame; when some
one, who was expected to patronize him, dies, or is altered though he
lives. No such lot is ours: our hope is sure and unmoveable. For He Who
hath made the promise ever liveth, and we that are to be the enjoyers of
it, even should we die, shall rise again, and there is absolutely
nothing which can put us to shame, as having been elated at random, and
to no purpose, upon unsound hopes. Having then sufficiently cleared them
of all doubtfulness by these words of his, he does not let his discourse
pause at the time present, but urges again the time to come, knowing
that there were men of weaker character, who looked too for present
advantages, and were not satisfied with these mentioned. And so he
offers a proof for them in blessings already given. For lest any should
say, But what if God be unwilling to give them to us? For that He can,
and that He abideth and liveth, we all know: but how do we know, that He
is willing, also, to do it? From the things which have been done
already. “What things done?” The Love which He hath shown for us. In
doing what? some may say. In giving the Holy Ghost. Wherefore after
saying “hope maketh not ashamed,” he goes on to the proof of this, as
follows:

<span id="vii.xi-p30"></span>“Because the love of God is,” he does not
say “given,” but “shed abroad in our hearts,” so showing the profusion
of it. That gift then, which is the greatest possible, He hath given;
not heaven and earth and sea, but what is more precious than any of
these, and hath rendered us Angels from being men, yea sons of God, and
brethren of Christ. But what is this gift? The Holy Spirit. Now had He
not been willing to present us after our labors with great crowns, He
would never have given us such mighty gifts before our labors. But now
the warmth of His Love is hence made apparent, that it is not gradually
and little by little that He honors us; but He hath shed abroad the full
fountain of His blessings, and this too before our struggles. And so, if
thou art not exceedingly worthy, despond not, since thou hast that Love
of thy Judge as a mighty pleader for thee. For this is why he himself by
saying, “hope maketh not ashamed,” has ascribed everything not to our
well-doings, but to God’s love. But after mentioning the gift of the
Spirit, he again passes to the Cross, speaking as follows:

<span id="vii.xi-p31"></span>[Rom.
5.6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xi-p31.1"></span>.
“For while we were yet without strength, Christ in due time died for the
ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet pervadenture
for a good man some would even dare to die. <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) But God commendeth His love towards
us.”

<span id="vii.xi-p33"></span>Now what he is saying is somewhat of this
kind. For if for a virtuous man, no one would hastily choose to die,
consider thy Master’s love, when it is not for virtuous men, but for
sinners and enemies that He is seen to have been crucified—which he says
too after this, “In that, if when we were sinners Christ died for us,”

<span id="vii.xi-p34"></span>[Rom.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="vii.xi-p34.1"></span>.
“Much more then, being now justified by His Blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through Him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the death of His Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be
saved by His life.”

<span id="vii.xi-p35"></span>And what he has said looks indeed like
tautology, but it is not to any one who accurately attends to it.
Consider then. He wishes to give them reasons for confidence respecting
things to come. And first he gives them a sense of shame from the
righteous man’s decision, when he says, that he also “was fully
persuaded that what God had promised He was able also to perform;” and
next from the grace that was given; then from the tribulation, as
sufficing to lead us into hopes; and again from the Spirit, whom we have
received. Next from death, and from our former viciousness, he maketh
this good. And it seems indeed, as I said, that what he had mentioned
was one thing, but it is discovered to be two, three, and even many
more. First, that “He died:” second, that it was “for the ungodly;”
third, that He “reconciled, saved, justified” us, made us immortal, made
us sons and heirs. It is not from His Death then only, he says, that we
draw strong assertions, but from the gift which was given unto us
through His Death. And indeed if He had died only for such creatures as
we be, a proof of the greatest love would what He had done be! but when
He is seen at once dying, and yielding us a gift, and that such a gift,
and to such creatures, what was done casts into shade our highest
conceptions, and leads the very dullest on to faith. For there is no one
else that will save us, except He Who so loved us when we were sinners,
as even to give Himself up for us. Do you see what a ground this topic
affords for hope? For before this there were two difficulties in the way
of our being saved; our being sinners, and our salvation requiring the
Lord’s Death, a thing which was quite incredible before it took place,
and required exceeding love for it to take place. But now since this
hath come about, the other requisites are easier. For we have become
friends, and there is no further need of Death. Shall then He who hath
so spared his enemies as not to spare His Son, fail to defend them now
they are become friends, when He hath no longer any need to give up his
Son? For it is either because a person does not wish it, or because
though he may wish it perhaps, <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) yet he is unable to do it, that he
does not save. Now none of these things can be said of God. For that He
is willing is plain from His having given up His Son. <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) But that He is able also is the
very thing He proved likewise, from the very fact of His having
justified men who were sinners. What is there then to prevent us any
more from obtaining the things to come? Nothing! Then again, lest upon
hearing of sinners, and enemies, and strengthless ones, and ungodly,
thou shouldest be inclined to feel abashed and blush; hear what he says.

<span id="vii.xi-p38"></span>[Rom.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)<span id="vii.xi-p38.1"></span>.
“And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by Whom we have now received the atonement.”

<span id="vii.xi-p39"></span>What meaneth the “not only so?” Not only
were we saved, he means, but we even glory <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) for this very reason, for which
some suppose we ought to hide our faces. For, for us who lived in so
great wickedness to be saved, was a very great mark of our being
exceedingly beloved by Him that saved us. For it was not by angels or
archangels, but by His Only-begotten Son Himself, that He saved us. And
so the fact of His saving us, and saving us too when we were in such
plight, and doing it by means of His Only-begotten, and not merely by
His Only-begotten, but by His Blood, weaves for us endless crowns to
glory in. For there is not anything that counts so much in the way of
glory and confidence, as the being treated as friends (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p40.2"></span>φιλεἵσθαι</span>) by God,
and finding a Friend (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p40.3"></span>φιλεἵν</span>) in Him that loveth (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p40.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p40.5"></span>γαπὥντα</span>) us. This it
is that maketh the angels glorious, and the principalities and powers.
This is greater than the Kingdom, and so Paul placed it above the
Kingdom. For this also I count the incorporeal powers blessed, because
they love Him, and in all things obey Him. And on this score the Prophet
also expressed his admiration at them. “Ye that excel in strength, that
fulfil His Word.” (<span id="vii.xi-p40.6"></span>[Ps. ciii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#020)<span id="vii.xi-p40.7"></span>.)
And hence too Isaiah extolleth the Seraphim, setting forth their great
excellency from their standing near that glory, which is a sign of the
greatest love.

<span id="vii.xi-p41"></span>Let us then emulate the powers above, and
be desirous not only of standing near the throne, but of having Him
dwelling in us who sitteth upon the Throne. He loved us when we hated
Him, and also continueth to love us. “For He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust.” ([Matt. v. 45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="vii.xi-p41.1"></span>.) As then He loveth us, do thou love Him. For
He is our Friend (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p41.2"></span>φιλεἵ γὰρ</span>). And how cometh it, some will
say, that one who is our Friend threateneth hell, and punishment, and
vengeance? It is owing to His loving us alone. For all He doeth and is
busied with, is with a view to strike out thy wickedness, and to refrain
with fear, as with a kind of bridle, thy inclinableness to the worse
side, and by blessings and by pains recovering thee from thy downward
course, and leading thee up to Him, and keeping thee from all vice,
which is worse than hell. But if thou mockest what is said, and wouldest
rather live continually in misery, than be punished for a single day, it
is no marvel. For this is but a sign of thy unformed judgment (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p41.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p41.4"></span>τελοὕς γνώμης</span>),
drunkenness, and incurable disorder. Since little children even when
they see the physician going to apply burning or the knife, flee and
leap away screaming and convulsed, and choose to have a continual sore
eating into their body, rather than to endure a temporary pain, and so
enjoy health afterwards. But those who have come to discretion, know
that to be diseased is worse than submitting to the knife, as also to be
wicked is worse than to be punished. For the one is to be cured and to
be healthy, the other to ruin one’s constitution and to be in continual
feebleness. Now that health is better than feebleness, surely is plain
to every one. Thieves then ought to weep not when they have their sides
pierced through, but when they pierce through walls and murder. For if
the soul be better than the body (as it is), when the former is ruined
there is more reason to groan and lament; but if a man does not feel it,
so much the more reason to bewail it. For those that love with an
unchastened love ought to be more pitied than those who have a violent
fever, and those that are drunken, than those that are undergoing
torture. But if these are more painful (some may say), how come we to
give them the preference? Because there are many of mankind, who, as the
proverb saith, like the worse, and they choose these, and pass by the
better. And this one may see happening as well in victuals as in forms
of government, in emulous aims of life too, and in the enjoyment of
pleasure, and in wives, and in houses, and in slaves, and in lands, and
in the case of all other things. For which is more pleasurable pray,
cohabiting with women or with males? with women or with mules? Yet still
we shall find many that pass over women, and cohabit with creatures void
of reason, and abuse the bodies of males. Yet natural pleasures are
greater than unnatural ones. But still many there are that follow after
things ridiculous and joyless, and accompanied with a penalty, as if
pleasurable. Well but to them, a man may say, these things appear so.
Now this alone is ground enough to make them miserable, that they think
those things to be pleasurable which are not so. Thus they assume
punishment to be worse than sin which it is not, but just the contrary.
Yet, if it were an evil to the sinner, God would not have added evils to
the evil; for He that doeth everything to extinguish evil, would not
have increased it. Being punished then is no evil to the man who has
done wrong, but not being punished, when in that plight, is evil, just
as for the infirm not to be cured. (Plat. *Gorg.* p. 478, sqq.) For
there is nothing so evil as extravagant desire. And when I say,
extravagant, I mean that of luxury, and that of ill-placed glory, and
that of power, and in general that of all things which go beyond what is
necessary. For such is he who lives a soft and dissolute life, who seems
to be the happiest of men, but is the most wretched, as superinducing
upon his soul harsh and tyrannical sovereigns. For this cause hath God
made the present a life of labor to us, that He may rid us of that
slavery, and bring us into genuine freedom. For this cause He threatened
punishment, and made labors a part of our portion in life, so muzzling
our vaunting spirit. In this way the Jews also, when they were fettered
to the clay and brick making, were at once self-governed, and called
continually upon God. But when they were in the enjoyment of freedom,
then they murmured, and provoked the Lord, and pierced themselves
through with countless evils. What then, it may be said, will you say to
those frequent instances of men being altered for the worse by
tribulations? Why, that this is no effect of tribulation, but of their
own imbecility. For neither if a man had a weak stomach and could not
take a bitter medicine which would act as a purgative, but was made even
worse by it, would it be the drug we should find fault with, but the
weakness of the part, as we should therefore here too with the
yieldingness of temper. For he who is altered so by tribulation, is much
more likely to be affected in this way by laxity. If he fails even when
splinted, (or tied) (this is what affliction is), much more will he when
the bandage is removed. If when braced up he is altered, much more when
in a state of tumor (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p41.5"></span>χαυνούμενος</span>). And how am I, one may ask,
to keep from being so altered by tribulation? Why, if thou reflectest
that, wish it or not, thou wilt have to bear the thing inflicted: but if
thou dost it with a thankful spirit, thou wilt gain very greatly
thereby; but if thou art indignant at it, and ragest <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) and blasphemest, thou wilt not make
the calamity lighter, but thou wilt render its wave more troublous. By
feeling then in this way, let us turn what is necessary into a matter of
our own choice. What I mean is this—suppose one has lost his own son,
another all his property: if you reflect that it is not in the nature of
things for what has taken place to be undone; while it is to gain fruit
from the misfortune, though irremediable, even that of bearing the
circumstance nobly; and if instead of using blasphemous words, thou wert
to offer up words of thanksgiving to the Lord, so would evils brought
upon thee against thy will become to thee the good deeds of a free
choice. Hast thou seen a son taken prematurely away? Say, “the Lord hath
given, the Lord hath taken away.” Do you see your fortune exhausted?
Say, “naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return
thither.” ([Job. i. 21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xi-p42.2"></span>.) Do you see evil men faring well, and just
men faring ill and undergoing ills without number, and dost thou not
know where to find the cause? Say, “I became even as it were a beast
before Thee. Yet I am ever with Thee.” (<span
id="vii.xi-p42.3"></span>[Ps. lxxiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022)<span id="vii.xi-p42.4"></span>.)
But if thou wilt search out the cause, reflect that He has fixed a day
in which He will judge the world, and so you will throw off perplexity,
for then every man will meet his deserts, even as Lazarus and the rich
man. Call to mind the Apostles, for they too rejoiced at being scourged,
at being driven about and undergoing numberless sufferings, because they
were “counted worthy to suffer shame for His Name’s sake.” (<span
id="vii.xi-p42.5"></span>[Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="vii.xi-p42.6"></span>.)
And do thou, then, if thou art sick, bear it nobly, and own thyself
indebted to God for it, and thou shalt receive the same reward with
them. But how, when in feebleness and pain, art thou to be able to feel
grateful to the Lord? Thou wilt if thou lovest Him sincerely. For if the
Three Children who were thrown into the furnace, and others who were in
prisons, and in countless other evils, ceased not to give thanks, much
more will they who are in a state of disease, be able to do this. For
there is not, assuredly there is not, anything which vehement desire
doth not get the better of. But when the desire is even that of God, it
is higher than anything, and neither fire, nor the sword, nor poverty,
nor infirmity, nor death, nor aught else of the kind appeareth dreadful
to one who hath gotten this love, but scorning them all, he will fly to
heaven, and will have affections no way inferior to those of its
inhabitants, seeing nothing else, neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea,
but gazing only at the one Beauty of that glory. And neither the
vexations of this life present will depress him, nor the things which
are goodly and attended with pleasure elate him or puff him up. Let us
then love with this love (for there is not anything equal unto it) both
for the sake of things present and for the sake of things to come. Or
rather, more than for these, for the nature of the love itself. For we
shall be set free both from the punishments of this life and of that
which is to come, and shall enjoy the kingdom. Yet neither is the escape
from hell, nor the fruition of the kingdom, anything great in comparison
of what is yet to be said. For greater than all these things is it to
have Christ our beloved at once and our lover. For if when this happens
with men it is above all pleasure; when both happen from God, what
language or what thought is able to set before one the blessedness of
this soul? There is none that can, save the experience of it only. That
then we may by experience come to know what is this spiritual joy, and
life of blessedness, and untold treasure of good things, let us leave
everything to cling to that love, with a view as well to our own joy as
to the glory of God. For unto Him is the glory and power, with His
Only-begotten, and the Holy Ghost, now, and ever, and unto all ages
evermore. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[i:1326](1110072.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="vii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span> If a fresh argument commences here, there
is no vicious circle. For there was independent proof of each
proposition, and so, when shown to involve one another, they were
mutually confirmed.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[i:1327](1110072.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="vii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span> So nearly all <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span>mss</span>. here; and there is good authority
for the reading in the text of the N.T. both from <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xi-p9.2"></span>mss.</span>, versions, and
Fathers. It is accepted by Tregelles: Tischendorf retains the received
text “we have.”

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[i:1328](1110072.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="vii.xi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span> The text of Chrys. adds confirmation to
the strongly attested <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.2"></span>χωμεν</span>(so <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.3"></span>א</span> A. B. C. D.) as against the reading
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p10.4"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p10.5"></span>χομεν</span>) of the T.R.
Strong and clear as is the external evidence here, it is to me very
doubtful whether it is not overborne by the internal evidence. There
seems to be no appropriateness in an exhortation here. The thought has
been developed in a didactic form thus far and we should now expect a
didactic conclusion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.6"></span>οὖν</span>). Nor should we expect an
exhortation to have peace with God which would be the natural
consequence of justification and scarcely the proper object of an
exhortation. De Wette, Meyer, Godet and Weiss reject the better
authenticated reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.7"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p10.8"></span>χωμεν</span>on these grounds. It is difficult
to see how Chrys. can think that the Apostle is here treating of our
“Conversation”—when he proceeds at once to enumerate the new comfort,
patience and hope which follow from justification.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[i:1329](1110072.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="vii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p12"></span> 3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> If thou wilt consider how, etc.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[i:1330](1110072.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="vii.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p13"></span> Or perhaps “by the terms of
reconciliation,” for so the text may be understood. The reading in
Savile’s margin, <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p13.1"></span>τοῖς
καταλλαγεῖσι</span>, seems also to bear the same sense.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[i:1331](1110072.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="vii.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p19"></span> The word rendered “patience,” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p19.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p19.2"></span>πομονή</span>) means rather
patient endurance, constancy. It is active rather than passive in
meaning. Then the endurance which is developed under tribulation helps
to form a tried, tested character, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p19.3"></span>Δοκιμή</span> means a tested state—approved
character. The R.V. renders “probation,” which is more nearly correct
than “experience” (A.V.). We have no word which makes a felicitous
translation. The meaning is that steadfastness under trials develops a
tested moral manhood, and this kind of character begets hope; it takes
away fear for what the future may bring.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[i:1332](1110072.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="vii.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p21"></span> We do not see what use patience will be of
in a future state, cf. Butler’s *Anal.* part i. c. v. §4.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[i:1333](1110072.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="vii.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p22"></span> That such is the power of conscience even
in a heathen is plain from Plato, *Rep.* 1. §5. Steph. p. 350. e. “For
you must know, Socrates,” said he, “that when a man is near the time
when he must expect to die, there comes into his mind a fear and anxiety
about things that were never so thought of before. For the stories that
are told of things in Hades, how a man that has done wrong here must
satisfy justice for it there, which have hitherto been laughed at, come
then to perplex his soul with alarms that they may be true. And even of
himself, whether from the infirmity of age, or in that he is in a manner
already nearer to that state, he sees somewhat more of it. However it
be, he becomes full of suspicion and alarm; and takes account and
considers whether he has at all wronged any one. And then a man who
finds a number of guilty actions in his life is often roused by alarm
from his sleep, like children, and lives ever in expectation of misery.
But one who is conscious in himself of no wrong has a pleasing hope ever
with him, as the kind nurse of his old age, as Pindar too says. For
beautifully indeed, Socrates, has he expressed this, that whoever has
passed his life in justice and holiness,

<span id="vii.xi-p23"></span>Sweet Hope, best helpmate of the heart,

<span id="vii.xi-p24"></span>With cheerful tenderness,

<span id="vii.xi-p25"></span>Soothes his declining years.

<span id="vii.xi-p26"></span>She whom we mortals trust

<span id="vii.xi-p27"></span>In many an anxious doubt

<span id="vii.xi-p28"></span>To sway life’s wavering helm.

<span id="vii.xi-p29"></span>Well said indeed! one wonders to think how
well,” etc.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[i:1334](1110072.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="vii.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p32"></span> Meyer and Weiss make no distinction
between <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p32.1"></span>δικαίου</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p32.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p32.3"></span>γαθοῦ</span> here. Most have held (I think,
rightly) that the latter expresses more than the former. It comprehends
those qualities of benevolence, kindness, etc., which may be considered
as the peculiar bonds of friendship and would lead to the greatest
sacrifices. Holman, Godet and Weiss (following Jerome) take <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p32.4"></span>τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ</span> as
neuter. J. Müller supposes it to refer to God. The force of the argument
is: For an upright man one would hardly be moved to die, but in the case
of a benefactor to whom one owed much, the motives of love and pity
might move one strongly enough to lead him to summon up the resolution
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p32.5"></span>τολμᾷ</span>) to
die, but this would be the highest and a very improbable reach of human
love. But Christ died for his *enemies,* etc.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[i:1335](1110072.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="vii.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p36.1"></span>πολλάκις</span>, Heind. ad Plat. *Phæd.* p.
140, §12.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[i:1336](1110072.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="vii.xi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p37"></span> So Field, from one <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p37.1"></span>ms.</span> and Brixius’ version: the old
reading could only mean “Now none of these things can be said of God,
considering He hath given up.”

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[i:1337](1110072.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="vii.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p40"></span> Same word as joy. See [Rom.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)<span id="vii.xi-p40.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[i:1338](1110072.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="vii.xi-p41.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p42"></span> Several <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p42.1"></span>mss.</span> “art in pain.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X on Rom. v. 12.](1110073)
