[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110058)  [Next](1110060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.liv"></span> <span id="vi.liv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.liv-p1.1"></span>Homily LIV.</span>

<span id="vi.liv-p2"></span>[Acts
28.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)<span id="vi.liv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p3"></span>“And the barbarous people showed us no
little kindness: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one,
because of the present rain, and because of the cold. And when Paul had
gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a
viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.”

<span id="vi.liv-p4"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.liv-p4.1"></span>Showed</span>,” he says, “no little kindness to
us—barbarians” (as they were <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164)
)—“having kindled a fire:” else it were of no use that their lives be
saved, if the wintry weather must destroy them. Then Paul having taken
brushwood, laid it on the fire. See how active he is; observe how we
nowhere find him doing miracles for the sake of doing them, but only
upon emergency. Both during the storm when there was a cause he
prophesied, not for the sake of prophesying, and here again in the first
instance he lays on brushwood:—nothing for vain display, but (with a
simple view) to their being preserved, and enjoying some warmth. Then a
viper “fastened on his hand. And when the barbarians saw the venomous
beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is
a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance
suffereth not to live.” ([Acts
28.4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004)<span id="vi.liv-p5.4"></span>.)
Well also was this permitted, that they should both see the thing and
utter the thought, in order that, when the result ensued, there might be
no disbelieving the miracle. Observe their good feeling (towards the
distressed), in saying this (not aloud, but) among themselves—observe
(also) the natural judgment clearly expressed even among barbarians, and
how they do not condemn without assigning a reason. And these also
behold, that they may wonder the more. “And he shook off the beast into
the fire, and felt no harm. Howbeit they looked when he should have
swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great
while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said
that he was a god.” ([Acts 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#006)<span id="vi.liv-p5.5"></span>.)
They expected him, it says, to fall down dead: and again, having seen
that nothing of the kind happened to him, they said, He is a god. Again
(viz. as in [Acts 14.11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)<span
id="vi.liv-p5.6"></span>), another excess on the part of these men. “In
the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island, whose
name was Publius; who received us, and lodged us three days courteously.
And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and
of a bloody flux: to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his
hands on him, and healed him.” ([Acts
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#008)<span id="vi.liv-p5.7"></span>.)
Behold again another hospitable man, Publius, who was both rich and of
great possessions: he had seen nothing, but purely out of compassion for
their misfortune, he received them, and took care of them. So that he
was worthy to receive kindness: wherefore Paul as a requital for his
receiving them, “healed him. So when this was done, others also, which
had diseases in the island, came, and were healed: who also honored us
with many honors; and when we departed, they laded us with such things
as were necessary” ([Acts 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#010)<span id="vi.liv-p5.8"></span>),
both us and the rest. See how when they were quit of the storm, they did
not become <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) more negligent,
but what a liberal entertainment was given to them for Paul’s sake: and
three months were they there, all of them provided with sustenance. See
how all this is done for the sake of Paul, to the end that the prisoners
should believe, and the soldiers, and the centurion. For if they were
very stone, yet from the counsel they heard him giving, and from the
prediction they had heard him making, and from the miracles they knew
him to have wrought, and from the sustenance they by his means enjoyed,
they must have got a very high notion of him. See, when the judgment is
right, and not preoccupied by some passion, how immediately it gets
right judgings, and gives sound verdicts. “And after three months we
departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose
sign was Castor and Pollux. <span id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166)
And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days. And from thence we
fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind
blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli: where we found brethren, and
were desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we went toward Rome.
And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as
far as Appii forum, and the Three Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he
thanked God, and took courage.” ([Acts
28.11-15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)<span
id="vi.liv-p7.1"></span>.) Already the preaching has reached to Sicily:
see how it has run through (even to those lands): at Puteoli also they
found some: others also came to meet them. Such was the eagerness of the
brethren, it nothing disconcerted them, that Paul was in bonds. But
observe also how Paul himself also was affected after the manner of men.
For it says, “he took courage, when he saw the brethren.” Although he
had worked so many miracles, nevertheless even from sight he received an
accession (of confidence). From this we learn, that he was both
comforted after the manner of men, and the contrary. “And when we came
to Rome, Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept
him.” ([Acts 28.16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016)<span
id="vi.liv-p7.2"></span>.) Leave was given him to dwell by himself. No
slight proof this also of his being held in much admiration: it is clear
they did not number him among the rest. “And it came to pass, that after
three days he called together them that were the chief of the Jews.”
After three days he called the chief of the Jews, that their ears might
not be preoccupied. And what had he in common with them? for they would
not (else) have been like to accuse him. Nevertheless, it was not for
this that he cared; it was for the teaching that he was concerned, and
that what he had to say might not offend them.

<span id="vi.liv-p8"></span>(Recapitulation.) “And the barbarians,” etc.
([Acts 28.2](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#002)<span
id="vi.liv-p8.1"></span>.) The Jews then, beholding all the many
miracles they did, persecuted and harassed (Paul); but the barbarians,
who had seen none, merely on the ground of his misfortune, were kind to
him.—“No doubt,” say they, “this man is a murderer:” ([Acts
28.4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004)<span id="vi.liv-p8.2"></span>).
They do not simply pronounce their judgment, but say, “No doubt,” (i.e.)
as any one may see “and vengeance,” say they, “suffereth him not to
live.” Why then, they held also the doctrine of a Providence, and these
barbarians were far more philosophic than the philosophers, who allow
not the benefit of a Providence to extend to things “below the moon:”
whereas (these barbarians) suppose God to be present everywhere, and
that although a (guilty) man may escape many (a danger), he will not
escape in the end. And they do not assail him forthwith, but for a time
respect him on account of his misfortune: nor do they openly proclaim
their surmise, but speak it “among themselves: a murderer;” for the
bonds led them to suspect this. “They showed no small kindness,” and yet
(some of them) were prisoners. Let those be ashamed that say, Do not do
good to those in prison: let these barbarians shame us; for they knew
not who these men were, but simply because they were in misfortune (they
were kind): thus much they perceived, that they were human beings, and
therefore they considered them to have a claim upon their humanity. “And
for a great while,” it says, “they expected that he would die.” ([Acts
28.6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#006)<span id="vi.liv-p8.3"></span>.)
But when he shook his hand, and flung off the beast, then they saw and
were astonished. And the miracle did not take place suddenly, but the
men went by the length of time, “after they had looked a great while,”
so plainly was there no deceit, no haste here (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p8.4"></span>συναρπαγή</span>). “Publius,” it says, “lodged
them courteously” ([Acts 28.7](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007)<span
id="vi.liv-p8.5"></span>): two hundred and seventy-six persons. Consider
how great the gain of his hospitality: not as of necessity, not as
unwilling, but as reckoning it a gain he lodged them for three days:
thereafter having met with his requital, he naturally honored Paul much
more, when the others also received healing. “Who also,” it says,
“honored us with many honors” ([Acts
28.10](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#010)<span id="vi.liv-p8.6"></span>):
not that he received wages, God forbid; but as it is written, “The
workman is worthy of his meat. And when we departed, they laded us with
such things as were necessary.” ([Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="vi.liv-p8.7"></span>.) It
is plain that having thus received them, they also received the word of
the preaching: for it is not to be supposed, that during an entire three
months they would have had all this kindness shown them, <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) had these persons not believed
strongly, and herein exhibited the fruits (of their conversion): so that
from this we may see a strong proof of the great number there was of
those that believed. Even this was enough to establish (Paul’s) credit
with those (his fellow-voyagers). Observe how in all this voyage they
nowhere touched at a city, but (were cast) on an island, and passed the
entire winter (there, or) sailing—those being herein under training for
faith, his fellow-voyagers, I mean. (*a*) “And after three months we
departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose
sign was Castor and Pollux.” ([Acts
28.11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)<span id="vi.liv-p9.8"></span>.)
Probably this was painted on it: so addicted were they to their idols.
(*d*) “And when the south wind blew, we came the next day to Puteoli:
where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days:
and so we went toward Rome.” ([Acts
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014)<span id="vi.liv-p9.9"></span>.)
(*b*) Observe them tarrying a while, and again hasting onwards. (*e*)
“And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as
far as Appii forum, and the Three Taverns” ([Acts
28.15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)<span id="vi.liv-p9.10"></span>):
not fearing the danger. (*c*) Paul therefore was now so much respected,
that he was even permitted to be by himself: for if even before this
they used him kindly, much more would they now. *(g)* “He was suffered,”
it says, “to dwell by himself, with a soldier that kept him.” ([Acts
28.16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016)<span id="vi.liv-p9.11"></span>.)
That it might not be possible for any plot to be laid against him there
either—for there could be no raising of sedition now. So that in fact
they were not keeping Paul in custody, but guarding him, so that nothing
unpleasant should happen: for it was not possible now, in so great a
city, and with the Emperor there, and with Paul’s appeal, for anything
to be done contrary to order. So surely is it the case, that always
through the things which seem to be against us, all things turn out for
us. “With the soldier”—for he was Paul’s guard. “And having called
together the chief of the Jews” ([Acts
28.17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)<span id="vi.liv-p9.12"></span>),
he discourses to them, who both depart gainsaying, and are taunted by
him, yet they dare not say anything: for it was not permitted them to
deal with his matter at their own will. For this is a marvellous thing,
that not by the things which seem to be for our security, but by their
very opposites, all comes to be for us. And that you may learn
this—Pharaoh commanded the infants to be cast into the river. (<span
id="vi.liv-p9.13"></span>[Exod. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022)<span id="vi.liv-p9.14"></span>.)
Unless the infants had been cast forth, Moses would not have been saved,
he would not have been brought up in the palace. When he was safe, he
was not in honor; when he was exposed, then he was in honor. But God did
this, to show His riches of resource and contrivance. The Jew threatened
him, saying, “Wouldest thou kill me?” ([Exod.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)<span id="vi.liv-p9.15"></span>)
and this too was of profit to him. It was of God’s providence, in order
that he should see that vision in the desert, in order that the proper
time should be completed, that he should learn philosophy in the desert,
and there live in security. And in all the plottings of the Jews against
him the same thing happens: then he becomes more illustrious. As also in
the case of Aaron; they rose up against him, and thereby made him more
illustrious ([Num. 16:0](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000), [Num.
17:0](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#000)<span
id="vi.liv-p9.16"></span>[Num.
xvi.](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000)<span id="vi.liv-p9.17"></span>
xvii.): that so his ordination should be unquestionable, that he might
be held in admiration for the future also from the plates of brass
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p9.18"></span>τὥν πετάλων τοὕ
χαλκοὕ</span>). Of course you know the history: wherefore I pass over
the narration. And if ye will, let us go over the same examples from the
beginning.

<span id="vi.liv-p10"></span>Cain slew his brother, but in this he
rather benefited him: for hear what Scripture says, “The voice of thy
brother’s blood crieth unto Me” (<span id="vi.liv-p10.1"></span>[Gen.
iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span
id="vi.liv-p10.2"></span>): and again in another place, “To the blood
that speaketh better things than that of Abel.” ([Heb. xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#024)<span id="vi.liv-p10.3"></span>.) He
freed him from the uncertainty of the future, he increased his reward:
we have all learnt hereby what love God had for him. For what was he
injured? Not a whit, in that he received his end sooner. For say, what
do they gain, who die more slowly? Nothing: for the having good days
does not depend on the living many years or few years, but in the using
life properly. The Three Children were thrown into the furnace, and
through this they became more illustrious: Daniel was cast into the pit,
and thence was he made more renowned. ([Dan.
3:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000), [Dan.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000)<span
id="vi.liv-p10.4"></span>[Dan.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span id="vi.liv-p10.5"></span>
and vi.) You see that trials in every case bring forth great good even
in this life, much more in the life to come: but as to malice, the case
is the same, as if a man having a reed should set himself to fight with
the fire: it seems indeed to beat the fire, but it makes it brighter,
and only consumes itself. For the malice of the wicked becomes food and
an occasion of splendor to virtue: for by God’s turning the
unrighteousness to good account, our character shines forth all the
more. Again, when the devil works anything of this kind, he makes those
more illustrious that endure. How then, you will say, was this not the
case with Adam, but, on the contrary, he became more disgraced? Nay, in
this case of all others God turned (the malice of) that (wicked one) to
good account: but if (Adam) was the worse for it, it was he that injured
himself: for it is the wrongs that are done to us by others that become
the means of great good to us, not so the wrongs which are done by
ourselves. As indeed, because the fact is that when hurt by others, we
grieve, but not so when hurt by ourselves, therefore it is that God
shows, that he who suffers unjustly at the hands of another, gets
renown, but he who injures himself, receives hurt: that so we may bear
the former courageously, but not the latter. And besides, the whole
thing there was Adam’s own doing. Wherefore didst thou the woman’s
bidding? ([Gen. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span
id="vi.liv-p10.6"></span>.) Wherefore when she counselled thee contrary
(to God), didst thou not repel her? Thou wast assuredly thyself the
cause. Else, if the devil was the cause, at this rate all that are
tempted ought to perish: but if all do not perish, the cause (of our
destruction) rests with ourselves. <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) “But,” you will say, “all that are
tempted ought (at that rate) to succeed.” No: for the cause is in
ourselves. “At that rate it ought to follow that (some) perish without
the devil’s having anything to do with it.” Yes: and in fact many do
perish without the devil’s being concerned in it: for surely the devil
does not bring about all (our evil doings); no, much comes also from our
own sluggishness by itself alone: and if he too is anywhere concerned as
a cause, it is from our offering the occasion. For say, why did the
devil prevail in Judas’ case? When “Satan entered into him” ([John xiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)<span id="vi.liv-p11.17"></span>),
you will say. Yes, but hear the cause: it was because “he was a thief,
and bare what was put in the bag.” ([John
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)<span id="vi.liv-p11.18"></span>.)
It was he that himself gave the devil a wide room for entering into him:
so that it is not the devil who puts into us the beginning, it is we
that receive and invite him. “But,” you will say, “if there were no
devil, the evils would not have become great.” True, but then our
punishment would admit of no plea for mitigation: but as it is, beloved,
our punishment is more mild, whereas if we had wrought the evils of
ourselves, the chastisements would be intolerable. For say, if Adam,
without any counsel, had committed the sin he did, who would have
snatched him out of the dangers? “But he would not have sinned,” you
will say? What right hast thou to say this? For he who had so little
solidity, that was so inert and so ready for folly as to receive such
advice as this, much more would he without any counsel have become this
(that he did become). What devil incited the brethren of Joseph to envy?
If then we be watchful brethren, the devil becomes to us the cause even
of renown. Thus, what was Job the worse for his falling into such
helplessness of distress? “Speak not of this instance,” you will say:
“(Job was not the worse,) but the weak person is the worse.” Yes, and
the weak person is the worse, even if there be no devil. “But in a
greater degree,” you will say, “when there is the devil’s power working
along with him.” True, but he is the less punished, when he has sinned
through the devil’s working with him; for the punishments are not the
same for all sins. Let us not deceive ourselves: the devil is not the
cause of our taking harm, if we be watchful: <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) rather what he does, is to awake us
out of our sleep; what he does, is to keep us on the alert. Let us for a
while examine these things: suppose there were no wild beasts, no
irregular states of the atmosphere; no sicknesses, no pains, no sorrows,
nor anything else of the kind: what would not man have become? A hog
rather than a man, revelling in gluttony and drunkenness, and troubled
by none of those things. But as it is, cares and anxieties are an
exercise and discipline of philosophy, a method for the best of
training. For say, let a man be brought up in a palace, having no pain,
nor care, nor anxiety, and having neither cause for anger nor failure,
but whatever he sets his mind upon, that let him do, in that let him
succeed, and have all men obeying him: (see whether) such a man would
not become more irrational than any wild beast. But as it is, our
reverses and our afflictions are as it were a whetstone to sharpen us.
For this reason the poor are for the most part wiser than the rich, as
being driven about and tost by many waves. Thus a body also, being idle
and without motion, is sickly and unsightly: but that which is
exercised, and suffers labor and hardships, is more comely and healthy:
and this we should find to hold also in the case of the soul. Iron also,
lying unused, is spoilt, but if worked it shines brightly; and in like
manner a soul which is kept in motion. Now these reverses are precisely
what keeps the soul in motion. Arts again perish, when the soul is not
active: but it is active when it has not everything plain before it: it
is made active by adverse things. If there were no adverse things, there
would be nothing to stir it: thus, if everything existed ready-made in
beautiful sort, art would not have found wherein to exercise itself. So,
if all things were level to our understanding, the soul would not find
wherein to exert itself: if it had to be carried about everywhere, it
would be an unsightly object. See you not, that we exhort nurses not to
make a practice of carrying children always, that they may not bring
them into a habit (of wanting to be carried) and so make them helpless?
This is why those children which are brought up under the eyes of their
parents are weak, in consequence of the indulgence, which by sparing
them too much injures their health. It is a good thing, even pain in
moderation; a good thing, care; a good thing, want; for <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) they make us strong: good also are
their opposites: but each of these when in excess destroys us; and the
one relaxes, but the other (by overmuch tension) breaks us. Seest thou
not, that Christ also thus trains His own disciples? If they needed
these things, much more do we. But if we need them, let us not grieve,
but even rejoice in our afflictions. For these are remedies, answering
to our wounds, some of them bitter, others mild; but either of them by
itself would be useless. Let us therefore return thanks to God for all
these things: for He does not suffer them to happen at random, but for
the benefit of our souls. Therefore, showing forth our gratitude, let us
return Him thanks, let us glorify Him, let us bear up courageously,
considering that it is but for a time, and stretching forward our minds
to the things future, that we may both lightly bear the things present,
and be counted worthy to attain unto the good things to come, through
the grace and mercy of His only begotten Son, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[i:1165](1110059.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="vi.liv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p5"></span> The Maltese, though undoubtedly civilized,
were <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p5.1"></span>βάρβαροι</span>
in the Greek and Roman sense of speaking an unintelligible language (cf.
<span id="vi.liv-p5.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011)<span id="vi.liv-p5.3"></span>). The
word might be appropriately rendered “foreigners.” The Maltese were of
Phœnician descent and spoke a mixed dialect.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[i:1166](1110059.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="vi.liv-p5.9"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p6.2"></span>μελεστέρους γενομένους</span>, i.e. the
impression left on their minds by the storm was not suffered to wear
out, when the danger was over. What happened on shore, Paul’s miracles,
the kindness and honors shown them by the barbarians for Paul’s sake,
all helped to keep them from relapsing into indifference.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[i:1167](1110059.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="vi.liv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p7"></span> Or with the sign of the Dioscuri. The
reference is to the ships *insigne,* an image or picture of the
divinities Castor and Pollux on the prow of the ship. In the current
mythology they were the sons of Jupiter and Leda, and were regarded as
the tutelary divinities of sailors.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[i:1168](1110059.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="vi.liv-p8.8"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p9.1"></span>οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἐν τριμήνῳ τοσούτῳ διελέχθησαν μὴ
σφόδρα αὐτῶν πιστευσάντων</span>. (Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p9.2"></span>τοσαῦτα διελέχθη</span>.) This is evidently
corrupt. The context requires (as we have given in the translation),
“would not have been so hospitably and liberally entertained, such a
number as there were of them, two hundred and seventy-six souls and this
for a period of three months:” but in <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p9.3"></span>διελέχθ</span>. perhaps <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p9.4"></span>διηλέγχθησαν</span> is
latent: “they would not have been so honored etc., but rather would have
been convicted,” etc.—In what follows, the parts had fallen out of their
places thus, 2, 4, 6: 3, 5: 1, 7. Mod. text in *e,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p9.5"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p9.6"></span>τι φοβηθέντες τὸν κίνδυνον
ἐξῆλθον</span>, connecting this with the first clause of *f,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p9.7"></span>καὶ ταῦτα ἱκανὰ ἐκείνους
πιστώσασθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[i:1169](1110059.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="vi.liv-p10.7"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p11"></span> The dialogue seems to proceed thus. “If
the devil was the cause of Adam’s fall, at this rate it ought to follow
that all whom the devil tempts should perish (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.2"></span>δει κατὰ τοῦτο πάντας τοὺς πειραζομένους
ἀπόλλυσθαι</span>): if this be not the case, as certainly it is not,
then, the cause (of our perishing) is with ourselves (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p11.3"></span>εἰ δὲ μὴ ἀπόλλυνται, παῤ
ἡμᾶς ἡ αἰτία</span>).” Then: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.5"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἔδει, φησὶ, πάντας τοὺς πειραζομένους
κατορθοῦν· οὐ· παῤ ἡμᾶς γὰρ ἡ αἰτία· ἔδει, φησὶ, καὶ χωρὶς τοῦ διαβόλου
ἀπόλλυσθαι</span>. “But,” say you, “(at this rate) all that are tempted
ought to succeed (against the Tempter, to come off victorious from the
encounter).” No: for the cause (of our being tempted) is with ourselves.
“Then people ought to perish even without the devil:” i.e. ‘It should
follow that those who perish, perish independently of the tempter.’ Yes:
in fact many do,” etc. In the printed text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.7"></span>λλ᾽ ἔδει</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.8"></span>κατορθοῦν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.9"></span>,.…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.10"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.11"></span>δει ἀπόλλυσθαι</span> are put interrogatively,
and in place of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.12"></span>οὐ παῤ ἡμᾶς γὰρ ἡ αἰτία</span> of the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.liv-p11.13"></span>mss.</span> (which we point
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p11.14"></span>Οὐ. παῤ ἡμᾶς γ. ἡ.
ἀ</span>.) it has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.15"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p11.16"></span>, εἰ παῤ ἡ. ἡ. ἀ</span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[i:1170](1110059.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="vi.liv-p11.19"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p12"></span> *Hom.* xxiii.*in Gen.* § 6, p. 215, A. “I
exhort you never to lay the blame upon Satan, but upon your own
remissness. I say not this to exculpate him, for he ‘goeth about,’ etc.
[1 Pet. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="vi.liv-p12.1"></span>, but to put ourselves in more security, that
we may not exculpate ourselves when we so easily go over to the evil
one, that we may not speak those heartless, senseless words, ‘Why has
God left the evil one so much freedom to seduce men.’ These words
betoken the greatest ingratitude. Consider this: God has left him that
freedom, to this very end, that by fear of the enemy he may keep us ever
watchful and sober.”

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[i:1171](1110059.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="vi.liv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p13"></span> The printed text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.1"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.2"></span>σχυροὺς γὰρ ἡμᾶς ποιεῖ καλὰ
καὶ τὰ ἐναντία</span>. Ben., *fortes enim nos reddunt quæ bona et
contraria sunt.* But <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p13.3"></span>καλὰ καὶ τὰ ἐναντία</span> clearly answers to
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.4"></span>καλὸν καὶ λυπὴ
σύμμετρος, καλὸν καὶ φροντὶς, καλὸν καὶ ἔνδεια</span>. Only it may be
doubted whether <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.5"></span>τὰ
ἐναντία</span> is to be taken here as above, “Good also are adverse
things, or, “their opposites,” i.e. “freedom from sorrow, and care, and
want, if in moderation.” But the context speaks for the latter: viz.
“(In moderation), for each of them (both these things and of their
opposites) being out of measure destroys: and as the one leaves no
solidity or stability (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p13.6"></span>καὶ τὸ μὲν χαυνοῖ</span>, i.e. immoderate joy,
ease, comfort), so the other by excessive tension breaks.”—So below by
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.7"></span>ταῦτα</span> we
understand “these things and their opposites,” which are described as
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.liv-p13.8"></span>τὰ μὲν πικρὰ, τὰ δὲ
ἥμερα</span> (mod text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p13.9"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.liv-p13.10"></span>δέα</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LV on Acts xxviii. 17-20.](1110060)
