[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110075)  [Next](1110077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv"></span> <span id="vii.xv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>[Rom. VII.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p3"></span>“For we know that the Law is spiritual: but
I am carnal, sold under sin.”

<span id="vii.xv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xv-p4.1"></span>After</span> having said that great evils had
taken place, and that sin, taking occasion by the commandment, had grown
stronger, and the opposite of what the Law mainly aimed at had been the
result, and after having thrown the hearer into a great deal of
perplexity, he goes on next to give the rationale of these events, after
first clearing the Law of any ill suspicion. For lest—upon hearing that
it was through the commandment that sin took that occasion, and that it
was when it came that sin revived, and through it deceived and
killed—any one should suppose the Law to be the source of these evils,
he first sets forth its defence with considerable advantage, not
clearing it from accusation only, but encircling it also with the utmost
praise. And this he lays down, not as granting it for his own part, but
as declaring a universal judgment. “For we know,” he says, “that the Law
is spiritual.” As if he had said, This is an allowed thing, and
self-evident, that it “is spiritual,” so far is it from being the cause
of sin, or to blame for the evils that have happened. And observe, that
he not only clears it of accusation, but bestows exceeding great praise
upon it. For by calling it spiritual, he shows it to be a teacher of
virtue and hostile to vice; for this is what being spiritual means,
leading off from sin of every kind. And this the Law did do, by
frightening, admonishing, chastening, correcting, recommending every
kind of virtue. Whence then, was sin produced, if the teacher was so
admirable? It was from the listlessness of its disciples. Wherefore he
went on to say, “but I am carnal;” giving us a sketch now of man, as
comporting himself in the Law, and before the Law. <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389.md) “Sold under sin.” Because with
death (he means) the throng of passions also came in. For when the body
had become mortal, it was henceforth a necessary thing for it to receive
concupiscence, and anger, and pain, and all the other passions, which
required a great deal of wisdom (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p5.8"></span>φιλοσοφίας</span>) to prevent their flooding us,
and sinking reason in the depth of sin. For in themselves they were not
sin, <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390.md) but, when their
extravagancy was unbridled, it wrought this effect. Thus (that I may
take one of them and examine it as a specimen) desire is not sin: but
when it has run into extravagance, being not minded to keep within the
laws of marriage, <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391.md) but
springing even upon other men’s wives; then the thing henceforward
becomes adultery, yet not by reason of the desire, but by reason of its
exorbitancy. And observe the wisdom of Paul. For after praising the Law,
he hastens immediately to the earlier period, that he may show the state
of our race, both then and at the time it received the Law, and make it
plain how necessary the presence of grace was, a thing he labored on
every occasion to prove. For when he says, “sold under sin,” he means it
not of those who were under the Law only, but of those who had lived
before the Law also, and of men from the very first. Next he mentions
the way in which they were sold and made over.

<span id="vii.xv-p8"></span>[Rom.
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.xv-p8.1"></span>.
“For that which I do, I know not.”

<span id="vii.xv-p9"></span>What does the “I know not” mean?—I am
ignorant. And when could this ever happen? For nobody ever sinned in
ignorance. Seest thou, that if we do not receive his words with the
proper caution, and keep looking to the object of the Apostle, countless
incongruities will follow? For if they sinned through ignorance, then
they did not deserve to be punished. As then he said above, “for without
the Law sin is dead,” not meaning that they did not know they were
sinning, but that they knew indeed, but not so distinctly; wherefore
they were punished, but not so severely: and again; “I should not have
known lust;” not meaning an entire ignorance of it, but referring to the
most distinct knowledge of it; and said, that it also “wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence,” not meaning to say that the commandment made
the concupiscence, but that sin through the commandment introduces an
intense degree of concupiscence; so here it is not absolute ignorance
that he means by saying, “For what I do, I know not;” since how then
would he have pleasure in the law of God in his inner man? What then is
this, “I know not?” I get dizzy, he means, I feel carried away, <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392.md) I find a violence done to me, I get
tripped up without knowing how. Just as we often say, Such an one came
and carried me away with him, without my knowing how; when it is not
ignorance we mean as an excuse, but to show a sort of deceit, and
circumvention, and plot. “For what I would, that I do not: but what I
hate, that I do.” How then canst thou be said not to know what thou art
doing? For if thou willest the good, and hatest the evil, this requires
a perfect knowledge. Whence it appears that he says, “that I would not,”
not as denying free will, or as adducing any constrained necessity. For
if it was not willingly, but by compulsion, that we sinned, then the
punishments that took place before would not be justifiable. But as in
saying “I know not,” it was not ignorance he set before us, but what we
have said; so in adding the “that I would not,” it is no necessity he
signifies, but the disapproval he felt of what was done. <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393.md) Since if this was not his meaning
in saying, “That which I would not, that I do:” he would else have gone
on, “But I do what I am compelled and enforced to.” For this is what is
opposed to willing and power (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p11.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p11.3"></span>ξουσί& 139·</span>). But now he does not say
this, but in the place of it he has put the word, “that I hate,” that
you might learn how when he says, “that I would not,” he does not deny
the power. Now, what does the “that I would not” mean? It means, what I
praise not, what I do not approve, what I love not. And in
contradistinction to this, he adds what follows; “But what I hate, that
I do.”

<span id="vii.xv-p12"></span>[Rom.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.xv-p12.1"></span>.
“If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law, that it is
good.”

<span id="vii.xv-p13"></span>You see here, that the understanding is not
yet perverted, but keeps up its own noble character even during the
action. For even if it does pursue vice, still it hates it the while,
which would be great commendation, whether of the natural or the written
Law. For that the Law is good, is (he says) plain, from the fact of my
accusing myself, when I disobey the Law, and hate what has been done.
And yet if the Law was to blame for the sin, how comes it that he felt a
delight in it, yet hated what it orders to be done? For, “I consent,” he
says, “unto the Law, that it is good.”

<span id="vii.xv-p14"></span>[Rom.
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.xv-p14.1"></span>.
“Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. For I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing.”

<span id="vii.xv-p15"></span>On this text, those who find fault with the
flesh, and contend it was no part of God’s creation, attack us. What are
we to say then? Just what we did before, when discusssing the Law: that
as there he makes sin answerable for everything so here also. For he
does not say, that the flesh worketh it, but just the contrary, “it is
not I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.” But if he does say that
“there dwelleth no good thing in it,” still this is no charge against
the flesh. For the fact that “no good thing dwelleth in it,” does not
show that it is evil itself. Now we admit, that the flesh is not so
great as the soul, and is inferior to it, yet not contrary, or opposed
to it, or evil; but that it is beneath the soul, as a harp beneath a
harper, and as a ship under the pilot. And these are not contrary to
those who guide and use them, but go with them entirely, yet are not of
the same honor with the artist. As then a person who says, that the art
resides not in the harp or the ship, but in the pilot or harper, is not
finding fault with the instruments, but pointing out the great
difference between them <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394.md) and
the artist; so Paul in saying, that “in my flesh dwelleth no good
thing,” is not finding fault with the body, but pointing out the soul’s
superiority. For this it is that has the whole duty or pilotage put into
its hands, and that of playing. And this Paul here points out, giving
the governing power to the soul, and after dividing man into these two
things, the soul and the body, he says, that the flesh has less of
reason, and is destitute of discretion, and ranks among things to be
led, not among things that lead. But the soul has more wisdom, and can
see what is to be done and what not, yet is not equal to pulling in the
horse as it wishes. And this would be a charge not against the flesh
only, but against the soul also, which knows indeed what it ought to do,
but still does not carry out in practice what seems best to it. “For to
will,” he says, “is present with me; but how to perform that which is
good, I find not.” Here again in the words, “I find not,” he does not
speak of any ignorance or perplexity, but a kind of thwarting and crafty
assault made by sin, which he therefore points more clearly out in the
next words.

<span id="vii.xv-p17"></span>[Rom.
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.xv-p17.1"></span>.
“For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not that
I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it but sin
that dwelleth in me.”

<span id="vii.xv-p18"></span>Do you see, how he acquits the essence of
the soul, as well as the essence of the flesh, from accusation, and
removes it entirely to sinful actions? For if the soul willeth not the
evil, it is cleared: and if he does not work it himself, the body too is
set free, and the whole may be charged upon the evil moral choice. Now
the essence of the soul and body and of that choice are not the same,
for the two first are God’s works, and the other is a motion from
ourselves towards whatever we please to direct it. For willing is indeed
natural (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p18.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p18.2"></span>μφυτον</span>), and is from God: but willing on
this wise is our own, and from our own mind.

<span id="vii.xv-p19"></span>[Rom.
7.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.xv-p19.1"></span>.
“I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.”

<span id="vii.xv-p20"></span>What he says is not very clear. What then
is it that is said? I praise the law, he says, in my conscience, and I
find it pleads on my side so far as I am desirous of doing what is
right, and that it invigorates this wish. For as I feel a pleasure in
it, so does it yield praise to my decision. Do you see how he shows,
that the knowledge of what is good and what is not such is an original
and fundamental part of our nature, and that the Law of Moses praises
it, and getteth praise from it? For above he did not say so much as I
get taught by the Law, but “I consent to the Law;” nor further on that I
get instructed by it, but “I delight in” it. Now what is “I delight?” It
is, I agree with it as right, as it does with me when wishing to do what
is good. And so the willing what is good and the not willing what is
evil was made a fundamental part of us from the first. But the Law, when
it came, was made at once a stronger accuser in what was bad, and a
greater praiser in what was good. Do you observe that in every place he
bears witness to its having a kind of intensitiveness and additional
advantage, yet nothing further? For though it praises and I delight in
it, and wish what is good the “evil is” still “present with me,” and the
agency of it has not been abolished. And thus the Law, with a man who
determines upon doing anything good, only acts so far as auxiliary to
him, as that it has the same wish as himself. Then since he had stated
it indistinctly, as he goes on he gives a yet more distinct
interpretation, by showing how the evil is present, how too the Law is a
law to such a person only who has a mind to do what is good.

<span id="vii.xv-p21"></span>[Rom.
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.xv-p21.1"></span>.
“For I delight,” he says, “in the law of God after the inward man.”

<span id="vii.xv-p22"></span>He means, for I knew even before this what
was good, but when I find it set down in writing, I praise it.

<span id="vii.xv-p23"></span>[Rom.
7.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.xv-p23.1"></span>.
“But I see another law warring against the law of my mind.”

<span id="vii.xv-p24"></span>Here again he calls sin a law warring
against the other, not in respect of good order, but from the strict
obedience yielded to it by those who comply with it. As then it gives
the name of master (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p24.1"></span>κύριον</span> <span
id="vii.xv-p24.2"></span>[Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.xv-p24.3"></span>;
[Luke xvi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p24.4"></span>) to Mammon, and of god ([Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xv-p24.5"></span>.md) to
the belly, not because of their intrinsically deserving it, but because
of the extreme obsequiousness of their subjects; so here he calls sin a
law, owing to those who are so obsequious to it, and are afraid to leave
it, just as those who have received the Law dread leaving the Law. This
then, he means, is opposed to the law of nature; for this is what is
meant by “the law of my mind.” And he next represents an array and
battle, and refers <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395.md) the whole
struggle to the law of nature. For that of Moses was subsequently added
over and above: yet still both the one and the other, the one as
teaching, the other as praising what was right, wrought no great effects
in this battle; so great was the thraldom of sin, overcoming and getting
the upper hand as it did. And this Paul setting forth, and showing the
decided (<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p25.6"></span>κατὰ
κράτος</span>) victory it had, says, “I see another law warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity.” He does not use the
word conquering only, but “bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin.” He does not say the bent of the flesh, or the nature of the flesh,
but “the law of sin.” That is, the thrall, the power. In what sense then
does he say, “Which is in my members?” Now what is this? Surely it does
not make the members to be sin, but makes them as distinct from sin as
possible. For that which is in a thing is diverse from that wherein it
is. As then the commandment also is not evil, because by it sin took
occasion, so neither is the nature of the flesh, even if sin subdues us
by means of it. For in this way the soul will be evil, and much more so
too, since it has authority in matters of action. But these things are
not so, certainly they are not. Since neither if a tyrant and a robber
were to take possession of a splendid mansion and a king’s court, would
the circumstance be any discredit to the house, inasmuch as the entire
blame would come on those who contrived such an act. But the enemies of
the truth, along with their impiety, fall unawares also into great
unreasonableness. For they do not accuse the flesh only, but they also
disparage the Law. And yet if the flesh were evil, the Law would be
good. For it wars against the Law, and opposes it. If, however, the Law
be not good, then the flesh is good. <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396.md) For it wars and fights against it
even by their own account. How come they then to assert that both belong
to the devil, putting things opposed to each other before us? Do you
see, along with their impiety, how great is their unreasonableness also?
But such doctrines as these are not the Church’s, for it is the sin only
that she condemns; and both the Laws which God has given, both that of
nature and that of Moses, she says are hostile to this, and not to the
flesh; for the flesh she denies to be sin, for it is a work of God’s,
and one very useful too in order to virtue, if we live soberly.

<span id="vii.xv-p27"></span>[Rom.
7.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.xv-p27.1"></span>.
“O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?”

<span id="vii.xv-p28"></span>Do you notice what a great thraldom that of
vice is, in that it overcomes even a mind that delighted in the Law? For
no one can rejoin, he means, that I hate the Law and abhor it, and so
sin overcomes me. For “I delight in it, and consent to it,” and flee for
refuge to it, yet still it had not the power of saving one who had fled
to it. But Christ saved even one that fled from Him. See what a vast
advantage grace has! Yet the Apostle has not stated it thus; but with a
sigh only, and a great lamentation, as if devoid of any to help him, he
points out by his perplexity the might of Christ, and says, “O wretched
man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” The
Law has not been able: conscience has proved unequal to it, though it
praised what was good, and did not praise it only, but even fought
against the contrary of it. For by the very words “warreth against” he
shows that he was marshalled against it for his part. From what quarter
then is one to hope for salvation?

<span id="vii.xv-p29"></span>[Rom.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.xv-p29.1"></span>.
“I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.”

<span id="vii.xv-p30"></span>Observe how he shows the necessity of
having grace present with us, and that the well-doings herein belong
alike to the Father and the Son. For if it is the Father Whom he
thanketh, still the Son is the cause of this thanksgiving. But when you
hear him say, “Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” do not
suppose him to be accusing the flesh. For he does not say “body of sin,”
but “body of death:” that is, the mortal body—that which hath been
overcome by death, not that which gendered death. And this is no proof
of the evil of the flesh, but of the marring (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p30.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p30.2"></span>πηρείας</span>, thwarting) it has undergone. As
if any one who was take captive by the savages were to be said to belong
to the savages, not as being a savage, but as being detained by them: so
the body is said to be of death, as being held down thereby, not as
producing it. Wherefore also it is not the body that he himself wishes
to be delivered from, but the mortal body, hinting, as I have often
said, that from its becoming subject to suffering, <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397.md) it also became an easy prey to sin.
Why then, it may be said, the thraldom of sin being so great before the
times of grace, were men punished for sinning? Because they had such
commands given them as might even under sin’s dominion be accomplished.
For he did not draw them to the highest kind of conversation, but
allowed them to enjoy wealth, and did not forbid having several wives,
and to gratify anger in a just cause, and to make use of luxury within
bounds. <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398.md) ([Matt. v.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)<span id="vii.xv-p32.1"></span>..md)
And so great was this condescension, that the written Law even required
less than the law of nature. For the law of nature ordered one man to
associate with one woman throughout. And this Christ shows in the words,
“He which made them at the beginning, made them male and female.”
([Matt. 19.4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p32.2"></span>.) But the Law of Moses neither forbade the
putting away of one and the taking in of another, nor prohibited the
having of two <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399.md) at once!
([Matt. 5.31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p33.1"></span>.) And besides this there are also many other
ordinances of the Law, that one might see those who were before its day
fully performing, being instructed by the law of nature. They therefore
who lived under the old dispensation had no hardship done them by so
moderate a system of laws being imposed upon them. But if they were not,
on these terms, able to get the upper hand, the charge is against their
own listlessness. Wherefore Paul gives thanks, because Christ, without
any rigorousness about these things, not only demanded no account of
this moderate amount, <span id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400.md) but
even made us able to have a greater race set before us. And therefore he
says, “I thank my God through Jesus Christ.” And letting the salvation
which all agreed about pass, he goes from the points he had already made
good, to another further point, in which he states that it was not our
former sins only that we were freed from, but we were also made
invincible for the future. For “there is,” he says, “now no condemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh.” Yet he
did not say it before he had first recalled to mind our former condition
again in the words, “So then with the mind I myself serve the law of
God, but with the flesh the law of sin.”

<span id="vii.xv-p35"></span>[Rom.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xv-p35.1"></span>.
“There is therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.”

<span id="vii.xv-p36"></span>Then as the fact that many fall into sin
even after baptism presented a difficulty (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p36.2"></span>ντέπιπτεν</span>), he consequently hastened to
meet it, and says not merely “to them that are in Christ Jesus,” but
adds, “who walk not after the flesh;” so showing that all afterward
comes of our listlessness. For now we have the power of walking not
after the flesh, but then it was a difficult task. Then he gives another
proof of it by the sequel, in the words,

<span id="vii.xv-p37"></span>[Rom.
8.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xv-p37.1"></span>.
“For the law of the Spirit of life hath made me free.”

<span id="vii.xv-p38"></span>It is the Spirit he is here calling the law
of the Spirit. For as he calls sin the law of sin, so he here calls the
Spirit the law of the Spirit. And yet he named that of Moses as such,
where he says, “For we know that the Law is spiritual.” What then is the
difference? A great and unbounded one. For that was spiritual, but this
is a law of the Spirit. Now what is the distinction between this and
that? The other was merely given by the Spirit, but this even furnisheth
those that receive it with the Spirit in large measure. Wherefore also
he called it the law of life <span id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401.md)
in contradistinction to that of sin, not that of Moses. For when he
says, It freed me <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402.md) from the
law of sin and death, it is not the law of Moses that he is here
speaking of, since in no case does he style it the law of sin: for how
could he one that he had called “just and holy” so often, and
destructive of sin too? but it is that which warreth against the law of
the mind. For this grievous war did the grace of the Spirit put a stop
to, by slaying sin, and making the contest light to us and crowning us
at the outstart, and then drawing us to the struggle with abundant help.
Next as it is ever his wont to turn from the Spirit to the Son and the
Father, and to reckon all our estate to lean upon the Trinity, <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403.md) so doth he here also. For after
saying, “Who shall deliver me from the body of this death,” he pointed
at the Father as doing this by the Son, then again at the Holy Spirit
along with the Son. “For the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
hath made me free, he says. Then again, at the Father and the Son;

<span id="vii.xv-p42"></span>[Rom.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xv-p42.1"></span>.
“For what the Law could not do,” he saith, “in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.”

<span id="vii.xv-p43"></span>Again, he seems indeed to be disparaging
the Law. But if any one attends strictly, he even highly praises it, by
showing that it harmonizes with Christ, and gives preference to the same
things. For he does not speak of the badness of the Law, but of “what it
could not do;” and so again, “in that it was weak,” not, “in that it was
mischievous, or designing.” And even weakness he does not ascribe to it,
but to the flesh, as he says, “in that it was weak through the flesh,”
using the word “flesh” here again not for the essence and subsistency
itself, but giving its name to the more carnal sort of mind. In which
way he acquits both the body and the Law of any accusation. Yet not in
this way only, but by what comes next also. For supposing the Law to be
of the contrary part, how was it Christ came to its assistance, and
fulfilled its requisitions, and lent it a helping hand by condemning sin
in the flesh? For this was what was lacking, since in the soul the Lord
had condemned it long ago. What then? is it the greater thing that the
Law accomplished, but the less that the Only-Begotten did? Surely not.
For it was God that was the principal doer of that also, in that He gave
us the law of nature, and added the written one to it. Again, there were
no use of the greater, if the lesser had not been supplied. For what
good is it to know what things ought to be done, if a man does not
follow it out? None, for it were but a greater condemnation. And so He
that hath saved the soul it is, Who hath made the flesh also easy to
bridle. For to teach is easy, but to show besides a way in which these
things were easily done, this is the marvel. Now it was for this that
the Only-Begotten came, and did not depart before He had set us free
from this difficulty. But what is greater, is the method of the victory;
for He took none other flesh, but this very one which was beset with
troubles. So it is as if any one were to see in the street a vile woman
of the baser sort being beaten, and were to say he was her son, when he
was the king’s, and so to get her free from those who ill treated her.
And this He really did, in that He confessed that He was the Son of Man,
and stood by it (i.e. the flesh), and condemned the sin. However, He did
not endure to smite it besides; or rather, He smote it with the blow of
His death, but in this very act it was not the smitten flesh which was
condemned and perished, but the sin which had been smiting. And this is
the greatest possible marvel. For if it were not in the flesh that the
victory took place, it would not be so astonishing, since this the Law
also wrought. But the wonder is, that it was with the flesh (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p43.1"></span>μετὰ σαρκὸς</span>) that
His trophy was raised, and that what had been overthrown numberless
times by sin, did itself get a glorious victory over it. For behold what
strange things there were that took place! One was, that sin did not
conquer the flesh; another, that sin was conquered, and conquered by it
too. For it is not the same thing not to get conquered, and to conquer
that which was continually overthrowing us. A third is, that it not only
conquered it, but even chastised it. For by not sinning it kept from
being conquered, but by dying also, He overcame and condemned it, having
made the flesh, that before was so readily made a mock of by it, a plain
object of fear to it. In this way then, He at once unnerved its power,
and abolished the death by it introduced. For so long as it took hold of
sinners, it with justice kept pressing to its end. But after finding a
sinless body, when it had given it up to death, it was condemned as
having acted unjustly. Do you observe, how many proofs of victory there
are? The flesh not being conquered by sin, Its even conquering and
condemning it, Its not condemning it barely, but condemning it as having
sinned. For after having convicted it of injustice, he proceeds to
condemn it, and that not by power and might barely, but even by the
rules of justice. For this is what he means by saying, “for sin
condemned sin in the flesh.” As if he had said that he had convicted it
of great sin, and then condemned it. So you see it is sin that getteth
condemned everywhere, and not the flesh, for this is even crowned with
honor, and has to give sentence against the other. But if he does say
that it was “in the likeness” of flesh that he sent the Son, do not
therefore suppose that His flesh was of a different kind. For as he
called it “sinful,” this was why he put the word “likeness.” <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404.md) For sinful flesh it was not that
Christ had, but like indeed to our sinful flesh, yet sinless, and in
nature the same with us. And so even from this it is plain that by
nature the flesh was not evil. For it was not by taking a different one
instead of the former, nor by changing this same one in substance, that
Christ caused it to regain the victory: but He let it abide in its own
nature, and yet made it bind on the crown of victory over sin, and then
after the victory raised it up, and made it immortal. What then, it may
be said, is this to me, whether it was this flesh that these things
happened in? Nay, it concerns thee very much. Wherefore also he
proceeds:

<span id="vii.xv-p45"></span>[Rom.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.xv-p45.1"></span>.
“That the righteousness <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405.md) of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh.”

<span id="vii.xv-p47"></span>What meaneth this word, righteousness? Why,
the end, the scope, the well-doing. For what was its design, and what
did it enjoin? To be without sin. This then is made good to us (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p47.1"></span>κατώρθωται ἡμἵν</span>) now
through Christ. And the making a stand against it, and the getting the
better of it, came from Him. But it is for us to enjoy the victory. Then
shall we never sin henceforth? We never shall unless we have become
exceedingly relaxed and supine. And this is why he added, “to them that
walk not after the flesh.” For lest, after hearing that Christ hath
delivered thee from the war of sin, and that the requisition (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p47.2"></span>δικαίωμα</span>) of the Law
is fulfilled in thee, by sin having been “condemned in the flesh,” thou
shouldest break up all thy defences; therefore, in that place also,
after saying, “there is therefore no condemnation,” he added, “to them
that walk not after the flesh;” and here also, “that the requisition of
the Law might be fulfilled in us,” he proceeds with the very same thing;
or rather, not with it only, but even with a much stronger thing. <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406.md) For after saying, “that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us that walk not after
the flesh,” he proceeds, “but after the Spirit.”

<span id="vii.xv-p49"></span>So showing, that it is not only binding
upon us to keep ourselves from evil deeds, but also to be adorned (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p49.1"></span>κομᾅν</span>) with good.
For to give thee the crown is His; but it is thine to hold it fast when
given. For the righteousness of the Law, that one should not become
liable to its curse, Christ has accomplished for thee. Be not a traitor
then to so great a gift, but keep guarding this goodly treasure. For in
this passage he shows that the Font will not suffice to save us, unless,
after coming from it, we display a life worthy of the Gift. And so he
again advocates the Law in saying what he does. For when we have once
become obedient to Christ, we must use all ways and plans so that its
righteousness, which Christ fulfilled, may abide in us, and not come to
naught.

<span id="vii.xv-p50"></span>[Rom.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.xv-p50.1"></span>.
“For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh.”

<span id="vii.xv-p51"></span>Yet even this is no disparaging of the
flesh. For so long as it keeps its own place, nothing amiss cometh to
pass. But when we let it have its own will in everything, and it passes
over its proper bounds, and rises up against the soul, then it destroys
and corrupts everything, yet not owing to its own nature, but to its
being out of proportion, and the disorder thereupon ensuing. “But they
that are after the Spirit do mind the things of the Spirit.”

<span id="vii.xv-p52"></span>[Rom.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.xv-p52.1"></span>.
“For to be carnally minded is death.” He does not speak of the nature of
the flesh, or the essence of the body, but of being carnally “minded,”
which may be set right again, and abolished. And in saying thus, he does
not ascribe to the flesh any reasoning power of its own. Far from it.
But to set forth the grosser motion of the mind, and giving this a name
from the inferior part, and in the same way as he often is in the habit
of calling man in his entireness, and viewed as possessed of a soul,
flesh. “But to be spiritually minded.” Here again he speaks of the
spiritual mind, in the same way as he says further on, “But He that
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the spirit” ([Rom.
8.27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027)<span id="vii.xv-p52.2"></span>.md);
and he points out many blessings resulting from this, both in the
present life, and in that which is to come. For as the evils which being
carnally minded introduces, are far outnumbered by those blessings which
a spiritual mind affords. And this he points out in the words “life and
peace.” The one is in contraposition to the first—for death is what he
says to be carnally minded is. And the other in contraposition to the
following. For after mentioning peace, he goes on,

<span id="vii.xv-p53"></span>[Rom.
8.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xv-p53.1"></span>.
“Because the carnal mind is enmity against God:” and this is worse than
death. Then to show how it is at once death and enmity; “for it is not
subject to the Law of God,” he says, “neither indeed can be.” But be not
troubled at hearing the “neither indeed can be.” For this difficulty
admits of an easy solution. For what he here names “carnal mindedness”
is the reasoning (or “way of thinking,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p53.2"></span>λογισμὸν</span>) that is earthly, gross, and
eager-hearted after the things of this life and its wicked doings. It is
of this he says “neither yet can” it “be subject” to God. And what hope
of salvation is there left, if it be impossible for one who is bad to
become good? This is not what he says. Else how would Paul have become
such as he was? how would the (penitent) thief, or Manasses, or the
Ninevites, or how would David after falling have recovered himself? How
would Peter after the denial have raised himself up? (<span
id="vii.xv-p53.3"></span>[1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="vii.xv-p53.4"></span>..md) How
could he that had lived in fornication have been enlisted among Christ’s
fold? (<span id="vii.xv-p53.5"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span id="vii.xv-p53.6"></span>..md)
How could the Galatians who had “fallen from grace” (<span
id="vii.xv-p53.7"></span>[Gal. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="vii.xv-p53.8"></span>.md),
have attained their former dignity again? What he says then is not that
it is impossible for a man that is wicked to become good, but that it is
impossible for one who continues wicked to be subject to God. Yet for a
man to be changed, and so become good, and subject to Him, is easy. For
he does not say that man cannot be subject to God, but, wicked doing
cannot be good. As if he had said, fornication cannot be chastity, nor
vice virtue. And this it says in the Gospel also, “A corrupt tree cannot
bring forth good fruit” ([Matt. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#018)<span id="vii.xv-p53.9"></span>.md),
not to bar the change from virtue to vice, but to say how incapable
continuance in vice is of bringing forth good fruits. For He does not
say that an evil tree cannot become a good one, but that bring forth
good fruit it cannot, while it continues evil. For that it can be
changed, He shows from this passage, and from another parable, when He
introduces the tares as becoming wheat, on which score also He forbids
their being rooted up; “Lest,” He says, “ye root up also the wheat with
them” ([Matt. 13.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#029.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p53.10"></span>); that is, that which will spring (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p53.11"></span>γίνεσθαι</span>, 4 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xv-p53.12"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p53.13"></span>τίκτεσθαι</span>) from
them. It is vice then he means by carnal mindedness, and by spiritual
mindedness the grace given, and the working of it discernible in the
right determination of mind, not discussing in any part of this passage,
a substance and an entity, but virtue and vice. For that which thou
hadst no power to do under the Law, now, he means, thou wilt be able to
do, to go on uprightly, and with no intervening fall, if thou layest
hold of the Spirit’s aid. For it is not enough not to walk after the
flesh, but we must also go after the Spirit, since turning away from
what is evil will not secure our salvation, but we must also do what is
good. And this will come about, if we give our souls up to the Spirit,
and persuade our flesh to get acquainted with its proper position, for
in this way we shall make it also spiritual; as also if we be listless
we shall make our soul carnal. For since it was no natural necessity
which put the gift into us, but the freedom <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) of choice placed it in our hands,
it rests with thee henceforward whether this shall be or the other. For
He, on His part, has performed everything. For sin no longer warreth
against the law of our mind, neither doth it lead us away captive as
heretofore, for all that state has been ended and broken up, and the
affections cower in fear and trembling at the grace of the Spirit. But
if thou wilt quench the light, and cast out the holder of the reins, and
chase the helmsman away, then charge the tossing thenceforth upon
thyself. For since virtue hath been now made an easier thing (for which
cause also we are under far stricter obligations of religious living),
consider how men’s condition lay when the Law prevailed, and how at
present, since grace hath shone forth. The things which aforetime seemed
not possible to any one, virginity, and contempt of death, and of other
stronger sufferings, are now in full vigor through every part of the
world, and it is not with us alone, but with the Scythians, and
Thracians, and Indians, and Persians, and several other barbarous
nations, that there are companies of virgins, and clans of martyrs, and
congregations of monks, and these now grown even more numerous than the
married, and strictness of fasting, and the utmost renunciation of
property. Now these are things which, with one or two exceptions,
persons who lived under the Law never conceived even in a dream. Since
thou seest then the real state of things voiced with a shriller note
than any trumpet, let not thyself grow soft and treacherous to so great
a grace. Since not even after the faith is it possible for a listless
man to be saved! For the wrestlings are made easy that thou mayest
strive and conquer, nor that thou shouldest sleep, or abuse the
greatness of the grace by making it a reason for listlessness, so
wallowing again in the former mire. And so he goes on to say,

<span id="vii.xv-p55"></span>[Rom.
8.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xv-p55.1"></span>.
“So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.”

<span id="vii.xv-p56"></span>What then? Are we, it will be said, to cut
our bodies in pieces to please God, and to make our escape from the
flesh? and would you have us be homicides, and so lead us to virtue? You
see what inconsistencies are gendered by taking the words literally. For
by “the flesh” in this passage, he does not mean the body, or the
essence of the body, but that life which is fleshly and worldly, and
uses self-indulgence and extravagance to the full, so making the entire
man flesh. For as they that have the wings of the Spirit, make the body
also spiritual, so do they who bound off from this, and are the slaves
of the belly, and of pleasure, make the soul also flesh, not that they
change the essence of it, but that they mar its noble birth. And this
mode of speaking is to be met with in many parts of the Old Testament
also, to signify by flesh the gross and earthly life, which is entangled
in pleasures that are not convenient. For to Noah He says, “My Spirit
shall not always make its abode in these men, because they are flesh.”
([Gen. vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p56.1"></span> as the LXX. give it.) And yet Noah was himself
also compassed about with flesh. But this is not the complaint, the
being compassed about with the flesh, for this is so by nature, but the
having chosen a carnal life. Wherefore also Paul saith, “But they that
are in the flesh cannot please God.” Then he proceeds:

<span id="vii.xv-p57"></span>[Rom.
8.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.xv-p57.1"></span>.
“But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.”

<span id="vii.xv-p58"></span>Here again, he does not mean flesh
absolutely, but such sort of flesh, that which was in a whirl and
thraldom of passions. Why then, it may be said, does he not say so, nor
state any difference? It is to rouse the hearer, and to show that he
that liveth aright is not even in the body. For inasmuch as it was in a
manner clear to every one that the spiritual man was not in sin, he
states the greater truth that it was not in sin alone, that the
spiritual man was not, but not even in the flesh was he henceforward,
having become from that very moment an Angel, and ascended into heaven,
and henceforward barely carrying the body about. Now if this be thy
reason for disparaging the flesh, because it is by its name that he
calls the fleshly life, at this rate you are also for disparaging the
world, because wickedness is often called after it, as Christ also said
to His disciples, “Ye are not of this world;” and again to His brethren,
He says, “The world cannot hate you, but me it hateth.” ([John
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019.md), [John
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p58.1"></span>[John xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.xv-p58.2"></span>. ib.
vii. 7.) And the soul too Paul must afterwards be calling estranged from
God, since to those that live in error, he gives the name of men of the
soul ([1 Cor. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p58.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p58.4"></span>ψυχικὸς</span> A.V. natural). But this is not
so, indeed it is not so. For we are not to look to the bare words, but
always to the sentiment of the speaker, and so come to a perfectly
distinct knowledge of what is said. For some things are good, some bad,
and some indifferent. Thus the soul and the flesh belong to things
indifferent, since each may become either the one or the other. But the
spirit belongs to things good, and at no time becometh any other thing.
Again, the mind of the flesh, that is, ill-doing, belongs to things
always bad. “For it is not subject to the law of God.” If then thou
yieldest thy soul and body to the better, thou wilt have become of its
part. If on the other hand thou yield to the worse, then art thou made a
partaker of the ruin therein, not owing to the nature of the soul and
the flesh, but owing to that judgment which has the power of choosing
either. And to show that these things are so, and that the words do not
disparage the flesh, let us take up the phrase itself again, and sift it
more thoroughly. “But ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit,” he
says. What then? were they not in the flesh, and did they go about
without any bodies? What sense would this be? You see that it is the
carnal life that he intimates. And why did he not say, But ye are not in
sin? It is that you may come to know that Christ hath not extinguished
the tyranny of sin only, but hath even made the flesh to weigh us down
less, and to be more spiritual, not by changing its nature, but rather
by giving it wings. For as when fire cometh in company with iron, the
iron also becomes fire, though abiding in its own nature still; thus
with them that believe, and have the Spirit, the flesh henceforth goeth
over into that manner of working, and becometh wholly spiritual,
crucified in all parts, and flying with the same wings as the soul, such
as was the body of him who here speaks. Wherefore all self-indulgence
and pleasure he made scorn of, and found his self-indulgence in hunger,
and stripes, and prisons, and did not even feel pain in undergoing them.
([2 Cor. xi](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p58.5"></span>.) And it was to show this that he said, “For
our light affliction, which is but for a moment,” etc. ([2 Cor.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span id="vii.xv-p58.6"></span>..md)
So well had he tutored even the flesh to be in harmony with the spirit.
“If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p58.7"></span>εἴπερ</span>.) He often
uses this “if so be,” not to express any doubt, but even when he is
quite persuaded of the thing, and instead of “since,” as when he says,
“If it is a righteous thing,” for “seeing it is a righteous thing with
God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.” (<span
id="vii.xv-p58.8"></span>[2 Thess. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="vii.xv-p58.9"></span>..md)
Again, “Have ye suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain?”
(<span id="vii.xv-p58.10"></span>[Gal. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)<span id="vii.xv-p58.11"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.xv-p59"></span>“Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ.” He does not say, if ye have not, but he brings forward the
distressing word, as applied to other persons. “He is none of His,” he
says.

<span id="vii.xv-p60"></span>[Rom.
8.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xv-p60.1"></span>.
“And if Christ be in you.”

<span id="vii.xv-p61"></span>Again, what is good he applies to
them, <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408.md) and the distressing
part was short and parenthetic. And that which is an object of desire,
is on either side of it, and put at length too, so as to throw the other
into shade. Now this he says, not as affirming that the Spirit is
Christ, far from it, but to show that he who hath the Spirit not only is
called Christ’s, but even hath Christ Himself. For it cannot but be that
where the Spirit is, there Christ is also. For wheresoever one Person of
the Trinity is, there the whole Trinity is present. For It is undivided
in Itself, and hath a most entire Oneness. What then, it may be said,
will happen, if Christ be in us? “The body is dead because of sin; but
the Spirit is life because of righteousness.” You see the great evils
that come of not having the Holy Spirit; death, enmity against God,
inability to satisfy His laws, not being Christ’s as we should be, the
want of His indwelling. Consider now also what great blessings come of
having the Spirit. Being Christ’s, having Christ himself, vying with the
Angels (for this is what mortifying the flesh is), and living an
immortal life, holding henceforward the earnests of the Resurrection,
running with ease the race of virtue. For he does not say so little as
that the body is henceforward inactive for sin, but that it is even
dead, so magnifying the ease of the race. For such an one without
troubles and labors gains the crown. Then afterward for this reason he
adds also, “to sin,” that you may see that it is the viciousness, not
the essence of the body, that He hath abolished at once. For if the
latter had been done, many things even of a kind to be beneficial to the
soul would have been abolished also. This however is not what he says,
but while it is yet alive and abiding, he contends, it is dead. For this
is the sign of our having the Son, of the Spirit being in us, that our
bodies should be in no respect different from those that lie on the bier
with respect to the working of sin (so the <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p62.3"></span>mss.</span> Sav. “of the body.” The preceding
words are slightly corrupt.) But be not affrighted at hearing of
mortifying. For in it you have what is really life, with no death to
succeed it: and such is that of the Spirit. It yieldeth not to death any
more, but weareth out death and consumeth it, and that which it
receiveth, it keepeth it immortal. And this is why after saying “the
body is dead,” he does not say, “but the Spirit ‘liveth,’” but, “is
life,” to point out that He (the Spirit) had the power of giving this to
others also. Then again to brace up his hearer, he tells him the cause
of the Life, and the proof of it. Now this is righteousness; for where
there is no sin, death is not to be seen either; but where death is not
to be seen, life is indissoluble.

<span id="vii.xv-p63"></span>[Rom.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xv-p63.1"></span>.
“But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, He that raised up our Lord shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
His Spirit that dwelleth in you.”

<span id="vii.xv-p64"></span>Again, he touches the point of the
Resurrection, since this was the most encouraging <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409.md) hope to the hearer, and gave him a
security from what had happened unto Christ. Now be not thou afraid
because thou art compassed about with a dead body. Let it have the
Spirit, and it shall assuredly rise again. What then, shall the bodies
which have not the Spirit not rise? How then must “all stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ?” ([Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="vii.xv-p65.4"></span>.md) or
how will the account of hell be trustworthy? For if they that have not
the Spirit rise not, there will not be a hell at all. What then is it
which is said? All shall rise, yet not all to life, but some to
punishment and some to life. (<span id="vii.xv-p65.5"></span>[John v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="vii.xv-p65.6"></span>..md)
This is why he did not say, shall raise up, but shall quicken. ([Dan.
xii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p65.7"></span>.) And this is a greater thing than
resurrection, and is given to the just only. And the cause of this honor
he adds in the words, “By His Spirit that dwelleth in you.” And so if
while here thou drive away the grace of the Spirit, and do not depart
with it still safe, thou wilt assuredly perish, though thou dost rise
again. For as He will not endure then, if He see His Spirit shining in
thee, to give thee up to punishment, so neither will He allow them, if
He see It quenched, to bring thee into the Bride-chamber, even as He
admitted not those virgins. ([Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="vii.xv-p65.8"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.xv-p66"></span>Suffer not thy body then to live in this
world, that it may live then! Make it die, that it die not. For if it
keep living, it will not live: but if it die, then shall it live. And
this is the case with resurrection in general. For it must die first and
be buried, and then become immortal. But this has been done in the Font.
It has therefore had first its crucifixion and burial, and then been
raised. This has also happened with the Lord’s Body. For that also was
crucified and buried (7 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p66.1"></span>mss.</span> died) and rose again. This then let
us too be doing: let us keep continually mortifying it in its works. I
do not mean in its substance—far be it from me—but in its inclinations
towards evil doings. For this is a life too, or rather this only is
life, undergoing nothing that is common to man, nor being a slave to
pleasures. For he who has set himself under the rule of these, has no
power even to live through the low spirits, the fears, and the dangers,
and the countless throng of ills, that rise from them. For if death must
be expected, he hath died, before death, of fear. And if it be disease
he dreads, or affront, or poverty, or any of the other ills one cannot
anticipate, he is ruined and hath perished. What then can be more
miserable than a life of this sort? But far otherwise is he that liveth
to the Spirit, for he stands at once above fears and grief and dangers
and every kind of change: and that not by undergoing no such thing, but,
what is much greater, by thinking scorn of them when they assail him.
And how is this to be? It will be if the Spirit dwell in us continually.
For he does not speak of any short stay made thereby, but of a continual
indwelling. Hence he does not say “the Spirit which” dwelt, but “which
dwelleth in us,” so pointing to a continual abiding. He then is most
truly alive, who is dead to this life. Hence he says, “The Spirit is
life because of righteousness.” And to make the thing clearer, let me
bring <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410.md) before you two men, one
who is given up to extravagances and pleasures, and the deceitfulness of
this life; and the other made dead to all these; and let us see which is
more really the living one. For let one of these two be very rich and
much looked up to, keeping parasites and flatterers, <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md) and let us suppose him to spend the
whole day upon this, in revelling and drunkenness: and let the other
live in poverty, and fasting, and hard fare, and strict rules (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p68.1"></span>φιλοσοφί& 139·</span>), and
at evening partake of necessary food only; or if you will let him even
pass two or three days without food. <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412.md) Which then of these two think we (3
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xv-p69.1"></span>mss.</span> you) is
most really alive? Men in general will, I know, reckon the former so,
the man that takes his pleasure (Sav. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.2"></span>σκιρτὥντα</span>, <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.3"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.4"></span>τρυφὥντα</span>) and squanders his goods. But
we reckon the man that enjoys the moderate fare. Now then since it is
still a subject of contest and opposition let us go into the houses of
them both, and just at the very time too when in your judgment the rich
man is living in truest sense, in the very season of self-indulgence,
and when we have got in, let us look and see the real condition of each
of these men. For it is from the actions that it appears which is alive
and which dead. Shall we not find the one among his books, or in prayer
and fasting, or some other necessary duty, awake and sober, and
conversing with God? but the other we shall see stupid in drunkenness,
and in no better condition than a dead man. And if we wait till the
evening, we shall see this death coming upon him more and more, and then
sleep again succeeding to that: but the other we shall see even in the
night keeping from wine and sleep. Which then shall we pronounce to be
most alive, the man that lies in a state of insensibility, and is an
open laughing-stock to everybody? or the man that is active, and
conversing with God? For if you go up to the one, and tell him something
he ought to know, you will not hear him say a word, any more than a dead
man. But the latter, whether you choose to be in his company at night or
by day, you will see to be an angel rather than a man, and will hear him
speak wisdom about things in Heaven. Do you see how one of them is alive
above all men living, and the other in a more pitiable plight even than
the dead? And even if he have a mind to stir he sees one thing instead
of another, and is like people that are mad, or rather is in a worse
plight even than they. For if any one were to do them any harm, we
should at once feel pity for the sufferer, and rebuke the doer of the
wrong. But this man, if we were to see a person trample on him, we
should not only be disinclined to pity, but should even give judgment
against him, now that he was fallen. And will you tell me this is life,
and not a harder lot than deaths unnumbered? So you see the
self-indulgent man is not only dead, but worse than dead, and more
miserable than a man possessed. For the one is the object of pity, the
other of hatred. And the one has allowance made him, the other suffers
punishment for his madness. But if externally he is so ridiculous, as
having his saliva tainted, and his breath stinking of wine, just
consider what case his wretched soul, inhumed as it were in a grave, in
such a body as this, is probably in. For one may look upon this as much
the same as if one were to permit a damsel, comely, chaste, free-born,
of good family, and handsome, to be trampled on, and every way insulted
by a serving woman, that was savage, and disgustful, and impure;
drunkenness being something of this sort. And who, being in his senses,
would not choose to die a thousand deaths, rather than live a single day
in this way? For even if at daylight he were to get up, and seem to be
sober from that revelling (or absurd show, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.5"></span>κωμῳδίας</span>, 1 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.6"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p69.7"></span>κώμου</span>) of his, still even then it is not
the clear brightness of temperance which he enjoys, since the cloud from
the storm of drunkenness still is hanging before his eyes. And even if
we were to grant him the clearness of sobriety, what were he the better?
For this soberness would be of no service to him, except to let him see
his accusers. For when he is in the midst of his unseemly deeds, he is
so far a gainer in not perceiving those that laugh at him. But when it
is day he loses this comfort even, and while his servants are murmuring,
and his wife is ashamed, and his friends accuse him, and his enemies
make sport of him, he knows it too. What can be more miserable than a
life like this, to be laughed at all day by everybody, and when it is
evening to do the same unseemly things afresh. But what if you would let
me put the covetous before you? For this is another, and even a worse
intoxication. But if it be an intoxication, then it must be a worse
death by far than the former, since the intoxication is more grievous.
And indeed it is not so sad to be drunk with wine as with covetousness.
For in the former case, the penalty ends with the sufferings (several
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xv-p69.8"></span>ms.</span> “sufferer,”)
and results in insensibility, and the drunkard’s own ruin. But in this
case the mischief passes on to thousands of souls, and kindles wars of
sundry kinds upon all sides. Come then and let us put this beside the
other, and let us see what are the points they have in common, and in
what again this is worse than it, and let us make a comparison of
drunkards to-day. For with that blissful man, who liveth to the Spirit,
let them not be put at all in comparison, but only tried by one another.
And again, let us bring the money-table before you, laden as it is with
blood. What then have they in common, and in what are they like each
other? It is in the very nature of the disease. For the species of
drunkenness is different, as one comes of wine, the other of money, but
its way of affecting them is similar, both being alike possessed with an
exorbitant desire. For he who is drunken with wine, the more glasses he
has drunk off, the more he longs for; and he that is in love with money,
the more he compasses, the more he kindles the flame of desire, and the
more importunate he renders his thirst. In this point then they resemble
each other. But in another the covetous man has the advantage (in a bad
sense). Now what is this? Why that the other’s affection is a natural
one. For the wine is hot, and adds to one’s natural drought, and so
makes drunkards thirsty. But what is there to make the other man always
keep desiring more? how comes it that when he is increased in riches,
then he is in the veriest poverty? This complaint then is a perplexing
one, and has more of paradox about it. But if you please, we will take a
view of them after the drunkenness also. Or rather, there is no such
thing as ever seeing the covetous man after his drunkenness, so
continual a state of intoxication is he in! Let us then view them both
in the state of drunkenness, and let us get a distinct notion which is
the most ridiculous, and let us again figure to ourselves a correct
sketch of them. We shall see then the man who dotes with his wine at
eventide with his eyes open, seeing no one, but moving about at mere
hap-hazard, and stumbling against such as fall in his way, and spewing,
and convulsed, and exposing his nakedness in an unseemly manner. (See
[Habak. ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p69.9"></span>.) And if his wife be there, or his daughter,
or his maid-servant, or anybody else, they <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413.md) will laugh at him heartily. And now
let us bring before you the covetous man. Here what happens is not
deserving of laughter only, but even of a curse, and exceeding wrath,
and thunderbolts without number. At present however let us look at the
ridiculous part, for this man as well as the other has an ignorance of
all, whether friend or foe. And like him too, though his eyes are open,
he is blinded. And as the former takes all he sees for wine, so does
this man take all for money. And his spewing is even more disgusting.
For it is not food that he vomits, but words of abuse, of insolence, of
war, of death, that draws upon his own head lightnings without number
from above. And as the body of the drunkard is livid and dissolving, so
also is the other’s soul. Or rather, even his body is not free from this
disorder, but it is taken even worse, care eating it away worse than
wine does (as do anger too and want of sleep), and by degrees exhausting
it entirely. And he that is seized with illness from wine, after the
night is over may get sober. But this person is always drunken day and
night, watching or sleeping, so paying a severer penalty for it than any
prisoner, or person at work in the mines, or suffering any punishment
more grievous than this, if such there be. Is it then life pray, and not
death? or rather, is it not a fate more wretched than any death? For
death gives the body rest, and sets it free from ridicule, as well as
disgrace and sins: but these drunken fits plunge it into all these,
stopping up the ears, dulling the eyesight, keeping down the
understanding in great darkness. For it will not bear the mention of
anything but interest, and interest upon interest, and shameful gains,
and odious traffickings, and ungentlemanly and slavelike transactions,
barking like a dog at everybody, and hating everybody, averse to
everybody, at war with everybody, without any reason for it, rising up
against the poor, grudging at the rich, and civil to nobody. And if he
have a wife, or children, or friends, if he may not use them all towards
getting gain, these are to him more his enemies than natural enemies.
What then can be worse than madness of this sort, and what more
wretched? when a man is preparing rocks for his own self on every side,
and shoals, and precipices, and gulfs, and pits without number, while he
has but one body, and is the slave of one belly. And if any thrust thee
into a state office, thou wilt be a runaway, through fear of expense.
Yet to thyself thou art laying up countless charges far more distressing
than those, enlisting thyself for services not only more expensive, but
also more dangerous, to be done for mammon, and not paying this tyrant a
money contribution only, nor of bodily labor, torture to the soul, and
grief, but even of thy blood itself, that thou mayest have some addition
to thy property (miserable and sorrow-stricken man!) out of this
barbarous slavery. Do you not see those who are taken day by day to the
grave, how they are carried to tombs naked and destitute of all things,
unable to take with them aught that is in the house, but bearing what
clothes they have about them to the worm? Consider these day by day, and
perchance the malady will abate, unless you mean even by such an
occasion to be still more mad at the expensiveness of the funeral
rites—for the malady is importunate, the disease terrible! This then is
why we address you upon this subject at every meeting, and constantly
foment your hearing, that at all events by your growing accustomed to
such thoughts, some good many come. But be not contentious, for it is
not only at the Day to come, but even before it, that this manifold
malady brings with it sundry punishments. For if I were to tell you of
those who pass their days in chains, or of one nailed to a lingering
disease, or of one struggling with famine, or of any other thing
whatsoever, I could point out no one who suffers so much as they do who
love money. For what severer evil can befall one, than being hated by
all men, than hating all men, than not having kindly feeling towards
any, than being never satisfied, than being in a continual thirst, than
struggling with a perpetual hunger, and that a more distressing one than
what all men esteem such? than having pains day by day, than being never
sober, than being continually in worries and harasses? For all these
things, and more than these, are what the covetous set their shoulder
to; in the midst of their gaining having no perception of pleasure,
though scraping to themselves from all men, because of their desiring
more. But in the case of their incurring a loss, if it be but of a
farthing, they think they have suffered most grievously, and have been
cast out of life itself. What language then can put these evils before
you? And if their fate here be such, consider also what comes after this
life, the being cast out of the kingdom, the pain that comes from hell,
the perpetual chains, the outer darkness, the venomous worm, the
gnashing of teeth, the affliction, the sore straitening, the rivers of
fire, the furnaces that never get quenched. And gathering all these
together, and weighing them against the pleasure of money, tear up now
this disease root and branch, that so receiving the true riches, and
being set free from this grievous poverty, thou mayest obtain the
present blessings, and those to come, by the grace and love toward man,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[i:1390](1110076.htm#fr_1389.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p5"></span> Chrys. gives no hint of any controversy as
to the interpretation of the passage [Rom.
7.14-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.xv-p5.1"></span>.
In modern times the question has been greatly disputed: Whom does the
apostle represent by the “I” who is waging such an unsuccessful combat
with sin? Passing by the views that he refers to himself personally
(Hofmann) and that he refers to the Jewish people under the old
dispensation (Grotius, Reiche), two opinions have prevailed among
interpreters (1) that he is representing the *regenerate* man. (For the
arguments by which this view is supported see Hodge on Romans *in
loco*). (2) That he is here personating the *unregenerate* man who,
however, has become awakened under the law to a sense of his sinful
condition. This view is preferred on the following grounds. (1) The
connection of [Rom. 7.14-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p5.2"></span> with the argument of [Rom.
7.7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xv-p5.3"></span>,
which shows the power of the law to awaken the consciousness of sin and
can therefore apply only to the Jew aroused by the law. (2) The relation
of the passage to [Rom. 8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.xv-p5.4"></span>. In [Rom.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.xv-p5.5"></span>the
apostle mounts to the Christian plane and in [Rom.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000.md)<span id="vii.xv-p5.6"></span>.
exults in the liberation from the conflict just described which Christ
brings to the soul. (3) Much of the language of [Rom.
7.14-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.xv-p5.7"></span>
is inconsistent with the consciousness of a regenerate man and
especially with Paul’s joyous and triumphant view of the Christian life.
(4) The language throughout is appropriate, not, indeed, to the morally
indifferent man, but to the unconverted Jew whom the law has awakened to
a knowledge of his sin and need, and this is precisely the subject under
consideration in the earlier verses of the Chap. So Tholuck, De Wette,
Alford, Olshausen, Lange, Meyer, Weiss, Godet). Chrys. rather takes for
granted, than states the same view, in saying that it is “a sketch of
*man* as comporting himself in the law and before the law.”—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[i:1391](1110076.htm#fr_1390.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p5.9"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p6"></span> The words of the Fathers on this subject
become more definite after the Pelagian Controversy. St. Aug. *contr.
Julianum,* i. 2, §32. (Ben. t. 10), speak thus of concupiscence, (not in
act, but as an inherited habit). “It is not however called sin in the
sense of making one guilty, but in that it is caused by the guilt of the
first man, and in that it rebels, and strives to draw us into guilt
except grace aid us.”

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[i:1392](1110076.htm#fr_1391.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p7"></span> So Field from most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> Sav. lawful marriage.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[i:1393](1110076.htm#fr_1392.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p10.2"></span>μποδισμὸς ταῖς βουλήσεσι</span>. Arist. *Rhet.*
ii.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[i:1394](1110076.htm#fr_1393.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p11"></span> This seems to have been Plato’s view of
free-will. See Tenneman, *Plat. Philos.* iv. p. 34, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p11.1"></span>οὐδεὶς ἕκων πονηρὸς</span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[i:1395](1110076.htm#fr_1394.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p16"></span> So the <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> Sav. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p16.2"></span>τῆς τέχνης</span>, which seems to have been put
in to show that it was not the maker, but the user of the instrument,
that was meant.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[i:1396](1110076.htm#fr_1395.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p24.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p25"></span> Ver. and Sav. Marg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p25.2"></span>ντίθησι</span>, which makes
much the same sense; his conj. and 2 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p25.3"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p25.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p25.5"></span>ντιτίθησι</span>, “sets in opposition.”

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[i:1397](1110076.htm#fr_1396.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p25.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p26"></span> It is peculiarly interesting to see how
vigorously Chrys. combats the idea that the flesh is essentially evil,
as if it were a current notion of his time. This view—derived from
heathen sources—exerted a powerful influence in the Church from early
times and became the fruitful source of ascetic rigors.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[i:1398](1110076.htm#fr_1397.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p31.1"></span>παθητὸν</span>, which may also mean liable to
passions.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[i:1399](1110076.htm#fr_1398.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p32"></span> He is speaking of the actual precepts. Men
under the Law were encouraged to higher aims, but it was in looking
beyond the letter.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[i:1400](1110076.htm#fr_1399.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p33"></span> The typical fitness of this permission is
illustrated by the case of Sarah and Hagar; the coincidence of typical
with moral fitness is in many cases above our understanding.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[i:1401](1110076.htm#fr_1400.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p34"></span> So Field from 1 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p34.1"></span>ms</span>.: others “past sins:” Vulg. “our
doings.”

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[i:1402](1110076.htm#fr_1401.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p39"></span> It may be right to consider <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p39.1"></span>τῆς ζωῆς</span> as forming
part of the attribute of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p39.2"></span>νόμος</span> in conformity with the Hebr.
idiom; see Lee’s *Gram. Art.* 224, 8.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[i:1403](1110076.htm#fr_1402.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p40"></span> “Thee” most <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p40.1"></span>mss.</span>, and Edd. before Field.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[i:1404](1110076.htm#fr_1403.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p41.1"></span>τῇ τριάδι πάντα τὰ παῤ ἡμῶν λογιζόμενος</span>,
or “imputing all things (done) by us to the Trinity.”

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[i:1405](1110076.htm#fr_1404.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p44"></span> The Fathers lay great stress upon this
phrase of the Apostles. August. *contr. Faust.* xiv. 5, argues, that
this likeness consisted in our Lord’s flesh being mortal; death being
the penalty of sin: vid. also *de Nuptiis et Concupisc.* 1. 12. vid.
also Basil, Ep. 261<span id="vii.xv-p44.1"></span>, where writing
against the Apollinarians, he interprets this text to mean, that whereas
Christ had all affections of human nature, which implied the reality of
His assumption of it, He had not those which infringe our nature, i.e.
which arise from sin. Athanasius, writing against the same heretics,
observes, that Christ’s sinlessness was like Adam’s before the fall (In
Apoll. ii. 6): or as St. Cyril observes, greater than before the fall
because He has a physical inability to sin, arising from His personality
being Divine, vid. Cyr. Alex. *in Esai. l. i. Orat.* 4, *fin.* At the
same time He took the flesh, not of Adam unfallen, but fallen, such as
ours. *Vid. Leont. contra Nest. et Eutych. lib.* 2 *apud Canis.* vol. i.
p. 568. Gall. xii. 681. Fulgent. *Ep. ad. Regin. Tertull. de Carn.
Christi.* xvi.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[i:1406](1110076.htm#fr_1405.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p46"></span> Aristotle defines <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p46.1"></span>δικαίωμα</span> to be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p46.2"></span>τὸ δίκαιον ὅταν
πραχθῇ·</span> but rather in the sense of correcting wrong than in the
more general meaning: *Eth.* b. v. c. 7, §7. It may mean here what the
Law claims of right.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[i:1407](1110076.htm#fr_1406.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p48"></span> St. Chr. evidently used a text which read
in v. 1 <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p48.1"></span>μὴ κατὰ σάρκα
περιπ</span>., but omitted <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p48.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p48.3"></span>λλὰ κατὰ Πνεῦμα</span>. Most <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xv-p48.4"></span>mss.</span> of the N.T. and
all recent critical editions, omit both clauses there: here there is no
doubt of either.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[i:1408](1110076.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p53.14"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p54"></span> i.e. as exercised in coming to the font.
Field proposes to soften the strong expression by reading, “it was by no
natural necessity that He put, etc., but by freedom of choice He placed
it.”

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[i:1409](1110076.htm#fr_1408.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p62.1"></span>τὸ χρηστὸν</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p62.2"></span>τὸν Χριστὸν</span> Field, with the Catena and
the Version of Musculus.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[i:1410](1110076.htm#fr_1409.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p65.1"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p65.2"></span>λειφεν</span>, v. p. 170, n. Sav. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p65.3"></span>εἴληφεν</span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[i:1411](1110076.htm#fr_1410.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p67"></span> See Ernesti in v. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p67.1"></span>παραγωγή</span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[i:1412](1110076.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p68"></span> The Plutus evidently in his mind.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[i:1413](1110076.htm#fr_1412.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p69"></span> This was not uncommon in warmer climates,
Euseb. ii. 17.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[i:1414](1110076.htm#fr_1413.md) <span
id="vii.xv-p69.10"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p70.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p70.2"></span>γγελάσεται</span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xv-p70.3"></span>mss.</span>, “he will be laughed at” or rather
“she (the supposed spectator) will laugh at him.” Field reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p70.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p70.5"></span>γελάσατε</span> with one or
two <span class="c14"><span id="vii.xv-p70.6"></span>mss</span>., and
alters the punctuation; so that the passage will run “exposing, etc.,
even if his wife be there….or anybody else. Do you laugh heartily? Then
let us bring before you,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIV on Rom. viii. 12, 13.](1110077.md)
