<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index.md) 
[Roma](../../neu/roma/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsft02.md) 
[Next](gsft04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMSI/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling*, by Charles Godfrey Leland,
\[1891\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span id="img_xiii"></span> ![](img/xiii.jpg)

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![](img/00100.jpg)

# CHAPTER I

### THE ORIGIN OF WITCHCRAFT, SHAMANISM, AND SORCERY—VINDICTIVE AND MISCHIEVOUS MAGIC

<span id="img_00101"></span> ![](img/00101.jpg)AS their peculiar perfume
is the chief association with spices, so sorcery is allied in every
memory to gypsies. And as it has not escaped many poets that there is
something more strangely sweet and mysterious in the scent of cloves
than in that of flowers, so the attribute of inherited magic power adds
to the romance of these picturesque wanderers. Both the spices and the
Romany come from the far East—the fatherland of divination and
enchantment. The latter have been traced with tolerable accuracy, If we
admit their affinity with the Indian Dom and Domar, back to the

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

threshold of history, or well-nigh into prehistoric times, and in all
ages they, or their women, have been engaged, as if by elvish instinct,
in selling enchant. merits, peddling prophecies and palmistry, and
dealing with the devil generally ill a small retail way. As it was of
old so it is to-day—

*Ki shan i Romani—  
Adoi san' i chov'hani.*

Wherever gypsies go,  
There the witches are, we know.

It is no great problem ill ethnology or anthropology as to how gypsies
became fortune-tellers. We may find a very curious illustration of it in
the wren. This is apparently as humble, modest, prosaic little fowl as
exists, and as far from mystery and wickedness as an old hen. But the
ornithologists of the olden time, and the myth-makers, and the gypsies
who lurked and lived in the forest, knew better. They saw how this
bright-eyed, strange little creature in her elvish way slipped in and
out of hollow trees and wood shade into sunlight, and anon was gone, no
man knew whither, and so they knew that it was an uncanny creature, and
told wonderful tales of its deeds in human form, and to-day it is called
by gypsies in Germany, as in England, the witch-bird, or more briefly,
*chorihani*, "the witch." Just so the gypsies themselves, with their
glittering Indian eyes, slipping like the wren in and out of the shadow
of the Unknown, and anon away and invisible, won for themselves the name
which now they wear. Wherever Shamanism, or the sorcery which is based
on exorcising or commanding spirits, exists, its professors from leading
strange lives, or from solitude or wandering, become strange and
wild-looking. When men have this appearance people associate with it
mysterious power. This is the case in Tartary, Africa, among the Eskimo,
Lapps, or Red Indians, with all of whom the sorcerer, voodoo or
*medaolin*, has the eye of the "fascinator," glittering and cold as that
of a serpent. So the gypsies, from the mere fact of being wanderers and
out-of-doors livers in wild places, became wild-looking, and when asked
if they did not associate with the devils who dwell in the desert
places, admitted

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the soft impeachment, and being further questioned as to whether their
friends the devils, fairies, elves, and goblins had not taught them how
to tell the future, they pleaded guilty, and finding that it paid well,
went to work in their small way to improve their "science," and
particularly their pecuniary resources. It was an easy calling; it
required no property or properties, neither capital nor capitol, shiners
nor shrines, wherein to work the oracle. And as I believe that a company
of children left entirely to themselves would form and grow up with a
language which in a very few years would be spoken fluently, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) so I am certain that the shades of night,
and fear, pain, and lightning and mystery would produce in the same time
conceptions of dreaded beings, resulting first in demonology and then in
the fancied art of driving devils away. For out of my own childish
experiences and memories I retain with absolute accuracy material enough
to declare that without any aid from other people the youthful mind
forms for itself strange and seemingly supernatural phenomena. A tree or
bush waving in the night breeze by moonlight is perhaps mistaken for a
great man, the mere repetition of the sight or of its memory make it a
personal reality. Once when I was a child powerful doses of quinine
caused a peculiar throb in my ear which I for some time believed was the
sound of somebody continually walking upstairs. Very young children
sometimes imagine invisible playmates or companions talk with them, and
actually believe that the unseen talk to them in return. I myself knew a
small boy who had, as he sincerely believed, such a companion, whom he
called Bill, and when he could not understand his lessons he consulted
the mysterious William, who explained them to him. There are children
who, by the voluntary or involuntary exercise of visual perception or
volitional eye-memory, <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) reproduce or
create images which they imagine

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

to be real, and this faculty is much commoner than is supposed. In fact
I believe that where it exists in most remarkable degrees the adults to
whom the children describe their visions dismiss them as "fancies" or
falsehoods. Even in the very extraordinary cases recorded by Professor
HALE, in which little children formed for themselves spontaneously a
language in which they conversed fluently, neither their parents nor
anybody else appears to have taken the least interest in the matter.
However, the fact being that babes can form for themselves supernatural
conceptions and embryo mythologies, and as they always do attribute to
strange or terrible-looking persons power which the latter do not
possess, it is easy, without going further, to understand why a wild
Indian gypsy, with eyes like a demon when excited, and unearthly-looking
at his calmest, should have been supposed to be a sorcerer by credulous
child-like villagers. All of this I believe might have taken place, or
really did take place, in the very dawn of man's existence as a rational
creature—that as soon as "the frontal convolution of the brain which
monkeys do not possess," had begun with the "genial tubercule,"
essential to language, to develop itself, then also certain other
convolutions and tubercules, not as yet discovered, but which ad interim
I will call "*the ghost-making*," began to act. "Genial," they certainly
were not—little joy and much sorrow has man got out of his
spectro-facient apparatus—perhaps if it and talk are correlative he
might as well, many a time, have been better off if he were dumb.

So out of the earliest time, in the very two o'clock of a misty morning
in history, man came forth believing in non-existent terrors and evils
as soon as he could talk, and talking about them as fast as he formed
them. Long before the conception of anything good or beneficent, or of a
Heavenly Father or benevolent angels came to him, he was scared with
nightmares and spirits of death and darkness, hell, hunger, torture, and
terror. We all know how difficult it is for many people when some one
dies out of a household to get over the involuntary feeling that we
shall unexpectedly meet the departed in the usual haunts. In almost
every family there is a record how some one has "heard a voice they
cannot hear," or the dead speaking

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

in the familiar tones. Hence the belief in ghosts, as soon as men began
to care for death at all, or to miss those who had gone. So first of all
came terrors and spectres, or *revenants*, and from setting out food for
the latter. which was the most obvious and childlike manner to please
them, grew sacrifices to evil spirits, and finally the whole system of
sacrifice in all its elaboration.

It may therefore be concluded that as soon as man began to think and
speak and fear the mysterious, he also began to appease ghosts and
bugbears by sacrifices. Then there sprung up at once—quite as early—the
*magus*, or the *cleverer* man, who had the wit to do the sacrificing
and eat the meats sacrificed, and explain that he had arranged it all
privately with the dead and the devils. *He* knew all about them, and
*he* could drive them away. This was the Shaman. He seems to have had a
Tartar-Mongol-mongrel-Turanian origin, somewhere in Central Asia, and to
have spread with his magic drum, and songs, and stinking smoke,
exorcising his fiends all over the face of the earth, even as his
descendant, General Booth, with his "devil-drivers" is doing at the
present day. But the earliest authentic records of Shamanism are to be
found in the Accadian, proto-Chaldæan and Babylon records. According to
it all diseases whatever, as well as all disasters, were directly the
work of evil spirits, which were to be driven away by songs of exorcism,
burning of perfumes or evil-smelling drugs, and performing ceremonies,
many of which, with scraps of the exorcisms are found in familiar use
here and there at the present day. Most important of all in it was the
extraordinary *influence* of the Shaman himself on his patient, for he
made the one acted on sleep or wake, freed him from many apparently dire
disorders in a minute, among others of epilepsies which were believed to
be caused by devils dwelling in man—the nearest and latest explanation
of which magic power is given in that very remarkable book,
"Psycho-Therapeutics, or Treatment by Sleep and Suggestion," by C. LLOYD
TUCKEY, M.D. (London: Bailliere and Co., 1889), which I commend to all
persons interested in ethnology as casting light on some of the most
interesting and perplexing problems of humanity, and especially of
"magic."

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

It would seem, at least among the Laplanders, Finns, Eskimo, and Red
Indians, that the *first* stage of Shamanism was a very horrible
witchcraft, practised chiefly by women, in which attempts were made to
*conciliate* the evil spirits; the means employed embracing everything
which could revolt and startle barbarous men. Thus fragments of dead
bodies and poison, and unheard-of terrors and crimes formed its basis. I
think it very probable that this was the primitive religion among
savages everywhere. An immense amount of it in its vilest conceivable
forms still exists among negroes as *Voodoo*.

After a time this primitive witchcraft or voodooism had its
reformers—probably brave and shrewd men, who conjectured that the powers
of evil might be "exploited" to advantage. There is great confusion and
little knowledge as yet as regards primitive man, but till we know
better we may roughly assume that witch-voodooism was the religion of
the people of the paleolithic period, if they could talk at all, since
language is denied to the men of the Neanderthal, Canstadt, Egnisheim,
and Podhava type. All that we can declare with some certainty is that we
find the advanced Shamanism the religion of the early Turanian races,
among whose descendants, and other people allied to them, it exists to
this day. The grandest incident in the history of humanity is the
appearance of the Man of Cromagnon. He it was who founded what M. DE
QUATREFAGES calls "a magnificent race," probably one which speedily
developed a high civilization, and a refined religion. But the old
Shamanism with its amulets, exorcisms, and smoke, its noises, more or
less musical, of drums and enchanted bells, and its main belief that all
the ills of life came from the action of evil spirits, was deeply based
among the inferior races and the inferior scions of the Cromagnon stock
clung to it in forms more or less modified. just as the earlier
witchcraft, or the worship and conciliation of evil, overlapped in many
places the newer Shamanism, so the latter overlapped the beautiful
Nature-worship of the early Aryans, the stately monotheism of the
Shemites, and the other more advanced or ingenious developments of the
idea of a creative cause. There are, in fact, even

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

among us now, minds to whom Shamanism or even witchcraft is deeply or
innately adapted by nature, and there are hundred of millions who, while
professing a higher and purer doctrine, cling to its forms or
essentials, believing that because the apparatus is called by a
different name it is in no respect whatever the same thing. Finally
there are men who, with no logical belief whatever in any kind of
supernaturalism, study it, and love it, and are moved by it, owing to
its endless associations, with poetry, art, and all the legends of
infancy or youth. HEINE was not in his reasoning moments anything more
or less than a strict Deist or Monotheist, but all the dreams and
spectres, fairies and goblins, whether of the Middle Ages or the Talmud,
were inexpressibly dear to him, and they move like myriad motes through
the sunshine of his poetry and prose, often causing long rays when there
were bars at the window—like that on which the saint hung his cloak. It
is probable or certain that Shamanism (or that into which it has very
naturally developed) will influence all mankind, until science, by
absorbing man's love of the marvellous in stupendous discoveries shall
so put to shame the old thaumaturgy, or wonder-working, that the latter
will seem poor and childish. In all the "Arabian Nights" there is
nothing more marvellous than the new idea that voices and sounds may be
laid aside like real books, and made to speak and sing again years
afterwards. And in all of that vast repertory of occult lore, "Isis
Unveiled," there is nothing so wonderful as the simple truth that every
child may be educated to possess an infinitely developed memory of
words, sights, sounds, and ideas, allied to incredible quickness of
perception and practice of the constructive faculties. These, with the
vast fields of adjusting improved social relations and reforms—all of
which in a certain way opens dazzling vistas of a certain kind of
enchantment or brilliant hope—will go fast and far to change the old
romance to a radically different state of feeling and association.

It is coming—let it come! Doubtless there was an awful romance of
darkness about the old witchcraft which caused its worshippers to
declare that the new lights of Shamanism could never dissipate it. just
so many

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

millions of educated people at present cannot be brought to understand
that all things to which *they* are used are not based on immutable laws
of nature, and must needs be eternal. They will find it hard to
comprehend that there can ever be any kind of poetry, art, or sentiment,
utterly different from that to which *they* and their ancestors have
been accustomed. Yet it is clear and plain before them, this New Era,
looking them directly in the face, about to usher in a reformation
compared to which all the reformations and revolutions and new religions
which the world has ever seen were as nothing; and the children are born
who will see more than the beginning of it.

In the next chapter I will examine the Shamanic spells and charms still
used among certain gypsies. For, be it observed, all the gypsy magic and
sorcery here described is purely *Shamanic*—that is to say, of the most
primitive Tartar type—and it is the more interesting as having
preserved—from prehistoric times many of the most marked characteristics
of the world's first magic or religion. It treats every disease,
disorder, trouble, or affliction as the work of an evil spirit; it
attempts to banish these influences by the aid of ceremonies, many of
which, by the disgusting and singular nature of the ingredients
employed, show the lingering influences of the black witchcraft which
preceded Shamanism; and it invokes favourable supernatural agencies,
such as the spirits of the air and Mashmurdalo', the giant of the
forests. In addition to this there will be found to be clearly and
unmistakably associated with all their usages, symbols and things nearly
connected with much which is to be found in Greek, Roman, and Indian
mythology or symbolism. Now whether this was drawn from "classic"
sources, or whether all came from some ancient and obscure origin,
cannot now be accurately determined. But it certainly cannot be denied
that Folk-lore of this kind casts a great deal of light on the early
history of mankind, and the gradual unfolding or evolution of religion
and of mind, and that, if intelligently studied, this of the gypsies is
as important as any chapter in the grand work.

The gypsies came, historically speaking, very recently from India.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

It has not been so carefully observed as it might that all Indians are
not of the religion of Brahma, much less of Buddha or of Mahommed, and
that among the lower castes, the primæval Altaic Shamanism, with even
earlier witchcraft, still holds its own. Witchcraft, or Voodoo, or Obi,
relies greatly on poisoning for its magic, and the first gypsies were
said to poison unscrupulously. Even to this day there is but one word
with them as with many Hindoos for both medicine and poison—*id est
drab*. How exactly this form of witchcraft and Shamanism exists today in
India appears from the following extract from *The St. James's Gazette*,
September 8, 1888:—

THE HINDOO PRIEST

In India, the jadoo-wallah, or exorcist, thrives apace; and no wonder,
for is not the lower-caste Hindoo community bhut, or demon-ridden? Every
village, graveyard, burning-ghat, has its special bhut or bhuts; and the
jadoo-wallah is the earthly mediator between their bhutships and the
common folk. The exorcist is usually the spiritual adviser to the
population of a low-caste village, and is known as a gooroo, or priest:
that is to say, he professes to hold commune with the spirits of defunct
Hindoos which have qualified for their unique position in the other
world—by their iniquity in this one, perhaps. Every Hindoo has a
guardian bhut that requires propitiating, and the gooroo is the medium.

Amongst the Jaiswars and other low-caste Hindoos, caste is regulated by
carnal pice, and a man is distinguished amongst them by a regulated
monetary scale. One person may be a 14-anna caste man while another may
only be a 12-anna caste man. Does the 12-anna caste man wish to
supersede the 14-anna caste man, then he consults the gooroo, who will,
in consideration of a certain contribution, promote him to a
higher-caste grade. A moneyed man having qualms about his future state
should join the Jaiswars, where at least he would have an opportunity of
utilizing his spare cash for the good of his soul. The average gooroo
will be only too glad to procure him everlasting glory for a matter of a
few rupees.

The gooroo, then, serves as regulator of the lower-caste Hindoo, system.
But it is our intention to exhibit him in his peculiar position of
exorcist-general to the people. This will perhaps be best explained by
an account of the case of one Kaloo. Kaloo was a grass-cutter, and had
been offended by Kasi, a brother grass-cutter. Kasi, it appears, had
stolen Kaloo's quilt one night during his temporary absence at a
neighbouring liquor-shop. Kaloo, on his return, finding his quilt gone,
raised the hue-and-cry; and Mooloo, the village policeman, traced the
robbery to Kasi's hut. Yet, in spite of this damning proof, the village
*panchayet*, or bench of magistrates, decided that, as Kaloo

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

could not swear to the exact colour of his lost quilt—Kaloo was
colour-blind—it could not possibly be his. Anyhow, Kaloo kept Kasi in
view and hit upon a plan to do him a grievous bodily injury. Scraping
together a few rupees, he went to the village gooroo and promised that
worthy a reward if he would only exorcise the bhuts and get them to
"make Kasi's liver bad." The gooroo, in consideration of five rupees
cash, promised compliance. So that night we find the gooroo busy with
sandal-wood and pig's blood propitiating the neighbouring bhuts.
Needless to say that Kasi had in a very short space of time all the
symptoms of liver complaint. Whether the bhuts gave Kasi a bad liver or
the gooroo gave him a few doses of poison is a question. Anyhow, Kasi
soon died. Another case in point is that of Akuti. Akuti was a retired
courtesan who had long plied a profitable trade in the city. We find
her, however, at her native village of Ramghur, the wife of one Balu.
Balu soon got tired of his Akuti, and longed for the contents of her
strong box wherein she kept her rupees, bracelets, nose-rings, and other
valuables. This was a rather awkward matter for Balu, for Akuti was
still in the prime of life. Balu accordingly [visits](errata.htm#0.md) the
gooroo and wants Akuti's liver made bad. "Nothing easier," says the
gooroo: "five rupees." Balu has reckoned without his host, however: for
the gooroo, as general spiritual adviser to the Ramghur community,
visits Akuti and tells her of Balu's little scheme. Naturally Balu's
liver is soon in a decline, for Akuti's ten rupees were put in the
opposite side of the gooroo's scales.

Knaves of the gooroo genus flourish in India, and when their disposition
is vicious the damage they can do is appalling. That these priests exist
and do such things as I have illustrated is beyond question. Ask any
native of India his views on the bhut question, and he will tell you
that there are such things, and, further, that the gooroo is the only
one able to lay them, so to speak. According to the low-caste Hindoo,
the bhut is a spiteful creature which requires constant supplies of
liquor and pork; otherwise it will wreak its vengeance on the forgetful
votary who neglects the supply. A strange idea, too, is this of pork
being pleasing to the bhuts; but when it is remembered that the
Jaiswars, Chamars, and other low-caste Hindoos are inordinately fond of
that meat themselves, they are right in supposing pig to be the
favourite dish of the bhuts, who, after all, are but the departed
spirits of their own people. Naturally *bhai* (brother) Kaloo, or
*bahin* (sister, English gypsy *pen*) Muti, the quondam grass-cutter and
courtesan of Ramghur village, who in this life liked nothing better than
a piece of bacon and a dram of spirits, will, in their state of bhuthood
hanker after those things still. Acting on these notions of the people,
the gooroo lives and thrives exceedingly.

Yet of all this there is nothing "Hindoo," nothing of the Vedas. It is
all pre-Aryan, devil-worshipping, poisoning, and Turanian; and it is
exactly like voodooing in Philadelphia or any other city in America. It
is the old faith which came before all, which existed through and under
Brahminism, Buddhism, and Mahommedanism, and which, as is well

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

known, has cropped out again and flourishes vigorously under British
toleration. And this is the faith which forms the basis of European
gypsy sorcery, as it did of yore that of the Chaldæan and Etrurian,
which still survive in the witchcraft of the Tuscan Romagna. Every gypsy
who came to Europe a few centuries ago set up as a gooroo, and did his
sorceries after the same antique fashion. Even to-day it is much the
same, but with far less crime. But the *bhut* or malignant spirit is,
under other names, still believed, in, still doctored by gypsies with
herbs and smoke, and "be rhymed like an Irish rat," and conjured into
holes bored in trees, and wafted away into running streams, and naively
implored to "go where he is wanted," to where he was nursed, and to no
longer bother honest folk who are tired of him. And for all this the
confiding villager must pay the gypsy wise-woman "so much monies"—as it
was in the beginning and is now in good faith among millions in Europe
who are in a much better class of society. And from this point of view I
venture to say that there is not a charm or spell set down in this work
or extant which will not be deeply interesting to every sincere student
of the history of culture. Let me, however, say in this beginning once
for all that I have only given specimens sufficient to illustrate my
views, for my prescribed limits quite forbid the introduction of all the
gypsy cures, spells, &c., which I have collected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](gsft03.htm#fr_1.md) *Vide* an extremely
interesting paper on "The Origin of Languages and the Antiquity of
Speaking Man," by Horatio Hale. \["Proceedings of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science," vol. xxv.\] As I had, owing
to studies for many years of baby-talk and jargons, long ago arrived at
Mr. Hale's conclusions, I was astonished to learn that they have been so
recently formed by anybody.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:2](gsft03.htm#fr_2.md) *Vide* "Practical
Education," by C. G. Leland (London: Whittaker and Co., 1888), in which
this faculty is fully discussed, pp. 184-213.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Charms and Conjurations to Cure the Disorders of
Grown People](gsft04.md)

</div>
