<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index) 
[Roma](../../neu/roma/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsft13) 
[Next](gsft15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMSI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling*, by Charles Godfrey Leland,
\[1891\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

 

<span id="img_18600"></span> ![](img/18600.jpg)

 

# CHAPTER XII

FORTUNE-TELLING (*continued*)—ROMANCE BASED ON CHANCE, OR HOPE, AS
REGARDS THE FUTURE-FOLK—AND SORCERY-LORE—AUTHENTIC INSTANCES OF GYPSY
PREDICTION

<span id="img_18601"></span> ![](img/18601.jpg)IT would seem to all who
now live that life would be really intolerably dry were it utterly
deprived of mystery, marvel, or romance. This latter is the sentiment of
hopeful *chance* allied to the beautiful. Youth is willing or eager to
run great risks if the road to or through them passes by dark ravines,
under castled rocks—

"o'er dewy grass  
And waters wild and fleet"

—and ever has been from the beginning. Now, it is a matter of serious
importance to know whether this romance is so deeply inherent in man
that it can never be removed. For, rightly viewed, it means current
religion, poetry, and almost all art—as art at least was once
understood—and it would seem as if we had come, or are coming, to a time
when science threatens to deprive

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

us of it all. Such is the hidden fear of many a priest and poet—it may
be worth while to consider whether it is all to pass away into earnest
prose or assume new conditions. Has the world been hitherto a child, or
a youth, were poetry and supernaturalism its toys, and has the time come
when it is to put away childish things?

We can only argue from what we *are*, and what we clearly know or
understand. And we know that there are in Nature, though measured by the
senses alone, phenomena which awake delightful or terrible, sublime or
beautiful, grave or gay feelings, or emotions, which inspire
corresponding thoughts. There is for us "an elf-home glory-land," far
over setting suns, mysterious beauty in night and stars in their eternal
course, grandeur of God in the ocean, loveliness in woman, chiaroscuro
in vapoury valleys and the spray of waterfalls by moonlight, exciting
emotions which are certainly *not* within the domain of science—as
yet—and which it is impossible for us, as we are at present constituted,
to imagine as regarded entirely from the standpoint of chemical and
physical analysis. To see in all this—as we are—*only* hydro-carbons,
oxygen, silex and aluminium, atoms, molecules, and "laws"—that is to
say, always the *parts* and combinations and no sense as regards man
that he is, with his emotional sense of beauty, anywhere in the game or
of any account—is going far too far. Setting teleology and theology
entirely aside, Man, as the highest organism, has a right to claim that,
as the highest faculties which have been as yet developed in him were
caused by natural phenomena, therefore there is in the phenomena a
certain *beauty* which is far more likely to lead to more advanced
enjoyment of form, colour, or what we call the æsthetic sense, than to
shrink away and disappear. And it seems to me that the most extended
consideration of science leads to the result or conclusion that under
its influence we shall find that the chemical and physical analyses of
which I have spoken are only the dry A B C of a marvellously grand
literature, or of a Romance and Poetry and Beauty—perhaps even of a
wondrous "occult" philosophy, of whose beginning even we have, as yet,
no idea.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

But, great as it may be, those who will make it must derive their
summary of facts or bases of observation from the past, and therefore I
urge the importance of every man who can write doing what he can to
collect *all* that illustrates Humanity as it is and as it was in
by-gone ages. It hath not entered into the heart of man to conceive what
a Folk-lore or ethnological society in ancient Greece, Rome, or Egypt
might not have collected and preserved for the delight of every
civilized human being of the present day. It is very true that the
number of persons, as yet, who understand this—still less of those who
take a real interest in it—is extremely limited, and they do not extend
in England, America, or any other country, to more than a few hundreds.
To the vast multitude, even of learned men, Folk-lore is only a "craze"
for small literary *bric-à-brac*, a "fancy" which will have its run, and
nothing more. To its earnest devotees it is the last great development
of the art of learning and writing history, and a timely provision for
future social science. It sets forth the most intimate inner life of
people as they were, and the origins of our life as it is. In Folk-lore,
Philology, Ethnology, and the study of Mythology or Religion find their
greatest aid.

The amount of Red Indian Folk-lore which has been suffered to perish in
the United States without exciting the least interest is beyond all
belief. THOREAU could find in the Algonkin legends of New England
nothing but matter for feeble-minded ridicule. But there are men coming,
or a generation rising, to whom every record of the past will be of
value, for they are beginning to perceive that while the collector is
doing work of value the mere *theorist*, who generally undervalues if he
does not actually oppose the collector, will with his rubbish be swept
away "down the back-entry of time," to be utterly forgotten.

Gypsy sorcery-lore is of great value because all over the Aryan world
gypsies have in ancient or modern times been, so to speak, the wandering
priests of that form of popular religion which consists of a faith in
fortune-telling. This is really a very important part in every cult; the
most remarkable thing connected with it; as with charms, fetishes,
incantations

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

and protective spells, being the extraordinary success with which the
more respectable *magi* have succeeded in convincing their followers
that their own sorcery was not "magic" at all, and that the world-old
heathen rites, which are substantially the same, are mere modern
thieveries from the "established religion." Prediction and prophecy were
the cornerstones of the classic mythology and of the Jewish law; they
were equally dear to the Celtic races, and all men seem from the
earliest times to have believed that coming events cast their shadows
before. How this began and grew requires no deep study. Many disorders
are prefaced by uneasy dreams or unaccountable melancholy, even as the
greatest disaster which befel the gods of Valhalla was preceded by the
troubled dreams of Balder. Sometimes the first symptom of gout is a
previous irritability. But if diseases are believed to be caused by the
literal occupation of the body by evil spirits these presages will be
ascribed to occult spiritual influences. A man in excellent health feels
gay—he goes hunting and has luck—of course his guardian spirit is
believed to have inspired him to go. Then comes the priest or the gypsy
to predict, and the hits are recorded and the misses are promptly
forgotten.

The following instance has been related to me in good faith by a learned
friend, whose books are well known to all Folk-lorists:—

"I can quote from my own experience a strange event founded on a
prediction made to me by a gypsy in 1863. This was before I had learned
the language of the Romany or had begun to take any interest in them. At
the time of which I speak, I met one day here, in T———, one or two gypsy
women bearing as usual babies on their shoulders, when the oldest as I
was passing by pointed me out to the bystanders, saying in German, '*Der
Herr hat viel Kummer gehabt*' ('That gentleman has had much trouble '-or
sorrow).

"This was true enough, as I was suffering greatly at the time from a
previous bereavement, though I was no longer in mourning, nor was there
at the instant any indication of gloom in my looks, for I was in a
cheerful humour. So I stopped to ask her why she had made her remark.
She replied, '*Ja, geben Sie mir die linke Hand und legen Sie drei
Silbermünze darauf, wenn Sie weiteres hören wollen*' ('Yes, give me your
hand, and put three silver coins on it, if you would hear more'). I did
so, when she repeated her assertion as to my sorrow, and added, '*Aber
eine Gräfinn steht für Ihnen*' ('But there is a countess awaiting you').

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

"I laughed at myself for listening to this, and for the strange feeling
of interest or faith which I felt in it, and which my common sense told
me was ridiculous. And yet the prediction, strangely enough, was
fulfilled, though not in the sense in which I suppose most people would
have taken it. Soon after I lost another relative, and was overwhelmed
with that and other troubles when providence gent me a friend in that
most amiable and remarkable woman the Countess B———, who, with that
noble and gracious affability which distinguishes her, as well as her
husband, Sir ———, relieved my mind and cheered my depressed spirits.

"I add to this a marvellous story of a gypsy prediction which was
uttered here in T——— and published last year in a small biography, but
which is worth consideration because I have heard it apparently well
authenticated by trustworthy people. A very great disgrace to our town—I
am happy to say he was the only one—was a Mr. M———, of very good family.
This man kept a mistress named R. M———-, who became acquainted with a
young man who was employed as a clerk at the *Credit Anstalt*, and who
always at night carried on his person its keys. This M———learned, and
formed the following plot: The victim was to be enticed by the woman to
her room, where she proposed to cut his throat, take the keys, and with
the aid of M——— to rob the bank and escape. It succeeded so far as that
the young man was brought to her room, but when she began to attempt to
kill him he struggled, and was overpowering her when M——— entered the
room and shot him dead.

"The precious pair were subsequently arrested and tried, and in the
report of the proceedings there appears the following curious
statement:—

"'It is a singular thing (*cosa piu singolare*) that to this woman
(M———'s mistress, Miss R———), a gypsy woman who pretended to palmistry
predicted that she would come to a bad end (*ch'essa finirebbe assai
male*.),' Which she effectually did, being condemned to fourteen years'
hard labour, and would have been hung had not her "interesting state"
inclined the judge to mercy.

"There is the following addition in the pamphlet to what has been
quoted: "Being begged by the said Maria R——— to look more closely into
the hand, the Zingara refused to do so, and went away muttering strange
or foreign words.' (*Borbottanda strane parole*)."

To this my informant adds:—

"I know of a more cheerful case of gypsy prediction, and of quite
another kind, and which happened to a friend's friend of mine, also here
in T———-. The 'subject' was a young lady, who was 'intended' or
betrothed, to an Italian actor, who had gone to play at Madrid; but for
two months she heard nothing from him, and, believing that he had
neglected her, was in despair.

"One morning she was passing through one of the main streets, and was
talking with my friend, when a dark gypsy girl going by, whispered to
her in a hurried manner: '*Domani avrai una lettera e sarai felice*'
('To-morrow you will receive a letter and be

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

happy'). Having said this and nothing more, without asking for money,
she went away. The promised letter was in fact received, all went well,
and the lady is now married to the gentleman. This is all simply, true.
I leave the comments on the case to investigators. Can it be that
gypsies are sometimes clairvoyant?"

My own comment on the case is that, admitting that the gypsy knew
beforehand all the circumstances or even the "parties" in the affair,
she had divined or "intuited" a result, and risked, as some might call
it, or else tittered from a real conviction, her prophecy. How the mind,
without any miracle—as miracles are commonly regarded—often arrives
quite unconsciously to such conclusions, I have already considered in
another chapter. Making every allowance for unconscious exaggeration and
the accretive power of transmission, I am willing to believe that the
story is actually true.

The following is also perfectly authentic: An English lady of excellent
family, meeting a gypsy, was told by the latter that in six months the
most important event of her life would come to pass. At the end of the
time she died. On her death-bed she said, "I thought the gypsy meant a
marriage, but I feel that something far more important is coming, for
death is the great end of life."

The following was told me by a Hungarian gentleman of Szegedin:—

"There was in Arad a lady who went to a ball. She had a necklace to
which were attached four rings. During the evening she took this from
her neck, and doubling it, wore it on her arm as a bracelet. In the
house where she lived was a young gentleman who came to accompany her
home from the ball. All at once, late at night, she missed her necklace
and the rings, which were of great value.

"The next day she sent for a gypsy woman, who, being consulted, declared
that the collar had been stolen by some one who was very intimate in her
house. Her suspicions rested on the young man who had accompanied her
home. He was arrested, but discharged far want of evidence.

"Three months after there came a *kellner*, a waiter, from some other
city, to Arad. The lady, being in a *café* or some such place of resort,
was waited on by this man, and saw one of her rings on his hand. He was
arrested, and before the police declared that he held the ring in
pledge, having advanced money upon it to a certain gentleman. This
gentleman was the lady's betrothed, and he had stolen her necklace and
rings. The gypsy had truly enough said that the articles had been taken
by some one who was intimate in her house."

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

The gentleman who told me this story also said that the death of his
father had been foretold by a gypsy—that is, by a lady who was of
half-gypsy blood.

It should be borne in mind, though few realize its truth, that in stages
of society where people *believe* earnestly in anything—for example, in
witchcraft or the evil eye—there results in time a state of mind or body
in which they are actually capable of being killed with a curse, or a
fear of seeing what is not before them in the body, and of many nervous
conditions which are absolutely impossible and incomprehensible to the
world of culture at the present day. But there are still places where
witchcraft may be said to exist literally, for there the professors of
the art to all intents work miracles, *because* they are believed in.
There is abundance of such faith extant, even in England. I have heard
the names of three "white" witch doctors in as many towns in the West of
England, who are paid a guinea a visit, their specialty being to
"unlock," or neutralize, or defeat the evil efforts of black witches.
This, as is indeed true, indicates that a rather high class of patients
put faith in them. In Hungary, in the country, the majority, even of the
better class, are very much influenced by gypsy-witches. Witness the
following, which is interesting simply because, while there is very
little indeed in it, it was related to me as a most conclusive proof of
magic power:—

"In a suburb of Szegedin, inhabited only by peasants, there is a school
with a farm attached to it. The pay of the teacher is trifling, but he
can make a comfortable living from the land. This was held by an old
man, who had a young assistant. The old man died; the youth succeeded
him, and as he found himself doing well, in due time he took a wife.
They lived happily together for a year and had a daughter. In the spring
the teacher had to work very hard, not only in school but on his farm,
and so for the first time contracted the habit of going to the tavern to
refresh himself, and what was worst, of concealing it from his wife
under plausible tales, to which she gave no trust. She began to be very
unhappy, and, naturally enough, suspected a rival.

"Of course she took advice from a gypsy woman, who heard all the story
and consulted her cards. 'There is,' she said, 'no woman whatever in the
way. There is no sign of one for good or evil, *na latchi na misec*, in
the cards. But beware! for

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

there is a great and unexpected misfortune coming, and more than this I
cannot see.' So she took her pay and departed. Suddenly her child fell
ill and died after eight days. Then the husband reformed his ways, and
all went well with them. So, you see, the gypsy foretold it all,
wonderfully and accurately."

It requires no sorcery to conjecture that the gypsy already knew the
habits of the schoolmaster, as the Romany is generally familiar with the
tavern of every town. To predict a misfortune at large is a sure card
for every prophetess. What is remarkable is that a man of the world and
one widely travelled, as was my informant, attached great importance to
the story. It is evident that where so much of the sherris sack of faith
accompanies such a small crust of miracle there must be a state of
society in which miracles in their real sense are perfectly capable of
being worked.

 

<span id="img_19300"></span> ![](img/19300.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Proverbs Referring to Witches, Gypsies and
Fairies](gsft15)

</div>
