[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03043)  [Next](sbe03045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

### BOOK XVII. THE CHARGE TO KUNG OF ȜHÂI

ȜHÂI was the name of the small state or territory, which had been
conferred on Tû, the next younger brother of the duke of *K*âu. The name
still remains in the district of Shang-*ȝh*âi, department *Z*û-ning,
Ho-nan. Tû was deprived of his state because of his complicity in the
rebellion of Wû-*k*ăng; but it was subsequently restored to his son Hû
by this charge. Hû is here called *K*ung, that term simply denoting his
place in the roll of his brothers or cousins. King *Kh*ăng, and Hû were
cousins,--'brothers' according to Chinese usage of terms, and Hû being
the younger of the two, was called Ȝhâi Kung, 'the second or younger
brother,--of Ȝhâi.'

The Book consists of two chapters. The former is of the nature of a
preface, giving the details necessary to explain the appointment of Hû.
The second contains the king's charge, delivered in his name by the duke
of *K*âu, directing Hû how to conduct himself, so that he might blot out
the memory of his father's misdeeds, and win the praise of the king.

1\. When the duke, of Kâu was in the place of prime minister and
directed all the officers, the (king's) uncles spread abroad an (evil)
report, in consequence of which (the duke) put to death the prince of
Kwan in Shang <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_227); confined the prince
of Ȝhâi in Kwo-lin <span id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_228), with an
attendance of seven chariots; and reduced the prince of Hwo <span
id="fr_239"></span>[3](#fn_229) to be a private man, causing his name to
be erased from the registers for three years. The son of the prince

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

of Ȝhâi having displayed a reverent virtue, the duke of *K*âu made him a
high minister, and when his father died, requested a decree from the
king, investing him with the country of Ȝhâi.

2\. 'The king speaks to this effect:--"My little child, Hû, you follow
the virtue (of our ancestors), and have changed from the conduct (of
your father); you are able to take heed to your ways;--I therefore
appoint you to be a marquis in the east. Go to your fief, and be
reverent!

"In order that you may cover the faults of your father, be loyal, be
filial <span id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_230). Urge on your steps in your
own way, diligent and never idle, and so shall you hand down an example
to your descendants. Follow the constant lessons of your grandfather
king Wăn, and be not, like your father, disobedient to the royal orders.

"Great Heaven has no partial affections;--it helps only the virtuous.\*
The people's hearts have no unchanging attachment;--they cherish only
the kind. Acts of goodness are different, but they contribute in common
to good order. Acts of evil are different, but they contribute in common
to disorder. Be cautious!

In giving heed to the beginning think of the end;--the end will then be
without distress. If you do not think of the end, it will be full of
distress, even of the greatest.

"Exert yourself to achieve your proper merit. Seek to be in harmony with
all your neighbours.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Be a fence to the
royal House. Live in amity with your brethren. Tranquillize and help the
lower people.

"Follow the course of the Mean, and do not by aiming to be intelligent
throw old statutes into confusion. Watch over what you see and hear, and
do not for one-sided words deviate from the right rule. Then I, the One
man, will praise you.

'The king says, "Oh! my little child, Hû, go, and do not idly throw away
my charge."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_227"></span>[211:1](sbe03044.htm#fr_237) The prince of
Kwan--corresponding to the present *Kh*ăng *K*âu, department Khâi-fang,
Ho-nan--was the third of the sons of king Wăn, and older than the duke
of *K*âu. The Shang where he was put to death was probably what had been
the capital of the Shang kings.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[211:2](sbe03044.htm#fr_238) We do not know
where Kwo-lin was.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[211:3](sbe03044.htm#fr_239) The name of Hwo
remains in Hwo *K*âu, department Phing-yang, Shan-hsî. The prince of Hwo
was the eighth of Wăn's sons.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[212:1](sbe03044.htm#fr_240) Hû's father had
not been filial. When he is told to be filial, there underlies the words
the idea of the solidarity of the family. His copying the example of his
grandfather would be the best service he could render to his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVIII. The Numerous Regions](sbe03045)
