[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03127)  [Next](sbe03129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 2. THE TÂ MING.

#### HOW THE APPOINTMENT OF HEAVEN OR GOD CAME FROM HIS FATHER TO KING WĂN, AND DESCENDED TO HIS SON, KING WÛ, WHO OVERTHREW THE DYNASTY OF SHANG BY HIS VICTORY AT MÛ; CELEBRATING ALSO THE MOTHER AND WIFE OF KING WĂN.

The illustration of illustrious (virtue) is required below, And the
dread majesty is or, high <span id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_480). Heaven
is not readily to be relied on; It is not easy to be king. Yin's
rightful heir to the heavenly seat Was not permitted to possess the
kingdom.

*Z*ăn, the second of the princesses of *K*ih <span
id="fr_498"></span>[3](#fn_481), From (the domain of) Yin-shang, Came to
be married to (the prince of) *K*âu, And became his wife in his

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

capital. Both she and king *K*î Were entirely virtuous. (Then)
Thâi-*z*ăn became pregnant, And gave birth to our king Wăn.

This king Wăn, Watchfully and reverently, With entire intelligence
served God, And so secured the great blessing. His virtue was without
deflection; And in consequence he received (the allegiance of) the
states from all quarters.

Heaven surveyed this lower world; And its appointment lighted (on king
Wăn). In his early years, It made for him a mate <span
id="fr_499"></span>[1](#fn_482);--On the north of the Hsiâ, On the banks
of the Wei. When king Wăn would marry, There was the lady in a large
state <span id="fr_500"></span>[2](#fn_483).

In a large state was the lady, Like a fair denizen of heaven. The
ceremonies determined the auspiciousness (of the union) <span
id="fr_501"></span>[3](#fn_484), And in person he met her on the Wei.
Over it he made a bridge of boats; The glory (of the occasion) was
illustrious.

The favouring appointment was from Heaven, Giving the throne to our kin
Wăn, In the capital of *K*âu. The lady-successor was from Hsin, Its
eldest daughter, who came to marry him. She was blessed to give birth to
king Wû, Who was preserved, and helped, and received (also) the.
appointment,

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And in accordance
with it smote the great Shang.

The troops of Yin-shang Were collected like a forest, And marshalled in
the wilderness of Mû. We rose (to the crisis); 'God is with you,' (said
Shang-fû to the king), 'Have no doubts in your heart <span
id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_485).'

The wilderness of Mû spread out extensive; Bright shone the chariots of
sandal; The teams of bays, black-maned and white-bellied, galloped
along; The Grand-Master Shang-fû. Was like an eagle on the wing,
Assisting king Wû, Who at one onset smote the great Shang. That
morning's encounter was followed by a clear, bright (day).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_480"></span>[380:2](sbe03128.htm#fr_497) 'The first two
lines,' says the commentator Yen *Ȝh*an, 'contain a general sentiment,
expressing the principle that governs the relation between Heaven and
men. According to line 1, the good or evil of a ruler cannot be
concealed; according to 2, Heaven, in giving its favour or taking it
away, acts with strict decision. When below there is the illustrious
illustration (of virtue), that reaches up on high. When above there is
the awful majesty, that exercises a survey below. The relation between
Heaven and men ought to excite our awe.'

<span id="fn_481"></span>[380:3](sbe03128.htm#fr_498) The state of *K*ih
must have been somewhere in the royal domain of Yin. Its lords had the
surname of *Z*ăn, and the second daughter of the House became the wife
of *K*î of *K*âu. She is called in the eighth line Thâi-*z*ăn, by which
name she is still famous in China. 'She commenced,' it is said, 'the
instruction of her child when he was still in her womb, looking on no
improper sight, listening to no licentious sound, uttering no word of
pride.'

<span id="fn_482"></span>[381:1](sbe03128.htm#fr_499) Heaven is here
represented as arranging for the fulfilment of its purposes beforehand.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[381:2](sbe03128.htm#fr_500) The name of the
state was Hsin, and it must have been near the Hsiâ and the Wei,
somewhere in the south-east of the present Shen-hsî.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[381:3](sbe03128.htm#fr_501) 'The ceremonies'
would be various; first of all, divination by means of the
tortoise-shell.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[382:1](sbe03128.htm#fr_502) See the account of
the battle of Mû in the third Book of the fifth Part of the Shû.
Shang-fû was one of Wû's principal leaders and counsellors, his
'Grand-Master Shang-fû' in the next stanza.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 3. The Mien](sbe03129)
