[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03177)  [Next](sbe03179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE RECOVERY OF THE HSIÂO KING UNDER THE HAN DYNASTY, AND ITS PRESERVATION DOWN TO THE PUBLICATION OF THE COMMENTARY OF THE THANG EMPEROR HSÜAN ZUNG.

1\. The Hsiâo King suffered, like all the other Confucian books except
the Yî, from the fires of *Kh*in. Its subsequent recovery was very like
that of the Shû, described on pp. [7](sbe03004.htm#page_7), 8. We have
in each case a shorter and a longer copy, a modern text and an ancient
text.

<span class="margnote">Recovery of the Hsiâo King.</span>

In the Catalogue of the Imperial Library, prepared by Liû Hin
immediately before the commencement of our Christian era, there are two
copies of the Hsiâo:--'the old text of the Khung family,' which was in
twenty-two chapters, according to a note by Pan Kû (died A.D. 92), the
compiler of the documents in the records of the western Han; and another
copy, which was, according to the same authority, in eighteen chapters,
and was subsequently styled 'the modern text.' Immediately following the
entry of these two copies, we find 'Expositions of the Hsiâo by four
scholars,'--whose surnames were .*K*ang-sun, *K*iang, Yî, and Hâu. 'They
all,' says Pan Kû, 'had laboured on the shorter text.'

<span class="margnote">The shorter or modern text.</span>

The copy in eighteen chapters therefore, we must presume, had been the
first recovered; but of how this came about we have no account till we
come to the records of the Sui dynasty. There it is said that, when the
*Kh*in edict for the destruction of the books was issued, his copy of
the Hsiâo was hidden by a scholar called Yen *K*ih, a member, doubtless,
of the Yen family to which Confucius' favourite disciple Yen Hui had
belonged When the edict was abrogated in a few years, *K*ăn, a son of
*K*ih, brought the copy from its hiding place. This must have been in
the second century B. C., and the copy, transcribed, probably by *K*ăn,
in the form of the characters then used, would pass into the charge of
the board of great scholars' appointed to preserve the

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

ancient books, in the reigns of the emperors Wăn and *K*ing, B. C.
179-141.

<span class="margnote">The old or longer text.</span>

The copy in the ancient text was derived from the tablets found in the
wall of the Confucian house in the time of the emperor Wû (B.C. 140-87),
and is commonly said to have been deciphered, as in the case of the
tablets of the Shû, by Khung An-kwo. An-kwo wrote a commentary himself
on the Hsiâo, which does not appear in Hin's Catalogue, just as no
mention is made there of his commentary on the Shû. We find it entered,
however, among the books in the Sui Library with the following
note:--'The work of An-kwo disappeared during the troubles of the Liang
dynasty (A.D. 502-556), and continued unknown till the time of Sui, when
a copy was found in the capital, and came into the possession of a
scholar called Liû Hsüan.' Hsüan made his treasure public, and ere long
it was acknowledged by the court, while many scholars contended that it
was a forgery of his own, and ascribed by him to An-kwo. Whatever
opinion we may form on this matter, the discovery of the old text, and
the production of a commentary on it by Khung An-kwo, can hardly be
called in question.

<span class="margnote">Was another copy in the old text
discovered?</span>

It might be argued, indeed, that another copy in the old text was found
in the first century B. C. In a memorial addressed about the Shwo Wăn
dictionary to the emperor An, in A.D. 121, by Hsü *K*ung, a son of the
author, he says that the Hsiâo King which his father used was a copy of
that presented, by 'a very old man of Lû,' to The emperor *K*âo (B.C.
86-74) <span id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_626) Many Chinese critics, and
especially Wang Ying-lin

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (better known as
Wang Po-hâu, A.D. 1223-1296), say that this is a different account of
the recovery of the old text from that with which the name of Khung
An-kwo is connected. It is difficult to reconcile the two statements, as
will be seen on a reference to the note below <span
id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_627); and yet it

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

is possible that the difficulty would disappear, if the details of the
discovery and the subsequent dealing with the tablets had come down to
us complete.

<span class="margnote">Can we rely fully on the copies catalogued by Liû
Hin?</span>

Certainly, in the first century B. C. there were two copies of the Hsiâo
King in the Imperial Library of Han. If those copies, catalogued by Liû
Hin, were the actual text, presented by Yen *K*ăn, and a faithful
transcript in the current Han characters of the ancient text discovered
in the wall of Confucius' old lecture hall, we should be able to say
that the evidence for the recovery of the Hsiâo, as it had existed
during the *K*âu dynasty, was as satisfactory as we could desire; but
there are some considerations that are in the way of our doing so.

According to the records of Sui, after the old text came into the
possession of the court, and the differences between it and the text
earlier recovered were observed, Liû Hsiang (B.C. 80-9), the father of
Hin, was charged by the emperor (*Kh*ăng, B.C. 32-7) to compare the two.
The result of his examination of them was that 'he removed from the
modern text what was excessive and erroneous, and fixed the number of
the chapters at eighteen.' It does not appear that previously there was
any division of *K*ăn's copy into chapters. What Hsiang did in the case
of the old text we are not told. A note by Yen Sze-kû of the Thang
dynasty, appended to Hin's Catalogue, quotes from him that 'one chapter
of the modern text was divided into two in the old, another into three,
and that the old had one chapter which did not appear in the other.'
This missing chapter, it is understood, was the one beginning, 'Inside
the smaller doors leading to the inner apartments, which I have
appended, from the current old text, to my translation of the classic as
published by Hsüan Ȝung; and yet the Sui account says that that chapter
was in the Hsiâo of .*K*ang-sun, one of the four early commentators on
the modern text.

The copies catalogued by Hin were made after the examination and
revision of the two texts by his father. There are suspicious
resemblances between the style and method of the present classic and
those of the original works of

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hsiang that have
come down to us. It is impossible to say, from the want of information,
what liberties he took with the documents put into his charge. The
differences between the two texts as we now have them are trivial. I
believe that the changes made in them by Hsiang were not important; but
having them as they came from his revision, we have them at second hand,
and this has afforded ground for the dealing with them by *K*û Hsî and
others in the manner which will be described in the next chapter.

<span class="margnote">From Khung An-kwo to the emperor Hsüan
Ȝung.</span>

2\. I have said above ([p. 450](sbe03177.htm#page_450)) that for the
text of the classic,--the modern text, that is,--as we now have it, we
are indebted to the labours of the emperor Hsüan Ȝung of the Thang
dynasty. *K*û Î-tsun, of the *Kh*ien-lung period (1736-1795), in his
work on the classics and the writings on them, has adduced the titles of
eighty-six different works on our classic, that appeared between Khung
An-kwo and Hsüan ZȜung. Not a single one of all these now survives; but
the enumeration of them shows that the most distinguished scholars
during the intervening centuries exercised their powers on the treatise,
and would keep a watch on one another in the preservation of the text.
Moreover, several of the works continued through the Thang dynasty, and
on into that of Sung. The Catalogue of the Sui Library contains the
titles of nineteen in its list.

<span class="margnote">Hsüan Ȝung's work.</span>

The emperor Hsüan says, in his preface, that in the making of his
commentary he had freely used the commentaries of six earlier writers,
whom he names. They were, Wei *K*âo, Wang Sû, Yü Fan, and Liû Shâo, all
of our second and third centuries; Liû Hsüan, of our sixth century, who
laboured on the commentary of Khung An-kwo, which, as I have already
stated, is said to have been discovered in his time and presented to
him; and Lû *Kh*ang, rather earlier than Liû, who dealt critically with
the commentary attributed to *K*ăng Khang-*kh*ăng. 'But,' says the
imperial author, 'if a comment be right in reason, why need we enquire
from whom it came? We have therefore taken those six writers, considered
wherein

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

they agreed and differed, and decided between their interpretations by
reference to the general scope of the five (great) King. In compendious
style, but with extensive examination of the subject, we have made the
meaning of the classic clear.'

The emperor says nothing himself about the differences between the
ancient and modern texts, though we know that that subject was
vehemently agitated among the scholars of his court, The text as
commented on by him is in eighteen chapters, which do not include the
chapter to which I have referred on p. 455 as having been in the copy of
*K*ang-sun in the first century B.C. It is said, and on sufficient
authority, that this chapter was excluded through the influence of the
scholar and minister Sze-mâ *K*ăn. To each of his chapters the emperor
prefixed a brief heading or argument, which I have retained in the
translation. These headings, probably, were selected by him from a
variety proposed by the scholars about the court.

The text employed in this imperial commentary might now be considered as
sufficiently secured. It was engraved, in less than a. century after, on
the stone tablets of Thang, which were completed in the year 837, and
set up in Hsî-an, the Thang capital, where they remain, very little
damaged, to this day <span id="fr_648"></span>[1](#fn_628). And not only
so. The emperor was so pleased with the commentary which he had made,
that he caused the whole of it to be engraved on four large tablets or
pillars of stone in 745. They are still to be seen at Hsî-an, in front
of the Confucian College.

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

<span class="margnote">The work of Hsing Ping.</span>

It is hardly necessary to say more on the preservation of the Hsiâo
King. In A.D. 996 the second emperor of the Sung dynasty gave orders for
an annotated edition of it to be prepared. This was finally completed in
1001, under the superintendence of Hsing Ping (932-1010), with a large
critical apparatus, and a lengthened exposition, both of the text and of
Hsüan Ȝung's explanation. This work has ever since been current in
China.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_626"></span>[453:1](sbe03178.htm#fr_646) The language of
the memorial is:--The Hsiâo King' (used by my father in the composition
of his dictionary) 'was what San lâo of Lû presented in the time of the
emperor *K*âo.' The San lâo most readily suggests to the reader the idea
of 'three old men;' but the characters may also mean, in harmony with
Chinese idiom, 'the three classes of old men,' or 'an individual from
those three classes.' The classical passage to explain the phrase is
par. 18 in the first section of the sixth Book in the Lî *K*î, where it
is said that king Wăn feasted the San lâo and Wû kang, 'the three
classes of old men and five classes of men of experience,' in his royal
college, The three classes of old men were such as were over 80, 90, and
100 years respectively. It was from a man of one of these classes that
the emperor received the Hsiâo in the old <span id="page_454">p.
454</span> text. According to the account given in the next note this
man was Khung Ȝze-hui; and in the Books of Sui that is given as the name
of the individual of the Khung family, who had hidden the tablets on the
appearance of the *Kh*in edict for the destruction of all the old books.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[454:1](sbe03178.htm#fr_647) The Catalogue
Raisonné of the Imperial Libraries commences its account of the copies
of the Hsiâo with a description of 'the Old Text of the Hsiâo with the
Commentary of Khung An-kwo,' obtained from Japan; but the editors give
good reasons for doubting its genuineness. There is a copy of this work
in the Chinese portion of the British Museum, an edition printed in
Japan in 1732, which I have carefully examined, with the help of
Professor R. K. Douglas and Mr. A. Wylie. It contains not only the
commentary of Khung An-kwo, but what purports to be the original preface
of that scholar. There it is said that the bamboo tablets of the copy in
'tadpole characters,' found in the wall of Confucius' old 'lecture hall,
in a stone case,' were presented to the emperor by Khung Ȝze-hui, 'a
very old man of Lû.' The emperor, it is added, caused two copies to be
made in the current characters of the time by 'the great scholars,' one
of which was given to Ȝze-hui, and the other to General Ho Kwang, a
minister of war and favourite, who greatly valued it, and placed it
among the archives of the empire, where it was jealously guarded.

This account makes the meaning of the phrase 'the San lâo of Lû quite
clear; but there are difficulties in the way of our believing that it
proceeded from Khung An-kwo. No mention is made of him in it, whereas,
according to the current narrations, the tablets with the tadpole
characters were first deciphered by him; nor is the name of the emperor
to whom Khung Ȝze-hui presented the tablets given. No doubt, however,
this emperor was Kâo, with whom Ho Kwang was a favourite. If the preface
were genuine, of course An-kwo was alive after Ȝze-hui went to court
with the tablets. Now, the tablets were discovered in the period
Thien-han, B.C. 100-97, and *K*âo reigned from B.C. 86 to 74. An-kwo
died at the age of sixty, but in what year we are not told. He had
studied the Shih under Shăn Kung, whose death can hardly be placed later
than in B.C. 135. If An-kwo were born. in B.C. 150, he would have been
more than sixty years old--the age assigned to him at his death at the
accession of *K*âo. I cannot believe, therefore, that the preface in the
Japanese Hsiâo was written by him; and if we reject the preface, we must
also reject the commentary before which it stands.

The text of the Hsiâo in the work is nearly identical with that of
Sze-mâ Kwang, mentioned below on [p. 458](#page_458); but to the
chapters there are prefixed the headings (which Kwang did not adopt),
that cannot be traced farther back than the Thang dynasty. This might be
got over, but the commentary throws no new light on the text. 'It is
shallow and poor,' say the editors of the Catalogue Raisonné, 'and not
in, the style of the Han scholars.' I must think with them that Khung
An-Kwo's commentary, purporting to have been preserved in Japan is a
forgery.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[457:1](sbe03178.htm#fr_648) These tablets are
commonly said to contain the thirteen classics (Shih-san King). They
contained, however, only twelve different works,--the Yî, the Shû, the
Shih, the *K*âu Lî, the Î Lî, the Lî *K*î, and the amplifications of the
*Kh*un *Kh*îu,--by Ȝo *Kh*iû-ming, by Kung-yang, and by Kû-liang. These
form 'the nine King.' In addition to these there were the Lun Yü, the
Hsiâo King, and the *R* Yâ. According to Kû Yen-wû (1613-1682), the
characters on the tablets were in all 650,252. Mr. T. W. Rhys Davids
(Buddhism, p.19) estimates that our English Bible contains between
800,000 and 950,000 words. The first Psalm, in what is called the
Delegates' version, very good and concise, contains 100 Chinese
characters, and in our English version 130 words. The classics of the
Thang tablets, if the translator were a master of both languages, might
be rendered in English so as to form a volume not quite so large as our
Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sbe03179)
