[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03044)  [Next](sbe03046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XVIII. THE NUMEROUS REGIONS.

THE king has returned to his capital in triumph, having put down
rebellion in the east, and specially extinguished the state or tribe of
Yen. The third chapter of Book xiv contained a reference to an
expedition against Yen. Critics are divided on the point of whether the
expedition mentioned in this Book was the same as that, or another; and
our sources of information are not sufficient to enable us to pronounce
positively in the case. If we may credit what Mencius says, the Records
of the Shû do not tell us a tithe of the wars carried on by the duke of
*K*âu to establish the new dynasty:--'He smote Yen, and after three
years put its ruler to death. He drove Fei-lien to a corner by the sea,
and slew him. The states which he extinguished amounted to fifty'
(Mencius, III, ii, ch. 9).

However this point be settled, on the occasion when the announcement in
this Book was delivered, a great assembly of princes and nobles--the old
officers of Yin or Shang, and chiefs from many regions--was met
together. They are all supposed to have been secretly, if not openly, in
sympathy with the rebellion which has been trampled out, and to grudge
to yield submission to the rule of *K*âu. The king, by the duke of
*K*âu, reasons and expostulates with them. He insists on the leniency
with which they had been treated in the past; and whereas they might be
saying that *K*âu's overthrow of the Yin dynasty was a usurpation, he
shows that it was from the will of Heaven.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The history of the
nation is then reviewed, and it is made to appear that king Wû had
displaced the kings of Yin or Shang, just as Thang, the founder of the
Shang dynasty, had displaced those of Hsiâ. It was their duty therefore
to submit to *K*âu. If they did not avail themselves of its leniency,
they should be dealt with in another way.

Having thus spoken, the duke turns, in the fourth of the five chapters
into which I have divided the Book, and addresses the many officers of
the states, and especially those of Yin, who had been removed to Lo,
speaking to them, as 'the Numerous Officers,' after the style of Book
xiv. Finally, he admonishes them all that it is time to begin a new
course. If they do well, it will be well with them; if they continue
perverse, they will have to blame themselves for the consequences.

1\. In the fifth month, on the day Ting-hâi, the king arrived from Yen,
and came to (Hâo), the honoured (capital of) *K*âu. The duke of *K*âu
said, 'The king speaks to the following effect: "Ho! I make an
announcement to you of the four states, and the numerous (other)
regions. Ye who were the officers and people of the prince of Yin, I
have dealt very leniently as regards your lives, as ye all know. You
kept reckoning greatly on (some) decree of Heaven, and did not keep with
perpetual awe before your thoughts (the preservation of) your
sacrifices <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_231).\*

'"God sent down correction on Hsiâ, but the sovereign (only) increased
his luxury and sloth, and would not speak kindly to the people. He
showed himself dissolute and dark, and would not yield for a single day
to the leadings of God:--this is what you have heard.\* He kept
reckoning on the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

decree of God (in his favour), and did not cultivate the means for the
people's support.\* By great inflictions of punishment also he increased
the disorder of the states of Hsiâ. The first cause (of his evil course)
was the internal misrule <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_232), which
made him unfit to deal well with the multitudes. Nor did he endeavour to
find and employ men whom he could respect, and who might display a
generous kindness to the people; but where any of the people of Hsiâ
were covetous and fierce, he daily honoured them, and they practised
cruel tortures in the cities. Heaven on this sought a (true) lord for
the people, and made its. distinguished and favouring decree light on
Thang the Successful, who punished and destroyed the sovereign of
Hsiâ.\* Heaven's refusal of its favour (to Hsiâ) was decided. The
righteous men of your numerous regions were not permitted. to continue
long in their posts of enjoyment, and the many officers whom Hsiâ's
(last sovereign) honoured were unable intelligently to maintain the
people in the enjoyment (of their lives), but, on the contrary, aided
one another in oppressing them, till of the hundred ways of securing
(prosperity) they could not promote (one).

'"In the case indeed of Thang the Successful, it was because he was the
choice of your numerous regions that he superseded Hsiâ, and became the
lord of the people. He paid careful attention to the essential virtue
(of a sovereign) <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_233), in order to
stimulate the people, and they on their part imitated him

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and were stimulated. From him down to Tî-yî, the sovereigns all made
their virtue illustrious, and were cautious in the use of
punishments;--thus also exercising a stimulating influence (over the
people). When they, having examined the evidence in criminal cases, put
to death those chargeable with many crimes, they exercised the same
influence, and they did so also when they liberated those who were not
purposely guilty. But when the throne came to your (last) sovereign, he
could not with (the good will of) your numerous regions continue in the
enjoyment of the favouring decree of Heaven."'\*

2\. 'Oh! the king speaks to the following effect:--I announce and
declare to you of the numerous regions, that Heaven had no set purpose
to do away with the sovereign of Hsiâ or with the sovereign of Yin. But
it was the case that your (last) ruler, being in possession of your
numerous regions, abandoned himself to great excess, and reckoned on the
favouring decree of Heaven, making trifling excuses for his conduct. And
so in the case of the (last) sovereign of Hsiâ; his plans of government
were not of a tendency to secure his enjoyment (of the kingdom), and
Heaven sent down ruin on him, and the chief of the territory (of Shang)
put an end (to the line of Hsiâ). In truth, the last sovereign of your
Shang was luxurious to the extreme of luxury, while his plans of
government showed neither purity nor progress, and thus Heaven sent down
such ruin on him <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_234).\*

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

'"The wise, through not thinking, become foolish, and the foolish, by
thinking, become wise. Heaven for five years waited kindly, and forbore
with the descendant (of Thang), to see if he would indeed prove himself
the ruler of the people; but there was nothing in him deserving to be
regarded. Heaven then sought among your numerous regions, making a great
impression by its terrors to stir up some one who would look
(reverently) to it, but in all your regions there was not one deserving
of its favouring regard. But there were the kings of our *K*âu, who
treated well the multitudes of the people, and were able to sustain the
burden of virtuous (government). They could preside over (all services
to) spirits and to Heaven.\* Heaven thereupon instructed us, and
increased our excellence, made choice of us, and gave us the decree of
Yin, to rule over your numerous regions."'\*

3\. '"Why do I now presume to make (these) many declarations? I have
dealt very leniently as regards the lives of you, the people of these
four states. Why do you not show a sincere and generous obedience in
your numerous regions? Why do you not aid and co-operate with the kings
of our *K*âu, to secure the enjoyment of Heaven's favouring decree? You
now still dwell in your dwellings, and cultivate your fields;--why do
you not obey our kings, and consolidate the decree of Heaven? The paths
which you tread are continually those of disquietude;--have you in your
hearts no love for yourselves? do you refuse so greatly to acquiesce in
the ordinance of Heaven? do you triflingly reject that decree? do you of
yourselves pursue unlawful courses, scheming (by your alleged reasons)
for the

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

approval of upright men? I simply instructed you, and published my
announcement <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_235); with trembling awe I
secured and confined (the chief criminals):--I have done so twice and
for three times. But if you do not, take advantage of the leniency with
which I have spared your lives, I will proceed to severe punishments,
and put you to death. It is not that we, the sovereigns of *K*âu, hold
it virtuous to make you untranquil, but it is you yourselves who
accelerate your crimes (and sufferings)."'

4\. 'The king says, "Oh! ho! I tell you, ye many officers of the.
various regions, and you, ye many officers of Yin, now have ye been
hurrying about, doing service to my overseers for five years. There are
among you the inferior assistants, the chiefs, and the numerous
directors, small and great;--see that ye all attain to the discharge of
your duties. Want of harmony (in the life) rises from (the want of it
in) one's (inner) self;--strive to be harmonious. Want of concord in
your families (arises from the want of it in your conduct);--strive to
be harmonious. When intelligence rules in your cities, then will you be
proved to be attentive to your duties. Do not be afraid, I pray you, of
the evil ways, (of the people); and moreover, by occupying your offices
with a reverent harmony, yon will find it possible to select from your
cities individuals on whose assistance you can calculate. You may thus
long continue in this city of Lo <span id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_236),
cultivating your fields. Heaven will favour and compassionate you, and
we,

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the sovereigns of *K*âu, will greatly help you, and confer rewards,
selecting you to stand in-our royal court. Only be attentive to your
duties, and you may rank among our great officers."

'The king says, "Oh! ye numerous officers, if you cannot exhort one
another to pay a sincere regard to my charges, it will further show that
you are unable to honour your sovereign; and all the people will (also)
say, 'We will not honour him.' Thus will ye be proved slothful and
perverse, greatly disobedient to the royal charges. Throughout your,
numerous regions you will bring on yourselves the terrors of Heaven, and
I will then inflict on you its punishments, removing you far from your
country."'

5\. 'The king says, "I do not (wish to) make these many declarations,\*
but it is in a spirit of awe that I lay my commands before you." He
further says, "You may now make a (new) beginning. If you cannot
reverently realize the harmony (which I enjoin), do not (hereafter)
murmur against me."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_231"></span>[214:1](sbe03045.htm#fr_241) The extinction of
the sacrifices of a state was its utter overthrow. None were left--or if
some might be left, none of them were permitted--to continue the
sacrifices to its founder and his descendants.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[215:1](sbe03045.htm#fr_242) The vile
debaucheries of which *K*ieh was guilty through his connexion with the
notorious Mei-hsî.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[215:2](sbe03045.htm#fr_243) That is, to
benevolence or the love of the people.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[216:1](sbe03045.htm#fr_244) There must have
been something remarkable in the closing period of *K*âu-hsin's history,
to which the duke alludes in the subsequent specification, of five
years. We do not know the events of the times sufficiently to say what
it was.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[218:1](sbe03045.htm#fr_245) Referring probably
to 'the Great Announcement' in Book vii.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[218:2](sbe03045.htm#fr_246) It would almost
seem from this that the announcement was made in Lo; and some critics
have argued that Lo was 'the honoured capital' in the first sentence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIX. The Establishment of Government](sbe03046)
