[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03195)  [Next](sbe03197) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XVI. THE INFLUENCE OF FILIAL PIETY AND THE RESPONSE TO IT.

'The Master said, 'Anciently, the intelligent kings served their fathers
with filial piety, and therefore they served Heaven with intelligence;
they served their mothers with filial piety, and therefore they served
Earth with discrimination <span id="fr_692"></span>[3](#fn_672). They
pursued

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

the right course with reference to their (own) seniors and juniors, and
therefore they secured the regulation of the relations between superiors
and inferiors (throughout the kingdom).

'When Heaven and Earth were served with intelligence and discrimination,
the spiritual intelligences displayed (their retributive power <span
id="fr_693"></span>[1](#fn_673)).

'Therefore even the Son of Heaven must have some whom he honours; that
is, he has his uncles of his surname. He must have some to whom he
concedes the precedence; that is, he has his cousins, who bear the same
surname, and are older than himself. In the ancestral temple he
manifests the utmost reverence, showing that he does not forget his
parents; he cultivates his person and is careful of his conduct, fearing
lest he should disgrace his predecessors.

'When in the ancestral temple he exhibits the

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

utmost reverence, the spirits of the departed manifest themselves <span
id="fr_694"></span>[1](#fn_674). Perfect filial piety and fraternal duty
reach to (and move) the spiritual intelligences, and diffuse their light
on all within the four seas; they penetrate everywhere.

'It is said in the Book of Poetry <span id="fr_695"></span>[2](#fn_675),

"From the west to the east,  
From the south to the north,  
There was not a thought but did him homage."'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_672"></span>[484:3](sbe03196.htm#fr_692) This chapter is as
difficult to grasp as the seventh, which treated of Filial Piety in
Relation to 'the Three Powers.' It is indeed a sequel to that. Heaven
and Earth appear as two Powers, or as <span id="page_485">p. 485</span>
a dual Power, taking the place of Heaven or God. We can in a degree
follow the treatise in transferring the reverence plaid by a son to his
father to loyalty shown by him to his ruler; but it is more difficult to
understand the development of filial piety into religion that is here
assumed and described. Was it not the pressing of this virtue too far,
the making more of it than can be made, that tended to deprave religion
during the *K*âu dynasty, and to mingle with the earlier monotheism a
form of nature-worship?

Hsing Ping, in his 'Correct Meaning,' makes the 'discrimination' here to
be 'an ability to distinguish the advantages of the earth;'--showing how
he had the sixth and seventh chapters in his mind.\]

<span id="fn_673"></span>[485:1](sbe03196.htm#fr_693) 'The Spiritual
Intelligences' here are Heaven and Earth conceived of as Spiritual
Beings. They responded to the sincere service of the intelligent kings,
as Hsing Ping says, with 'the harmony of the active and passive
principles of nature, seasonable winds and rain, the absence of epidemic
sickness and plague, and the repose of all under heaven.' Compare with
this what is said in 'the Great Plan' of the Shû, pp.
[147](sbe03031.htm#page_147), [148](sbe03031.htm#page_148).

<span id="fn_674"></span>[486:1](sbe03196.htm#fr_694) The reader will
have noticed many instances of this, or what were intended to be
instances of it, in the translations from the Shih, pp.
[365](sbe03119.htm#page_365)-368, &c.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[486:2](sbe03196.htm#fr_695) See the Shih, III,
i, ode 10, stanza 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. The Service of the Ruler](sbe03197)
