[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03064)  [Next](sbe03066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 1. THE NÂ <span id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_318).

#### APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE TO THANG, THE FOUNDER OF THE SHANG DYNASTY, DWELLING ESPECIALLY ON THE MUSIC AND THE REVERENCE WITH WHICH THE SACRIFICE WAS PERFORMED.

We cannot tell by which of the kings of Shang the sacrifice here
referred to was first performed. He is simply spoken of as 'a descendant
of Thang.' The ode seems to have been composed by some one, probably a
member of the royal House, who had taken part in the service.

How admirable! how complete! Here are set our hand-drums and drums. The
drums resound harmonious and loud, To delight our meritorious
ancestor <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_319).

The descendant of Thang invites him with this music, That he may soothe
us with the realization of our thoughts <span
id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_320). Deep is the sound of our hand-drums

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

and drums; Shrilly sound the flutes; All harmonious and blending
together, According to the notes of the sonorous gem. Oh! majestic is
the descendant of Thang; Very admirable is his music.

The large bells and drums fill the ear; The various dances are grandly
performed <span id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_321). We have the admirable
visitors <span id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_322), who are pleased and
delighted.

From of old, before our time, The former men set us the example;--How to
be mild and humble from morning to night, And to be reverent in
discharging the service.

May he regard our sacrifices of winter and autumn <span
id="fr_335"></span>[3](#fn_323), (Thus) offered by the descendant of
Thang!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_318"></span>[304:1](sbe03065.htm#fr_330) The piece is
called the Nâ, because a character so named is an important part of the
first line. So generally the pieces in the Shih receive their names from
a character or phrase occurring in them. This point will not be again
touched on.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[304:2](sbe03065.htm#fr_331) The 'meritorious
ancestor' is Thang. The sacrifices of the Shang dynasty commenced with
music; those of the *K*âu with libations of fragrant spirits;--in both
cases with the same object, to attract the spirit, or spirits,
sacrificed to, and secure their presence at the service. *Kh*ăn Hâo
(Ming dynasty) says, 'The departed spirits hover between heaven and
earth, and sound goes forth, filling the region of the air. Hence in
sacrificing, the people of Yin began with a performance of music.'

<span id="fn_320"></span>[304:3](sbe03065.htm#fr_332) The Lî *K*î, XXIV,
i, parr. 2, 3, tells us, that the sacrificer, as preliminary to the
service, had to fast for some days, and to think of the person of his
ancestor,--where he had stood and sat, how he had smiled and spoken,
what had been his cherished aims, <span id="page_305">p. 305</span>
pleasures, and delights; and on the third day he would have a complete
image of him in his mind's eye. Then on the day of sacrifice, when he
entered the temple, he would seem to see him in his shrine, and to hear
him, as he went about in the discharge of the service. This line seems
to indicate the realization of all this.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[305:1](sbe03065.htm#fr_333) Dancing thus
entered into the service as an accompaniment of the music. Two terms are
employed; one denoting the movements appropriate to a dance of war, the
other those appropriate to a dance of peace.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[305:2](sbe03065.htm#fr_334) The visitors would
be the representatives of the lines of Hsiâ, Shun, and Yâo.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[305:3](sbe03065.htm#fr_335) Two of the
seasonal sacrifices are thus specified, by synecdoche, for all the four.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 2. The Lieh Ȝû](sbe03066)
