[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03180)  [Next](sbe03182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

# THE HSIÂO KING.

## CHAPTER I.

## THE SCOPE AND MEANING OF THE TREATISE.

(ONCE), when *K*ung-nî <span id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_631) was
unoccupied, and his disciple Ȝăng <span id="fr_652"></span>[2](#fn_632)
was sitting by in attendance on him, the Master said, 'Shin, the ancient
kings had a perfect virtue and all-embracing rule of conduct, through
which they were in accord with all under heaven. By the practice of it
the people were brought to live in peace and harmony, and there was no
ill-will between superiors and inferiors. Do you know what it was <span
id="fr_653"></span>[3](#fn_633)?' Ȝăng rose from his mat, and said, 'How

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

should I, Shan, who am so devoid of intelligence, be able to know this?'
The Master said, '(It was filial piety). Now filial piety is the root of
(all) virtue <span id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_634), and (the stem) out
of which grows (all moral) teaching. Sit down again, and I will explain
the subject to you. Our bodies--to every hair and bit of skin--are
received by us from our parents, and we must not presume to injure or
wound them:--this is the beginning of filial piety. When we have
established our character by the practice of the (filial) course, so as
to make our name famous in future ages, and thereby glorify our
parents:--this is the end of filial piety. It commences with the service

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

of parents; it proceeds to the service of the ruler; it is completed by
the establishment of the character.

'It is said in the Major Odes of the Kingdom,

"Ever think of your ancestor,  
Cultivating your virtue <span id="fr_655"></span>[1](#fn_635)."'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_631"></span>[465:1](sbe03181.htm#fr_651) *K*ung-nî was the
designation or marriage-name of Confucius. We find it twice in the
Doctrine of the Mean (chh. 2 and 30), applied to the sage by Ȝze-sze,
his grandson, the reputed author of that treatise. By his designation,
it is said, a grandson might speak of his grandfather, and therefore
some scholars contend that the Classic of Filial Piety should also be
ascribed to Ȝze-sze; but such a canon cannot be considered as
sufficiently established, On the authorship of the Classic, see the
Introduction, [p. 451](sbe03177.htm#page_451).

<span id="fn_632"></span>[465:2](sbe03181.htm#fr_652) Ȝăng-ȝze, named
Shăn, and styled Ȝze-yü, was one of the most distinguished of the
disciples of Confucius. He was a favourite with the sage, and himself a
voluminous writer. Many incidents and sayings are related, illustrative
of his filial piety, so that it was natural for the master to enter with
him on the discussion of that virtue. He shares in the honour and
worship still paid to Confucius, and is one of his 'Four Assessors' in
his temples.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[465:3](sbe03181.htm#fr_653) Both the
translator in the Chinese Repository and P. Cibot have rendered this
opening address of Confucius very imperfectly. <span id="page_466">p.
466</span> The former has:--'Do you understand how the ancient kings,
who possessed the greatest virtue and the best moral principles,
rendered the whole empire so obedient that the people lived in peace and
harmony, and no ill-will existed between superiors and inferiors?' The
other:--'Do you know what was the pre-eminent virtue and the essential
doctrine which our ancient monarchs taught to all the empire, to
maintain concord among their subjects, and banish all dissatisfaction
between superiors and inferiors?' P. Cibot comes the nearer to the
meaning of the text, but he has neglected the characters corresponding
to 'through which they were in accord with all under heaven,' that are
expounded clearly enough by Hsüan Ȝung. The sentiment of the sage is, as
he has tersely expressed it in the Doctrine of the Mean (ch. 13), that
the ancient kings 'governed men, according to their, nature, with what
is proper to them.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[466:1](sbe03181.htm#fr_654) 'All virtue' means
the five virtuous principles, the constituents of humanity,
'benevolence, righteousness, propriety, knowledge, and fidelity.' Of
these, benevolence is the chief and fundamental, so that Mencius say's
(VII, ii, ch. 16), 'Benevolence is man.' In man's nature, therefore,
benevolence is the root of filial piety; while in practice filial piety
is the root of benevolence. Such is the way in which *K*û Hsî and other
critical scholars reconcile the statements of the text here and
elsewhere with their theory as to the constituents of humanity.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[467:1](sbe03181.htm#fr_655) See the Shih King,
III, i, ode 2, stanza 4. *K*û Hsî commences his expurgation of our
classic with casting out this concluding paragraph; and rightly so. Such
quotations of the odes and other passages in the ancient classics are
not after the manner of Confucius. The application made of them,
moreover, is often far-fetched, and away from their proper meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Filial Piety in the Son of Heaven](sbe03182)
