[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03056)  [Next](shih00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XXX.

### THE SPEECH OF (THE MARQUIS OF) *KH*IN.

THE state of *Kh*in, at the time to which this speech belongs, was one
of the most powerful in the kingdom, and already giving promise of what
it would grow to. Ultimately, one of its princes overthrew the dynasty
of *K*âu, and brought feudal China to an end. Its earliest capital was
in the present district of *Kh*ăng-shui, *Kh*in *K*âu, Kan-sû.

*Kh*in and *K*in were engaged together in B.C. 631 in besieging the
capital of Kăng, and threatened to extinguish that state. The marquis of
*K*in, however, was suddenly induced to withdraw his troops, leaving
three of his officers in friendly relations with the court of *K*ăng,
and under engagement to defend the state from aggression. These men
played the part of spies in the interest of Khin, and in B.C. 629, one
of them, called *Kh*î-ȝze, sent word that he was in charge of one of the
gates, and if an army were sent to surprise the capital, Kang might be
added to the territories of *Kh*in. The marquis--known in history as
duke Mû--laid the matter before his counsellors. The most experienced of
them--Pâi-lî Hsi and *Kh*ien-shû were against taking advantage of the
proposed treachery; but the marquis listened rather to the promptings of
ambition; and the next year he sent a large force, under his three
ablest commanders, hoping to find *K*ăng unprepared for any resistance.
The attempt, however, failed; and the army, on its way back to

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Khin, was attacked
by the forces of *K*in, and sustained a terrible defeat. It was nearly
annihilated, and the three commanders were taken prisoners.

The marquis of *K*in was intending to put these captives to death, but
finally sent them to *Kh*in, that duke Mû might himself sacrifice them
to his anger for their want of success. Mû, however, did no such thing.
He went from his capital. to meet the disgraced generals, and comforted
them, saying that the blame of their defeat was due to himself, who had
refused to listen to the advice of his wise counsellors. Then also, it
is said, he made the speech here preserved for the benefit of all his
ministers, describing the good and bad minister, and the different
issues of listening to them, and deploring how he had himself foolishly
rejected the advice of his aged counsellors, and followed that of new
men;--a thing which he would never do again.

The duke <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_301) said, 'Ah! my officers,
listen to me without noise. I solemnly announce to you the most
important of all sayings. (It is this which) the ancients have said,
"Thus it is with all people,--they mostly love their ease. In reproving
others there is no difficulty, but to receive reproof, and allow it to
have free course,--this is difficult." The sorrow of my heart is, that
the days and months have passed away, and it is not likely they will
come again, (so that I might pursue a different course.)

'There were my old counsellors <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_302).--I
said, "They will not accommodate themselves to me," and I hated them.
There were my new counsellors, and I would for the time give my
confidence to them <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_303). So indeed it
was with me; but hereafter I will

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

take advice from the men of yellow hair, and then I shall be free from
error. That good old officer!--his strength is exhausted, but I would
rather have him (as my counsellor). That dashing brave officer!--his
shooting and charioteering are faultless, but I would rather not wish to
have him. As to men of quibbles, skilful at cunning words, and able to
make the good man change his purposes, what have I to do to make much
use of them?

'I have deeply thought and concluded.--Let me have but one resolute
minister, plain and sincere, without other ability, but having a
straightforward mind, and possessed of generosity, regarding the talents
of others as if he himself possessed them; and when he finds
accomplished and sage men, loving them in his heart more than his mouth
expresses, really showing himself able to bear them:--such a minister
would be able to preserve my descendants and people, and would indeed be
a giver of benefits.

'But if (the minister), when he finds men of ability, be jealous and
hates them; if, when he finds accomplished and sage men, he oppose them
and does not allow their advancement, showing himself really not able to
bear them:--such a man will not be able to protect my descendants and
people; and will he not be a dangerous man?

'The decline and fall of a state may arise from one man. The glory and
tranquillity of a state may also arise from the goodness of one man.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_301"></span>[271:1](sbe03057.htm#fr_313) The prince of
*Kh*in was only a marquis; but the historiographers or recorders of a
state always gave their ruler the higher title. This shows that this
speech is taken from the chronicles of *Kh*in.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[271:2](sbe03057.htm#fr_314) Pâi-lî Hsî and
*Kh*ien-shû.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[271:3](sbe03057.htm#fr_315) *Kh*î-ȝze and
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](shih00)
