[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03019)  [Next](sbe03021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### BOOK IV. THE INSTRUCTIONS OF Î

THANG died in B.C. 1754 or 1753, and was succeeded, so far as the
evidence of the Shû goes, by his grandson, known as Thâi *K*iâ. The
chief minister of Thang had been Î Yin, who delivers these Instructions
to his young sovereign soon after his accession. was a great and wise
man, 'a great sage,' as Thang calls him in the last Book, and is classed
by Mencius among other celebrated ministers as 'the one most inclined to
take office.' He reasons thus:--'Heaven's plan with mankind is that they
who are first informed should instruct those who are later in being
informed, and they who first apprehend principles should instruct those
who are later in doing so.' He thought he was one of the former class,
and a fire burned within him, impelling him to see\], for office with a
view to benefit the ignorant and erring. There were many legends about
him in the times of *K*âu. He was surnamed Î, from having been born near
the river of that name, an affluent of the Ho. His name is said to have
been *K*ih, and also Â-hăng (see the beginning of next Book). Yin was
his designation. Thang had, probably, entrusted to him the guardianship
of his grandson, and so he now went over the history of the kingdom from
Yü, till it was transferred from the line of Hsiâ to that of Shang,
celebrated the virtues of Thang and his government, and warned the young
king of the fate that he must incur if he neglected the instructions
given to him.

1\. In the twelfth month of the first year, on (the day) Yî-*kh*âu, Î
Yin sacrificed to the former king, and presented the heir-king
reverently before (the shrine of) his grandfather.\* All the princes
from the domain of the nobles and the royal domain were present; all the
officers (also), each continuing to discharge his particular duties,
were there to receive the orders of the chief minister. Î Yin then
clearly described the complete virtue of the Meritorious Ancestor for
the instruction of the (young) king.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

2\. He said, 'Oh! of old the former kings of Hsiâ cultivated earnestly
their virtue, and then there were no calamities from Heaven. The spirits
of the hills and rivers likewise were all in tranquillity; and the birds
and beasts, the fishes and tortoises, all enjoyed their existence
according to their nature.\* But their descendant did not follow (their
example), and great Heaven sent down calamities, employing the agency of
our (ruler) who was in possession of its favouring appointment.\* The
attack (on Hsiâ) may be traced to (the orgies in) Ming-thiâo <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_103), but our (rise) began in Po. Our king of
Shang brilliantly displayed his sagely prowess; for oppression he
substituted his generous gentleness; and the millions of the people gave
him their hearts. Now your Majesty is entering on the inheritance of his
virtue;--all depends on (how) you commence your reign. To set up love,
it is for you to love (your relations); to set up respect, it is for you
to respect (your elders). The commencement is in the family and the
state; the consummation is in (all within) the four seas.'

3\. 'Oh! the former king began with careful attention to the bonds that
hold men together. He listened to expostulation, and did not seek to
resist it; he conformed to (the wisdom. of) the ancients; occupying the
highest position, he displayed intelligence; occupying an inferior
position, he displayed his loyalty; he allowed (the good qualities of)
the men (whom he employed), and did

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

not seek that they should have every talent; in the government of
himself, he seemed to think that he could never (sufficiently) attain.
It was thus he arrived at the possession of the myriad regions.--How
painstaking was he in these things!

'He extensively sought out wise men, who should be helpful to you, his
descendant and heir. He laid down the punishments for officers, And
warned those who were in authority, saying, "If you dare to have
constant dancing in your palaces, and drunken singing in your
chambers,--that is called the fashion of sorcerers; if you dare, to set
your hearts on wealth and women, and abandon yourselves to wandering
about or to the chase,--that is called the fashion of extravagance; if
you dare to despise sage words, to resist the loyal and upright, to put
far from you the aged and virtuous, and to seek the company of
procacious youths,--that is called the fashion of disorder. Now if a
high noble or officer be addicted to one of these three fashions with
their ten evil ways <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_104), his family
will surely come to ruin; if the prince of a country be so addicted, his
state will surely come to ruin. The minister who does not (try to)
correct (such vices in the sovereign) shall be punished with branding."
These rules were minutely inculcated (also) on the sons of officers and
nobles in their lessons.'

4\. 'Oh! do you who now succeed to the throne, revere (these warnings)
in your person. Think of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

them!--sacred counsels of vast importance, admirable words forcibly set
forth! (The ways) of God are not invariable:--on the good-doer he sends
down all blessings, and on the evil-doer he sends down all miseries.\*
Do you but be virtuous, be it in small things (or in large), and the
myriad regions will have cause for rejoicing. If you be not virtuous, be
it in large things (or in small), it will bring the ruin of your
ancestral temple.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[93:1](sbe03020.htm#fr_107) Ming-thiâo was a
place not far from the capital of *K*ieh (in the present district of
An-yî, Hâi *K*âu, Shan-hsî). He had a palace there, where the vilest
orgies were celebrated that alienated the minds of the people from him.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[94:1](sbe03020.htm#fr_108) The 'ten evil ways'
are those mentioned in connexion with the three evil fashions;--two
under the sorcerers' fashion, and four under each of the other two
fashions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V. The Thâi *K*iâ](sbe03021)
