[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03124)  [Next](sbe03126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 6, STANZAS 1 AND 2. THE PIN *K*IH *KH*Û YEN.

#### AGAINST DRUNKENNESS. DRINKING ACCORDING TO RULE AT ARCHERY CONTESTS AND THE SEASONAL SACRIFICES, AND DRINKING TO EXCESS.

There are good grounds for referring the authorship of this piece to
duke Wû of Wei (B.C. 812 to 7 58), who played an important part in the
kingdom, during the affairs which terminated in the death of king Yû,
and the removal of the capital from Hâo to Lo. The piece, we may
suppose, is descriptive of things as they were at the court of king Yû.

When the guests first approach the mats <span
id="fr_479"></span>[2](#fn_463), They take their, places on the left and
the right in an orderly manner. The dishes of bamboo and wood are
arranged in rows, With the sauces and kernels displayed in them. The
spirits are mild and good, And they drink, all equally reverent. The
bells and drums are properly arranged <span
id="fr_480"></span>[3](#fn_464), And they raise their pledge-cups with
order and ease <span id="fr_481"></span>[4](#fn_465). (Then) the great

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

target is set up; The bows and arrows are made ready for the shooting.
The archers are arranged in classes; 'Show your skill in shooting,' (it
is said by one). 'I shall hit that mark' (is the response), 'And pray
you to drink the cup <span id="fr_482"></span>[1](#fn_466)'.

The dancers move with their flutes to the notes of the organ and drum,
While all the instruments perform in harmony. All this is done to please
the meritorious ancestors, Along with the observance of all ceremonies.
When all the ceremonies have been fully performed, Grandly and fully,
(The personators of the dead say), 'We confer on you great blessings,
And may your descendants, also be happy!' These are happy and delighted,
And each of them exerts his ability. A guest <span
id="fr_483"></span>[2](#fn_467) draws the spirits; An attendant enters
again with a cup, And fills it,--the cup of rest <span
id="fr_484"></span>[2](#fn_467). Thus are performed your seasonal
ceremonies <span id="fr_485"></span>[3](#fn_468).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_463"></span>[374:2](sbe03125.htm#fr_479) The mats were
spread on the floor, and also the viands of the feast. Chairs and tables
were not used in that early time.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[374:3](sbe03125.htm#fr_480) The archery took
place in the open court, beneath the hall or raised apartment, where the
entertainment was given. Near the steps leading up to the hall was the
regular place for the bells and drums, but it was necessary now to
remove them more on one side, to leave the ground clear for the archers.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[374:4](sbe03125.htm#fr_481) The host first
presented a cup to the guest, which the latter drank, and then be
returned a cup to the host. After this preliminary <span
id="page_375">p. 375</span> ceremony, the company all drank to one
another,--'took up their cups,' as it is here expressed.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[375:1](sbe03125.htm#fr_482) Each defeated
archer was obliged to drink a large cup of spirits as a penalty.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[375:2](sbe03125.htm#fr_484) This guest was, it
is supposed, the eldest of all the scions of the royal House present on
the occasion. At this point, he presented a cup to the chief among the
personators of the ancestors, and received one in return. He then
proceeded to draw more spirits from one of the vases of supply, and an
attendant came in and filled other cups,--we may suppose for all the
other personators. This was called 'the cup of repose or comfort;' and
the sacrifice was thus concluded,--in all sobriety and decency.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[375:3](sbe03125.htm#fr_485) The three stanzas
that follow this, graphically descriptive of the drunken revel, are said
to belong to the feast of the royal relatives that followed the
conclusion of the sacrificial service, and is called 'the second
blessing' in the sixth ode of the preceding decade. This opinion
probably is correct; but as the piece does not itself say so, and
because of the absence from the text of religious sentiments, I have not
given the stanzas here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 5, Stanzas 1 and 2. The Po Hwâ](sbe03126)
