[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03047)  [Next](sbe03049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XXI. THE *K*ÜN-*KH*ĂN.

*K*ÜN-*KH*ĂN was the successor in 'the eastern capital' of the duke of
*K*âu, who has now passed off the stage of the Shû, which he occupied so
long. Between 'the Officers of *K*âu' and this Book, there were, when
the Shû was complete, two others, which are both lost. We must greatly
deplore the loss of the second of them, for it contained an account of
the death of the duke of *K*âu, and an announcement made by king *Kh*ăng
by his bier.

Who *K*ün-*kh*ăn, the charge to whom on entering on his important
government is here preserved, really was, we are not informed. Some have
supposed that he was a son of the duke of *K*âu; but we may be sure,
from the analogy of other charges, that if he had been so, the fact
would have been alluded to in the text. *K*ün-*kh*ăn might be translated
'the prince *Kh*ăn,' like *K*ün Shih in the title of Book xvi, but we
know nothing of any territory with which he was invested.

The following summary of the contents is given by a Chinese
critic:--'The whole Book may be divided into three chapters. The first
relates *K*ün-*kh*ăn's appointment to the government of the eastern
capital. The concluding words, "Be reverent,"

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

are emphatic, and give the key-note to all that follows. The second
chapter enjoins on him to exert himself to illustrate the lessons of the
duke of *K*âu, and thereby transform the people of Yin. The third
requires him to give full development to those lessons, and instances
various particulars in which his doing so would appear;--all
illustrative of the command at the commencement, that he should be
reverent.'

1\. The king spake to the following effect:--'*K*ün-*kh*ăn, it is you
who are possessed of excellent virtue, filial and respectful. Being
filial, and friendly with your brethren, you can display these qualities
in the exercise of government. I appoint you to rule this eastern
border. Be reverent.'

2\. 'Formerly, the duke of *K*âu acted as teacher and guardian of the
myriads of the people, who cherish (the remembrance of) his virtue. Go
and with sedulous care enter upon his charge; act in accordance with his
regular ways, and exert yourself to illustrate his lessons;--so shall
the people be regulated. I have heard that he said, "Perfect government
has a piercing fragrance, and influences the spiritual intelligences.\*
It is not the millet which has the piercing fragrance; it is bright
virtue." Do you make this lesson of the duke of *K*âu your rule, being
diligent from day to day, and not presuming to indulge in luxurious
ease. Ordinary men, while they have not yet seen a sage, (are full of
desire) as if they should never get a sight of him; and after they have
seen him, they are still unable to follow him. Be cautioned by this! You
are the wind; the inferior people are the grass. In revolving the plans
of your government, never hesitate to acknowledge the difficulty of the
subject. Some things have to be abolished, and some new things to be
enacted;--

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

going out and coming in, seek the judgment of your people about them,
and, when there is a general agreement, exert your own powers of
reflection. When you have any good plans or counsels, enter and lay them
before your sovereign in the palace. Thereafter, when you are acting
abroad in accordance with them, say, "This plan or this view is all due
to our sovereign." Oh! if all ministers were to act thus, how excellent
would they be, and how distinguished!'

3\. The king said, '*K*ün-*kh*ăn, do you give their full development to
the great lessons of the duke of *K*âu. Do not make use of your power to
exercise oppression; do not make use of the laws to practise extortion.
Be gentle, but with strictness of rule. Promote harmony by the display
of an easy forbearance.

'When any of the people of Yin are amenable to punishment, if I say
"Punish," do not you therefore punish; and if I say "Spare," do not you
therefore spare. Seek the due middle course. Those who are disobedient
to your government, and uninfluenced by your instructions, you will
punish, remembering that the end of punishment is to make an end of
punishing. Those who are inured to villainy and treachery, those who
violate the regular duties of society, and those who introduce disorder
into the public manners:--those three classes you will not spare, though
their particular offences be but small.

'Do not cherish anger against the obstinate, and dislike them. Seek not
every quality in one individual. You must have patience, and you will be
successful; have forbearance, and your virtue will

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

be great. Mark those who discharge their duties well, and also mark
those who do not do so, (and distinguish them from one another.) Advance
the good, to induce those who may not be so to follow (their example).

'The people are born good, and are changed by (external) things,\* so
that they resist what their superiors command, and follow what they
(themselves) love. Do you but reverently observe the statutes, and they
will be found in (the way of) virtue; they will thus all be changed, and
truly advance to a great degree of excellence. Then shall I, the One
man, receive much happiness, and your excellent services will be famous
through long ages!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXII. The Testamentary Charge](sbe03049)
