[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03147)  [Next](sbe03149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 5, STANZAS 1, 2, AND 4. THE SUNG KÂO.

#### CELEBRATING THE APPOINTMENT BY KING HSÜAN OF A RELATIVE TO BE THE MARQUIS OF SHĂN, AND DEFENDER OF THE SOUTHERN BORDER OF THE KINGDOM, WITH THE ARRANGEMENTS MADE FOR HIS ENTERING ON HIS CHARGE.

That the king who appears in this piece was king Hsüan is sufficiently
established. He appears in it commissioning 'his great uncle,' an elder
brother, that is, of his mother, to go and rule, as marquis of Shăn, and
chief or president of the states in the south of the kingdom, to defend
the borders against the encroaching hordes of the south, headed by the
princes of Khû, whose lords bad been rebellious against the middle
states even in the time of the Shang dynasty;--see the last of the
Sacrificial Odes of Shang.

Grandly lofty are the mountains, With their large masses reaching to the
heavens. From those mountains was sent down a spirit, Who produced the
birth of (the princes of) Fû and Shăn <span
id="fr_604"></span>[1](#fn_584). Fû and

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shăn Are the
support of *K*âu, Screens to all the states, Diffusing (their influence)
over the four quarters of the kingdom.

Full of activity is the chief of Shăn, And the king would employ him to
continue the services (of his fathers), With his capital in Hsieh <span
id="fr_605"></span>[1](#fn_585), Where he should be a pattern to the
states of the south. The king gave charge to the earl of Shâo, To
arrange all about the residence of the chief of Shăn, Where he should do
what was necessary for the regions of the south, And where his posterity
might maintain his merit.

Of the services of the chief of Shăn The foundation was laid by the earl
of Shâo, Who first built the walls (of his city), And then completed his
ancestral temple <span id="fr_606"></span>[2](#fn_586). When the temple
was completed, wide and grand, The king conferred on the chief of Shâo
Four noble steeds, With the hooks for the trappings of the breast-bands,
glittering bright <span id="fr_607"></span>[3](#fn_587).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_584"></span>[423:1](sbe03148.htm#fr_604) Shăn was a small
marquisate, a part of what is the present department of Nan-yang,
Ho-nan. Fû, which was also called Lü, was another small territory, not
far from Shan. The princes of both were *K*iangs, descended from the
chief minister of Yâo, called in the first Book of the Shû, 'the Four
Mountains.' Other states were ruled by his descendants, particularly the
great state of *Kh*î. When it is said here that a spirit was sent down
from the great mountains, and produced the birth of (the princes of) Fû
and Shăn, we have, probably, a legendary tradition concerning the birth
of Yâo's minister, which was current among all his descendants; and with
which we may compare the legends that have come under our notice about
the supernatural births of the ancestors of the founders of the Houses
of Shang and *K*âu. The character for <span id="page_424">p. 424</span>
'mountains' in lines 1 and 3 is the same that occurs in the title of
Yâo's minister. On the statement about the mountains sending 'down a
spirit, Hwang Hsün, a critic of the Sung dynasty, says that it is merely
a personification of the poet, to show how high Heaven had a mind to
revive the fortunes of *K*âu, and that we need not trouble ourselves
about whether there was such a spirit or not!

<span id="fn_585"></span>[424:1](sbe03148.htm#fr_605) Hsieh was in the
present Făng *K*âu of the department of Nan-yang.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[424:2](sbe03148.htm#fr_606) Compare with this
the account given, in ode 3 of the first decade, of the settling of 'the
ancient duke Than-fû' in the plain of *K*âu. Here, as there, the great
religious edifice, the ancestral temple, takes precedence of all other
buildings in the new city.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[424:3](sbe03148.htm#fr_607) The steeds with
their equipments were tokens of the royal favour, usually granted on
occasions of investiture. The. conferring of them was followed
immediately by the departure of the newly-invested prince to his charge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 6, Stanzas 1 and 7. The *K*ăng Min](sbe03149)
