[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03138)  [Next](sbe03140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 4. THE HÛ Î.

#### AN ODE APPROPRIATE TO THE FEAST GIVEN TO THE PERSONATORS OF THE DEPARTED, ON THE DAY AFTER THE SACRIFICE IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE.

This supplementary sacrifice on the day after the principal service in
the temple appeared in the ninth Book of the fourth Part of the Shû; and
of the feast after it to the personators of the dead I have spoken on
[p. 301](sbe03063.htm#page_301).

The wild-ducks and widgeons are on the *K*ing <span
id="fr_566"></span>[3](#fn_546);

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The personators of
your ancestors feast and are happy. Your spirits are clear; Your viands
are fragrant. The personators of your ancestors feast and drink;--Their
happiness and dignity are made complete.

The wild-ducks and widgeons are on the sand; The personators of the dead
enjoy the feast, their appropriate tribute. Your spirits are abundant;
Your viands are good. The personators of your ancestors feast and
drink;--Happiness and dignity lend them their aids.

The wild-ducks and widgeons are on the islets; The personators of your
ancestors feast and enjoy themselves. Your spirits are strained; Your
viands are in slices. The personators of your ancestors feast and
drink;--Happiness and dignity descend on them.

The wild-ducks and widgeons are where the waters meet; The personators
of your ancestors feast and are honoured. The feast is spread in the
ancestral temple. The place where happiness and dignity descend. The
personators of your ancestors feast and drink;--Their happiness and
dignity are at the highest point.

The wild-ducks and widgeons are in the gorge; The personators of your
ancestors rest, full of complacency. The fine spirits are delicious;
Your meat, roast and broiled, is fragrant. The personators of your
ancestors feast and drink;--No troubles will be theirs after this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_546"></span>[402:3](sbe03139.htm#fr_566) The *K*ing is an
affluent of the Wei, not far from Wû's capital of Hâo. The birds,
feeling at home in its waters, on its sands, &c., serve to introduce the
parties feasted, in a situation where they might relax from the gravity
of the preceding day, and be happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 5, Stanza 1. The *K*iâ Lo](sbe03140)
