[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03106)  [Next](sbe03108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fourth Decade, or that of Khî fû.

#### ODE 5, STANZAS 5 TO 9. THE SZE KAN.

#### THE SZE KAN WAS, PROBABLY MADE FOR A FESTIVAL ON THE COMPLETION OF A PALACE; CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF IT, AND PROCEEDING TO GOOD WISHES FOR THE BUILDER AND HIS POSTERITY. THE STANZAS HERE GIVEN SHOW HOW DIVINATION WAS RESORTED TO FOR THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS.

The piece is referred to the time of king Hsüan (B.C. 827 to 782).

Level and smooth is the courtyard, And lofty are the pillars around it.
Pleasant is the exposure of the chamber to the light, And deep and wide
are its recesses. Here will our noble lord repose.

On the rush-mat below and that of fine bamboos above it, May he repose
in slumber! May he sleep

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

and awake, (Saying), 'Divine for me my dreams <span
id="fr_422"></span>[1](#fn_408). What dreams are lucky? They have been
of bears and grisly bears; They have been of cobras and (other) snakes.'

The chief diviner will divine them. 'The bears and grisly bears Are the
auspicious intimations of sons; The cobras and (other) snakes Are the
auspicious intimations of daughters <span
id="fr_423"></span>[2](#fn_409).'

Sons shall be born to him:--They will be put to sleep on couches; They
will be clothed in robes; They will have sceptres to play with; Their
cry will be loud. They will be (hereafter) resplendent with red
knee-covers, The (future) king, the princes of the land.

Daughters shall be born to him:--They will be put to sleep on the
ground; They will be clothed with wrappers; They will have tiles to play
with <span id="fr_424"></span>[3](#fn_410). It will be theirs neither to
do wrong nor to do good <span id="fr_425"></span>[4](#fn_411). Only
about the spirits and the food will

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

they have to think, And to cause no sorrow to their parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_408"></span>[350:1](sbe03107.htm#fr_422) In the Official
Book of *K*âu, ch. 24, mention is made of the Diviner of Dreams and his
duties:--He had to consider the season of the year when a dream
occurred, the day of the cycle, and the then predominant influence of
the two powers of nature. By the positions of the sun, moon, and planets
in the zodiacal spaces he could determine whether any one of the six
classes of dreams was lucky or unlucky. Those six classes were ordinary
and regular dreams, terrible dreams, dreams of thought, dreams in
waking, dreams of joy, and dreams of fear.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[350:2](sbe03107.htm#fr_423) The boy would have
a sceptre, a symbol of dignity, to play with; the girl, a tile, the
symbol of woman's work, as, sitting with a tile on her knee, she twists
the threads of hemp.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[350:3](sbe03107.htm#fr_424) That is, the red
apron of a king and of the prince of a state.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[350:4](sbe03107.htm#fr_425) The woman has only
to be obedient. That is her whole duty, The line does not mean, as it
has been said, that 'she is incapable of good or evil;' but it is not
her part to take the initiative even in what is good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 6, Stanza 4. The Wû Yang](sbe03108)
