[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03034)  [Next](sbe03036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VIII. THE CHARGE TO THE COUNT OF WEI.

THE count of Wei was the principal character in the eleventh Book of the
last Part, from which it appeared that he was a brother of the tyrant
*K*âu-hsin. We saw how his friends advised him to withdraw from the
court of Shang, and save

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

himself from the destruction that was impending over their House. He had
done so, and king Wû had probably continued him in the possession of his
appanage of Wei, while Wû-*k*ăng, the son of the tyrant, had been
spared, and entrusted with the duty of continuing the sacrifices to the
great Thang and the other sovereigns of the House of Shang. Now that
Wû-*k*ăng has been punished with death for his rebellion, the duke of
*K*âu summons the count of Wei to court, and in the name of king *Kh*ăng
invests him with the dukedom of Sung, corresponding to the present
department of Kwei-teh, Ho-nan, there to be the representative of the
line of the departed kings of Shang.

The king speaks to the following effect:--'Ho! eldest son of the king of
Yin, examining into antiquity, (I find) that the honouring of the
virtuous (belongs to their descendants) Who resemble them in worth, and
(I appoint) you to continue the line of the kings your ancestors,
observing their ceremonies and taking care of their various relics. Come
(also) as a guest to our royal House <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_177), and enjoy the prosperity of our
kingdom, for ever and ever without end.

'Oh! your ancestor, Thang the Successful, was reverent and sage, (with a
virtue) vast and deep. The favour and help of great Heaven lighted upon
him, and he grandly received its appointment, to soothe the people by
his gentleness, and remove the wicked oppressions from which they were
suffering.\* His achievements affected his age, and his virtue was
transmitted to his posterity. And you are the one who pursue and
cultivate his plans;--this praise

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

has belonged to you for long. Reverently and carefully have you
discharged your filial duties; gravely and respectfully you behave to
spirits and to men.\* I admire your virtue, and pronounce it great and
not to be forgotten. God will always enjoy your offerings; the people
will be reverently harmonious (under your sway).\* I raise you therefore
to the rank of high duke, to rule this eastern part of our great
land <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_178).

'Be reverent. Go and diffuse abroad your instructions. Be carefully
observant of your robes and (other accompaniments of) your
appointment <span id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_179); follow and observe
the proper statutes;--so as to prove a bulwark to the royal House.
Enlarge (the fame of) your meritorious ancestor; be a law to your
people;--so as for ever to preserve your dignity. (So also) shall you be
a help to me, the One man; future ages will enjoy (the benefit of) your
virtue; all the states will take you for a pattern;--and thus you will
make our dynasty of *K*âu never weary of you.

Oh! go, and be prosperous. Do not disregard my charge.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[162:1](sbe03035.htm#fr_183) Under the dynasty
of *K*âu, the representatives of the two previous dynasties of Shang and
Hsiâ were distinguished above the other princes of the kingdom, and
denominated 'guests' of the sovereign, coming to his court and assisting
in the services in his ancestral temple, nearly on a footing of equality
with him.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[163:1](sbe03035.htm#fr_184) Sung lay east from
Făng and Hâo, the capitals of Wăn and Wû, which were in the present
department of Hsî-an, Shen-hsî.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[163:2](sbe03035.htm#fr_185) Meaning probably
that he was to bear in mind that, however illustrious his descent, he
was still a subject of the king of *K*âu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX. The Announcement to the Prince of Khang](sbe03036)
