[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03030)  [Next](sbe03032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK IV. THE GREAT PLAN.

THE Great Plan, ordinarily classed among the 'Counsels' or among the
'Instructions' of the Shû, might as well have a place among the
'Canons.' It is a remarkable production, and though it appears among the
documents of the *K*âu dynasty, there is claimed for the substance of it
a much greater antiquity. According to the introductory sentences, king
Wû, the founder of *K*âu, obtained it from the count of *Kh*î in the
same year, the thirteenth of his dignity as Chief of the West, that he
took the field against the tyrant of Shang. The count of *Kh*î, it is
understood, was the Grand-Master at the court of Shang, who appears in
the concluding Book of the last Part. He says there, that, when ruin
overtook the House of Shang, he would not be the servant of another
dynasty. Accordingly, he refused to acknowledge the sovereignty of king
Wû, who had delivered him from the prison in which he had been confined
by *K*âu-hsin, and fled--or purposed perhaps to flee to Corea. Wû
respected and admired his fidelity to the fallen dynasty, and invested
him with that territory. He then, it is said, felt constrained to appear
at the court of *K*âu, when the king consulted

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

him on the principles of government; and the result was that he
communicated to him this Great Plan, with its nine divisions. When we
read the Book, we see that it belonged originally to the time of Hsiâ,
and that the larger portion of it should be ascribed to the Great Yü,
and was as old, indeed, as the reign of Yâo. How it had come into the
possession of the count of *Kh*î we cannot tell. Nor does it appear how
far the language of it should be ascribed to him. That the larger
portion of it had come down from the times of Hsiâ is not improbable.
The use of the number nine and other numbers, and the naming of the
various divisions of the Plan, are in harmony with Yü's style and
practice in his Counsels in the second Part of our Classic, and in the
second Part also of the Tribute of Yü. We are told in the introductory
sentences, that Heaven or God gave the Plan with its divisions to Yü. To
explain the way in which the gift was made, there is a tradition about a
mysterious tortoise that appeared in the waters of the Lo, bearing
well-defined marks on its back from one to nine, and that thereupon Yü
determined the meaning of those marks and of their numbers, and
completed the nine divisions of the Plan. Of this legend, however, it is
not necessary to speak in connexion with the Shû, which does not mention
it; it will come up in connexion with the translation of the Yî King.

The Great Plan means the great model for the government of the
nation,--the method by which the people may be rendered happy and
tranquil, in harmony with their condition, through the perfect character
of the king, and his perfect administration of government.

P. Gaubil says that the Book is a treatise at once of physics,
astrology, divination, morals, politics, and religion, and that it has a
sufficiently close resemblance to the work of Ocellus the Lucanian.
There is a shadowy resemblance between the Great Plan and the curious
specimen of Pythagorean doctrine which we have in the treatise on the
Universe; but the dissimilarities are still greater and more numerous.
More especially are the differences between the Greek mind, speculative,
and the Chinese mind, practical, apparent in the two works. Where the
Chinese writer loses himself in the sheerest follies of his imagining,
he yet gropes about for a rule to be of use in the conduct of human
affairs.

The whole of the treatise is divided into three chapters. The first is
introductory, and relates bow the Great Plan with its

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

nine divisions was first made known to Yü, and came at this time to be
communicated to king Wû; the second contains the names of the nine
divisions of the Plan; and in the third we have a description of the
several divisions. 'The whole,' says a Chinese writer, 'exhibits the
great model for the government of the nation.' The fifth or middle
division on royal perfection is the central one of the whole, about
which the Book revolves. The four divisions that precede it show how
this royal perfection is to be accomplished, and the four that follow
show how it is to be maintained.

1\. In the thirteenth year <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_145), the
king went to enquire of the count of *Kh*î, and said to him, Oh! count
of *Kh*î, Heaven, (working) unseen, secures the tranquillity of the
lower people, aiding them to be in harmony with their condition <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_146). I do not know how the unvarying
principles (of its method in doing so) should be set forth in due
order.'

The count of *Kh*î thereupon replied, 'I have heard that in old time
Khwăn dammed up the inundating waters, and thereby threw into disorder
the arrangement of the five elements. God was consequently roused to
anger, and did not give him the Great Plan with its nine divisions, and
thus the unvarying principles (of Heaven's method) were allowed to go to
ruin.\* Khwăn was therefore

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

kept a prisoner till his death, and his son Yü rose up (and entered on
the same undertaking). To him Heaven gave the Great Plan with its nine
divisions, and the unvarying principles (of its method) were set forth
in their due order.'\*

2\. '(Of those divisions) the first is called "the five elements;" the
second, "reverent attention to the five (personal) matters;" the third,
"earnest devotion to the eight (objects of) government;" the fourth,
"the harmonious use of the five dividers of time;" the fifth, "the
establishment and use of royal perfection;" the sixth, "the
discriminating use of the three virtues;" the seventh, "the intelligent
use of (the means for) the examination of doubts;" the eighth, "the
thoughtful use of the various verifications;" the ninth, "the hortatory
use of the five (sources of) happiness, and the awing use of the six
(occasions of) Suffering."'

3\. i. 'First, of the five elements <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_147).--The first is

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

water; the second is fire; the third, wood; the fourth, metal; and the
fifth, earth. (The nature of) water is to soak and descend; of fire, to
blaze and ascend; of wood, to be crooked and straight; of metal, to
yield and change; while (that of) earth is seen in seed-sowing and
in-gathering. That which soaks and descends becomes salt; that which
blazes and ascends becomes bitter; that which is crooked and straight
becomes sour; that which yields and changes becomes acrid; and from
seed-sowing and in-gathering comes sweetness.'

ii\. 'Second, of the five (personal) matters <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_148).--The first is the bodily demeanour; the
second, speech; the third, seeing; the fourth, hearing; the fifth,
thinking. (The virtue of) the bodily appearance is respectfulness; of
speech, accordance (with reason); of seeing, clearness; of hearing
distinctness; of thinking, perspicaciousness. The respectfulness becomes
manifest in gravity; accordance (with reason), in orderliness; the
clearness, in wisdom; the distinctness, in deliberation; and the
perspicaciousness, in sageness.'

iii\. 'Third, of the eight (objects of) government <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_149).--

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The first is food;
the second, wealth and articles of convenience; the third, sacrifices;
the fourth, (the business of) the Minister of Works; the fifth, (that
of) the Minister of Instruction; the sixth, (that of) the Minister of
Crime; the seventh, the observances, to be paid to guests; the eighth,
the army.'

iv\. 'Fourth, of the five dividers of time <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_150).--The first is the year (or the planet
Jupiter); the second, the moon; the third, the sun; the fourth, the
stars and planets, and the zodiacal spaces; and the fifth, the
calendaric calculations.'

v\. 'Fifth, of royal perfection <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_151).-The sovereign, having established (in
himself) the highest degree and pattern of excellence, concentrates in
his own person the five (sources of) happiness, and proceeds to diffuse
them, and give them to the multitudes of the people. Then they, on their
part, embodying your perfection, will give it (back) to you, and secure
the preservation of it. Among all the multitudes of the people there
will be no unlawful confederacies, and among men (in office) there will
be no bad and selfish combinations;--let the sovereign

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

establish in (himself) the highest degree and pattern of excellence.

'Among all the multitudes of the people there will be those who have
ability to plan and to act, and who keep themselves (from evil):--do you
keep such in mind; and there will be those who, not coming up to the
highest point of excellence, yet do not involve themselves in evil:--let
the sovereign receive such. And when a placid satisfaction appears in
their countenances, and they say, "Our love is fixed on virtue," do you
then confer favours on them;--those men will in this way advance to the
perfection of the sovereign. Do not let him oppress the friendless and
childless, nor let him fear the high and distinguished. When men (in
office) have ability and administrative power, let them be made still
more to cultivate their conduct; and the prosperity of the country will
be promoted. All (such) right men, having a competency, will go on in
goodness. If you cannot cause them to have what they love in their
families, they will forthwith proceed to be guilty of crime. As to those
who have not the love of virtue, although you confer favours (and
emoluments) on them, they will (only) involve you in the of employing
the evil

'Without deflection, without unevenness,  
Pursue the royal righteousness.  
Without selfish likings,  
Pursue the royal way.  
Without selfish dislikings,  
Pursue the royal path.  
Avoid deflection, avoid partiality;--  
Broad and long is the royal way.  
Avoid partiality, avoid deflection;--  
Level and easy is the royal way.  
Avoid perversity, avoid one-sidedness;--  
Correct and straight is the royal way. <span id="page_144">p.
144</span>  
(Ever) seek for this perfect excellence,  
(Ever) turn to this perfect excellence.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He went on to say,
'This amplification of the royal perfection contains the unchanging
(rule), and is the (great) lesson;--yea, it is the lesson of God.\* All
the multitudes of the people, instructed in this amplification of the
perfect excellence, and carrying it into practice, will thereby
approximate to the glory of the Son of Heaven, and say, "The Son of
Heaven is the parent of the people, and so becomes the sovereign of all
under the sky."'

vi\. 'Sixth, of the three virtues <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_152).--The first is correctness and
straightforwardness; the second, strong rule; and the third, mild rule.
In peace and tranquillity, correctness and straightforwardness (must
sway); in violence and disorder, strong rule; in harmony and order, mild
rule. For the reserved and retiring there should be (the stimulus of)
the strong rule; for the high(-minded) and distinguished, (the restraint
of) the mild rule.

'It belongs only to the sovereign to confer dignities and rewards, to
display the terrors of majesty, and to receive the revenues (of the
kingdom). There should be no such thing as a minister's conferring
dignities or rewards, displaying the terrors of majesty, or receiving
the revenues. Such

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

a thing is injurious to the clans, and fatal to the states (of the
kingdom); smaller affairs are thereby managed in a one-sided and
perverse manner, and the people fall into assumptions and excesses.'

vii\. 'Seventh, of the (means for the) examination of doubts <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_153).--Officers having been chosen and
appointed for divining by the tortoise-shell and the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

stalks of the Achillea, they are to be charged (on occasion) to execute
their duties. (In doing this), they will find (the appearances of) rain,
of clearing up, of cloudiness, of want of connexion, and of crossing;
and the inner and outer diagrams. In all (the indications) are
seven;--five given by the shell, and two by the stalks; and (by means)
of these any errors (in the mind) may be traced out. These officers
having been appointed, when the divination is proceeded with, three men
are to interpret the indications, and the (consenting) words of two of
them are to be followed.\*

'When you have doubts about any great matter, consult with your own
mind; consult with your high ministers and officers; consult with the
common people; consult the tortoise-shell and divining stalks. If you,
the shell, the stalks, the ministers and officers, and the common
people, all agree about a course, this is what is called a great
concord, and the result will be the welfare of your person and good
fortune to your descendants. If you, the shell, and the stalks agree,
while the ministers, and officers, and the common people oppose, the
result will be fortunate. If the ministers and officers, with the shell
and stalks, agree, while you and the common people oppose, the result
will be fortunate. If the common people, the shell, and the stalks
agree, while you, with the ministers and officers, oppose, the result
will be fortunate. If you and the shell agree. while the stalks, with
the ministers and officers, and the common people, oppose, internal
operations will be fortunate, and external undertakings unlucky. When
the shell and stalks are both opposed to the views of men, there will be

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

good fortune in being still, and active operations will be unlucky.'\*

viii\. 'Eighth, of the various verifications <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_154).--They are rain, sunshine, heat, cold,
wind, and seasonableness. When the five come, all complete, and each in
its proper order, (even) the various plants will be richly luxuriant.
Should any one of them be either excessively abundant or excessively
deficient, there will be evil.\*

There are the favourable verifications <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_155):--namely,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

of gravity, which is emblemed by seasonable rain; of orderliness,
emblemed by seasonable sunshine; of wisdom, emblemed by seasonable heat;
of deliberation, emblemed by seasonable cold; and of sageness, emblemed
by seasonable wind, There are (also) the unfavourable
verifications:--namely, of recklessness, emblemed by constant rain; of
assumption, emblemed by constant sunshine; of indolence, emblemed by
constant heat; of hastiness, emblemed by constant cold; and of
stupidity, emblemed by constant wind.'\*

He went on to say, 'The king should examine the (character of the whole)
year; the high ministers and officers (that of) the month; and the
inferior officers (that of) the day. If, throughout the year, the month,
the day, there be an unchanging seasonableness, all the grains will be
matured; the measures of government will be wise, heroic men will stand
forth distinguished; and in the families (of the. people) there will be
peace and prosperity. If, throughout the year, the month, the day, the
seasonableness be interrupted, the various kinds of grain will not be
matured; the measures of government will be dark and unwise; heroic men
will be kept in

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

obscurity; and in the families (of the people) there will be an absence
of repose.

'By the common people the stars should be examined. Some stars love
wind, and some love rain. The courses of the sun and moon give winter
and summer. The way in which the moon follows the stars gives wind and
rain.'

ix\. 'Ninth, of the five (sources of) happiness <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_156).--The first is long life; the second,
riches; the third, soundness of body and serenity of mind; the fourth,
the love of virtue; and the fifth, fulfilling to the end the will (of
Heaven).\* Of the six extreme evils, the first is misfortune shortening
the life; the second, sickness; the third, distress of mind; the fourth,
poverty; the fifth, wickedness; the sixth, weakness <span
id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_157).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[139:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_149) See the
commencement of Book i.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[139:2](sbe03031.htm#fr_150) Khung Ying-tâ of
the Thang dynasty says on this:--'The people have been produced by
supreme Heaven, and both body and soul are Heaven's gift. Men have thus
the material body and the knowing mind, and Heaven further assists them,
helping them to harmonize their lives. The right and the wrong of their
language, the correctness and errors of their conduct, their enjoyment
of clothing and food, the rightness of, their various movements;--all
these things are to be harmonized by what they are endowed with by
Heaven.'

<span id="fn_147"></span>[140:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_151) Gaubil gives here
'les cinq hing,' without translating the Chinese term, English
sinologists have got into the habit of rendering it by 'elements,' but
it hardly seems possible to determine what the Chinese mean by it, We
intend by 'elements' 'the first principles or ingredients of which all
things are composed.' The Pythagoreans, by their four elements of earth,
water, air, and fire, did not intend so much the nature or essence of
material substances, as the forms under which matter is actually
presented to us. The character hsing, meaning 'to move,' 'to be in
action,' shows that the original conception of the Chinese is of a
different nature; and it is said in the Khang-hsî Dictionary, 'The five
hsing move and revolve between heaven and earth, without ever ceasing,
and hence they are named.' The editors of the latest imperial edition of
the Shû say, 'Distributed through the four seasons, they make "the five
dividers of time;" exhibited in prognostications, they give rise to
divination by the tortoise-shell and the reeds; having lodgment in the
human body, they <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> produce "the five
personal matters;" moved by good fortune and bad, they produce "the
various verifications" communicated to organisms, they produce the
different natures, hard and soft, good and evil; working out their
results in the changes of those organisms, they necessitate--here
benevolence and there meanness, here longevity and there early
death:--all these things are from the operation of the five hsing. But
if we speak of them in their simplest and most important character, they
are what mans life depends on, what the people cannot do without.' After
all this, I should still be sorry to be required to say what the five
hsing are.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[141:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_152) These five
'matters' are represented as being in the human person what the five
hsing are in nature. Demeanour is the human correspondency of water,
speech that of fire, &c.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[141:2](sbe03031.htm#fr_153) Medhurst calls the
eight (objects of) government 'the eight <span id="page_142">p.
142</span> regulators,' and Gaubil calls them 'les huit règles du
gouvernement.' The phrase means the eight things to be attended to in
government,--its objects and departments.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[142:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_154) 'The five dividers
of time' are with Medhurst 'the five arrangers,' and with Gaubil 'les
cinq périodes.' This division of the Great Plan is substantially the
same as Yâo's instructions to his astronomers.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[142:2](sbe03031.htm#fr_155) By 'royal
perfection' we are to understand the sovereign when he is, or has made
himself, all that he ought to be. 'Perfection' is 'the utmost point,'
the extreme of excellence, realized in the person of the sovereign,
guiding his administrative measures, and serving as an example and
attractive influence to all below, both ministers and people.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[144:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_156) 'The three
virtues' are not personal attributes of the sovereign, but
characteristics of his rule, the varied manifestations of the perfection
described in the preceding division.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[145:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_157) The practice of
divination for the satisfaction of doubts was thus used in China from
the earliest times. In the Counsels of Yü, p. 50, that sage proposes to
Shun to submit the question of who should be his successor on the throne
to divination, and Shun replies that he had already done so. Gaubil says
that according to the Great Plan divination was only used in doubtful
cases; but if such was the practice of the sages, diviners and
soothsayers must have formed, as they do now, a considerable and
influential class in society. The old methods of divination have fallen
into disuse, and we do not know how far other methods are employed and
sanctioned by the government. Those old methods were by means of the
tortoise-shell, and the stalks of the *Kh*î plant. 'The tortoise,' says
*K*û Hsî, 'after great length of years becomes intelligent; and the
*Kh*î plant will yield, when a hundred years old, a hundred stalks from
one root, and is also a spiritual and intelligent thing. The two
divinations were in reality a questioning of spiritual beings, the plant
and the shell being employed, because of their mysterious intelligence,
to indicate their intimations. The way of divination by the shell was by
the application of fire to scorch it till the indications appeared on
it; and that by the stalks of the plant was to manipulate in a
prescribed way forty-nine of them, eighteen different times, till the
diagrams were formed.'

The outer shell of the tortoise was removed, leaving the inner portion
on which were the marks of the lines of the muscles of the creature.
This was smeared with a black pigment, and, fire being applied beneath,
the pigment was examined, and according as it had been variously dried
by the heat, presented the indications mentioned in the text. The *Kh*î
plant was probably the Achillea millefolium. It is cultivated largely on
the mound over the grave of Confucius. I brought from that two bundles
of the dried stalks in 1873.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[147:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_158) P. Gaubil renders
by 'les apparences' the characters which I have translated 'the various
verifications,' observing that he could not find any word which would
cover the whole extent of the meaning. He says, 'In the present case,
the character signifies meteors, phenomena, appearances, but in such
sort that these have relation to some other things with which they are
connected;--the meteor or phenomenon indicates some good or some evil.
It is a kind of correspondency which is supposed, it appears, to exist
between the ordinary events of the life of men and the constitution of
the air, according to the different seasons;--what is here--and
supposes--I know not what physical speculation of those times. It is
needless to bring to bear on the text the interpretation of the later
Chinese, for they are full of false ideas on the subject of physics. It
may be also that the count of *Kh*î wanted to play the physicist on
points which he did not know! There seems to underlie the words of the
count that feeling of the harmony between the natural and spiritual
worlds, which occurs at times to most men, and strongly affects minds
under deep religious thought or on the wings of poetic rapture, but the
way in which he endeavours to give the subject a practical application
can only be characterised as grotesque.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[147:2](sbe03031.htm#fr_159) Compare with this
what is said above on the second division of the Plan, 'the five
(personal) matters.' It is observed here by Ȝhâi *Kh*ăn, the disciple of
*K*û Hsî, and whose commentary on the Shû has, of all others, the
greatest authority:--'To say that on occasion of such and such a
personal matter being realized, there will be the favourable
verification corresponding <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> to it, or
that, on occasion of the failure of such realization, there will be the
corresponding unfavourable verification, would betray a pertinacious
obtuseness, and show that the speaker was not a man to be talked with on
the mysterious operations of nature. It is not easy to describe the
reciprocal meeting of Heaven and men. The hidden springs touched by
failure and success, and the minute influences that respond to
them:--who can 'know these but the man that has apprehended all truth?'
This is in effect admitting that the statements in the text can be of no
practical use. And the same thing is admitted by the West imperial
editors of the Shû on the use which the text goes on to make of the
thoughtful use of the verifications by the king and others.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[149:1](sbe03031.htm#fr_160) It is hardly
possible to see how this division enters into the scheme of the Great
Plan.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[149:2](sbe03031.htm#fr_161) 'Wickedness' is,
probably, boldness in what is evil, and 'weakness,' feebleness of will
in what is good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V. The Hounds of Lü](sbe03032)
