[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03182)  [Next](sbe03184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III.

## FILIAL PIETY IN THE PRINCES OF STATES.

Above others, and yet free from pride, they dwell on high, without
peril; adhering to economy, and carefully observant of the rules and
laws, they are full, without overflowing. To dwell on high without peril
is the way long to preserve nobility; to be full without overflowing is
the way long to preserve riches. When their riches and nobility do not
leave their persons, then they are able to preserve the altars of their
land and grain, and to secure the harmony of their people and men in
office <span id="fr_660"></span>[4](#fn_640):--this is the filial piety
of the princes of states.

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

It is said in the Book of Poetry <span id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_641),

Be apprehensive, be cautious,  
As if on the brink of a deep abyss,  
As if treading on thin ice!

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_640"></span>[468:4](sbe03183.htm#fr_660) In the Chinese
Repository we have for this:--'They will be able to protect their
ancestral possessions with the produce of their lands;' 'They will make
sure the supreme rank to their families! But it is better to retain the
style of the original. The king had a great altar to the spirit (or
spirits) presiding over the land. The colour of the earth in the Centre
of it was yellow; that on each of its four sides differed according to
the colours assigned to the four quarters of the sky. A portion of this
earth was cut away, and formed the nucleus of a corresponding altar in
each feudal state, according to their position relative to the capital.
The prince of the state had the prerogative of sacrificing there. A
similar rule prevailed for the altars to the spirits presiding over the
grain. So long as a family ruled in a state, so long its chief offered
those sacrifices; and the extinction of the sacrifices was an emphatic
way of describing the ruin and extinction of the ruling House.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[469:1](sbe03183.htm#fr_661) See the Shih, II,
v, ode i, stanza 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Filial Piety in High Ministers and Great
Officers](sbe03184)
