[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03032)  [Next](sbe03034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VI. THE METAL-BOUND COFFER.

A CERTAIN chest or coffer, that was fastened with bands of metal, and in
which important state documents were deposited, plays an important part
among the incidents of the Book, which is therefore called 'the
Metal-bound Coffer.' To what class among the documents of the Shû it
should be assigned is doubtful.

King Wû is very ill, and his death seems imminent. His brother, the duke
of *K*âu, apprehensive of the disasters which such an

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

event would occasion to their infant dynasty, conceives the idea of
dying in his stead, and prays to 'the three kings,' their immediate
progenitors, that he might be taken and king Wû left. Having done so,
and divined that he was heard, he deposits the prayer in the metal-bound
coffer. The king gets well, and the duke is also spared; but live years
later, Wû does die, and is succeeded by his son, a boy only thirteen
years old. Rumours are spread abroad that the duke has designs on the
throne, and he withdraws for a time from the court. At length, in the
third year of the young king, Heaven interposes. He has occasion to open
the coffer, and the prayer of the duke is found. His devotion. to his
brother and to the interests of their family is brought to light. The
boy-monarch weeps because of the unjust suspicions he had harboured, and
welcomes the duke back to court, amid unmistakeable demonstrations of
the approval of Heaven.

The whole narrative is a very pleasing episode in the history of the
times. It divides itself naturally into two chapters:--the first, ending
with the placing the prayer in the coffer; and the second, detailing how
it was brought to light, and the consequences of the discovery.

It is in this Book that we first meet in the Shû with the duke of *K*âu,
a name in Chinese history only second to that of Confucius. He was the
legislator and consolidator of the dynasty of *K*âu, equally mighty in
words and in deeds,--a man of counsel and of action. Confucius regarded
his memory with reverence, and spoke of it as a sign of his own failing
powers, that the duke of *K*âu no longer appeared to him in his dreams.
He was the fourth son of king Wăn; his name was Tan, and he had for his
appanage the territory of *K*âu, where Than-fû, canonized by him as king
Thâi, first placed the seat of his family in B.C. 1327, and hence he is
commonly called 'the duke of *K*âu.'

1\. Two years after the conquest of Shang <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_159), the king fell ill, and was quite
disconsolate. The two (other great) dukes <span
id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_160) said, 'Let us reverently consult

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the tortoise-shell about the king;' but the duke of *K*âu said, 'You
must not so distress our former kings <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_161).' He then took the business on himself,
and reared three altars of earth on the same cleared space; and having
made another altar on the south of these, and facing the north, he took
there his own position. Having put a round symbol of jade (on each of
the three altars), and holding in his bands the lengthened symbol (of
his own rank), he addressed the kings Thâi, *K*î, and Wăn.\*

The (grand) historiographer had written on tablets his prayer, which was
to this effect:--'A. B., your great descendant, is suffering from a
severe and violent disease;--if you three kings have in heaven the
charge of (watching over) him, (Heaven's) great son, let me Tan be a
substitute for his person <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_162). I was
lovingly obedient to my father; I am possessed of many abilities and
arts, which fit me to serve spiritual beings. Your great descendant, on
the other hand, has not so many abilities and arts as I, and is not so
capable of serving spiritual beings. And moreover he was appointed in
the hall of God to extend his aid all over the kingdom, so that he might
establish your descendants in this lower earth. The people of the four
quarters all stand in reverent

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

awe of him. Oh! do not let that precious Heaven-conferred appointment
fall to the ground, and (all the long line of) our former kings will
also have one in whom they can ever rest at our sacrifices.\* I will now
seek for your determination (in this matter) from the great
tortoise-shell. If you grant me (my request), I will take these symbols
and this mace, and return and wait for your orders. If you do not grant
it, I will put them by <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_163).'\*

The duke then divined with the three tortoise-shells, and all were
favourable. He opened with a key the place where the (oracular)
responses were kept, and looked at them, and they also were favourable.
He said, 'According to the form (of the prognostic) the king will take
no injury. I, the little child, have got the renewal of his appointment
from the three kings, by whom a long futurity has been consulted for. I
have now to wait for the issue. They can provide for our One man.'\*

When the duke returned, he placed the tablets (of the prayer) in a
metal-bound coffer <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_164), and next day
the king got better.

2\. (Afterwards), upon the death of king Wû, (the duke's) elder brother,
he of Kwan, and his younger brothers, spread a baseless report through
the kingdom,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

to the effect that the duke would do no good to the (king's) young son.
On this the duke said to the two (other great) dukes, 'If I do not take
the law (to these men), I shall not be able to make my report to the
former kings <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_165).'\*

He resided (accordingly) in the east for two years <span
id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_166), when the criminals were taken (and
brought to justice). Afterwards he made a poem to present to the king,
and called it 'the Owl <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_167).' The King
on his part did not dare to blame the duke.

In the autumn, when the grain was abundant and ripe, but before it was
reaped, Heaven sent a great storm of thunder and lightning, along with
wind, by which the grain was all broken down, and great trees torn up.
The people were greatly terrified; and the king and great officers, all
in their caps of state, proceeded to open the metal-bound coffer and
examine the writings in it, where they found the words of the duke when
he took on himself the business of being a substitute for king Wû. The
two (great) dukes and the king asked the historiographer and all the
other officers (acquainted with the transaction) about the thing, and
they replied, 'It was really thus; but ah! the duke charged us that we

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

should not presume to speak about it.' The king held the writing in his
hand, and wept, saying, 'We need not (now) go on reverently to divine.
Formerly the duke was thus earnest for the royal House, but I, being a
child, did not know it. Now Heaven has moved its terrors to display his
virtue. That I, the little child, (now) go with my new views and
feelings to meet him, is what the rules of propriety of our kingdom
require.'\*

The king then went out to the borders (to meet the duke), when Heaven
sent down rain, and, by virtue of a contrary wind, the grain all rose
up. The two (great) dukes gave orders to the people to take up the trees
that had fallen and replace them. The year then turned out very
fruitful.\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[152:1](sbe03033.htm#fr_164) B.C. 1121.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[152:2](sbe03033.htm#fr_165) These were the
duke of Shâo, to whom the preceding Book is ascribed, and Thâi-kung, who
became the first of the lords of *Kh*î.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[153:1](sbe03033.htm#fr_166) He negatives their
proposal, having determined to take the whole thing on himself.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[153:2](sbe03033.htm#fr_167) Two things are
here plain:--first, that the duke of *K*âu offered himself to die in the
room of his brother; and second, that he thought that his offer might
somehow be accepted through the intervention of the great kings, their
progenitors. He proceeds to give his reasons for making such an offer,
which are sufficiently interesting. It was hardly necessary for Chinese
scholars to take the pains they have done to free the duke from the
charge of boasting in them.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[154:1](sbe03033.htm#fr_168) I suppose that the
divination took place before the altars, and that a different shell was
used to ascertain the mind of each king. The oracular responses would be
a few lines, kept apart by themselves, and consulted, on occasion,
according to certain rules which have not come down to the present day.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[154:2](sbe03033.htm#fr_169) Many scholars
think that it was this coffer which contained the oracles of divination
mentioned above. It may have been so; but I rather suppose it to have
been different, and a special chest in which important archives of the
dynasty, to be referred to on great emergencies, were kept.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[155:1](sbe03033.htm#fr_170) Wû died in B. C.
1116, and was succeeded by his son Sung, who is known in history as king
*Kh*ăng, or 'the Completer.' He was at the time only thirteen years old,
and his uncle, the duke of *K*âu, acted as regent. The jealousy of his
elder brother Hsien, 'lord of Kwan,' and two younger brothers, was
excited, and they spread the rumour which is referred to, and entered
into a conspiracy with the son of the tyrant of Shang, to overthrow the
new dynasty.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[155:2](sbe03033.htm#fr_171) *T*hese two years
were spent in military operations against the revolters.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[155:3](sbe03033.htm#fr_172) See the Book of
Poetry, Part I, xv, Ode 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII. The Great Announcement](sbe03034)
