[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03050)  [Next](sbe03052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XXIV. THE CHARGE TO THE DUKE OF PÎ.

THE king who delivers the charge in this Book was Khang, and the only
events of his reign of twenty-six years of which we have any account in
the Shû and in Sze-mâ *Kh*ien are it and the preceding announcement.

Book xxi relates the appointment of *K*ün-*kh*ăn, by king *Kh*ăng to the
charge which was now, on his death, entrusted to the duke of Pi, who is
mentioned at the commencement of 'the Testamentary Charge.' By the
labours of the duke of *K*âu and *K*ün-*kh*ăn a considerable change had
been effected in the character of the people of Yin, who had been
transferred to the new capital and its neighbourhood; and king Khang now

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

appoints the duke of Pî to enter into and complete their work.

After an introductory paragraph, the charge, in three chapters, occupies
all the rest of the Book. The first of them speaks of what had been
accomplished, and the admirable qualities of the duke which fitted him
to accomplish what remained to be done. The second speaks of the special
measures which were called for by the original character and the altered
character of the people. The third dwells on the importance of the
charge, and stimulates the duke, by various considerations, to address
himself to fulfil it effectually.

1\. In the sixth month of his twelfth year, the day of the new moon's
appearance was Kăng-wû, and on *Z*ăn-shăn, the third day after, the king
walked in the morning from the honoured capital of *K*âu to Făng <span
id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_278), and there, with reference to the
multitudes of *Kh*ăng-*k*âu <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_279), gave
charge to the duke of Pî <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_280) to
protect and regulate the eastern border.

2\. The king spoke to the following effect:--'Oh! Grand-Master, it was
when Wăn and Wû had diffused their great virtue all under heaven, that
they therefore received the appointment which Yin had enjoyed.\* The
duke of *K*âu acted as assistant to my royal predecessors, and
tranquillized and established their kingdom. Cautiously did he deal with
the refractory people of Yin, and removed them to the city of Lo, that
they might be quietly near the royal House, and be transformed by its

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

lessons. Six and thirty years have elapsed <span
id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_281); the generation has been changed; and
manners have altered. Through the four quarters of the land there is no
occasion for anxiety, and I, the One man, enjoy repose.

'The prevailing ways now tend to advancement and now to degeneracy, and
measures of government must be varied according to the manners (of the
time). If you (now) do not manifest your approval of what is good, 'the
people will not be led to stimulate themselves in it. But your virtue, O
duke, is strenuous, and you are cautiously attentive to the smallest
things. You have been helpful to and brightened four reigns <span
id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_282); with deportment all correct leading on
the inferior officers, so that there is not one who does not reverently
take your words as a law. Your admirable merits were many (and great) in
the times of my predecessors; I, the little child, have but to let my
robes hang down, and fold my hands, while I look up for the complete
effect (of your measures).'

3\. The king said, 'Oh! Grand-Master, I now reverently charge you with
the duties of the duke of *K*âu. Go! Signalize the good, separating the
bad from them; give tokens of your approbation in their
neighbourhoods <span id="fr_294"></span>[3](#fn_283), making it ill for
the evil by such distinction of the good, and thus establishing the
influence and reputation (of their virtue). When the people will not
obey your lessons and statutes,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

mark off the boundaries of their hamlets, making them fear (to do evil),
and desire (to do good). Define anew the borders and frontiers, and be
careful to strengthen the guard-posts through the territory, in order to
secure tranquillity (within) the four seas. In measures of government to
be consistent and constant, and in proclamations a combination of
completeness and brevity, and valuable. There should not be the love of
what is extraordinary. Among the customs of Shang was the flattery of
superiors; sharp-tonguedness was the sign of worth. The remains of these
manners are not yet obliterated. Do you, O duke, bear this in mind. I
have heard the saying, "Families which have for generations enjoyed
places of emolument seldom observe the rules of propriety. They become
dissolute, and do violence to virtue, setting themselves in positive
opposition to the way of Heaven. They ruin the formative principles of
good; encourage extravagance and display; and tend to carry all (future
ages) on the same stream with them." Now the officers of Yin had long
relied on the favour which they enjoyed. In the confidence of their
prideful extravagance they extinguished their (sense of) righteousness.
They displayed before men the beauty of their robes,--proud, licentious,
arrogant, and boastful;--the natural issue was that they should end in
being thoroughly bad. Although their lost minds have (in a measure) been
recovered, it is difficult to keep them under proper restraint. If with
their property and wealth they can be brought under the influence of
instruction, they may enjoy lengthened years, virtue, and
righteousness!--these are the great lessons. If you do not follow

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

in dealing with them these lessons of antiquity, wherein will you
instruct them?'

4\. The king said, 'Oh! Grand-Master, the security or the danger of the
kingdom depends on those officers of Yin. If you are not (too) stern
with them nor (too) mild, their virtue will be truly cultivated. The
duke of *K*âu exercised the necessary caution at the beginning (of the
undertaking); *K*ün-*kh*ăn displayed the harmony proper to the middle of
it; and you, O duke, can bring it at last to a successful issue. You
three princes will have been one in aim, and will have equally pursued
the proper way. The penetrating power of your principles, and the good
character of your measures of government, will exert an enriching
influence on the character of the people, so that the wild tribes, with
their coats buttoning on the left <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_284),
will all find their proper support in them, and I, the little child,
will long enjoy much happiness. Thus, O duke, there in *Kh*ăng-*k*âu
will you establish for ever the power (of *K*âu), and you will have an
inexhaustible fame. Your descendants will follow your perfect pattern,
governing accordingly.

'Oh! do not say, "I am unequal to this;" but exert your mind to the
utmost. Do not say, "The people are few;" but attend carefully to your
business. Reverently follow the accomplished achievements of the former
kings, and complete the excellence of the government of your
predecessors.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[246:1](sbe03051.htm#fr_289) That is, he went
from Hâo, founded by king Wû, to Făng the capital of Wăn. The king
wished to give his charge in the temple of king Wăn, because the duke of
Pî had been one of his ministers.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[246:2](sbe03051.htm#fr_290) *Kh*ăng-*k*âu was
a name of the new or 'lower' capital of Lo, perhaps as giving
'completion,' or full establishment to the dynasty.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[246:3](sbe03051.htm#fr_291) The duke of Pî had
succeeded the duke of *K*âu, in the office of Grand-Master, under king
*Kh*ăng.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[247:1](sbe03051.htm#fr_292) Probably, from the
death of the duke of *K*âu.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[247:2](sbe03051.htm#fr_293) Those of Wăn, Wû,
*Kh*ăng, and the existing reign of *Kh*ăng.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[247:3](sbe03051.htm#fr_294) Setting up, that
is, some conspicuous monument, with an inscription testifying his
approbation. All over China, at the present day, such testimonials are
met with.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[249:1](sbe03051.htm#fr_295) Confucius once
praised Kwan *K*ung, a great minister of *Kh*î, in the seventh century
B.C., for his services against the wild tribes of his time, saying, that
but for him they in China would be wearing their hair dishevelled, and
buttoning the lappets of their coats on the left side. See Analects,
XIV, xviii. The long robes and jackets of the Chinese generally, stretch
over on the right side of the chest, and are there buttoned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXV. The *K*ün-yâ](sbe03052)
