[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim04)  [Next](sim06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

# GÉHA AIDS A DESERTED BOY

### \[Told by John Jimison\]

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|           |                      |
|-----------|----------------------|
| GÉHA      | Wind                 |
| NYAGWAIHE | The Ancient of Bears |

</div>

 

IN a cabin at the edge of a village lived a grandmother and her
grandson. The grandmother was old and the grandson was young and they
were so poor that they ate scraps given them by their neighbors.

Once, when a hunting party was starting off, the little boy followed it.
The hunters traveled five days, then camped and built a bark hut.

The boy was too young to hunt; he went out with the men but never killed
anything. They called him OTHWÉNSAWÉNHDE from the part of a deer they
threw out for him to eat--"the small liver by the side of the large
one."

When the hunters were ready to start for home, they agreed to leave the
boy, not letting him know that they were going; they wanted to travel
fast.

One day when he came back to the hut, the boy found only the pile of
hair left from the skins they had dressed. The men had taken everything
and gone. The child didn't know the way home.

That night he slept on the pile of hair; the next morning be found the
chin bone of a deer and getting out the marrow ate it. When it was night
again, he heard somebody coming; the door opened, and a man said, "Well,
OTHWÉNSAWÉNHDE, you think you are going to die, but

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

you are not. Get your knife and put it on the stump outside the door,
and in the morning go and bring it in. You must hunt, to-morrow." The
stranger, who was GÉHA (Wind), went away.

The boy had an old basswood knife; he carried it out and put it on the
stump. Early in the morning he went to the stump and there he found a
new knife. He took his bow and arrow and knife and went into the woods.
He saw a deer, ran after it, overtook it and killed it with his knife.
Then he threw his bow and arrow away and afterward when hunting used his
knife. He killed large game and had plenty of meat.

One night he heard somebody coming, then a man pushed open the door, and
said, calling him by name, "I am here to tell you that NYAGWAIHE is
coming to kill you. To-night put your knife on the stump outside, get it
in the morning and go to the top of the tall elm tree at the end of the
hut; hide in the branches and wait. NYAGWAIHE will climb the tree and
look over into the hut to see if you are there. When he is coming down
backwards, stick your knife into a small white spot in his right hind
foot; he will fall to the ground, dead. Then pile up wood around the
body and burn it."

GÉHA went out.

The boy put his knife on the stump and in the morning the old knife was
gone and a larger and longer knife was in its place. He picked up the
knife and climbing the tree hid in the branches. Just at daybreak he
heard a terrible roar, and right away NYAGWAIHE was climbing the tree.
When he got to the top, he looked into the smoke-hole of the hut, and
said, "There is a fire; the boy must be there," and he started down the
tree.

The boy saw the white spot and stuck his knife into it; NYAGWAIHE fell
to the ground, dead.

That night, just as the boy was going to sleep, he heard somebody
coming. GÉHA opened the door, and said, "I came to tell you that those
hunters who left you here are starving. Ten days from now they will come
back to the hut. You must be kind to them. Don't feel proud or boast of
your swiftness. You felt proud, that is why NYAGWAIHE came to destroy
you,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"Don't say that there is no one who can outrun you, When they come tell
them to help themselves to the meat you have dried. When they are ready
to go home, go with them; tell every man to take as much meat as he can
carry. Put your knife on the stump."

GÉHA went away. The boy put his knife, which was made of basswood, on
the stump. In the morning the knife was shorter and smaller.

During the next nine days the boy killed many deer, The tenth day he
stayed in the hut, watching and listening. At midday the hunters came.
When they saw how much; meat the boy had, they asked forgiveness. He
told them to eat as much meat as they wanted, then take as much home as
each man could carry.

They took half of the meat. The boy packed up the other half, shook it
till it was as light a pack as any one of the men was carrying, then
started on behind them.

When they got back to the village, the boy went to his grandmother's
house and threw down his pack. That minute it came to its natural size.

"Oh," cried his grandmother, "I am happy now. The hunters said you were
lost in the woods. But you are back and have brought plenty of meat."

"Go, grandmother," said the boy, "and ask all the women to come and get
as much meat as they can carry away."

The women came and carried away many loads of meat, but the meat in the
house wasn't diminished. There seemed to be as much as before any was
taken.

Now a chief in the East challenged the chief of the village to run a
race; whichever side was beaten all the men on that side would lose
their lives.

The chief called the people together to decide on a runner. The boy
said, "I will run with the man you choose and you can decide which is
the better runner."

The chief was pleased. He chose a man and the two stood apart. Other men
also volunteered to run. The chief raised his hand, then dropped it, and
the runners started, that minute the boy was out of sight, then off at
the end of the opening a small dark object was seen. The other runner
was only half way across the opening

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

when the boy was back at the starting place. Then he began to boast that
nobody could outrun him; he forgot GÉHA's warning.

There was a valley that went across the world; that valley was to be the
race course. At the edge of the world was a rock that stood up like the
trunk of a huge tree. The rock was white flint and it shone brightly;
there was no other rock like it. The runner who reached the rock was to
bring back a chip of it.

The runner for the challenging chief was tall and thin. At midday the
sign was given and the runners started--the boy ran on the ground, his
opponent ran in the air.

The boy used his full power and soon came back with a piece of the stone
in his hand. After a long time the other runner came--the challenging
chief and his men lost their heads.

The boy was proud and boastful. That night, just as he was falling
asleep, he heard somebody coming. The door opened and a man said, "Come
out, I want to talk to you."

He went out.

"I challenge you to a foot race," said the man. "You must wager the
heads of all the people of the village, except yourself, against my
head. I have no people. We will start at daylight and run till the sun
reaches the middle of the Blue."

"Very well," said the boy.

The man disappeared. The boy told his grandmother what had happened and
she started off to notify the people that their heads had been put up as
a wager. While she was gone GÉHA came to the boy, and said, "I warned
you not to boast and told you what would happen if you did. Now you must
do your best or you will be beaten. You must help yourself. I am going
home."

The people assembled and the challenger came. Just as the sun rose, word
was given and the runners started. As the challenger ran he threw up so
much dirt that the boy was thrown back, and he fell. The people couldn't
see the runner; but off in the distance was a NYAGWAIHE.

As the boy fell, GÉHA was there, and said, "Get up and start! Help
yourself and I'll help you."

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The boy ran to the first knoll, looked but didn't see his opponent,
reached the second knoll and saw him on a knoll far ahead, then saw him
on the fourth knoll.

Now a Whirlwind took the boy up and, like a flash of lightning, put him
at the runner's heels. He called out, "Hurry, or I'll overtake you!"

The runner used all his strength and soon was out of sight.

Again a Whirlwind picked up the boy and put him at the heels of his
opponent. He shot twice and called out, "Do your best or I'll beat you!"

The runner couldn't get out of sight, he was losing strength.

Again a Whirlwind came and as it picked the boy up a voice said, out of
the cloud, "This is the last time I'll help you."

Whirlwind put the boy down at his opponent's heels; the runner, now in
his real form, the form of a NYAGWAIHE, said, "You have overtaken me and
won the race."

Exactly at midday the boy cut off the Bear's head, and taking it started
for home. When over three hills he was tired; he hung the head on the
limb of a tree and taking the tongue went on. He went over two other
hills and was tired; he hung the tongue on the limb of a tree and went
on over other hills and knolls. When he reached home and told the people
that he had killed his opponent, they said,

"We will go and see the body."

"You'll find it over the tenth hill. I tried to bring back the head, but
seven hills from here I was tired and I hung it on the limb of a tree. I
took the tongue, but when I came to the fifth hill I was tired and I
hung the tongue on the limb of a tree."

It took a long time for the people to get to the first hill. When they
had traveled five Summers and five Winters, they came to a hill. On the
top of the hill was a tree, and on the tree was the tongue of the
NYAGWAIHE. The ground around the tree was trampled down; thousands of
wild beasts had been there and tried to get the tongue, the men looked
at it and went on.

When they had traveled two more Summers and two

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

more Winters they came to the seventh hill and found a skull, all that
was left of the head. The ground around the tree was trampled down:
thousands of wild beasts had been there and tried to get the head.

They traveled three Summers and three Winters, then reached the tenth
hill. For a great distance around the ground had been made bare and hard
by the trampling of wild beasts.

The place where NYAGWAIHE fell had become a deer-lick, not a bone or a
trace of the body was left.

The men were ten years going home. The boy aided by GÉHA had made the
journey between sunrise and midday.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventures of Wolf-Marked](sim06)
