[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim86)  [Next](sim88) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

# THE GREAT BEAR AND THE SIX HUNTERS,

###### OR

# THE SEVEN STARS OF THE DIPPER

SIX men went out hunting, for a long time they found no game. One of
their number said he was sick (he was lazy) and they had to make a
litter of two poles and a blanket, and four carried him. The sixth
member of the party came behind bringing the kettle. Besides this each
man had his own load to carry.

At last, when the hunters were getting very hungry, they came upon bear
tracks. They were so hungry that when they saw the tracks they dropped
their companion and their burdens and each man ran as fast as he could
after the bear.

At first the tracks looked old but they thought, "We will overtake the
bear sometime."

Later they saw that the tracks couldn't be more than three days old. The
farther the men went the fresher the tracks were till the men said,
"To-morrow we will overtake the bear."

The man they had carried so long was not tired and when they dropped him
and he knew he was going to be left he jumped up and ran on after them.
As he was fresher than they were he soon passed them and killed the
bear.

The men in their race after the bear didn't notice that they were going
up all the time. Many people saw them in the air, as they ran along,
always rising.

When they overtook the bear and the lazy man, they had reached the sky
and there they have remained to this day and can be seen any starlit
night. The man who carried the kettle is in the bend of the Dipper, the
middle

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

star in the handle and a small star which is the only one near any other
of the Dipper stars is the kettle. The Bear is at the lower outside
corner. Every Autumn, when the first frost comes, one can see on the
leaves of the oak-tree drops of oil, not water, and this is the oil and
blood of the Bear.

On seeing it the Indians say, "The lazy man has killed the Bear."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Chipmunk and the Bear](sim88)
