<span id="P1203_323958"></span> <sup>172</sup> ginomenwn; some read
kinoumnwn, i.e, have different motions.

<span id="P1204_324218"></span> <sup>173</sup> kentroij: Schneidewin
suggests kenttrwn.

<span id="P1208_325465"></span> <sup>174</sup> See *Oracula Sibyllina
Fragm*., ii. ver. 1.

<span id="P1209_325781"></span> <sup>175</sup> perasaia; hence their
name Peratics, i.e., Transcendentalists. Bunsen considers, however, that
such a derivation as this was not the true one (see note x, p. 60), but
merely an after-thought. The title of one of the Peratic treatises, as
altered by Bunsen from Oi proasrteioi ewj aiOeroj into Oi IIeratai ewj
aiQeroj, i.e., "the Transcendental Etherians," would agree with their
subsequent assumption of this title. \[Bunsen, i. p. 37.\]

<span id="P1215_328828"></span> <sup>176</sup> Ex. iv. 2-4, Ex. iv. 17,
Ex. vii. 9-13.

<span id="P1216_329324"></span> <sup>177</sup> Or, "they say."

<span id="P1217_329356"></span> <sup>178</sup> Gen. iv. 15.

<span id="P1218_329393"></span> <sup>179</sup> Gen. iv. 5.

<span id="P1219_329992"></span> <sup>180</sup> Gen. xxvii. 1.

<span id="P1220_330157"></span> <sup>181</sup> Gen. xxxiii. 10.

<span id="P1221_330314"></span> <sup>182</sup> Gen. X. 9.

<span id="P1222_330750"></span> <sup>183</sup> John iii. 14, 15.

<span id="P1224_331303"></span> <sup>184</sup> John i. 1-4.

<span id="P1225_331438"></span> <sup>185</sup> The Abbe Cruise thinks
that Hippolytus is here quoting from the *Gospel of Eve* (see Epiph.,
*Haer*., xxvi. 2).

<span id="P1226_331849"></span> <sup>186</sup> akra,: this is a
conjectural reading instead of arxh.

<span id="P1228_332763"></span> <sup>187</sup> Aratus, *Phaenom*., v.
62.

<span id="P1231_332985"></span> <sup>188</sup> *Ibid*., v. 46.

<span id="P1237_334523"></span> <sup>189</sup> Gen. xxx. 37-39.

<span id="P1238_335844"></span> <sup>190</sup> Matt. vii. 11.

<span id="P1239_336046"></span> <sup>191</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P1241_336681"></span> <sup>192</sup> John x. 7.

<span id="P1242_336740"></span> <sup>193</sup> There is a hiatus here.
Miller, who also suggests diaferei instead of meraferei supplies the
deficiency as translated above. The Abbe Cruice fills up the hiatus by
words taken from a somewhat similar passage in the third chapter of book
viii., but the obscurity still remains. Miller thinks there is a
reference to Isa. vi. 10.

<span id="P1243_337587"></span> <sup>194</sup> This theory has been
previously alluded to by Hippolytus in the last chapter of book iv.

<span id="P1244_338074"></span> <sup>195</sup> kahariou: some would read
hakariou \[" the dome of thought, the palace of the soul "\].

<span id="P1248_338945"></span> <sup>196</sup> pantapasi: some read
panta pasi. Cruice suggests pasin epitiqeimenhn, i.e., one that plots a
against all.

<span id="P1252_339484"></span> <sup>197</sup> This is the form in which
the name occurs in Hippolytns, but the correct one is Sethians. As
regard.: this sect, sec Irenaeus, *Contr. Hearss*., i. 30; Tertullian,
*Praescript*., c. ixvii.; Theodoret, *Haeret*. *Fabul*., i. 14;
Epiphanius, *Advers. Haeres*., c. xxviii., xxxvii,and xxxix.: Augustine,
*De Haeret*., c. xix.; Josephus, *Antiq. Fusac* i. 2; Suidas on the word
"Seth."

<span id="P1253_340036"></span> <sup>198</sup> For zunameij...
logizisqw, Bernays reads zunatsii... logizesqai: "While these make
(such) assertions, he is able to calculate," etc.

<span id="P1255_343974"></span> <sup>199</sup> Or, "form of a seal"

<span id="P1257_345841"></span> <sup>200</sup> Or, "production."

<span id="P1258_345977"></span> <sup>201</sup> This is Cruin's mode of
supplying the hiatus. Miller has "man or OX."

<span id="P1259_346728"></span> <sup>202</sup> Or, "concealed."

<span id="P1260_346797"></span> <sup>203</sup> alaj twn genomeinwi
Miller read alalwn.

<span id="P1261_347147"></span> <sup>204</sup> The hiatus, as filled up
by Miller, is adopted above. The Abbe Cruice suggests the following
emendation: "For there has been intermingled a certain very diminutive
spark from the light (subsisting along with the supernal fragrance, from
the spirit producing, like a ray, composition in things desolved, and
dissolution in things compounded."

<span id="P1262_347537"></span> <sup>205</sup> Ps. XXIX. 3.

<span id="P1263_347787"></span> <sup>206</sup> bromw: some read brasmw,
i.e., agitation, literally a boiling up.

<span id="P1264_348098"></span> <sup>207</sup> akoteinu: some read akolw
(which is of similar import), crooked, i.e., involved, obscure.

<span id="P1265_348297"></span> <sup>208</sup> Or, "the light."

<span id="P1266_348596"></span> <sup>209</sup> A hiatus occurs here. The
deficiencyis supplied by Cruice from previous statements of Hippolytus,
and is adopted above.

<span id="P1267_348777"></span> <sup>210</sup> Or, "strong."

<span id="P1268_348867"></span> <sup>211</sup> This passage is obscure.
The translation above follows Schneidewin and Cruice. Miller's text
would seem capable of this meaning: "The wind, simultaneously fierce and
formidable, is whirled along like a trailing serpent supplied with
wings." His text is, tw surmati ofei parapllhsioj pterwtoj, but suggestj
pterwiw wj apo.

<span id="P1270_350094"></span> <sup>212</sup> Schneidewin has a full
stop after "wind," and begins the next sentence with qhriou (beast).

<span id="P1271_350236"></span> <sup>213</sup> Phil. ii. 7.

<span id="P1272_350462"></span> <sup>214</sup> Acts ii. 24.

<span id="P1273_350569"></span> <sup>215</sup> Miller would read meta
ta... ecelqwn, "after the foul mysteries of the womb he went forth,"
etc.

<span id="P1274_350777"></span> <sup>216</sup> John iv. 7-14. For piein
some read poiein, "a course which he must pursue who," etc.

<span id="P1278_351242"></span> <sup>217</sup> prostatai, This is a
military expression applied to those placed in the foremost ranks of a
battalion of soldiers; but it was also employed in civil affairs, to
designate, for instance at Athens, those who protected the metotkoi
(aliens), and others without the rights of citizenship. IIrostath" was
the Roman *Patronus.*

<span id="P1279_351849"></span> <sup>218</sup> Or, " their own
peculiar."

<span id="P1280_352285"></span> <sup>219</sup> It is written Cham in the
text.

<span id="P1281_352720"></span> <sup>220</sup> Gen. ii. 16, 17.

<span id="P1282_352861"></span> <sup>221</sup> Gen. xii. 1.

<span id="P1283_353159"></span> <sup>222</sup> Ex. xx. 13-15; Deut. v.
17-19.

<span id="P1285_353322"></span> <sup>223</sup> upo, Miller.

<span id="P1286_353399"></span> <sup>224</sup> These belong to the
legendary period of Greek philosophy. Musaeus flourished amon the
Athenians, Linus among the Thebans, and Orpheus amon the Thracians. They
weaved their physical theories into crude theological systems, which
subsequently suggested the cosmogony and theogony of Hesiod. See the
translator's *Treatise on Metaphysics*, chap. ii. pp. 33, 34.

<span id="P1287_353954"></span> <sup>225</sup> oufaloj: some read with
greater probability falloj, which means the figure, generally wooden, of
a *membrum virile*. This, harmonizes with what Hippolytus has already
mentioned respecting Osiris. A figure of this description was carried in
solemn procession in the orgies of Bacchus as a symbol of the generative
power of nature. The worship of the Lingam among the Hindoos is of the
same description.

<span id="P1288_354379"></span> <sup>226</sup> armonia (Schneidewin).
Cruise reads andreia(manliness), which agrees with falloj(see preceding
note). For fallojSchneidewin reads oufaloj(navel).

<span id="P1289_354831"></span> <sup>227</sup> "Of Achaia" (Neinekius,
*Vindic*. *Strab*., p. 242).

<span id="P1290_354972"></span> <sup>228</sup> The reading in Miller is
obviously incorrect, viz., legomenhmegalhgoria, for wich he suggests
megal eorth. Several othe emendations have been proposed, but they
scarcely differ from the rendering given above, which is coincident with
what may be learned of these mysteries from other sources.

<span id="P1291_355634"></span> <sup>229</sup> proj, or it might he
rendered "respecting." A reference, how ever, to the catalogue of
Empedocles' works, given by Fabricius (t.v. p. 160), shows that for
projwe should read "ei" .

<span id="P1292_355853"></span> <sup>230</sup> pleiosi: Miller would
read pulewsi. i.e., gateways.

<span id="P1293_356011"></span> <sup>231</sup> Or petrwtoj, intended for
petrwdhj, "made of stone." \[A winged *phallus*was worn by the women of
Pompeii as an ornament, for which Christian women substituted a cross.
See vol. iii., this series, p. 104.\]

<span id="P1294_356295"></span> <sup>232</sup> kuanoeidh: some read
kunoeidh, i.e., like a dog.

<span id="P1295_356445"></span> <sup>233</sup> Some read Persephone
(Proserpine) Phlya.

<span id="P1296_356513"></span> <sup>234</sup> For "phaos ruentes" some
read "Phanes rueis," which is the expression found in the Orphic hymn
(see Cruice's note).

<span id="P1297_357352"></span> <sup>235</sup> *Iliad*, xv. 189. (See
the passage from Hesiod given at the end of book i, of *The
Refutation*.)
