<span id="P1301_357978"></span> <sup>236</sup> *Iliad*, xv. 36-38 (Lord
Derby's translation); *Odyssey*,v. 185,187.

<span id="P1303_358238"></span> <sup>237</sup> Miller reasonably
proposes for tw noithe reading stoixeion, "which affirms water to be a
formidable element."

<span id="P1307_360009"></span> <sup>238</sup> udwr memigmenon oinw
diakrinei: Miller's text is udwr memigmenon ainwdia krhnh. which is
obviously corrupt. His emendation of the passage may be translated thus:
"And now some one observes water from a wayside fountain, mixed, so they
say: and even though all things be intermingled, a separation is
effected."

<span id="P1308_360702"></span> <sup>239</sup> Matt. x. 34.

<span id="P1310_361762"></span> <sup>240</sup> kentrw.In other passages
the word kerkijis used, i.e., the backbone.

<span id="P1311_361881"></span> <sup>241</sup> Or, "power"

<span id="P1313_362441"></span> <sup>242</sup> Or, "Ama."

<span id="P1314_363119"></span> <sup>243</sup> Herodotus, vi. 119.

<span id="P1321_363961"></span> <sup>244</sup> What Hippolytus here
states respecting Justinus is quite new. No mention occurs of this
heretic in ecclesiastical history. It is evident, however, that, like
Simon Magus, he was contemporary with St. Peter and St. Paul. Justinus,
however, and the Ophitic sect to which he belonged, are assigned by
Hippolytus and Irenaeus a prior position as regards the order of their
appearance to the system of Simon, or its offshoot Valentinianism. The
Ophites engrafted Phrygian Judaism, and the Valentinians Gentilism, upon
Christianity; the former not rejecting the speculations and mysteries of
Asiatic paganism, and the latter availing themselves of the cabalistic
corruptions of Judaism. The Jndaistic element soon became prominent in
successive phases of Valentinianism, which produced a fusion of the
sects of the old Gnostics and of Simon. Hippolytus, however, now places
the Ophitic sect before us prior to its amalgamation with
Valentinianism. Here, for the first time. we have an authentic
delineation of the primitive Ophites. This is of great value. \[See
Irenaeus, vol. i., this series, p. 354; also Bunsen (on Baur), vol. i.
p. 42.\]

<span id="P1322_365350"></span> <sup>245</sup> Matt. x. 5.

<span id="P1326_367396"></span> <sup>246</sup> Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii.
9.

<span id="P1327_367834"></span> <sup>247</sup> Ps. cx. 4; Heb. vii. 21.

<span id="P1328_368163"></span> <sup>248</sup> Or, "the rest of the
Mysteries."

<span id="P1332_368934"></span> <sup>249</sup> Herodotus, iv. 8-10.

<span id="P1333_369038"></span> <sup>250</sup> Erytheia (Eretheia) was
the island which Geryon inhabited. Miller's text has =Eruqaj(i.e., sc.
Qalasshj), "the Red Sea." This, however, is a mistake.

<span id="P1334_370800"></span> <sup>251</sup> Some read ton noun, which
has been properly altered into tonun, as translated above.

<span id="P1338_371499"></span> <sup>252</sup> Or, "mother."

<span id="P1339_371566"></span> <sup>253</sup> kai agnwstoj, "and
unknown," is added in Cruice's and Schneidewin's text, as this word
occurs in Hippolytus' epitome of Justinus' heresy in book x. of *The
Refutation*.

<span id="P1340_371831"></span> <sup>254</sup> dignwmoj: some read
agnwmwn, i.e., devoid of judgment.

<span id="P1341_372569"></span> <sup>255</sup> eunhn: some read eunoian,
i.e., goodwill, but this seems pleonastic where filiajprecedes.

<span id="P1342_372834"></span> <sup>256</sup> See Rev. iii. 14.
\[Bunsen, i. 39.\]

<span id="P1343_373036"></span> <sup>257</sup> Or, "Babelachamos," or"
Babel, Achamos."

<span id="P1344_373147"></span> <sup>258</sup> Or, "Kaviathan."

<span id="P1346_373535"></span> <sup>259</sup> Gen. ii. 8.

<span id="P1347_373876"></span> <sup>260</sup> Or, "this one."

<span id="P1348_375113"></span> <sup>261</sup> Gen. i. 28.

<span id="P1350_375629"></span> <sup>262</sup> en auth: some read en
arxh, i.e., in the beginning.

<span id="P1351_376009"></span> <sup>263</sup> satrapikhn. The common
reading astrapikhnis obviously corrupt.

<span id="P1352_376644"></span> <sup>264</sup> Or, "mixture."

<span id="P1354_377206"></span> <sup>265</sup> katw: some read katwgh,
i.e., katwgaioj, earthly; some katwferhj, with a downward tendency.

<span id="P1355_377626"></span> <sup>266</sup> Ps. cxvii. 19.

<span id="P1356_377769"></span> <sup>267</sup> Ps. cxviii. 20.

<span id="P1357_378032"></span> <sup>268</sup> Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 1 Cor.
ii. 9.

<span id="P1358_378130"></span> <sup>269</sup> Ps. cx. 1.

<span id="P1359_378275"></span> <sup>270</sup> Or, " the heavens."

<span id="P1361_379755"></span> <sup>271</sup> anqrwpoij pasin. =Elqwn.
Some read: anqrwpoij. Palin elqwn.

<span id="P1362_380156"></span> <sup>272</sup> Gen. ii. 16, 17.

<span id="P1364_381023"></span> <sup>273</sup> Or, " in heaven."

<span id="P1365_381466"></span> <sup>274</sup> Gal. v. 17.

<span id="P1366_381716"></span> <sup>275</sup> Or, " in heaven."

<span id="P1367_381894"></span> <sup>276</sup> These words are
superfluous here, and are repeated preceding sentence by mistake.

<span id="P1368_382028"></span> <sup>277</sup> Yuxhj: some read euxhj,
i.e., prayer.

<span id="P1371_384141"></span> <sup>278</sup> Miller confectures that
the parenthetical words should be added to the text.

<span id="P1372_384520"></span> <sup>279</sup> John xix. 26.

<span id="P1376_386472"></span> <sup>280</sup> enteuqen: this word
stands at the end of the last chapter in the text of Miller, who
suspects that there is here some hiatus. In this opinion the Abbe Cruice
concurs. Schneidewin, however, transfers enteuqento the beginning of
this chapter as above.

<span id="P1377_386907"></span> <sup>281</sup> paria tw agaqw: or
rather, we should expect, into a knowledge of the Good One.

<span id="P1378_387219"></span> <sup>282</sup> Ps. cx. 4; Heb. vii. 21.

<span id="P1379_387284"></span> <sup>283</sup> ontwj: some read outoj.

<span id="P1380_387663"></span> <sup>284</sup> 1 Cor. ii. 9.

<span id="P1381_387765"></span> <sup>285</sup> loutron: the
ecclesiastical use of this word makes it stand for baptism.

<span id="P1382_387888"></span> <sup>286</sup> John iv. 14.

<span id="P1383_388143"></span> <sup>287</sup> Gen. i. 6, 7.

<span id="P1384_388479"></span> <sup>288</sup> Hos. 1,2.

<span id="P1385_388915"></span> <sup>289</sup> entuxwn: some read
eutuxwn, i.e., one who is fortunate enough to meet with the book.

<span id="P1386_389287"></span> <sup>290</sup> Literally " wight,
according to his Hercules, by imitating,"etc.

<span id="P1387_389482"></span> <sup>291</sup> amaran. This word means a
trench or channel in a field, for the purpose either of irrigation or
drainage. Schneidewin and Cruice render it by the Latin *Sentinam*, an
expression applied, for example, to bilge water.

<span id="P1391_390513"></span> <sup>292</sup> ekrhqeih, i.e., ekriqeih:
some read ekkriqeih, which might be rendered, " even though, (for the
purpose of holding these heretics up to public shame,) there should be
made a selection only,"etc.
