<span id="P1405_391715"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Presuming that all who
are disposed to study this work will turn to Dr. Bunsen's first volume
(*Hippol*.), I have not thought it wise to load the-e pages with
references to his interesting reviewal.\]

<span id="P1407_392114"></span> <sup>2</sup> kata teleiwsin twn xronwn.
This is Bunsen's emendation. The textual reading is meiwsin.

<span id="P1408_392218"></span> <sup>3</sup> ekousiwj: Bunsen suggests
anosiwj,i,e., profanely.

<span id="P1412_392964"></span> <sup>4</sup> See Irenaeus, *Haeres*., i.
19, 20; Tertullian, *Prescript*., c, xlvi.; Epiphanius, *Haeres*., xxi.;
Theodoret, *Haeret. Fab*., i. 1; St. Augustine, *De Haeres*., 1. See the
apology of Justin Martyr (vol. i., this series, p. 171), who says, "
There was a Samaritan, Simon, a native of the village called Gitto, who,
in the reign of Claudius Caesar, and in your royal city of Rome, did
mighty acts of magic, by virtue of the art of the devils operating in
him."Simon's history and opinions i are treated of largely in the
*Recognitions of Clement*. See vol. iii. of the Edinburgh series, pp.
156-271; \[vol. viii. of this series\].

<span id="P1413_393940"></span> <sup>5</sup> In book iv. of *The
Refutation*.

<span id="P1414_394168"></span> <sup>6</sup> Acts viii. 9-24.

<span id="P1418_394619"></span> <sup>7</sup> Miller refers us to
Apostolius' *Proverb*., s.v. yafwn. Schneidewin remarks that Maximus
Tyrius relates almost a similar story concerning one Psapho, a Libyan,
in his *Dissert*. (xxxv.), and that Apostolius extracted this account
and inserted it in his Cent., xviii. p. 730, ed. Leutsch, mentioning at
the same time a similar narrative from *Aelian's Hist*., xiv. 30. See
Justin., xxi. 4, and Pliny, *Nat*. *Hist*., viii. 16.

<span id="P1422_397166"></span> <sup>8</sup> The text here is corrupt.
The above is Miller's emendation. Cruice's reading may thus be rendered:
" So that far sooner we may compare him unto the Libyan, who was a mere
man, and not the true God."

<span id="P1424_398068"></span> <sup>9</sup> Deut. iv. 24.

<span id="P1426_399446"></span> <sup>10</sup> The Abbe Cruice considers
that Theodoret has made use of this passage. (See *Haeret. Fab*., i, 1.)

<span id="P1427_400117"></span> <sup>11</sup> Or, ton aoraton, the
invisible one.

<span id="P1428_400834"></span> <sup>12</sup> nwmatoj aisan: Miller has
gnwmhn ishn, which yields but little sense.

<span id="P1429_401510"></span> <sup>13</sup> These powers are thus
arranged: 1. Mind and Intelligence: termed also, 1. Heaven and Earth. 2.
Voice and Name 2. Sun and Moon. 3. "Ratiocination and Reflection," 3.
Air and Water.

<span id="P1448_406713"></span> <sup>14</sup> Gen. ii. 2.

<span id="P1449_407259"></span> <sup>15</sup> Prov. viii. 22-24.

<span id="P1450_407609"></span> <sup>16</sup> "Brooded over" (see Gen.
i. 2).

<span id="P1451_408306"></span> <sup>17</sup> Gen. ii. 7.

<span id="P1452_408622"></span> <sup>18</sup> 1 Cor. xi. 32.

<span id="P1454_409260"></span> <sup>19</sup> Jer. i. 5.

<span id="P1455_409581"></span> <sup>20</sup> xwrion(i.e, locality) is
the reading in Miller, which Cruice ingeniously alters into xorion, the
caul in which the foetus is enclosed, which is called the "after-birth."

<span id="P1456_409831"></span> <sup>21</sup> Gen. ii. 10.

<span id="P1457_410087"></span> <sup>22</sup> This rendering follow-
Cruice, who has succeeded in clearing away the obscurity o( the passage
as given in Miller.

<span id="P1464_412984"></span> <sup>23</sup> Odyssey, x. 304 et seq.
\[See Butcher and Lang, p. 163.\]

<span id="P1469_414875"></span> <sup>24</sup> Isa. ii. 4.

<span id="P1470_415313"></span> <sup>25</sup> Matt. iii. 10 ; Luke iii.
9.

<span id="P1474_415600"></span> <sup>26</sup> In the *Recognitions of
Clement*we have this passage: "He (Simon) wishes himself to be believed
to be an exalted power, which is above God the Creator, and to be
thought to be the Christ, and to be called the standing one"
(Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinburgh. vol. iii. p. 196).

<span id="P1475_415899"></span> <sup>27</sup> The expression
*stan*(standinq) was used by the scholastic as applicable to the divine
nature. Interpreted in this manner, the words in the text would be
equivalent with "which was, and is, and is to come" (Rev. i. 8). The
*Recognitions of Clement*explain the term thus: "He (Simon) use: this
name as implying that he can never be dissolved, asserting that his
flesh is so compacted by the power of his divinity, that it can endure
to eternity. Hence, there-fore, he is called the *standing one*, as
though he cannot fall by any corruption" (Ante-Nicene Library, vol. iii.
p. 196). \[To be found in vol. viii. of this series, with the other
apocryphal Clementines.\]

<span id="P1477_418302"></span> <sup>28</sup> Gen. iii. 24.

<span id="P1484_422778"></span> <sup>29</sup> Homer, for instance \[See
Epiphanius, *Haeres*., xxi. 3).

<span id="P1485_424465"></span> <sup>30</sup> miaroj, Bunsen's
emendation for yuxroj, the reading in Miller and Schneidewin. Some read
yudroj, i.e., lying: others yeudoxristoj, i.e., counterfeit Christ.
Cruice considers Bunsen's emenda-: tion unnecessary, as yuxrojmay be
translated " absurd fellow."The word, literally meaning cold, is applied
in a derived sense to persons who were heartless,-an import suitable to
Hippolytus' meaning.

<span id="P1486_424981"></span> <sup>31</sup> \[See Irenaeus, vol. i. p.
348, and Bunsen's ideas, p. 50 of his first volume.\]

<span id="P1488_425677"></span> <sup>32</sup> This rendering is
according to Bunsen's emendation of the text.

<span id="P1489_426427"></span> <sup>33</sup> Cruice omits the word
dedokhkenai, which seems in interpolation. The above rendering adopts
the proposed emendation.

<span id="P1490_426598"></span> <sup>34</sup> Bunsen thinks that there
is an allusion here to the conversation of our Lord with the woman of
Samaria, and it' so, that Menander, a disciple of Simon, and not Simon
himself, was the author of *The Great Announcement*, as the heretic did
not outlive St. Peter and Paul, and therefore died before the period at
which St John's Gospel was written.

<span id="P1491_427827"></span> <sup>35</sup> Miller reads fusin, which
makes no sense. The rendering above follows Bunsen's emendation of the
text. \[Here it is equally interesting to the student of our author or
of Irenaeus to turn to Bunsen (p. 51), and to observe his parallels.\]

<span id="P1495_428932"></span> <sup>36</sup> The Abbe Cruice considers
that the statements made by Origen (Iontr. Celsum, lib. i. p. 44, ed
Spenc.), respecting the followers of Simon in respect of number,
militates against Origen's authorship of *The Refutation*.

<span id="P1496_429388"></span> <sup>37</sup> This rendering follows the
text of Schneidewin and Cruice. The *Clementine
Recognitions*(Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinb., vol. iii. p. 273)
represent Simon Magus as leaving for Rome, and St. Peter resolving to
follow him thither. Miller's text is different and as emended by him,
Hippolytus' account would harmonize with that given in the Acts.
Miller's text may be thus translated: "And having been laid under a
curse, as has been written in the Acts, he subsequently disapproved of
his practices, and made an attempt to journey as far as Rome, but he
fell in with the apostles," etc. The text or Cruice and Schneidewin
seems less forced: while the statement itself-a new witness to this
controverted point in ecclesiastical history concerning St.
Peter-corroborates Hippolytus' authorship of *The Refutation*.

<span id="P1497_430649"></span> <sup>38</sup> Justin Martyr mentions, as
an instance of the estimation in which Simon Magus was held among his
followers, that a statue was erected to him at Rome. Bunsen considers
that the refection of this fable of Justin Martyr's, point to the author
of *The Refutation*being a Roman, who would therefore, as he shows
himself in the case of the statue, be better informed than the Eastern
writer of any event occurring in the capital of the West. \[Bunsen's
magisterial decision (p. 53) is very amusingly characteristic.\]
Hippolytus' silence is a presumption against the existence of such a
statue, though it is very possible he might omit to mention it,
supposing it to be at Rome. At all events, the jvery precise statement
of Justin Martyr ought not to be rejected on slight or confectural
grounds. \[See vol. i., this series, pp. 171 ,172, 182, 187, and 193.
But our author relies on Irenaeus, same vol., p. 348. Why reject
positive testimony?\]
