<span id="P1501_432465"></span> <sup>39</sup> Valentinus came from
Alexandria to Rome during the pontificate of Hyginus, and established a
school there. Hisdesire seems to have been to remain in communion with
Rome, which he did for many ye:mrs. as Tertullian informs us.
Epiphanius, however, tells that Valentinus. towards the end of his life,
when living in Cyprus, separted entirely from the Church. Irenaeus, book
i.; Tertullian on Valentinus, and chap xxx. of his *Praescript.*;
Clemens Alexandrinus, *Strom*., iv. 13 vi.6; Theodoret, *Haeret. Fab.*,
i., 7; Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxxi.; St. Augustine, *Haer*., xi.;
Philastrius, *Hist. Haers.*, c. viii.; Photius, *Biblioth.*, cap.
ccxxx.; Clemens Alexandrinus' *Epitome of Theodotus* (pp. 789-809, ed.
Sylburg). The title is, Ek twn Qeodotou kai thj anatolikhj kaloumenhj
didaskaliaj, kata touj Oualentinou xronouj epitomai. See likewise
Neander's *Church History*, vol. ii. Bohn's edition.

<span id="P1502_433773"></span> <sup>40</sup> These opinions are mostly
given in extracts from Valentinus' work *Sophia*, a book of great repute
among Gnostics, and not named by Hippolytus, probably as being so well
known at the time. The *Gospel of Truth*, mentioned by Irenaeus as used
among the Valentinians, is not, however, considered to be from the pen
of Valentinus. In the extracts given by Hippolytus from Valentinus, it
is important (as in the case of Basilides: see translator's
introduction) to find that he quotes St. John's Gospel, and St. Paul's
Epistle to the Ephesians. The latter had been pronounced by the Tubingen
school as belonging to the period of the Montanistic disputes in the
middle of the second century, that is, somewhere about 25-30 years after
Valentinus.

<span id="P1506_435879"></span> <sup>41</sup> See *Timaeus*, c. vii. ed.
Bekker.

<span id="P1507_435988"></span> <sup>42</sup> Or, "Solomon," evidently a
mistake.

<span id="P1511_437696"></span> <sup>43</sup> Miller would read for
prostiqemenon, nomisteonor nomizei.

<span id="P1514_438366"></span> <sup>44</sup> Respecting these lines,
Miller refers us to Fabricius, *in Sextum Empiricum*, p. 332.

<span id="P1516_438611"></span> <sup>45</sup> The Abbe Cruice adduces a
passage from Suidas (on the word ariqmoj) which contains a similar
statement to that furnished by Hippolytus.

<span id="P1520_439515"></span> <sup>46</sup> Matt. v. 18.

<span id="P1527_443346"></span> <sup>47</sup> Or, sunagei, leads
together.

<span id="P1528_443926"></span> <sup>48</sup> The Abbe Cruice considers
that the writer of *The Refutation*did not agree with Pythagoras'
opinion regarding the soul,-a fact that negatives the authorship of
Origen, who assented to the Pythagorean psychology. The question
concerning the pre-existence of the soul is stated m a passage often
quoted, viz., St. Jerome's *Letter to Marcellina*(Ep. 82).

<span id="P1532_444861"></span> <sup>49</sup> Cruice thinks that the
following words are taken from Heraclitus, and refers to Plutarch, *De
Exilio*, c. xi.

<span id="P1533_445573"></span> <sup>50</sup> *Pkaedo*, vol. i. p. 89,
ed. Bekker.

<span id="P1537_446792"></span> <sup>51</sup> "Eat not from a stool."
This proverb is also differently read and interpreted. Another form is,
"Eat not from a chariot," of which the import is variously given, as, Do
not tamper with your health, because food swallowed in haste, as it must
be when one is driving a team of horses, cannot be salutary or
nutritive; or, Do not be careless, because one should attend to the
business in hand; if that be guiding a chariot, one should not at the
same time try to eat his meals.

<span id="P1538_447629"></span> <sup>52</sup> The word "entire" Plutarch
adds to this proverb. Its ancient form would seem to inculcate patience
and courtesy, as if one should not, when at meals, snap at food before
others. As read in Plutarch, it has been also interpreted as a precept
to avoid creating dissension the unbroken bread being a symbol of unity.
It has likewise been explained as an injunction against greediness. The
loaf was marked by two intersecting lines into four parts, and one was
not to devour ail of these. (See Horace, 1 *Epist*., xvii. 49.)

<span id="P1539_448296"></span> <sup>53</sup> This is the generally
received import of the proverb. Ancient writers, however, put forward
other meanings, connected chiefly with certain effects of beans, e.g.,
disturbing the mind, and producing melancholy, which Pythagoras is said
to have noticed. Horace had no such idea concerning beans (see *2 Serm*,
vi. 63), but evidently alludes to a belief of the magi that disembodied
spirits resided in beans. (See Lucian, *Micyll*: Plutarch, Peri Paid.
Agwg. 17; Aulus Gellius, iv, 11; and Guigniaut's Cruiser's Symbolik, i.
160.) \[See p. 12 *supra*, and compare vol, ii., this series, p. 383,
and Elucidation III. p. 403.\]

<span id="P1540_449151"></span> <sup>54</sup> The text seems doubtful.
Some would read, "The sun is (to be compared with) soul, and the moon
with body."

<span id="P1541_449446"></span> <sup>55</sup> Zaron. This word also
signifies "sweepings"or "refuse." Some say it means a Chaldean or
Babylonian measure. The meaning would then be: Neglect not giving good
measure, i e., practise fair dealing. This agrees with another form of
the proverb, reading zugonfor saron-that is, overlook not the balance or
scales.

<span id="P1542_449935"></span> <sup>56</sup> Another meaning assigned
to this proverb is, "Labour to no purpose." The palm, it is alleged,
when it grows of itself, produces fruit, but sterility ensues upon
transplantation. The proverb is also said to mean: Avoid what may seem
agreeable, but really is injurious. This alludes to the quality of the
wine (see Xenophon's *Anab*., ii.), which, pleasant in appearance,
produced severe headache in those partaking of it.

<span id="P1546_452747"></span> <sup>57</sup> Or, "completes the great
year of the world" (see book iv. chap. vii. of The Refutation).

<span id="P1550_455272"></span> <sup>58</sup> Valentinus' system, if
purged of the glosses put upon it by his disciples, appears to have been
constructed out of a grand conception of Deity, and evidences much power
of abstraction. Between the essence of God, dwelling in the midst of
isolation prior to an exercise of the creative energy, and the material
worlds, Valentinus interposes an ideal world. Through the latter, the
soul-of a kindred nature-is enabled to mount up to God. This is the
import of the terms Bythus (depth) and Sige (silence, i.e., solitarness)
afterwards used.

<span id="P1551_456249"></span> <sup>59</sup> kuria: instead of this has
been suggested the reading kai riza, i.e., "which is both the root,"
etc.

<span id="P1552_456497"></span> <sup>60</sup> In all this. Valentinus
intends to delineate the progress from absolute to phenomenal being.
There are three developments in this transition. Absolute being (Bythus
and Sige) is the same as the eternal thought and consciousness of God's
own essence. Here we have the primary emanation, viz., Nous, i.e., Mind
(called also Monogenes, only-begotten), and Aletheia, i.e., Truth. Next
comes the ideal manifestation through the Logos, i e., Word (obviously
borrowed from the prologue to St. John's Gospel), and Zoe, i.e., Life
(taken from the same source). We have then the passage from the ideal to
the actual in Anthropos, i.e., Man, and Ecclesia, i.e., Church These
last are the phenomenal manifestations o( the divine mind.

<span id="P1553_457931"></span> <sup>61</sup> teleioj: Bunsen would read
teloj, which Cruice objects to on account of the word
teleioterojoccurring in the next sentence.

<span id="P1557_458804"></span> <sup>62</sup> This follows the text as
emended by Bernays.

<span id="P1558_459176"></span> <sup>63</sup> The number properly should
be thirty, as there were two tetrads: (1) Bythus, Sige, Nous, and
Aletheia; (2) Logos, Zoe, Ecclesia, and Anthropos. Some, as we learn
from Hippolytus, made up the number to thirty, by the addition of Christ
and the Holy Ghost,-a fact which Bunsen thinks conclusively proves that
the alleged generation of Aeons was a subsequent addition to Valentinus'
system.

<span id="P1559_459629"></span> <sup>64</sup> There is some confusion in
Hippolytus' text, which is, however, removeable by a reference to
Irenaeus (i. 1).

<span id="P1560_459853"></span> <sup>65</sup> We subjoin the meanings of
these names: -Ten Aeons from Nous and Aletheia, (or) Logo- and Zoe, 1
Bythus = Profundity. 6. Hedone = Voluptuousness. 2 Mixis = Mixture. 7.
Acinetus = Motionless. 3. Ageratos = Ever-young. 8. Syncrasis =
Composition. 4. Henosis = Unification. 9. Monogenes = Only-begotten. 5.
Autophyes = Self-grown. 10. Macaria = Blessedness.

<span id="P1561_460494"></span> <sup>66</sup> The following are the
meanings of these names: -Twelve Nous from Anthropos and Ecclesia, (or)
Logos and Zoe: -1. Paracletus = Comforter. 7, Aeinous = Ever-thinking. 2
Pistis= Faith. 8. Synesis = Intelligence. 3 Patricus = Paternal. 19.
Ecclesiasticus = Ecclesiastical. 4 Elpis= Hope. 10. Makariotes =
Felicity. 5 tletricus = Temperate. 11. Theletus = Volition. 6. Agape =
Love. 12. Sophia = Wisdom.

<span id="P1562_461472"></span> <sup>67</sup> \[Rev. ii 24. It belongs
to the "depths of Satan"to create mytiiologies that caricature the
Divine mysteries. Cf. 2 Cor. ii. 11.\]

<span id="P1563_461721"></span> <sup>68</sup> This Sophia was, so to
speak, the bridge which spanned the abyss between God and Reality. Under
an aspect of this kind Solomon (Prov. viii.) views Wisdom; and
Valentinus introduces it into his system, according to the old Judaistic
interpretation of Sophia, as the instrument for God's creative energy.
But Sophia thought to pass beyond her function as the connecting link
between limited and illimitable existence, by an attempt to evolve the
infinite from herself. She fails, and an abortive image of the true
Wisdom is procreated, while Sophia herself sinks into this nether world.

<span id="P1564_463009"></span> <sup>69</sup> Miller's text has, "a
well-formed and properly-digested substance." This reading is, however,
obviously wrong, as is proved by a reference to what Epiphanius states
(*Haer*., xxxi.) concerning Valentinus.

<span id="P1569_466081"></span> <sup>70</sup> Or, "Metagogeus"(see
Irenaeus, i. 1, 2, iii. 1).

<span id="P1570_466450"></span> <sup>71</sup> Bunsen corrects the
passage, "So that she should not be inferior to any of the Aeons, or
unequal (in power) to any (of them)."

<span id="P1574_467468"></span> <sup>72</sup> enothtoj: Miller has
neothtoj, i.e., youth. The former is the emendation of Bernays.

<span id="P1576_469592"></span> <sup>73</sup> This is Bunsen's text,
upostatouj. Duncker reads upostatikaj, hypostatic.

<span id="P1577_469707"></span> <sup>74</sup> Some read ousian(see
Theodoret, *Haer*., c. vii.).

<span id="P1578_469855"></span> <sup>75</sup> epistrofhn; or it may be
rendered "solicitude." Literally, it means a turning towards, as in this
instance, for the purpose of prayer (see Irenaeus, i. 5).

<span id="P1579_470150"></span> <sup>76</sup> Valentinus denominates
what is psychical (natural) right, and what is material or pathematic
left (see Irenaeus, i. 5).

<span id="P1580_470287"></span> <sup>77</sup> Cruice renders the passage
thus: "which is denominated right, or Demiurge, while fear it is that
accomplishes this transformation." The Demiurge is of course called
"right," as being the power of the , psychical essence (see Clemens
Alexandrinue, *Hypot. excerpta c Theod*., c. 43).

<span id="P1581_470691"></span> <sup>78</sup> Ps. cxi. 10; Prov. i. 7,
10.

<span id="P1582_471028"></span> <sup>79</sup> Schneidewin fills, up the
hiatus thus: "Place of Mecdiation." The above translation adopts the
emendation of Cruice (see Irenaeus, i. 5).

<span id="P1583_471194"></span> <sup>80</sup> Dan. vii. 9, 13, 22.

<span id="P1584_471526"></span> <sup>81</sup> Deut. ix. 3 ; Ps. l. 3;
Heb. xii. 29.

<span id="P1585_471896"></span> <sup>82</sup> Gen. ii. 2.

<span id="P1586_472020"></span> <sup>83</sup> See *Epistle of Barnabas*,
chap. xv. vol. i. p. 146, and *Ignatius*' *Letter to the Magnesians*,
chap. ix. p. 63, this series.

<span id="P1590_472611"></span> <sup>84</sup> The opening sentence in
this chapter is confused in Miller's text. The sense, however, as given
above, is deducible from a reference to a corresponding passage in
Irenaeus (i. 5).

<span id="P1591_473656"></span> <sup>85</sup> Deut. iv. 35; Isa. xlv. 5,
18, 21, 22.

<span id="P1595_473902"></span> <sup>86</sup> These words are a line out
of Pythagoras' *Golden Verses*: -Phgh tij aenaou fusewj izwmat
exousa-(48).

<span id="P1597_475194"></span> <sup>87</sup> The Abbe Cruise thinks
that a comparison of this passage with the corresponding one in Irenaeus
suggests the addition of oi doruforoiafter Logoj, i.e., the Logos and
his satellites. \[ Vol. i. p. 381, this series.\]

<span id="P1598_476071"></span> <sup>88</sup> Gen. ii. 7.

<span id="P1599_476340"></span> <sup>89</sup> Or, "subterranean"
(Cruice).
