<span id="P1600_476484"></span> <sup>90</sup> Epiphanius, Haer., xxxi.
sec. 7.

<span id="P1601_476972"></span> <sup>91</sup> Eph. iii. 14-18.

<span id="P1602_477394"></span> <sup>92</sup> 1 Cor. ii. 14.

<span id="P1606_478065"></span> <sup>93</sup> Epiphanius, Haer., xxxi.
22.

<span id="P1607_478252"></span> <sup>94</sup> John x. 8.

<span id="P1608_478365"></span> <sup>95</sup> Col. i. 26.

<span id="P1609_479267"></span> <sup>96</sup> Luke i. 35.

<span id="P1611_480476"></span> <sup>97</sup> Rom. viii. 11, 12.

<span id="P1612_480599"></span> <sup>98</sup> Gen. iii. 19.

<span id="P1613_480673"></span> <sup>99</sup> Axionicus is mentioned by
Tertullian only (see Tertullian, Conte. Valent., c. iv; \[vol. iii. p.
505, this series\]).

<span id="P1614_480812"></span> <sup>100</sup> Bardesianes (or
Ardesianes, as Miller's text has it) is evidently the sane with
Bardesanes, mentioned by Eusebius and St. femme.

<span id="P1618_482056"></span> <sup>101</sup> kathxhqh. Stiller's text
has kathxqh, which is properly corrected by Bunsen into the word as
translated above.

<span id="P1619_482461"></span> <sup>102</sup> Ex. vi. 2, 3.

<span id="P1620_483181"></span> <sup>103</sup> Or, "the multitudes."

<span id="P1624_484122"></span> <sup>104</sup> Cruice thinks that the
following extract from Plato's epistles has been added by a second hand.
\[Cf vol. iii. p. 181, this series.\]

<span id="P1625_484303"></span> <sup>105</sup> There are some verbal
diversities between the texts of Plato and Hippolytus, which a reference
will show (see Plat., *Epist*., t. ix. p. 76, ed. Bekker).

<span id="P1626_485317"></span> <sup>106</sup> Some forty lines that
follow in Plato's letter are omitted here.

<span id="P1627_485723"></span> <sup>107</sup> Here likewise there is
another deficiency as compared with the original letter.

<span id="P1629_486623"></span> <sup>108</sup> Miller's text is, kai
pasi ghn, etc. In the German and French edition of Hippolytus we have,
instead of this, kai Proarxhn. The latter word is introduced on the
authority of Epiphanius and Theodored. Bernays proposes Zighn, and Scott
Plasthn. The Abbe Cruice considers Plasthnan incongruous word as applied
to the creation of spiritual beings.

<span id="P1630_487359"></span> <sup>109</sup> The word "limit" occurs
twice in this sentence, and Bunsen alters the second into "Pleroma," so
that the words may be rendered thus: "Valentinus supposes to be second
all the Aeons that are within the Pleroma."

<span id="P1631_487760"></span> <sup>110</sup> This is a Gnostic hymn,
and is arranged metrically by Cruice, of which the following is a
translation: -All things whirled on by spirit I see, Flesh from soul
depending And soul from air forth flashing, And air from aether hanging,
And fruits from Bythus streaming, And from womb the infant growing.

<span id="P1632_489107"></span> <sup>111</sup> The text here is corrupt,
but the above rendering follows the Abbe Cruice's version. Bunsen's
emendation would, however, seem untenable.

<span id="P1636_489346"></span> <sup>112</sup> Concerning Secundus and
Epiphanes, see Irenaeus, i. 11; Theodoret, *Haer. Fab.*, i. 5-9;
Epiphanius, xxxii. I, 3, 4; Tertullian, *Adv. Valent*., c. xxxviii.; and
St. Augustine, *Haer*., xi. Hippolytus, in his remarks on Secundus and
Epiphanes, borrows from St. Irenaeus.

<span id="P1638_491403"></span> <sup>113</sup> Concerning Ptolemaeus,
see Irenaeus, i. 12; Tertullian, *De Praescript*., c. xlix.; and
*Advers. Valent*., c. viii.; Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxxiii. 3-7; and
Theodoret, *Haeret*. *Fab*., i. 8.

<span id="P1642_492823"></span> <sup>114</sup> Concerning Marcus, see
Irenaeus, i. 12-18; Tertullian, *Praescript*., c. l.; Epiphanius,
*Haer*., xxxiv.; *Theodoret*, *Haeret. Fab.*, i. 9; St. Augustine,
*Haer*., c. xiv.; and St. Jerome's 29th Epistle.

<span id="P1643_493069"></span> <sup>115</sup> energwn: Bunsen reads
drwn, which has the same meaning. Cruice reads aiwrwn, but makes no
attempt at translation. Miller's reading is dwrwn, which is obviously
corrupt, but for which dolwnhas been suggested, and with good show of
reason.

<span id="P1644_494495"></span> <sup>116</sup> analuomenou: same read
anaduomenou, which is obviously untenable.

<span id="P1648_495207"></span> <sup>117</sup> \[ Here was an awful
travesty of the heresy of a later day which introduced" the miracle of
Bolsena" and the *Corpus-Christi*celebration. See Robertson, *Hist*.,
vol. iii. p. 604.\]

<span id="P1652_500044"></span> <sup>118</sup> \[Buusen (vol. i. p
72-75) makes useful comments.\]

<span id="P1656_500430"></span> <sup>119</sup> Hippolytus has already
employed this word, adromesteron, in the *Proaemium*. It literally
means, of strong or compact parts. Hippolytus, however, uses it m
contrast to the expression Leptomerhj, in reference to his *Summary of
Heresies*. Bunsen thinks that Hippolytus means to say that Irenaeus
expressed himself rather too strongly, and that the Marcosians, on
meeting with Irenaeus' assertions, indignantly repudiated them. Dr.
Wordsworth translates adromerwj(in the *Proaemium*), "with rude
generality,"-a rendering scarcely in keeping with the passage above.

<span id="P1658_502098"></span> <sup>120</sup> The largest extract from
Irenaeus is that which follows-the explanation of the heresy o( Marcus.
From this to the end of book vi. occurs in Irenaeus likewise.
Hippolytus' text does not always accurately correspond with that of his
master. The divergence, however, is inconsiderable, and may sometimes be
traceable to the error of the transcriber.

<span id="P1659_503484"></span> <sup>121</sup> Hippolytus uses two words
to signify letters, oixeionand gramma. The former strictly means an
articulate sound as the basis of language or of written words, and the
latter the sound itself when represented by a particular symbol or sign.

<span id="P1660_505112"></span> <sup>122</sup> \[Rev. iii. 14. A name of
Christ. This word is travestied as the name *Logos*also, most
profanely.\]

<span id="P1664_507223"></span> <sup>123</sup> This is Duncker's
emendation, suggested by Irenaeus' text. Miller reads ton topon, which
yields scarcely any meaning.

<span id="P1668_508463"></span> <sup>124</sup> Hippolytus' text has been
here corrected from that of Irenaeus.

<span id="P1669_509170"></span> <sup>125</sup> This is a correction from
Progenitor, on the authority of Irenaeus and Epiphanius.

<span id="P1670_509276"></span> <sup>126</sup> Propatora: Irenaeus reads
Patrodora, which is adopted by Schneidewin, and translated *patrium*.

<span id="P1674_509918"></span> <sup>127</sup> The reading is doubtful.
The translator adopts Scott's emendation.

<span id="P1675_510249"></span> <sup>128</sup> \[See note 1, p. 94
*supra*, on "Amen." Comp. Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 393, this series. This
name of Jesus does, indeed, run through all Scripture, in verbal and
other forms; Gen. xlix, 18and in Joshua, as a foreshadowing.\]

<span id="P1676_510482"></span> <sup>129</sup> Irenaeus has "known."

<span id="P1680_511039"></span> <sup>130</sup> eikonikaj. This is
Irenaeus' reading. Miller has eikonaj(representations).

<span id="P1681_511563"></span> <sup>131</sup> aporroian: some read
aporian, which is obviously erroneous.

<span id="P1682_511695"></span> <sup>132</sup> up= auta ; Irenaeus reads
uper authn, and Massuet upenerqen.

<span id="P1683_512262"></span> <sup>133</sup> The deficiency consisted
in there not being three ogdoads. The sum total was twenty-four, but
there was only one ogdoad-Logos and Zoe. The other two-Pater and
Alethen, and Anthropos and Ecclesia-had one above and one below an
ogdoad.

<span id="P1684_513005"></span> <sup>134</sup> twn oktwhas been
substituted for tw nohtw, an obviously corrupt reading. The correction
is supplied by Irenaeus.

<span id="P1688_514186"></span> <sup>135</sup> Or, "ecnnomy."

<span id="P1689_514347"></span> <sup>136</sup> Christ went up with the
three apostles, and was therefore the fourth Himself: by the presence of
Moses and Elias, He became the sixth: Matt. xvii. 1: Mark ix. 2.

<span id="P1690_514890"></span> <sup>137</sup> The Greek word for dove
is peristera, the letters of which represent 801, as may be seen thus: -
p=80 e=5 r=I00 s=200i=10 t=300 e=5 r=100 a=1 \_\_\_ 801 This, therefore,
is equipollent with Alpha and Omega, as a is equal to I, and w to 800.
\[Stuff! Bunsen, very naturally, exclaims.\]

<span id="P1691_515890"></span> <sup>138</sup> Irenaeus has the sentence
thus: "so also the soul in babes, lamenting and bewailing Marcus,
glorifies him."

<span id="P1695_516352"></span> <sup>139</sup> Ps. viii. 2.

<span id="P1696_516689"></span> <sup>140</sup> Ps. xix. 1.

<span id="P1697_516965"></span> <sup>141</sup> Hippolytus here omits
some passages which are to be found in Irenaeus.

<span id="P1698_517169"></span> <sup>142</sup> Literally, "being twice
two:" pnme for ousai read ousiai. Irenaeus has epi duo ousai, i.e.,
"which being (added) into two."

<span id="P1699_517548"></span> <sup>143</sup> Hippolytus has only the
word "twenty-four," to which Schneidewin supplies "letters," and
Irenaeus" forms," as given above. Hippolytus likewise omits the word
"produced," which Irenaeus supplies. The text of the latter is taj
eikosetessaraj apekuhsan morfaj.
