<span id="P1700_518501"></span> <sup>144</sup> Irenaeus adds, "which
being added together, I mean the twice five and twice seven, complete
the number of the twenty-four ( forms) ."

<span id="P1701_518775"></span> <sup>145</sup> The parenthetical words
had fallen into a wrong part of the sentence, and are placed here by
Schneidewin.

<span id="P1702_518939"></span> <sup>146</sup> This is a correction for
"expressed" from Irenaeus. Marcus observes the distinction afterwards.

<span id="P1703_519048"></span> <sup>147</sup> kata en grammatwn. The
ms.. has eggramatwn. Irenaeus omits these words.

<span id="P1707_520926"></span> <sup>148</sup> This entire sentence is
wanting in Irenaeus.

<span id="P1708_521014"></span> <sup>149</sup> Corrected from Chri,
which is in the ms..

<span id="P1709_521459"></span> <sup>150</sup> Irenaeus has the passage
thus; "And for this reason He says that He is Alpha and Omega, that He
may manifest the dove, inasmuch as this bird (symbolically) involves
this number (801)." See a previous note in chap. xiii. p. 95. *supra*.

<span id="P1713_522202"></span> <sup>151</sup> Part of this sentence is
supplied from Irenaeus.

<span id="P1714_522801"></span> <sup>152</sup> Hippolytus here omits the
following sentence found in Irenaeus: "And again thus-of the first
quarternion, when added into itself, in accordance with a progression of
number, appeared the number ten, and so forth."

<span id="P1718_523270"></span> <sup>153</sup> Luke i. 26-38.

<span id="P1719_523387"></span> <sup>154</sup> Or, "of the Son," an
obvious mistake.

<span id="P1720_523484"></span> <sup>155</sup> Irenaeus has, "And the
Virgin exhibited the place of Ecclesia."

<span id="P1721_523676"></span> <sup>156</sup> Irenaeus adds, "whom the
Father of the universe selected, for passage through the womb, by means
of the Logos, for recognition of Himself."

<span id="P1725_526045"></span> <sup>157</sup> Cruice thinks that for
stars we should read "numbers," but gives no explanation of the meaning
of metewra. This word, as applied to numbers, might refer to "the
astrological phenomena" deducible by means of numierical calculations.

<span id="P1727_526525"></span> <sup>158</sup> A comparison of
Hippolytus with Irenaeus, as regards what follows, manifests many
omissions in the former.

<span id="P1728_526992"></span> <sup>159</sup> Following Irenaeus, the
passage would be rendered thus: "And therefore, on account of its having
the remarkable (letter) concomitant with it, they style the dodecade a
remarkable passion." Massuet, in his *Annotations on Irenaeus*, gives
the following explanation of the above statement, which is made by
Hippolytus likewise. From the twelfth number, by once abstracting the
remarkable (number), which does not come into the order and number of
the letters, eleven letters remain. Hence in the dodecade, the paqoj, or
what elsewhere the heretics call the "Hysterema," is a defect of one
letter. And this is a symbol of the defect or suffering which, upon the
withdrawal of one Aeon, happended unto the last dodecade of Aeons.

<span id="P1729_527753"></span> <sup>160</sup> Hippolytus' statement is
less copious and less clear than that of Irenaeus, who explains the
defect of the letter to be symbolical of an apostasy of one of the
Aeons, and that this one was a female.

<span id="P1730_528108"></span> <sup>161</sup> Luke xv. 4-10.

<span id="P1731_529145"></span> <sup>162</sup> Marcus' explanation of
this, as furnished by Irenaeus, is more copions than Hippolytus'.

<span id="P1732_531284"></span> <sup>163</sup> The allusion here seems
to be to the habit among the ancients of employing the tinkers for
counting, those of the left hand being used for all numbers under 100,
and those of the right for the numbers above it. To this custom the poet
Juvenal alludes, when he says of Nestor: -Atque suos jam dextera
computat annos. That is, that he was one hundred years old.

<span id="P1736_532723"></span> <sup>164</sup> Or, "sketched out"
(Irenaeus).

<span id="P1737_533713"></span> <sup>165</sup> Or, "radiant."

<span id="P1738_533998"></span> <sup>166</sup> Or, "measured."

<span id="P1739_534070"></span> <sup>167</sup> Massuet gives the
following explanation: The sun each day describes a circle which is
divided into twelve parts of 30 degrees each, and consists of 360
degrees. And as for each of the hours, where days and nights are equal,
15 degrees are allowed, it follows that in two hours, that is, in the
twelfth part of a day, the sun completes a progress of 30 degrees.

<span id="P1740_534683"></span> <sup>168</sup> Or, "of the same
substance."

<span id="P1744_535186"></span> <sup>169</sup> Or, "blamelessness."

<span id="P1748_535893"></span> <sup>170</sup> Or, "strange."

<span id="P1749_536500"></span> <sup>171</sup> \[The Apostle John
delights to call himself a presbyter, and St. Peter claims to be
co-presbyter with the elders whom he exhorts. The Johannean school of
primitive theologians seem to love this expression pre-eminently. It was
almost as little specific in the primitive age as that of *pastor*or
*minister*in our own.\]

<span id="P1758_537722"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Here our author's theory
concerning the origin of heresy in heathen philosophy begins to be
elaborated.\]

<span id="P1760_537874"></span> <sup>2</sup> Satronilus (Miller).

<span id="P1765_538387"></span> <sup>3</sup> Or, "in no respect formed
his system from the Scriptures, but from the tenets propounded by the
Egyptians."

<span id="P1768_538735"></span> <sup>4</sup> Cruice would prefer, "from
the Gnostics," on account of Cerinthus being coupled with the Gnoctics
and Ebionaeans by Hippolytus, when he afterwards indicates the source
from which Theodotus derived his heretical notions of Christ.

<span id="P1770_539006"></span> <sup>5</sup> Miller has "Sacerdon."

<span id="P1772_539188"></span> <sup>6</sup> The word monojoccurs in
Miller's text, but ought obviously to be expunged. It has probably, as
Cruice conjectures, crept into the ms..from the termination of
genomenoj. Duncker suggests omoiwj.

<span id="P1774_539761"></span> <sup>7</sup> This rendering would
ascribe Pantheism to Apelles. The parsage might also be construed,
"supposed there to exist an essence (that formed the basis) of the
universe."

<span id="P1778_540461"></span> <sup>8</sup> A hiatus here has given
rise to conjecture. Cruice suggests xoroj(band) instead of oroj.

<span id="P1779_540728"></span> <sup>9</sup> Or, "practices of the
monsters," or "inhospitable beasts." Abbe Cruice suggests parocewn, and
Roeper emplastwn.

<span id="P1780_541705"></span> <sup>10</sup> Literally, the (accursed)
tree.

<span id="P1784_542210"></span> <sup>11</sup> What Hippolytus now states
in regard of the opinions of Basilides, is quite new (compare Irenaeus,
i. 24; Clemens Alexandrinus, *Stromr*., iii.and vii.;
Tertullian,*Praescript*., xlvi.; Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxiv.; Theodoret,
i. 4; Eusebius, *Ecclesiast, Hist*., iv.7; and Philastrius, c. xxxii.).
Abbe Cruice refers us to *Basilidis philosophi Gnostici Sententiae*,by
Jacobi (Berlin, 1852), md to *Das Basilidianische System*, etc., by
Ulhorn (Gottinggen, 1855).

<span id="P1788_543715"></span> <sup>12</sup> Or, "dispositions."

<span id="P1792_544423"></span> <sup>13</sup> Compare Porphyry's
*Isagoge*, c. ii., and Aristotle's *Categ*., c.

<span id="P1799_546694"></span> <sup>14</sup> Aristotle's Categ., c. v.
