<span id="P1900_593237"></span> <sup>70</sup> These are lines 55-57 in
Karsten's edition of a collection of the. Empedociean verses.

<span id="P1904_595557"></span> <sup>71</sup> These are lines 110, 111,
in Stein's edition of Empedocles.

<span id="P1910_596866"></span> <sup>72</sup> Lines 360-362 (ed.Karst.).

<span id="P1913_597285"></span> <sup>73</sup> Line 7 (Karsten), 381
(Stein).

<span id="P1917_598053"></span> <sup>74</sup> Line 4 (Karsten), 372, 373
(Stein).

<span id="P1920_598241"></span> <sup>75</sup> Line 5 (Karsten), 374
(Stein).

<span id="P1924_598579"></span> <sup>76</sup> Line 6 (Karsten), 375, 376
(Stein).

<span id="P1933_599261"></span> <sup>77</sup> Lines 16-19
(Karsten),377-380(Stein).

<span id="P1942_601078"></span> <sup>78</sup> Lines 1, 2 (Karsten), 369,
370(Stein).

<span id="P1954_602917"></span> <sup>79</sup> The text of these
verses,as given by Hippolytus, is obviously corrupt, and there(ore
obscure. Schneidewin has furnished an emended copy of them (*Philol*.,
vi. 166), which the translator has mostly adopted. (See Stein's edition
of the *Empedoclean Verses*, line 222 et seq.)

<span id="P1958_603515"></span> <sup>80</sup> o kolobodaktuloj. Bunsen
\[*more suo*, vol. i., p. 89\] considers this a corrupt reading, and
suggests kalwn logwnv didaskalos, i.e., "a teacher of good words," i.e.,
an evangelist, which word, as just used, he does not irish to repeat.
The Abbe Cruice denies the necessity for any such emendation, and refers
us to an article in the *Journal of Classical and Sacred
Philology*(Cambridge, March, 1855), the writer of which maintains, on
the authority of St. Jerome, that St. Mark bad amputated his thumb, in
order that he might be considered disqualified for the priesthood.

<span id="P1959_605198"></span> <sup>81</sup> 1 Tim. iv. 3.

<span id="P1963_606353"></span> <sup>82</sup> What Hippolytus
communicates concerning Prepon is quite new. The only writer who
mentions him is Theodoret (*Haer. Fab*., i. 25). in his article on
Apelles.

<span id="P1968_607761"></span> <sup>83</sup> Schneidewin gives a
restored version of these lines. They are found (at 1ines 338-341)in
Stein's edition of the *Empedoclean Verses*.

<span id="P1970_608456"></span> <sup>84</sup> Tertullian combats these
heretical notions in his *De Carne Christi*\[vol. viii. p. 521, two
series\].

<span id="P1971_608959"></span> <sup>85</sup> Gal. iii. 19.

<span id="P1972_609049"></span> <sup>86</sup> Matt. xix. 17; Mark x. 18;
Luke xviii. 19.

<span id="P1976_609915"></span> <sup>87</sup> See \[vol. i. p. 350\]
Irenaes, i. 25; \[vol. iii. p. 203\] Tertullian, *De Anima*, c.
xxiii.-xxv., and *Praescript*., c. xlviii.; Eusebius. *Hist.
Ecclesiast*., iv. 7, Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxvii. see.2; Theodoret,
*Haer*. Fab.,i. 5; and St.Augustine, *Haer*., c. vii. The entire of this
article is taken from Irenaes, and equally coincides with the account
given of Carpocrates by Epiphanius.

<span id="P1977_611015"></span> <sup>88</sup> Or, "came."

<span id="P1979_614251"></span> <sup>89</sup> Literally, "cauterize."

<span id="P1980_614520"></span> <sup>90</sup> Epiphanius alludes in the
same manner to these images.

<span id="P1984_614660"></span> <sup>91</sup> See \[vol. i. pp. 351,
415\] Irenaeus, i. 26, iii. 2, 3; \[vol. iii. p. 631\] Tertullian,
*Praescript*.,c. xlviii.; Eusebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., iii. 28, vii.
25; Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxviii.; Theodoret, *Haer.Fab*., ii. 3; St.
Augustine, *Haer*.,c. viii.; and Sr. Jerome, *Ep*., ixxxix. We have
here, as in the preceding articles, Irenaeus in the Greek, as
Hippolytus' text corresponds with the Latin version of this portion of
Irenaeus' work.

<span id="P1985_615831"></span> <sup>92</sup> Acts xvii. 23.

<span id="P1986_616072"></span> <sup>93</sup> Or, "paternal."

<span id="P1990_616195"></span> <sup>94</sup> See \[vol. i. p. 352\]
Irenaes, i. 26; \[vol. iii. p. 651\] Tertullian, *Praescript*., c.
xlviii.; \[vol. iv. p. 429, this series\] Origen, *Contr*. *Cels*. ii.
r; Eusebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., iii, 27; Epiphanius, *Haer*., xxx,;
and Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., ii. 2. Hippolytus is indebted in this
article partly to Irenaes, and partly to original sources.

<span id="P1991_616982"></span> <sup>95</sup> Or, "that the Christ o(
God was named Jesus" (Bunsen).

<span id="P1995_617527"></span> <sup>96</sup> See \[vol. iii. p. 654,
"two Theodoti "\] Tertullian, *Praescript*., c. liii.: Eusebuis, *Hist.
Ecclesiast*, v. 27; Epiphanius, *Haer*.,liv.; and Theodoret, *Haer.
Fab*., ii. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus seems to have been greatly indebted
to Theodotus, whose system he has explained and commented upon.

<span id="P1999_619261"></span> <sup>97</sup> Concerning the younger
Theodotus, see \[vol. iii. p. 654\] Tertutllian. *Praescript*., c.
liii.; Epiphanius, *Haer*., lv.; and Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., ii. 6.
