<span id="P204_5273"></span> <sup>1</sup> *Hippol.*, vol. i. p. 7. Ed.
London, 1851.

<span id="P209_8175"></span> <sup>2</sup> See this series, vol. iii.
Elucid. II. p. 630.

<span id="P211_8820"></span> <sup>3</sup> See this series, vol. i. pp.
309, 360; also vol. ii. p. 166, and Milman (vol. i. pp. 28, 29), *Latin
Christianity*.

<span id="P225_10553"></span> <sup>1</sup> I venture to state this to
encourage young students to keep pen in hand in all their researches,
and always to make notes.

<span id="P227_11692"></span> <sup>2</sup> Pompey and others were called
*imperatores*before the Caesars, but who includes them with the Roman
emperors?

<span id="P229_13167"></span> <sup>3</sup> How St. Peter would regard
it, see 1 Pet. v. 1-3. I am sorry to find Dr. Schaff, in his useful
compilation, *History of the Christian Church*, vol. ii. p 166,
dropping, into the old ruts of fable, after sufficiently proving just
before, what I have maintained. He speaks of "the insignificance of *the
first Popes*,"-meaning the early Bishops of Rome, men who minded their
own business, but could not have been "insignificant" had they even
imagined themselves "Popes."

<span id="P231_14419"></span> <sup>4</sup> See Bossuet, *passim*, and
all the Callican doctors down to our own times. In England the
"supremacy" was never acknowledged nor in France, until now.

<span id="P232_15558"></span> <sup>5</sup> See his Hippol., vol. i. pp.
209, 311.

<span id="P234_15925"></span> <sup>6</sup> See vol. ii. p. 298, this
series.

<span id="P235_16075"></span> <sup>7</sup> p. 207.

<span id="P238_17294"></span> <sup>8</sup> Vol. iv p 114, Elucidation
II., this series.

<span id="P240_18454"></span> <sup>9</sup> Even Quinet notes this. See
his *Ultamontanism*, p. 40, ed. 1845.

<span id="P243_19904"></span> <sup>10</sup> Bunsen gives it as the
thirty-fifth, vol. i. p. 311.

<span id="P244_20516"></span> <sup>11</sup> Of which we shall learn in
vol. viii., this series.

<span id="P245_21208"></span> <sup>12</sup> See Bingham, book ix. cap.
i. sec. 9.

<span id="P247_23461"></span> <sup>13</sup> Wordsworth, chap. viii. p,
93.

<span id="P251_29211"></span> <sup>14</sup> See vol. I, pp. 415, 460,
this series.

<span id="P252_29843"></span> <sup>15</sup> *Introduction to Greek
Classics*, p.228.

<span id="P253_30470"></span> <sup>16</sup> See vol. ii. p. 12, also iv.
210.

<span id="P266_30808"></span> <sup>1</sup> The four of the MSS. of the
first book extant prior to the recent discovery of seven out of the
remaining nine books of *The Refutation*, concur in ascribing it to
Origen. These inscriptions run thus: 1. "Refutation by Orison of all
Heresies;" 2. "Of Origen's Philosophumena... these are the contents;" 3.
"Being estimable (Dissertations) by Origen, a man of the greatest
wisdom." The recently discovered MS. itself in the margin has the words,
"Origen, and Origen's opinion." The title, as agreed upon by modern
commentators, is: 1. "Book I. of Origen's Refutation of all Heresies"
(Wolf and Gronovius); 2. "A Refutation of all Heresies; " 3. "Origen's
Philosophumena, or the Refutation of all Heresies." The last is
Stiller's in his Oxford edition, 1851. The title might have been,
"Philosophumena, and the Refutation (therefrom) of all Heresies." There
were obviously two divisions of the work: (1) A *resume* of the tenets
of the philosophers (books i., ii., iii., iv.), preparatory to (2) the
refutation of heresies, on the ground of their derivative character from
Greek and Egyptian speculation. Bunsen would denominate the work "St.
Hippolytus' (Bishop and Martyr) Refutation of all Heresies; what remains
of the ten books."

<span id="P269_32288"></span> <sup>2</sup> Most of what follows in book
i. is a compilation from ancient sources. The ablest *resume* followed
by Cicero in the *De Nat. Deor*., of the tenets of the ancient
philosophers, is to be found in Aristotle's *Metaphysics*. The English
reader is referred to the *Metaphysics*, book i. pp. 13-46 (Bohn's
Classical Library), also to the translator's analysis prefixed to this
work, pp, 17-25 See also Diogenes' *Lives of the Philosophers*, and
Tenneman's *Manual of Philosophy* (translated in Bohn's Library);
Plutarch, *De Placitis Philosophorum*; Lewes' *Biographical History of
(Ancient) Philolophy*; and Rev. Dr. F. D. Maurice's *History of
(Ancient) Metaphysical and Moral Philosophy*. The same subject is
discussed in Ritter's *History of Philosophy* (translated by Morrison).

<span id="P272_33628"></span> <sup>3</sup> This word is variously given
thus: Academian, Academeian, Academaic, Academe, Cademian, and Cadimian.
The two last would seem to indicate the character rather than the
philosophy of Pyrrho. To favour this view, the text should be altered
into kai adhmoj, i.e., apodhmoj = from home, not domestic.

<span id="P276_34309"></span> <sup>4</sup> Some hiatus at the beginning
of this sentence is apparent.

<span id="P277_34702"></span> <sup>5</sup> An elaborate defence of this
position forms the subject of Cudworth's great work, *The True
Intellectual System of the Universe*.

<span id="P278_34873"></span> <sup>6</sup> This statement has been urged
against Origen's authorship, in favour of Epiphinius, who wrote an
extended treatise on the *Heresies*, with an abridgment.

<span id="P279_35225"></span> <sup>7</sup> That is, their esoteric
mysteries, intended only for a favoured few, as contrasted with the
exoteric. designed for more general diffusion.

<span id="P280_35647"></span> <sup>8</sup> One ms. has-"the profane
opinion and unreasonable attempt."

<span id="P281_36909"></span> <sup>9</sup> "To learn" (Roeper).

<span id="P282_37316"></span> <sup>10</sup> "And those that are
irrational animals do not attempt," (or) "because irrational," etc. The
last is Sancroft's reading; that in the text, Roeper's.

<span id="P284_37602"></span> <sup>11</sup> "Ascend up to" (Roeper).

<span id="P285_38497"></span> <sup>12</sup> This passage is quoted by
those who impugn the authorship of Origen on the ground of his never
having been a bishop of the Church. It is not, however, quite certain
that the words refer to the episcopal office exclusively.

<span id="P286_38817"></span> <sup>13</sup> The common reading is in the
future, but the present tense is adopted by Richter in his *Critical
Observations*, p. 77.

<span id="P287_38982"></span> <sup>14</sup> It might be, "any opinion
that may be subservient to the subject taken in hand." This is Cruice's
rendering in his Latin version. A different reading is, "we must not be
silent as regards reasons that hold good," or, "as regards rational
distinctions," or, "refrain from utterances through the instrument of
reasoning." The last is Roeper's.

<span id="P288_39777"></span> <sup>15</sup> Another reading is,
"bringing into a collection."

<span id="P289_39972"></span> <sup>16</sup> Or, "the Spirit."

<span id="P290_40078"></span> <sup>17</sup> Or, "indicating a witness; "
or, "having adduced testimony,"

<span id="P292_40675"></span> <sup>18</sup> Or, "a starting-point."

<span id="P293_41303"></span> <sup>19</sup> Or:, "devoting his attention
to; " or, "having lighted upon."

<span id="P294_42204"></span> <sup>20</sup> The chief writers on the
early heresies are: Irenaeus, of the second century; Hippolytus, his
pupil, of the third; Philastrius, Epiphanius, and St. Augustine, of the
fourth century. The learncd need scarcely be reminded of the
comprehensive digest furnished by Ittigius in the preface to his
dissertation on the heresies of the apostolic and post-apostolic ages. A
book more within the reach of the general reader is Dr. Burton's
*Inquiry into the Heresies of the Apostolic Age*.

<span id="P298_43046"></span> <sup>21</sup> \[These were: Periander of
Corinth, B.C. 585; Pittacus of Mitylene, B.C. 570; Thales of Miletus,
B.C. 548: Solon of Athens, B.C.540; Chilo of Sparta, B.C. 597; Bias of
Priene; Cleobulus of Lindus, B.C. 564 \]

<span id="P299_43636"></span> <sup>22</sup> Or, "motions of the stars"
(Roeper).
