<span id="P2001_620205"></span> <sup>98</sup> Or, "in reference to"
(Bunsen).

<span id="P2002_620340"></span> <sup>99</sup> Or, "have been adduced"
(Miller).

<span id="P2003_620413"></span> <sup>100</sup> See \[*ut supra*\]
Irenaeus, i. 26; \[*ut supra*\] Tertullian, Praescript., c. xlv.;
Epiphanius, Haer., c. xxv.; Eusebius, Hist. Ecclesiast., iii. 29;
Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., i. 15; and St. Augustine, *Haer*., c.v. \[But
see Clement, vol. ii. p. 373 this series.\]

<span id="P2004_620803"></span> <sup>101</sup> \[He understands that the
seven (Acts vi. 5) were deacons. Bunsen, i. p.97.\]

<span id="P2005_621036"></span> <sup>102</sup> Or."knowledge." Bunsen
suggests brwsewj, as translated above.

<span id="P2006_621281"></span> <sup>103</sup> Rev. ii. 6.

<span id="P2010_621349"></span> <sup>104</sup> Irenaeus, i. 27; Eusebius
(who here gives Irenaeus' Greek), *Hist. Ecclesiast*., iv. 2;
Epiphanius, c. xli.; Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., i. 24; and Philastrius, i.
xliv.

<span id="P2011_621772"></span> <sup>105</sup> Hippolytus follows
Irenaeus but introduces some alterations.

<span id="P2012_622030"></span> <sup>106</sup> Antiqeseij. This is the
emendation proposed by tbe Abbe Cruice. The textual reading is
antiparaqeseij(comparisons).

<span id="P2013_622339"></span> <sup>107</sup> See \[*ut supra*,
p.,353\], Tertullian, *Praescript*., c. li., and Epiphanius, *Haer*., c.
xliii.

<span id="P2017_622546"></span> <sup>108</sup> See (vol. iii. p, 257 )
Tertullian, *Praescript*., c. xxx.; Eusebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., v,
13; Epiphanius, *Haer*., c. xliv.; Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., i. 25: and
St. Augustine, *Haer*., c. xxiv.

<span id="P2018_623563"></span> <sup>109</sup> Fanerwsesi. Miller's text
reads Fanerwj, the error of which is obvious from Tertullian's
*Praescript*., c. xxx. Cruice considers tne word to signify the title of
a work written by Apelles.

<span id="P2024_625631"></span> <sup>1</sup> Much that we have in this
book is quite new. Hippolytus derives his article on Tatian, and in a
measure that on the Encratites, from Irenaeus. The rest is probably from
original sources.

<span id="P2030_626048"></span> <sup>2</sup> Or, "Noimus."

<span id="P2035_626665"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Note the honour uniformly
rendered to the Holy Scriptures by the Fathers.\]

<span id="P2039_626976"></span> <sup>4</sup> Matt. vii. 3, 4; Luke vi.
41, 42.

<span id="P2040_627880"></span> <sup>5</sup> See \[vol i. p. 526\]
Irenaeus v. r; Theodoret, *Haer, Fab*., v. encl \[vol. ii. p. 398, and
Elucidation XIV. p. 407\] Clemens Alexandrinus (*Strom*., iii.), who
informs us that Julius Cassianus-a pupil of Valentinus-was founder of
the Docetic heresy.

<span id="P2042_628418"></span> <sup>6</sup> Miller's text reads
papeinon(lowly), but this is obviously untenable. Duncker alters it into
apeiron(infinite), and joins tapeinwith the word following. He renders
the passage thus: "but infin in power-a lowly magnitude." Cruice strikes
out the word tapeinand renders the passage thus: "but infinite in power,
a magniti incalculable in bulk." The above rendering seems to convey
Hpolytns' meaning.

<span id="P2043_629063"></span> <sup>7</sup> Or," the Lord came in
search of fruit" (Roeper). The read. followed in the translation agrees
with the scriptural account; see Luke xiii. 7.

<span id="P2044_629279"></span> <sup>8</sup> Matt. xxi. 19, 20; Mark xi.
13, 14, 2, 2.

<span id="P2045_630365"></span> <sup>9</sup> Deut. v. 22.

<span id="P2049_632349"></span> <sup>10</sup> Matt. xiii. 3-8; Mark iv.
3-8; Luke viii. 5-8.

<span id="P2050_632952"></span> <sup>11</sup> The word Mary seems
interpolated. Miller's text reads it after en mesothti. The passage
would then be rendered thus: "that is, Him who through the intervention
of Mary (has been born into the world) the Saviour of all."

<span id="P2052_634901"></span> <sup>12</sup> To asfalej: Cruice reads,
on the authority of Bernays, afelej, i.e., the simplicity.

<span id="P2053_635439"></span> <sup>13</sup> Gen. i. 4, 5, 7

<span id="P2054_635928"></span> <sup>14</sup> Gen. i. 1.

<span id="P2055_635959"></span> <sup>15</sup> Ex. iii. 2.

<span id="P2056_636023"></span> <sup>16</sup> The Docetae here attempted
to substantiate their system from Scripture by a play upon words.

<span id="P2060_637781"></span> <sup>17</sup> The Greek word for soul is
derived from the same root as that for refrigeration.

<span id="P2061_638230"></span> <sup>18</sup> These words are spoken of
the wile of Job, as the feminine form, planhtijand latrij, proves. They
have been added from apocryphal sources to the Greek version (ii. 9),
but are absent from the English translation. The passage stands thus:
kai egw planhtij kai latrij topon ek topou perierxomenh kai oikian ec
oikiaj. The Abbe Cruice refers to St. Chrysostom's *Hom. de
Statuis*\[voL ii. p. 139, opp. ed Migne. not textually quoted.\]

<span id="P2062_638862"></span> <sup>19</sup> Matt. xi. 14, 15

<span id="P2063_640184"></span> <sup>20</sup> Or, "a fleshly membrane."

<span id="P2065_640642"></span> <sup>21</sup> Miller reads, "of the
third Aeon."

<span id="P2066_640758"></span> <sup>22</sup> The Abbe Cruice considers
that the mention of the period of our Lord's birth has accidentally
dropt out of the ms.. here. See book vii. chap. xix.

<span id="P2067_641973"></span> <sup>23</sup> Col. ii. 11, 14, 15

<span id="P2068_642350"></span> <sup>24</sup> John iii. 5, 6

<span id="P2069_643123"></span> <sup>25</sup> Miller's text has "type."

<span id="P2076_645068"></span> <sup>26</sup> What is given here by
Hippolytus respecting Monoimus is quite new. The only writer that
mentions him is Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., i. 18. \[See Bunsen, vol. i. p.
103.\]

<span id="P2078_645465"></span> <sup>27</sup> *Iliad*, xiv, 201, 246.

<span id="P2080_645852"></span> <sup>28</sup> Or, "kinglessly," which
has no meaning here. Miller therefore alters abasileutwjinto aboulhtwj.

<span id="P2081_646241"></span> <sup>29</sup> Ex. vii., viii.

<span id="P2085_647736"></span> <sup>30</sup> The plagues, being
transformations, were no doubt considered symbols of creation, in
accordance with the view of the ancient philosophers, that creation
itself brought nothing into existence, but simply altered the
disposition of already existing elements. \[Gen. i. 2. See Dr. Chalmers'
*Astronomical Discources*.\]

<span id="P2086_648490"></span> <sup>31</sup> It is very much after this
allegorical mode that Philo Judxus interprets the Mosaic law and
history.

<span id="P2090_652668"></span> <sup>32</sup> \[Exod. xii. 17. Comp. 1
Cor. v. 7, 8.\]

<span id="P2091_653341"></span> <sup>33</sup> Isa. xl. 6.

<span id="P2095_654952"></span> <sup>34</sup> Literally, "nobly born."

<span id="P2099_655379"></span> <sup>35</sup> See \[vol. i. pp. 353,
457. But see his works, vol. ii. p. 6r, this series\]; Irenaeus, i. 28;
Eusebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., iv. i6, v. i3; Epiphanius, *Haer*.,
xlvi.: Jerome, *Vir. Illustr*., c. xxix.; and Theodoret, *Haer*. Fab.,
i. 20.
