<span id="P2200_689324"></span> <sup>38</sup> The Latin name is written
by Hippolytus in Greek letters, and means "the public fish-market." The
*Piscina*, one of the fourteen quarters of Rome, was the resort of
money-dealers.

<span id="P2201_691128"></span> <sup>39</sup> The *Pistrinum*was the
domestic treadmill of the Roman slaveholders.

<span id="P2203_691791"></span> <sup>40</sup> \[An instance illustrative
of the touching sense of moral obligation owen in 2 Kings vi. 5.\]

<span id="P2204_692633"></span> <sup>41</sup> See Josephus, *Antig*.,
xix, 10.

<span id="P2205_693754"></span> <sup>42</sup> The air of Sardinia was
unwholesome, if not pestilential; and for this reason, no doubt, it was
selected as a place of exile for martyrs. Hippolytus himself, along with
the Roman bishop Pontianus, was banished thither. See introductory
Notice.

<span id="P2207_694194"></span> <sup>43</sup> Marcia's connection with
the emperor would not seem very consistent with the Christian character
which Hippolytus ives her. Dr. Wordsworth supposes that Hippolytus
speaks ironically in the case of Marcia, as well as of Hyacinthus and
Carpophorus. \[I do not see the evidence of this. Poor Marcia,
afterwards poisoned by the wretch who de degradeded, was a heathen who
under a little light was awakening to some sense of duty, like the woman
of Samaria, John iv. 19.\]

<span id="P2208_694730"></span> <sup>44</sup> \[Note this expression in
contrast with subsequent claims to be the "Universal Bishop."\]

<span id="P2209_695004"></span> <sup>45</sup> See Dio Cassius, ixii. 4.
\[See vol. ii. p. 604, this series \]

<span id="P2210_695174"></span> <sup>46</sup> Or, "a presbyter, thouh an
eunuch," thus indicating the decay of ecclesiastical discipline.

<span id="P2211_695797"></span> <sup>47</sup> Or, "that Marcia had been
brought up by him." \[See what Bunsen has to say \[ vol. i. pp. 126,
and, and note) upon this subject, about which we know very little \]

<span id="P2212_696815"></span> <sup>48</sup> The cemeteryof Callistus
was situated in the *Via Appia*. \[The catacombs near the Church of St.
Sebastian still bear the name of this unhappy man, and give incidental
corroboration to the incident.\]

<span id="P2214_697775"></span> <sup>49</sup> \[Here wordsworth's note
is valuable, p. 80. Callistus had doubtless sent letters to announce his
consecration to other bishops, as was customary, and had received
answers demanding proofs of his orthodoxy. See my note on the
intercommunion of primitive bishops, vol. ii. p. 12, note 9; also on the
Provincial System, vol. iv. pp. 111, 114p. Also Cyprian, this vol.
*passim*.\]

<span id="P2215_698332"></span> <sup>50</sup> euqewj mhden. Scott reads
euqeoj mhden, Dr. Wordsworth translates the words thus: "having no
rectitude of mind."

<span id="P2216_699393"></span> <sup>51</sup> John xiv. 2.

<span id="P2218_700743"></span> <sup>52</sup> \[Here is a very early
precedent for the *Taxa Paenitentiaria,*of which see Bramhall, vol. i.
pp. 56, 180; ii. pp. 445, 446\].

<span id="P2219_701398"></span> <sup>53</sup> \[Elucidation X.11.\]

<span id="P2220_701628"></span> <sup>54</sup> 1 John v. 16.

<span id="P2221_701996"></span> <sup>55</sup> \[Elucidation XIII. And on
marriage of the clergy, vol. iv. p. 49, this series.\]

<span id="P2222_702254"></span> <sup>56</sup> Rom. xiv. 4.

<span id="P2223_702408"></span> <sup>57</sup> Matt. xiii. 30.

<span id="P2225_703413"></span> <sup>58</sup> This passage, of which
there are different readings, has been variously interpreted. The
rendering followed above does probably less violence to the text than
others proposed. The variety of meaning generally turns on the word
enaziain Miller's text. Bunsen alters it into en azia... hlikia, i.e.,
were inflamed at a proper age. Dr. Wordsworth reads hlikiwth... anaziw,
i.e., an unworthy comrade. Roeper reads hlikia... anaziou, i.e., in the
bloom of youth were enamoured with one undeserving of their choice.

<span id="P2226_704314"></span> <sup>59</sup> Dr. Wordsworth places
peridesmeisqaiin the first sentence, and translates thus: "women began
to venture to bandage themselves with ligaments to produce abortion, and
to deal with drugs in order to destroy what it was conceived."

<span id="P2227_704782"></span> <sup>60</sup> \[The prescience of Hermas
and Clement is here illustrated. See vol. ii. pp. 9, 32, 279, 597,
etc.\]

<span id="P2228_705112"></span> <sup>61</sup> \[Elucidation XIV.\]

<span id="P2229_705766"></span> <sup>62</sup> \[Bunsen, i. 115.
Elucidation XV.\]

<span id="P2233_706293"></span> <sup>63</sup> See Eusebius, *Hist.
Ecclesiast*., vi. 38; Epiphanius, *Haer*, xix.; and Theodoret, *Haer.
Fab*., ii. 7.

<span id="P2235_708137"></span> <sup>64</sup> For planhqhnaiDr.
Wordsworth reads platunqhnai, i.e., did not suffer the heresy to spread
wide.

<span id="P2242_710997"></span> <sup>65</sup> Roeper reads teknwi.e., if
any one is guilty of an unnatural crime.

<span id="P2243_711663"></span> <sup>66</sup> \[Concerning angels of
repentance, etc., see Hermas, vol, ii. pp. 19, 24, 26.\]

<span id="P2247_713941"></span> <sup>67</sup> Miller suggests the
singular number (dunamewj).

<span id="P2251_715602"></span> <sup>68</sup> Matt. vii. 6.

<span id="P2255_717455"></span> <sup>69</sup> Or, "nation."

<span id="P2256_718428"></span> <sup>70</sup> See Josephus, *De Beil.
Judaic*. ii. 8, from whom Hippolytus seems to have taken his account of
the Jewish sects, except, as Schneidewin remarks, we suppose some other
writer whom Josephus and Hippolytus themselves followed. The Abbe Cruice
thinks that the author followed by Hippolytus was not Josephus, but a
Christian writer ref the first century, who derived his materials from
the Jewish historian. Hippolytus' text sometimes varies from the text of
Josephus, as well as of Porphyry, who has taken excerpts from Josephus
work.

<span id="P2257_719713"></span> <sup>71</sup> Or "choice."

<span id="P2267_722489"></span> <sup>72</sup> \[The Essenes practised
many pious and edifying rites; and this became Christian usage, after
our Lord's example. Matt. xiv. 19; 1 Tim. iv. 3 - 5.\]

<span id="P2280_728799"></span> <sup>73</sup> \[Query, *un*necessarily?
This seems the sense required.\]

<span id="P2281_728958"></span> <sup>74</sup> \[Deut. xxiii. 13. The
very dogs scratch earth upon their ordure; and this ordinance of decency
is in exquisite consistency with the *modesty of nature*, against which
Christians should never offend.\]

<span id="P2285_729771"></span> <sup>75</sup> \[This zeal for the
*letter*of the Second Commandment was not shared by our Lord (Matt.
xxii. 20).\]

<span id="P2289_732622"></span> <sup>76</sup> \[Important corroborations
of Justin and other Fathers, vol. i p. 286; ii. p. 338, also 81, 117,
148.\]

<span id="P2290_733288"></span> <sup>77</sup> Thus Plato's "Laws"
present many parallels to the writings of Moses. Some have supposed that
Plato became acquainted with:he Pentateuch through the medium of an
ancient Greek version extant prior to that of the Septuagint.
