<span id="P2500_819942"></span> <sup>72</sup> Bunsen translates thus:
"Doubt not that you will exist again," a rendering which Dr. Wordsworth
controverts in favour of the one adopted above.

<span id="P2501_820207"></span> <sup>73</sup> Bunsen translates thus:
"For Christ is He whom the God of all has ordered to wash away the
sins," etc. Dr. Wordsworth severely censures this rendering in a
lengthened note.

<span id="P2502_820802"></span> <sup>74</sup> ptwxeuei, Bunsen
translates,"for God acts the beggar towards thee," which is literal,
though rather unintelligible. Dr. Wordsworth renders the word thus: "God
has a longing for thee."

<span id="P2503_821045"></span> <sup>75</sup> Hippolytus, by his
argument, recognises the duty not merely of overthrowing error but
substantiating truth, or in other words, the negative and positive
aspect of theology. His brief statement (chap. xxviii.-xxx.) in the
latter department, along with being eminently reflective, constitutes a
noble specimen of patristic eloquence. \[This is most just: and it must
be observed, that having summed up his argument against the heresies
derived from carnal anil inferior sources, and shown the primal truth,
he advances (in chap. xxviii.) to the Nnicene position, and proves
himself one of the witnesses on whose traditive testimony that sublime
formulary was given to the whole Church as the kthma ej aeiof
Christendom,- a formal countersign of apostolic doctrine.\]

<span id="P2517_823144"></span> <sup>76</sup> I venture to state this to
encourage young students to keep pen in hand in all their researches,
and always to make notes.

<span id="P2523_827532"></span> <sup>77</sup> Pompey and others were
called *imperatores*before the Caesars, but who includes them with the
Roman emperors?

<span id="P2524_828037"></span> <sup>78</sup> How St. Peter would regard
it, see 1 Pet. v. 1-3. I am sorry to find Dr. Schaff, in his useful
compilation, *History of the Christian Church*, vol. ii. p 166,
dropping, into the old ruts of fable, after sufficiently proving just
before, what I have maintained. He speaks of "the insignificance of *the
first Popes*,"-meaning the early Bishops of Rome, men who minded their
own business, but could not have been "insignificant" had they even
imagined themselves "Popes."

<span id="P2525_829106"></span> <sup>79</sup> See Bossuet, *passim*, and
all the Callican doctors down to our own times. In England the
"supremacy" was never acknowledged nor in France, until now.

<span id="P2531_830152"></span> <sup>80</sup> See his Hippol., vol. i.
pp. 209, 311.

<span id="P2532_830299"></span> <sup>81</sup> See vol. ii. p. 298, this
series.

<span id="P2533_830471"></span> <sup>82</sup> p. 207.

<span id="P2534_830638"></span> <sup>83</sup> Vol. iv p 114, Elucidation
II., this series.

<span id="P2535_832040"></span> <sup>84</sup> Even Quinet notes this.
See his *Ultamontanism*, p. 40, ed. 1845.

<span id="P2537_832556"></span> <sup>85</sup> Bunsen gives it as the
thirty-fifth, vol. i. p. 311.

<span id="P2539_833352"></span> <sup>86</sup> Of which we shall learn in
vol. viii., this series.

<span id="P2540_834329"></span> <sup>87</sup> See Bingham, book ix. cap.
i. sec. 9.

<span id="P2545_835513"></span> <sup>88</sup> Wordsworth, chap. viii. p,
93.

<span id="P2550_836472"></span> <sup>89</sup> See vol. I, pp. 415, 460,
this series.

<span id="P2557_838577"></span> <sup>90</sup> *Introduction to Greek
Classics*, p.228.

<span id="P2566_839407"></span> <sup>91</sup> See vol. ii. p. 12, also
iv. 210.

<span id="P2567_840966"></span> <sup>92</sup> See *Treatise on the
Lapsed*, infra.

<span id="P2577_843542"></span> <sup>93</sup> Ver. 17.

<span id="P2582_844040"></span> <sup>94</sup> See p. v. *supra* .

<span id="P2586_846113"></span> <sup>95</sup> Ps. cvi. 30-31.

<span id="P2596_848350"></span> <sup>96</sup> 2 Thess. ii. 8.
