<span id="P2700_870989"></span> <sup>29</sup> perimenei ton Zwnta.

<span id="P2701_871268"></span> <sup>30</sup> Matt. xxv, 34.

<span id="P2703_872437"></span> <sup>31</sup> 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

<span id="P2705_872775"></span> <sup>32</sup> John vi. 35.

<span id="P2707_873130"></span> <sup>33</sup> stelexoj aneimenon.

<span id="P2709_874360"></span> <sup>34</sup> Ps. cx. 1.

<span id="P2710_875088"></span> <sup>35</sup> Matt. iv. 15.

<span id="P2711_875167"></span> <sup>36</sup> Matt. iv. 17.

<span id="P2712_875726"></span> <sup>37</sup> Phil. iii. 15.

<span id="P2713_875953"></span> <sup>38</sup> Ps. xlv, 11.

<span id="P2716_876367"></span> <sup>39</sup> The text is touto pantwj
katagetai orqwj exein upeilhmmenon.

<span id="P2717_876516"></span> <sup>40</sup> This passage, down to the
word "inseparably," was transcribed by Isaac Vossius at Rome, and first
edited by Grabe in the *Annotations to Bull's Defens.fid*. Nic., p. 103.

<span id="P2718_876742"></span> <sup>41</sup> "God of God," Qeoj uparxwn
dk Qeou. Hippolytus uses here the exact phrase of the Nicene Council.
So, too, in his *Contra Noetum*, chap. x., he has the exact phrase,
"light of light" (fwj ek fwtoj). \[See my concluding remarks (note g) on
the last chapters of the *Phiulosophumena*, p. 153, *supra*.\]

<span id="P2719_877204"></span> <sup>42</sup> The words from "and
appeared" down to "so hereafter" are given by Grebe, but omitted in
Fabricius.

<span id="P2720_877592"></span> <sup>43</sup> Phil. ii. 7-9.

<span id="P2721_877976"></span> <sup>44</sup> oikonomikwj.

<span id="P2722_878082"></span> <sup>45</sup> John xvii. 5.

<span id="P2723_878592"></span> <sup>46</sup> zhlwtoj.

<span id="P2726_879720"></span> <sup>47</sup> 1 Cor. XV. 47.

<span id="P2727_879759"></span> <sup>48</sup> Matt. xxi. 31.

<span id="P2728_879843"></span> <sup>49</sup> o esxatoj. Sevenal
manuscripts and versions and Fathers read; esxatojwith Hippolytus
instead of prwtoj. Jerome *in loc*. remarks on the fact, and observes
that with that reading the interprtation would be quite inteligible; the
sense then being, that "the Jews understand the truth indeed, but evade
it, and refuse to acknowledge What they perceive." Wetstein, in his *New
Test*., i. p. 467, also cites this reading, and adds the conjecture,
that "some, remembering what is said in Matt. xx. 16, viz, \`the last
shall be first,0'thought that the \`publican0'would be called more
properly \`the last,0'and that then some one carried out this
emendation so far as to transpose the replies too."

<span id="P2730_882081"></span> <sup>50</sup> John i. 16.

<span id="P2732_882307"></span> <sup>51</sup> Gen. xlviii. 3, 4.

<span id="P2735_882763"></span> <sup>52</sup> Grabe adduces another
fragment of the comments of Hippolytus on this passage, found in some
leaves deciphered at Rome. It is to tis effect; Plainly and evidently
the generation of the Only-begotten, which is at once from God the
Father, and through the holy Virgin, is signified, even as He is belived
and manifested to be a man. For being by nature and in truth the Son
ofgod the Father, on our account He submitted to birth by woman and the
womb, and sucked the breast. for He did not, as some fancy, become man
only in appearance, but He manifested Himself as in reality that which
we are who follow the laws of nature, and supported Himself by food,
though Himself giving life to the world.

<span id="P2742_884184"></span> <sup>53</sup> From the Second Book of
the *Res Sacrae*of Leontius and Joannes, in Mai, *Script. vet*., vii. p.
84.

<span id="P2749_884915"></span> <sup>54</sup> Jerome introduces this
citation from the Commentary of Hippolytus on Genesis in these terms:
"Since, then we promised to add what that (concerning Isaac and Rebecca,
Gen. xxvii.) signifies figuratively, we may adduce the words of the
martyr Hippolytus, with whom our Victorinus very much agrees: not that
he has made out everything quite fully, but that he may give the reader
the means for a broader understanding of the passage."

<span id="P2750_886209"></span> <sup>55</sup> Gen. xxv. 23.

<span id="P2751_886375"></span> <sup>56</sup> Gen. xxvii. 9.

<span id="P2752_887082"></span> <sup>57</sup> Gen. xxvii. 20.

<span id="P2753_887699"></span> <sup>58</sup> Gen. xxvii. 41.

<span id="P2756_888501"></span> <sup>59</sup> In Leontius Ryzant., book
i. *Against Nestorius and Eutyches* (from Galland). The same fragment is
found in Mai, *Script. vet*., vii. p. 134. \[Galiand was a French
Orientalist, a.d. 1646-1715.\]

<span id="P2758_888884"></span> <sup>60</sup> 1 Tim. ii. 5.

<span id="P2759_888937"></span> <sup>61</sup> This word "man" agrees
ill, not only with the text in Galatians, but even with the meaning of
the writer here; for he is treating, not of a mediator between "two"
men, but between "God and men." Migne.

<span id="P2760_889154"></span> <sup>62</sup> Gal. iii. 20.

<span id="P2763_889386"></span> <sup>63</sup> A fragment from the
tractate of Hippolytus, *On the Sorceress (ventriloquist)*, or *On Saul
and the Witch*, 1 Sam. xxviii. From the Vatican ms.. cccxxx, in Allat.,
*De Engastr*., edited by Simon, in the *Acts of the Martyrs of Ostia*,
p. 160, Rome, 1795.

<span id="P2765_890168"></span> <sup>64</sup> \[Rather "god," the plural
of excellence, Elohim.\]

<span id="P2766_890411"></span> <sup>65</sup> \[This passage is the
scandal of commentators. As I read it, *the Lord interfered*, surprising
the woman and horrifying her. The soul of the prophet came back from
Sheol, and prophesied by the power of God. Our author misunderstands the
Hebrew plural.\]

<span id="P2769_891876"></span> <sup>66</sup> From Gallandi.

<span id="P2771_892514"></span> <sup>67</sup> \[i.e., Samuel prepares
for the Christian era, introducing the "schools of the prophets," and
the synagogue service, which God raised up David to complete, by
furnshing the Psalter. Compare Acts iii. 24, where Samuel's position in
the "goodlv fellowship" is marked. See Payne Smith's *Prophecyy a
Preparation for Christ*.\]

<span id="P2774_892852"></span> <sup>68</sup> i.e., in our version the
third. From Theodoret, Dialogue Second, entitled =Lougxutoj, p, 167.

<span id="P2778_894406"></span> <sup>69</sup> Theodoret, in his First
Dialogue.

<span id="P2780_894762"></span> <sup>70</sup> Ps. xxxviii. 6.

<span id="P2783_895061"></span> <sup>71</sup> Theodoret, in his First
Dialogue.

<span id="P2785_895509"></span> <sup>72</sup> Ps. xxiv. 7.

<span id="P2788_895599"></span> <sup>73</sup> Theodoret, in his Second
Dialogue.

<span id="P2794_897025"></span> <sup>74</sup> Bandini, *Catalog. Codd.
Graec. Biblioth. Mediceo-Laurent*., i.p. 91.

<span id="P2799_898574"></span> <sup>75</sup> Deut. xxxii, 33.
