<span id="P4402_1339732"></span> <sup>150</sup> In the Codex Baroccian.
206. This is found also, alon with the former piece, *On the Twelve
Apostles*, in two codices of the Coislinian or Seguierian Library, as
Montfaucon states in his recension of the Greek manuscripts of that
library. He mentions also a third codex of Hippolytus, *On the Twelve
Apostles*. (Probably spurious, but yet antique.\]

<span id="P4404_1340113"></span> <sup>151</sup> adelfoqeoj.

<span id="P4412_1340508"></span> <sup>152</sup> ecelqwn.

<span id="P4421_1340856"></span> <sup>153</sup> The text is, outoi oi B
twn o tugxanontwn diaskorpisqentwn. It may be meant for, "these two of
the seventy were scattered," etc.

<span id="P4422_1341112"></span> <sup>154</sup> John vi. 53, 66.

<span id="P4423_1341278"></span> <sup>155</sup> euaggelizesqai, perhaps
= *write*of that Gospel, as the Latin version puts it. \[But St. Mark's
body is *said to be*in Venice.\]

<span id="P4434_1341911"></span> <sup>156</sup> *Magus*.

<span id="P4447_1342327"></span> <sup>157</sup> Rom. xvi. 14, Patrobaj.

<span id="P4461_1342783"></span> <sup>158</sup> In the manuscript there
is a *cuna*here.

<span id="P4482_1343570"></span> <sup>159</sup> These were first
published in French by Jo. Michael Wanslebius in his book *Ecclesia
Alexandrina* Paris, 1677, p. 12; then in Latin, by Job Ludolfus, in his
*Commentar. ad historiam Aethiopicam*, Frankfort, 1691, p. 333; and by
William Whiston, in vol. iii. of his *Primitive Christianity Revived*,
published in English at London, 1711. p. 543. He has also noted the
passages in the *Constitutions Apostolicae*, treating the same: matters.

<span id="P4484_1344047"></span> <sup>160</sup> *Constit. Apostol*.,
lib. vi. ch. II, etc.

<span id="P4486_1344110"></span> <sup>161</sup> Lib. vii, ch. 41.

<span id="P4488_1344217"></span> <sup>162</sup> Lib. vii. ch. 4, 5, 10.
\[The service of the faithful, *Missa Fidelium*, not the modern Mass.
See Bingham, book xv. The *Missa*was an innocent word for the
*dismission*of those not about to receive the Communion. See Guettee,
*Exposition*, etc., p. 433.\]

<span id="P4492_1344587"></span> <sup>163</sup> Lib. viii. ch. 17, 18,
19, 20, 23, 45.

<span id="P4494_1344678"></span> <sup>164</sup> Lib. viii. ch. 21, 22.

<span id="P4496_1344735"></span> <sup>165</sup> Lib. viii. ch. 1, 2.

<span id="P4498_1344834"></span> <sup>166</sup> Lib. viii. ch. 46, 32.
