<span id="P4701_1406794"></span> <sup>13</sup> That is, Providence
ensured the respite, to fulfil the promise.

<span id="P4703_1408072"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[See note at end of this
memoir \]

<span id="P4707_1411915"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[He was the first of the
*province*, that is. See p 273, *supra*.\]

<span id="P4708_1412576"></span> <sup>16</sup> The simple attire of
Hippolytus, as seen in his statue. was doubtless what is here meant by
*insignia*. But see Hermas, vol. ii. p. 12.\]

<span id="P4719_1413385"></span> <sup>1</sup> In the Oxford edition this
epistle is given among the treatises.

<span id="P4723_1414149"></span> <sup>2</sup> Wearying, *scil*.
"fatigantis."

<span id="P4724_1414475"></span> <sup>3</sup> " Fabulis." \[Our
"Thanksgiving Day " = the "Vindemia."\]

<span id="P4725_1414759"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[A lover of' gardens and
of nature. The religion of Christ gave a new and loftier impulse to such
tastes universally. Vol, ii. p. 0.\]

<span id="P4728_1417065"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[Another Nicodemus, John
iii.\]

<span id="P4730_1420457"></span> <sup>6</sup> Or, "shone," "infulsit."

<span id="P4735_1425734"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[Alas, that in the modern
theatre and opera all this has been reproduced, and Christians applaud!
\]

<span id="P4736_1426006"></span> <sup>8</sup> Errors, *v*. *l*.

<span id="P4737_1428327"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[Compare Tertullian, vol.
iii. pp. 87 et seqq.\]

<span id="P4739_1429687"></span> <sup>10</sup> f Rom. i. 26, 27. The
enormous extent of this diabolical form of lust is implied in all these
patristic rebukes.\]

<span id="P4741_1430876"></span> <sup>11</sup> The dresses of peace.

<span id="P4743_1434353"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[Confirmed by all the
Roman satirists, as will be recalled by the reader. Conf. Horace,
*Sat.*,vi. book i.\]

<span id="P4747_1439434"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[What a testimony to
regeneration! Cyprian speaks from heathen experience, then from the
experience of a new birth. Few specimens of simple eloquence surpass
this.\]

<span id="P4750_1441588"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[See Cowper, on "the
Sabine bard", *Task*, b. iv. But compare even the best of Horatian
epistles with this: "O noctes coenaeque Deum," etc. What a blessed
contra.it in Christian society!\]

<span id="P4751_1441911"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[Here recall the
*Evening Hymn*, vol. ii. p. 298.\]

<span id="P4758_1442332"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. viii.

<span id="P4762_1442798"></span> <sup>2</sup> Papam. \[The Roman clergy
give this title to Cyprian.\]

<span id="P4763_1443438"></span> <sup>3</sup> This exercise of
*jurisdiction, vice episcopi*, is to be noted.)

<span id="P4764_1443874"></span> <sup>4</sup> Ezek. xxxiv. 3, 4.

<span id="P4765_1444205"></span> <sup>5</sup> John x. ii., 12.

<span id="P4766_1444335"></span> <sup>6</sup> John xxi. 17.

<span id="P4767_1444475"></span> <sup>7</sup> This is a very obscure
passage, and is variously understood. It seems most probable that the
allusion is to Peter's denial of his Lord, and following Him afar off;
and is intended to bear upon Cyprian's retirement. There seems no
meaning in interpreting the passage a. a reference to Peter's death.
\[It seems. in a slight degree, to reflect on Cyprian's withdrawal. But
note, it asserts that the *pasce oves meas*was a reproach to St. Peter,
and was understood to be so by his fellow-apostles. In other words, our
Lord, so these clergy argue, bade St. Peter not again to forsake the
brethren whom he should strengthen. Luke xxii. 32.\]

<span id="P4769_1445994"></span> <sup>8</sup> That is to say, "to the
Capitol to sacrifice."

<span id="P4771_1447111"></span> <sup>9</sup> Clinomeni.

<span id="P4772_1447368"></span> <sup>10</sup> i.e., as to the implied
promise of their preparation for baptism.

<span id="P4779_1448635"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. ix.

<span id="P4783_1449041"></span> <sup>2</sup> Fabian, bishop of Rome.
\[Cyprian's "colleague," but their bishop. See Greek of Philip. ii. 25,.
He is an example to his brethren: such the simple position of a
primitive Bishop of Rome.\]

<span id="P4785_1450220"></span> <sup>3</sup> The foregoing letter, Ep.
ii.

<span id="P4791_1451056"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. v.

<span id="P4795_1451714"></span> <sup>2</sup> *Scil*. Carthage, where
the populace had already demanded Cyprian's blood.

<span id="P4797_1453175"></span> <sup>3</sup> " Qui illic apud
confessores offerunt," scil. "the oblation" (prosfora, Rom. xv. 16),
i.e., "who celebrate the Eucharist."
