<span id="P5000_1517504"></span> <sup>2</sup> Comp. Ep, xiii. to the
Roman clergy.

<span id="P5003_1519854"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Another instance of this
usage (kat= ecoxhn), of which see p. 291, *supra*.\]

<span id="P5005_1521610"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[Note the moderation of
our author. 1 Pet. v. 5.\]

<span id="P5010_1522104"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxxvii. In
the autumn of A.D. 250.

<span id="P5014_1522455"></span> <sup>2</sup> "Further, that you came to
them in such way as you could enter: that you refreshed their minds,
robust in their own faith and confession, by your appeals and your
letters; that, accompanying their happiness with deserved praises, you
inflamed them to a much more ardent desire for heavenly glory; that you
urged them onward in the course; that you animated, as we believe and
hope, future victors by the power of your address, so that, although all
this may seem to come from the faith of the confessors and the divine
indulgence, yet in their martyrdom they may seem in some manner to have
become debtors to you."

<span id="P5016_1523875"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[i.e., confessorship. As
to the time, see Treatise ii. *infra*.\]

<span id="P5025_1529749"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxiii.
A.D. 250.

<span id="P5029_1529885"></span> <sup>2</sup> "Cypriano Papae," to
"Pope" Cyprian. \[An instance illustrative of what is to be found on p.
54, *supra*. See also Elucidation III. p. 154, *supra*.\]

<span id="P5035_1530541"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxvi. A.D.
250.

<span id="P5039_1530877"></span> <sup>2</sup> Isa. lxvi. 2.

<span id="P5040_1531481"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Elucidation V,\]

<span id="P5041_1531728"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[The affectionate and
general usage of primitive bishops to seek the *consensus fratrum*, is
noteworthy.\]

<span id="P5047_1532732"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxiv. A.D.
250.

<span id="P5051_1533041"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[The community of this
term, *presbyters*, has been noted. See p 156, *supra*.\]

<span id="P5052_1533260"></span> <sup>3</sup> "Some" would seem to be
correct (Goldhom); but it has no authority.

<span id="P5053_1533361"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[i.e., to idols, or the
imperial image.\]

<span id="P5054_1533638"></span> <sup>5</sup> "Presbyterium
subministrabat" assisted, probably as vicar or curate.

<span id="P5055_1534196"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[A very touching
incident, dramatically narrated.\]

<span id="P5060_1534759"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxv. A. D.
250.

<span id="P5065_1536246"></span> <sup>2</sup> Probably the treatise, *On
the Lapsed*.

<span id="P5066_1536797"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[A beautiful specimen of
obedience to the precept, 1 Pet. v. 5.\]

<span id="P5071_1536930"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxi. A.D.
250.

<span id="P5076_1538270"></span> <sup>2</sup> "Florida," *scil*.
"purpurea," purpled, that is, with blood. See concluding section of Ep.
viii. The Oxford translator has "empurpled."

<span id="P5078_1539551"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Written at Easter, like
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, as implied in cap. v. 7. See
Conybeare and Howson.\]

<span id="P5079_1539798"></span> <sup>4</sup> The Oxford edition has a
variation here, as follows: "Until our Lord Jesus Christ afford help,
and pity be manifested through you, or through those my lords who may
have been crowned, from whom you will entreat that these dreadful
shipwrecks may be pardoned."

<span id="P5081_1541099"></span> <sup>5</sup> Ps. xx. 4.

<span id="P5082_1541202"></span> <sup>6</sup> This seems altogether
unintelligible: the original is probably corrupt. \[It seems to relate
to the sort of *priesthood*which was conceded to all martyrs, in view of
(Rev. i. 6 and v. 10) the message sent b the angel "to His servants,"
and by their servant or minister, John.\]

<span id="P5083_1541808"></span> <sup>7</sup> Dodwell conjectures this
name to be from atuxousa(unhappy) or aekousa(unwilling), and applies it
to Candida.

<span id="P5084_1542061"></span> <sup>8</sup> A spot in the Roman Forum
which must of necessity be passed by in the ascent to the Capitol. It
would appear that Candida therefore repented of her purpose of
sacrificing, when she was actually on her way to effect it.

<span id="P5085_1542416"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[i.e., the clergy
administering jurisdiction.\]

<span id="P5086_1542557"></span> <sup>10</sup> i.e., in the room of
Fabian.

<span id="P5088_1543466"></span> <sup>11</sup> \[i e., to Ostia or
Portus\].

<span id="P5093_1544364"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xxii. A.D.
250.

<span id="P5098_1545296"></span> <sup>2</sup> The emperor Decius.

<span id="P5099_1545531"></span> <sup>3</sup> The passage is hopelessly
confused.
