<span id="P5401_1648242"></span> <sup>12</sup> Mark vii. 9.

<span id="P5402_1649081"></span> <sup>13</sup> 1 Tim. vi. 3-5.

<span id="P5403_1649291"></span> <sup>14</sup> Eph.v. 6, 7.

<span id="P5405_1651064"></span> <sup>15</sup> Deut. xvii. 12.

<span id="P5406_1651500"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[The high official tone
with which Cyprian upholds his own authority is always balanced by equal
zeal for the presbyters and the laity. On which Compare Hooker,
*Polity*, book viii. cap. vi. 8.\]

<span id="P5411_1652145"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xliv, A.D
251.

<span id="P5413_1652242"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[ Cornelius has succeeded
to the *cathedra*in Rome. Here opens a new chapter in the history of
Cyprian and of the Roman See.\]

<span id="P5417_1653375"></span> <sup>3</sup> *Ordination*to the
episcopate was the term used. *Consecration*is the inferior term now
usual in Western Christendom. Elucidation VIII.\]

<span id="P5418_1654047"></span> <sup>4</sup> "In statione," "stationary
assembly;" these being the Wednesdays and Fridays in each week
(Marshall). \[See vol. i. p. 33.\]

<span id="P5419_1654907"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[Note the free use of
this phrase by Cyprian This also to the Bishop of Rome.\]

<span id="P5421_1655672"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[Nothing of a "universal
bishop" is intimated or heard of. The e ection is that of a bishop like
any other bishop.\]

<span id="P5422_1655919"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[Here note, that the
episcopate of Rome is in no otherwise regulated or regarded than that of
any other See.\]

<span id="P5427_1656265"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed,: Ep. xlv. A.D.
251.

<span id="P5432_1658001"></span> <sup>2</sup> The Oxford edition follows
some authorities in reading this "sadness" rather than "gladness."

<span id="P5434_1660167"></span> <sup>3</sup> Ps. xxxiv. 13.

<span id="P5435_1660349"></span> <sup>4</sup> Ps. l. 19, 20.

<span id="P5436_1660545"></span> <sup>5</sup> Eph. iv, 29.

<span id="P5437_1660625"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lit.: "that these things
ought to be done."

<span id="P5438_1660930"></span> <sup>7</sup> The co-presbyter here
spoken of is Novatian. The Orford text reads," When such writings came
to me concerning you and your co-presbyters sitting with you, as had the
true ring of religious simplicity m then'." There is a variety of
readings. \[But think of a modern "Pope" thus addressed about a
"co-presbyter."\]

<span id="P5440_1661457"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[Cyprian, however,
respectfully demands the canonical evidences from his brother
Cornelius.\]

<span id="P5441_1661736"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[Every bishop thus
announced his ordination.\]

<span id="P5443_1663575"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[Had such instructions
proceeded from the Roman See to Cyprian, what inferences would have been
manufactured out of them by the media:vol writers.\]

<span id="P5448_1664389"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xlvii.
A.D. 25l.

<span id="P5453_1664920"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[On the frequent
confusion of these names see Wordsworth, *Hippol*., p. 109.\]

<span id="P5458_1665639"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xlvi. A.D.
251.

<span id="P5463_1666585"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[" Another bishop should
be made." What would have been the outcry o( the whole Church, and what
the language of Cyprian, had any idea entered their minds that the case
was that of the Divine Oracle of Christendom, the Vicar of Christ, the
Centre of Unity, the Infallible, etc.\]

<span id="P5468_1668069"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xlviii.
A.D. 251.

<span id="P5475_1670118"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[This refers to the
episcopate. They had taken letters only to "presbyters and deacons." Or
to Christ the root, and the Church the womb or matrix. See *infra*,
Letter xlviii. p. 325.

<span id="P5481_1672163"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. xlix. A.D.
251.

<span id="P5486_1672637"></span> <sup>2</sup> Novatian.

<span id="P5487_1673142"></span> <sup>3</sup> Baluz.: "Announced the
swelling pride of some, the softened temper of others."

<span id="P5488_1674376"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[i.e., for episcopal
ordination and consecration.\]

<span id="P5490_1674671"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[See Ep. xvii. p. 296,
*supra*.\]

<span id="P5491_1675636"></span> <sup>6</sup> Matt. v. 8.

<span id="P5492_1676739"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[*Episcopatus unus est*.
One bishop, i e., one episcopate. See the note, Oxford translation of
this letter, p. 108, and Cyprian's theory of the same in his *Treatise
on Unity*.\]

<span id="P5493_1676974"></span> <sup>8</sup> Baluzius reads,without
authority: "Who would not be moved by that profession of theirs.", etc.

<span id="P5499_1678204"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. li. A.D.
251.
