<span id="P6200_1961072"></span> <sup>2</sup> Ep. lxxi.

<span id="P6201_1961495"></span> <sup>3</sup> Mention is made o( both
letters in the Epistle to Jubaianus, and in the one that follows this.

<span id="P6203_1962431"></span> <sup>4</sup> "And true."

<span id="P6204_1962698"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[This is very much to be
observed, at this outset of an important historical controversy. Cyprian
was not conscious of any innovation. See.Oxford Tertull., vol. i. p.
280, note.\]

<span id="P6205_1963313"></span> <sup>6</sup> Jer. ii. 13.

<span id="P6206_1963458"></span> <sup>7</sup> Prov. ix. 19 (LXX.).

<span id="P6207_1963574"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[When a deacon baptized,
he was regarded as using, not his own "key," but the keys of the
priesthood, and as simply supplying a lawful hand to the absent priest.
See p. 366, note 8, *supra*.\]

<span id="P6208_1964101"></span> <sup>9</sup> Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.

<span id="P6209_1964339"></span> <sup>10</sup> Num. xix. 2.

<span id="P6211_1965122"></span> <sup>11</sup> \[i.e., confirmation,
called chrism, or *unction*, from 1 John ii. 27 and other Scriptures.\]

<span id="P6212_1965405"></span> <sup>12</sup> An authorized reading
here is, "But further, the Eucharist and the oil, whence the baptized
are anointed. are sanctified on the altar."

<span id="P6213_1965590"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[Material oil was not
originally used in baptism or confirmation, but was admitted
ceremonially, in divers rites, at an early period. Mark vi. 13; Jas. v.
14. Bunsen, *Hippol*., vol. ii. p. 322, note I.\]

<span id="P6214_1966103"></span> <sup>14</sup> Ps. cxli. 5 (LXX.).

<span id="P6215_1966527"></span> <sup>15</sup> John ix. 31.

<span id="P6216_1966879"></span> <sup>16</sup> Lev. xix. 2.

<span id="P6217_1966954"></span> <sup>17</sup> Tinctus.

<span id="P6219_1967688"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[Sec Cave, *Prim.
Christianity*, p. 365.\]

<span id="P6220_1968118"></span> <sup>19</sup> Luke xi. 23.

<span id="P6221_1968508"></span> <sup>20</sup> 1 John ii. 18, 19.

<span id="P6222_1969127"></span> <sup>21</sup> \[The vigour of Cyprian's
logic must be conceded. The discussion will show, as it proceeds, on
what grounds it failed to enlist universal support. It resembled the
Easter question, vol. i. p. 569.\]

<span id="P6227_1969394"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. lxxi. A.D.
255.

<span id="P6232_1970084"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Note this, at the
outset: it is *presumption*in his colleague Stephen to act otherwise
than as a general consent of the provinces seems to rule.\]

<span id="P6233_1970503"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Otherwise, "which
doubtless is one in the Catholic Church; and if this Church be one
baptism cannot exist outside the Church." His theory of unity underlies
all our author's conduct.\]

<span id="P6234_1971320"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[Note this, at the
outset: it is *presumption*in his colleague Stephen to act otherwise
than as a general consent of the provinces seems to rule.\]

<span id="P6235_1972008"></span> <sup>5</sup> Ecclus. xxxiv. 25.

<span id="P6237_1972381"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[The local custom of the
Roman Province seems to have justified Stephen's *local*practice. It is
a case similar to that of Polycarp and Anicetus disturbed by Victor,
vol. i. 310, and 312.\]

<span id="P6239_1974161"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[But a primacy involves
no supremacy. All the Gallicans, with Bossuet, insist on this. point.
Cyprian now adopts, as his rule, St. Paul's example, Gal. ii. 5.\]

<span id="P6240_1974396"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[Here, then, is the whole
of Cyprian's idea as to Peter, in a nutshell.\]

<span id="P6241_1975224"></span> <sup>9</sup> 1 Cor. xiv. 29, 30. \[P.
379, note 4, *infra*,\]

<span id="P6243_1976375"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[With Cyprian it was an
adjudged case. Stephen not only had no authority in the case, but, save
by courtesy, even his *primacy*was confined to his own province.\]

<span id="P6248_1976826"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. lxxii.
\[Concerning the council (seventh of Carthage), see the Acts, *infra*.
Elucidation XVL\]

<span id="P6253_1978275"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[He quotes Acts viii.
17.\]

<span id="P6254_1978524"></span> <sup>3</sup> The sense of this passage
has been doubted but seems to be this: "The rite of confirmation, or the
giving of the Holy Ghost, is of no avail unless baptism have first been
conferred. For only by being born *of each sacrament*, scil.
confirmation and baptism, can they be fully sanctified and be born
again; since it is written, \`Except a man be born of *water*and of the
*Spirit*,0' etc; which quotation is plainly meant to convey, that the
birth of water is by *baptism*, that of the Spirit by *confirmation*."

<span id="P6255_1979149"></span> <sup>4</sup> John iii. 5. \[Bingham,
book xii. cap. i. sec. 4.\]

<span id="P6256_1979947"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[This case (Acts x. 47)
was governed by the example of Christ, Matt. iii. 15. The baptism of the
Spirit had preceded; yet as an act of obedience to Christ, and in honour
of His example, St. Peter "fulfils all righteousness," even to the
letter.\]

<span id="P6258_1981740"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lev. xxi. 21.

<span id="P6259_1981922"></span> <sup>7</sup> Ex. xix. 22.

<span id="P6260_1982074"></span> <sup>8</sup> Ex. xxviii. 43.

<span id="P6262_1983911"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[Obviously, the law of
liberty here laid down might introduce the greatest confusion if not
limited by common consent. Yet the tolerant spirit of our author merits
praise. P. 378, notes 1, 2.\]

<span id="P6267_1984174"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. lxxiii.
A.D. 256.

<span id="P6271_1984548"></span> <sup>2</sup> In the year of Christ 256,
a little after the seventh council of Carthage, Cyprian wrote a long
letter to the Bishop Jubaianus. He had consulted Cyprian about baptism,
and at the same time had sent a letter not written by himself, but by
some other person opposed to the opinion of Cyprian.

<span id="P6273_1985778"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Letter lxx. sec. 4, p.
378, *supra*. Jubaian, was of Mauritania.\]

<span id="P6275_1986916"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[This helps us to
understand the expression, p. 322, note2, *supra*.\]

<span id="P6276_1987117"></span> <sup>5</sup> Or, "the source of baptism
which is one."

<span id="P6278_1988527"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[Note, that Cyprian
believes himself to be sustaining a res ad*judicata*, and has no idea
that the councils of the African Church need to be revised beyond seas.
Letter lxx. p. 373, note a, *supra*.\]

<span id="P6280_1990294"></span> <sup>7</sup> Or otherwise, "and other
plagues of heretics subverting the truth with their swords and poisons."

<span id="P6282_1991250"></span> <sup>8</sup> *Matt. xxviii. 18, 19*.
\[Eluiidation XVII.\]

<span id="P6284_1992686"></span> <sup>9</sup> Jer. xv. 18(LXX.).

<span id="P6286_1994018"></span> <sup>10</sup> John xx. 21-23. \[See
notes of Oxf. edition on this letter.\]

<span id="P6290_1996761"></span> <sup>11</sup> \[This sounds like
Ignatius himself, whose style abounds in aphorisms. See vol. i. p. 45.\]

<span id="P6291_1996908"></span> <sup>12</sup> Deut. iv. 24.

<span id="P6293_1998077"></span> <sup>13</sup> John vi. 37, 38. \[This
quotation is amended by me, in strict accordance with the (ek thj
koiliaj) Greek, which refers to the *nobler cavity*, not the inferior,
of the human body.\]

<span id="P6294_1998697"></span> <sup>14</sup> Or, "with the courage of
faith."

<span id="P6297_2000404"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[It would seem, then,
that "custom" could be pleaded on both sides. This appeal is recognised
in Scripture. 1 Cor. xi. 16; and see sec. 23, *infra*. As to preceding
sentence, Elucidation XVII.\]

<span id="P6298_2000932"></span> <sup>16</sup> 1 Tim. i. 13.
