<span id="P6300_2001804"></span> <sup>17</sup> Phil. i. 18.

<span id="P6302_2003528"></span> <sup>18</sup> 2 Tim. ii. 17.

<span id="P6303_2003797"></span> <sup>19</sup> 2 Cor. vi. 14.

<span id="P6304_2003964"></span> <sup>20</sup> 1 John iv. 3.

<span id="P6306_2004888"></span> <sup>21</sup> Matt. vii. 21.

<span id="P6307_2005208"></span> <sup>22</sup> Matt. xxiv. 5, 25.

<span id="P6309_2006085"></span> <sup>23</sup> John xiv. 6.

<span id="P6310_2006309"></span> <sup>24</sup> John xvii. 3.

<span id="P6311_2007352"></span> <sup>25</sup> Acts ii. 38, 39.

<span id="P6313_2009240"></span> <sup>26</sup> John vi. 65.

<span id="P6314_2009523"></span> <sup>27</sup> Matt. xv. 13.

<span id="P6316_2009880"></span> <sup>28</sup> Luke xvi. 8.

<span id="P6317_2010716"></span> <sup>29</sup> Ex. xx. 12.

<span id="P6318_2010967"></span> <sup>30</sup> Matt. xv. 4.

<span id="P6321_2013070"></span> <sup>31</sup> 1 Cor. xiii. 3.

<span id="P6322_2013236"></span> <sup>32</sup> \[One of the Catholic
maxims which has been terribly misunderstood and cruelly abused. See
below, p. 385, notes 2 and 3.\]

<span id="P6323_2014143"></span> <sup>33</sup> John iii. 5. \[His
exposition of this passage explains his hyperbole, *nulla salus extra
ecclesiam*. Of which sec. 23, *infra*.\]

<span id="P6325_2015223"></span> <sup>34</sup> Luke xii. 50. \[See p.
386, first line.\]

<span id="P6327_2016062"></span> <sup>35</sup> \[Here is the qualilfying
maxim to that other dictum. Potens est Dominus misericordia sua,
indulgentiam dare. Matt. ix. 13, 7. How emphatic this repeated maxim of
Christ! And see Jas. ii. 13.\]

<span id="P6329_2018034"></span> <sup>36</sup> \[John's baptism was
under the Law, and was distinguished from Christ's baptism; which
accounts for the plural in Heb. vi. 2\]

<span id="P6332_2019873"></span> <sup>37</sup> \[See Ep. lxxi, sec. 3,
p. 379, *supra*. Here is the spirit, not of Tertullian, but of Irenaeus
(vol. i. p. 310), which seems to have prevailed in the
*practical*settlement, between East and West, of one vexed question. As
a question of canonical consent and of irresistible logic, *assuming the
premiss*, Cyprian appears to me justified.\]

<span id="P6333_2020380"></span> <sup>38</sup> \[See Ep. lxxi, sec. 3,
p. 379, *supra*. Here is the spirit, not of Tertullian, but of Irenaeus
(vol. i. p. 310), which seems to have prevailed in the
*practical*settlement, between East and West, of one vexed question. As
a question of canonical consent and of irresistible logic, *assuming the
premiss*, Cyprian appears to me justified.\]

<span id="P6334_2020857"></span> <sup>39</sup> 1 Cor. xi 16.

<span id="P6335_2021154"></span> <sup>40</sup> \[See this volume,
*infra*.\] A.D. 256.

<span id="P6340_2021357"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep. lxiiv.

<span id="P6344_2021834"></span> <sup>2</sup> On which subject, again,
in chap. 25: "I will not now reconsider what he angrily uttered against
Stephen, because there is no necessity for it. The very same things are
indeed said which have already been suffciently discussed, and it is
better to pass by what suggested the risk of a mischievous dissension.
Stephen, for his part, had thought that they who endeavoured to annul
the old custom about receiving heretics were to be excommunicated; but
the other, moved with the diffculty of that very question, and very
largely endowed with a sacred charity, thought that unity might be
maintained with them who thought differently. Thus, although there was a
great deal of keenness, yet it was always in a spirit of brotherhood;
and at length the peace of Christ conquered in their hearts, so that in
such a dispute none of the mischief of schism arose between them"
(Migne), \[Ed. Migne adds, assuming the mediaeval system to have been
known to Cyprian, as follows\]: "Thus far Augustine, whom we have quoted
at length, because the passage is opposed to those who strive from this
to assert his schism from the Roman pontiff."

<span id="P6346_2023475"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[It will be seen, more
and more, that this entire conviction of Cyprian as to Stephen's
absolute equality with himself, results from the Ante-Nicene system, and
accords with his theory of the divine organization of the Church. So
Augustine, as quoted in the "Argument."\]

<span id="P6347_2024146"></span> <sup>4</sup> Meaning, probably,
heretics with regard to the doctrine of the Trinity, Stephen not
regarding the Novatians as" properly" heretics. \[See Oxford translator,
note m, p. 261.\]

<span id="P6349_2025624"></span> <sup>5</sup> Josh. i. 8.

<span id="P6350_2026358"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[Tit. iii. 11.\]

<span id="P6352_2027990"></span> <sup>7</sup> Isa. xxix. 13.

<span id="P6353_2028161"></span> <sup>8</sup> Mark vii. 13.

<span id="P6354_2028445"></span> <sup>9</sup> 1 Tim. vi. 3-5.

<span id="P6356_2029201"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[This "unity" consisted
not at all in agreeing with Stephen, according to our author. See good
note (1) Oxford edition, p. 260.\]

<span id="P6358_2030673"></span> <sup>11</sup> Gal. iii. 27.

<span id="P6359_2031430"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[Cyprian does not
believe in the mere *opus operatum*of the water. And one fears that
Stephen's position in this matter bore its fruit long after in that
pernicious dogma of the schoolmen.\]

<span id="P6361_2032127"></span> <sup>13</sup> Tit. iii. 5.

<span id="P6362_2032531"></span> <sup>14</sup> Eph. v. 25, 26.

<span id="P6363_2032804"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[Allowing the premisses
admitted alike by Stephen and Cyprian (of which it is not my place to
speak), the logic of our author appears to me irresistible.
*Practically*, how wise the inspired maxim, Rom. xiv. 1.\]

<span id="P6366_2034825"></span> <sup>16</sup> Mal. ii. 1, 2. \[Compare
Tertullian, vol. iv. p. 122.\]

<span id="P6367_2035512"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[A terrible indictment,
indeed, of his brother Stephen; provoked, however, by conduct less
warranted. See Ep. lxxiv. *infra*.\]

<span id="P6368_2036620"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[Stephen's presumption
in this step is the dark spot in his record. It was a *brutum fulmen*,
however, even in his own province. See Augustine's testimony, Oxf. ed.
(note l) p. 258.\]

<span id="P6370_2037265"></span> <sup>19</sup> Luke xviii. 8.

<span id="P6371_2037602"></span> <sup>20</sup> \[Another of Cyprian's
striking aphorisms: "Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est."\]

<span id="P6372_2038165"></span> <sup>21</sup> Esdras iv. 38-40.

<span id="P6373_2038262"></span> <sup>22</sup> John xiv. 6.

<span id="P6375_2038786"></span> <sup>23</sup> Original, "*docibilis*."
2 Tim. ii. 24.

<span id="P6376_2039216"></span> <sup>24</sup> 1 Cor. xiv. 30.

<span id="P6377_2040633"></span> <sup>25</sup> \[Elucidation XVIII. See
pp. 380 (note I) and 322 (note 2).\]

<span id="P6379_2041265"></span> <sup>26</sup> Cant. iv. 12, 13.

<span id="P6380_2041731"></span> <sup>27</sup> 1 Pet. iii. 20, 21.

<span id="P6381_2042103"></span> <sup>28</sup> \[It is obvious that the
Cyprianic theory of unity has not the least connection with a theory
depending on communion with a particular See. But this calculates the
maxim, p. 384, note 7.\]

<span id="P6383_2042694"></span> <sup>29</sup> \[See letter lxxi. p.
378, *supra*.\]

<span id="P6388_2042981"></span> <sup>1</sup> Oxford ed.: Ep lxxv.
\[This is one of the most important illustrations of ante-nicene unity
and its laws. Elucidation XIX.\]

<span id="P6392_2043368"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[But observe, in
contrast, the language of Stephen, which he rebukes (sec, 26, *infra*),
and his schismatical conduct towards the whole African Church.\]

<span id="P6393_2043671"></span> <sup>3</sup> To the effect that he
would not hold communion with them so long as they should persist in
their opinion concerning the baptism of heretics, as Eusebius tells us
from a letter of Dionysius of Alexandria to Xistus, the successor of
Stephen, *Hist. Eccles*., book vii. c. 4.

<span id="P6395_2044622"></span> <sup>4</sup> Isa. ii. 2.

<span id="P6396_2045053"></span> <sup>5</sup> Ps. cxxxiii. 1.

<span id="P6398_2045781"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[This is a sentence to be
admired, apart from anything in the general subject.\]
