<span id="P7300_2401771"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[" Aequali jure et pan
lege." This would have furnished ground for Jefferson's famous sentence
in the American Declaration of Independence. See also Franklin's
sentiment, vol. i. p. 552, note 9. There is a very remarkable passage in
Massillon which might have engendered the French Revolution had it been
known to the people. See Petit Careme, *On Palm Sunday*, p 189, etc.,
ed. 1745.\]

<span id="P7301_2402623"></span> <sup>18</sup> Some add, "over man."

<span id="P7303_2403719"></span> <sup>19</sup> Hos. iv. 1-4.

<span id="P7305_2404776"></span> <sup>20</sup> Some texts read, "fear or
shame in sinning."

<span id="P7307_2407136"></span> <sup>21</sup> Or, "no pretence." Some
add, "no fear."

<span id="P7308_2408598"></span> <sup>22</sup> Isa. lix. 1.

<span id="P7310_2409320"></span> <sup>23</sup> Or, "distress; " *v*.
*l*.

<span id="P7314_2413540"></span> <sup>24</sup> \[Vol. iii. pp. 176,
180.\]

<span id="P7316_2414891"></span> <sup>25</sup> Ex. xxii. 20.

<span id="P7317_2415072"></span> <sup>26</sup> Isa. ii. 8.

<span id="P7318_2416108"></span> <sup>27</sup> Some read, "the Son
whom."

<span id="P7320_2417342"></span> <sup>28</sup> Or, according to some,
"of kings."

<span id="P7321_2417654"></span> <sup>29</sup> Rom. xii. 19.

<span id="P7322_2417819"></span> <sup>30</sup> Prov. xx. 22.

<span id="P7324_2419044"></span> <sup>31</sup> \[Beautiful triumph of
faith, "peace in believing! "\]

<span id="P7326_2420482"></span> <sup>32</sup> Or, "whom you do not see
not to suffer with yourself."

<span id="P7328_2421259"></span> <sup>33</sup> Hab. iii. 17.

<span id="P7330_2422607"></span> <sup>34</sup> Otherwise read," to us
the worshippers of God, and to His profane opponents."

<span id="P7332_2423707"></span> <sup>35</sup> Isa. xliii. 6-9.

<span id="P7333_2423923"></span> <sup>36</sup> Mal. iv. 1.

<span id="P7334_2424620"></span> <sup>37</sup> Ezek. ix. 5.

<span id="P7335_2424916"></span> <sup>38</sup> Ezek. ix. 4.

<span id="P7336_2425319"></span> <sup>39</sup> Ex. xii. 13.

<span id="P7337_2425706"></span> <sup>40</sup> \[Ezek. ix. 4 ; Rev. vii.
3, 4.\]

<span id="P7339_2425764"></span> <sup>41</sup> Or, according to some
pleadings, "Be wise, therefore."

<span id="P7340_2426544"></span> <sup>42</sup> Amos v. 6.

<span id="P7341_2426751"></span> <sup>43</sup> John xvii. 3.

<span id="P7343_2427989"></span> <sup>44</sup> Isa. lxvi. 24.

<span id="P7344_2429029"></span> <sup>45</sup> Wisd. v. 1-9.

<span id="P7346_2429637"></span> <sup>46</sup> " From the deep and
darkling night o( superstition" is another reading.

<span id="P7347_2431852"></span> <sup>47</sup> \[Compare the
*Octavius*of Minucius Felix with this treatise, and also the other
apologists, e.g., vol. ii, 93gg.\]

<span id="P7352_2431981"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Written A.D. 247.
Compare vol. ii. pp. 79, 136, 184, etc.\]

<span id="P7356_2432697"></span> <sup>2</sup> Moreover, that it was
manifest from their deceitful results, that nothing could be referred to
auspices or auguries; nay, even those who acknowledged both one God and
the demons, allowed that these illusions were the work of the demons,
according to the testimony of the poets themselves, and Socrates, Plato,
Trismegistus, and Hostanes. The second point, that God is one, he makes
evident in a few words, as well from the greater dignity of a monarchy
than of other forms of I government, as Crom the very expressions of the
heathen and of the common people -" 0 God!" and the like. Finally, he
treats of Christ more at large, crom the Jewish prophets and from the
evangelical history.

<span id="P7359_2434087"></span> <sup>3</sup> Most editors read, "Castor
and Pollux."

<span id="P7360_2434627"></span> <sup>4</sup> *Latebra*.

<span id="P7361_2434740"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[" Litteras imprimere...
signare nummos." How could the art of printing have failed to follow
such inventions and such words? Every coin was a hint of the printer's
art. God only could have restrained the invention till the set time.
Dan. xii. 4.\]

<span id="P7362_2435135"></span> <sup>6</sup> According to some
readings, the words "an old man" are omitted.

<span id="P7364_2436002"></span> <sup>7</sup> The readings here vary
much. The first part of the sentence is found in Minucius Felix, c. ax.
\[Vol. iv. p. 185.\]

<span id="P7366_2437136"></span> <sup>8</sup> The following passage,
accepted in some editions, is of doubtful authenticity; "To such an
extent, indeed, were feigned the names of gods among the Romans, that
there is even among them a god, Viduus, who widows the body from the
soul-who, as being sap and funereal, is not kept within the walls, but
placed outside; but who nevertheless, in that he is excluded, is rather
condemned by the Roman religion than worshipped. There is also Scansus,
so-called from ascents, and Forculus from doors, and Limentinus Crom
thresholds, and Cardea from hinges, and Orbona from bereavement."

<span id="P7368_2438885"></span> <sup>9</sup> "Parricida."

<span id="P7371_2441376"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[2 Tim. iii. 13 See vol.
iii. 68.\]

<span id="P7372_2442969"></span> <sup>11</sup> \[Vol. iii. p, III; also
other apologists.\]

<span id="P7375_2445154"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[See vol. iii. p 179
elucidation.\]

<span id="P7377_2446116"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[Ps. lix. 11: and see p.
202, *supra*.\]

<span id="P7379_2446424"></span> <sup>14</sup> "Of greater obedience and
of stronger faith" is a varied reading here.

<span id="P7380_2446659"></span> <sup>15</sup> Some add, "and
discipline."

<span id="P7381_2446966"></span> <sup>16</sup> " With the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit," is perhaps a more probable reading. \[See vol. iii.
p. 609.\]

<span id="P7383_2447737"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[See Treatise xii. book
ii. secs. 13 and 28, *infra*.\]

<span id="P7385_2448748"></span> <sup>18</sup> " Set upon Him and " is
here interpolated by some.

<span id="P7387_2449456"></span> <sup>19</sup> \[John x. 18 See Pearson,
*Creed*, art. v. p. 424\]

<span id="P7393_2451254"></span> <sup>1</sup> Eusebius in his
*ronicon*makes mention of the occasion on which Cyprian wrote this
treatise, saying, "A pestilent disease took possession of many provinces
of the whole world, and especially Alexandria and Egypt; as Dionysius
writes, and the treatise of Cypnan \`concerning the Mortality0' bears
witness." A.D. 252.

<span id="P7396_2451676"></span> <sup>2</sup> He says: "By whom were
Christians,-grieved with excessive fondness at the loss of their
friends, or what is of more consequence, with their decrease of
faith,-comforted with the hope of things to come?" \[See p. kg,
*supra*.\]

<span id="P7397_2452691"></span> <sup>3</sup> Then to the tacit
objection that by this mortality they would be deprived of martyrdom, he
replies that martyrdom is not in our power, and that even the spirit
that is ready for martyrdom is crowned by God the judge. Finally, he
tells them that the dead must not be bewailed in such a matter as that
we should become a stumblingblock to the Gentiles, as if we were without
the hope of a resurrec-tion. Rut if also the day of our summons should
come, we must depart hence with a glad mind to the Lord, especially
since we are departing to our country, where the large number of those
dear to us are waiting for us: a dense and abundant multitude are
longing for us, who, being already secure of their own immortality, are
still solicitous about our salvation.
