<span id="P900_235801"></span> <sup>165</sup> The Abbe Cruice refers to
Censorinus ( *De Die Natali*, cap. vii. et xiv.), who mentions that two
numbers were held in veneration, the seventh (hebdomad) and ninth
(ennead). The former was of use in curing corporeal disease, and
ascribed to Apollo; the latter healed the diseases of the mind, and was
attributed to the Muses.

<span id="P902_238485"></span> <sup>166</sup> At foot of MS. occur the
words, "Fourth Book of Philosophumena."

<span id="P908_238641"></span> <sup>167</sup> "Pierced it through,"
i.e., bored the holes for the strings, or, in other words, constructed
the instrument. The Latin version in Buhle's edition of Aratus is *ad
cunam (cunabulam) compegit*, i.e., he fastened the strings into the
shell of the tortoise near his bed. The tortoise is mentioned by Aratus
in the first part of the line, which fact removes the obscurity of the
passage as quoted by Hippolytus. The general tradition corresponds with
this, in representing Mercury on the shores of the Nile forming a lyre
out of a dried tortoise. The word translated bed might be also rendered
fan, which was used as a cradle, its size and construction being
suitable. \[See note, p. 46, *infra*.\]

<span id="P916_239723"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Consult Bunsen, vol. i. p.
35, always interesting and ingeniously critical; nobody should neglect
his work. But for a judicial mind, compare Dr. Wordsworth, p. 182.\]

<span id="P920_240377"></span> <sup>2</sup> The MS. employs the form
Sithians, which is obviously not the correct one.

<span id="P921_240476"></span> <sup>3</sup> This term kleyilogoj is
frequently applied by Hippolytus to the heretics.

<span id="P926_241241"></span> <sup>4</sup> Miller has apokaluyaj for
paraleiyaj. This, however, can bear no intelligible meaning, except we
add some other word, as thus: "not even have I failed to disclose."
Schneidewin's correction of apoxaluyaj into paraleiyaj is obviously an
improvement.

<span id="P927_241963"></span> <sup>5</sup> Metalabontej; some read
metasxontej, which it is presumed might be rendered, "sharing in the
opinions which gave occasion to these heterodox doctrines."

<span id="P928_242551"></span> <sup>6</sup> i.e., ofij. This term has
created the title "Ophites," which may be regarded as the generic
denomination for all the advocates of this phase of Gnosticism.

<span id="P929_242928"></span> <sup>7</sup> The heresy of the Naasseni
is adverted to by the other leading writers on heresy in the early age
of the Church. See St. Irenaeus, i, 34: Origen, *Contr. Cels*., vi 28
(p. 291 et seq. ed. Spenc.); Tertullian, *Proeser*., c. 47 Theodoret,
*Haeretic. Fabul*, i. 14; Epiphanius, *Advers. Haereses*., xxv. and
xxxvii.: St. Augustine, *De Haeres*., xvii.; Jerome, *Comment. Epist. ad
Galat*., lib. ii. The Abbe Cruice reminds his readers that the Naasseni
carried their doctrines into India, and refers to the *Asiatic
Researches* (vol. x. p. 39).

<span id="P930_243538"></span> <sup>8</sup> The Hebrew word is h@n

( *nachash*).

<span id="P932_244086"></span> <sup>9</sup> paraton autwn logon.
Bernaysius suggests for these words, patera tw autw logw. Schneidewin
regards the emendation as an error, and Bunsen partly so. The latter
would read, patera ton autwn Logon, i.e., "The Naasseni honour the
Father of all existent things, the Logos, as man and the Son of Man."

<span id="P933_244608"></span> <sup>10</sup> See Irenaeus, *Haer*., i.
1.

<span id="P934_244886"></span> <sup>11</sup> Geryon (see note, chap.
iii.) is afterwards mentioned as a synonyme with Jordan, i.e., "flowing
from earth" ( gh ruwn).

<span id="P935_245312"></span> <sup>12</sup> gnwsij,-a term often
alluded to by St. John, and which gives its name "Gnosticism" to the
various forms of the Ophitic heresy. The aphorism in the text is one
that embodies a grand principle which lies at the root of all correct
philosophy. In this and other instances it will be found that the
system, however wild and incoherent in its theology, of the Naaseni and
of some of the other Gnostic sects, was one which was constructed by a
subtle analysis of thought, an by observation of nature.

<span id="P936_246022"></span> <sup>13</sup> The Abbe Cruice remarks on
this passage, that, as the statement here as regards Jesus Christ does
not correspond with Origen's remarks on the opininns of the Naasseni in
reference to our Lord, the *Philosophumena* cannot be the work of
Origen.

<span id="P940_247232"></span> <sup>14</sup> The Abbe Cruice observes
that we have here another proof that the *Philosophumena* is not the
work of Origen, who in his *Contra Celsum* mentions Mariamne, but
professes not to have met with any of his followers (see *Contr. Cels*.,
lib. v. p. 272, ed. Spenc.). This confirms the opinion mostly
entertained of Origen, that neither the bent of his mind nor the
direction of his studies justify the supposition that he would write a
detailed history of heresy.

<span id="P941_248360"></span> <sup>15</sup> Isa. liii. 8.

<span id="P942_248459"></span> <sup>16</sup> Or adiaf oon, equivocal.

<span id="P944_248562"></span> <sup>17</sup> This has been by the best
critics regarded as a fragment of a hymn of Pindar's on Jupiter Ammon.
Schneidewin furnishes a restored poetic version of it by Bergk. This
hymn, we believe, first suggested to M. Miller an idea of the possible
value and importance of the MS. of *The Refutation* brought by Minoides
Mynas from Greece.

<span id="P945_249181"></span> <sup>18</sup> The usual form is
Alalcomenes. He was a Baeotian Autocthon.

<span id="P946_250080"></span> <sup>19</sup> Or, "lannes." The Abbe
Cruice refers to Berosus, *Chald. Hist*., pp, 48, 49, and to his own
dissertation (Paris, 1844) on the authority to be attached to Josephus,
as regards the writers adduced by him in his treatise *Contr. Apoin*.

<span id="P947_250586"></span> <sup>20</sup> The Rabbins, probably
deriving their notions from the Chaldeans, entertained the most
exaggerated ideas respecting the perfection of Adam. Thus Gerson, in his
*Commentary on Abardanel*, says that "Adam was endued with the very
perfection of wisdom, and was cheif of philosophers, that he was an
immediate disciple of the Deity, also a physician and astrologer, and
the originator of all the arts and sciences." This spirit of
exaggeration passed from the Jews to the Christians (see *Clementine
Homilies*,ii). Aquinas (*Sum. Theol*. pars i 94)says of Adam, "Since the
first man was appointed perfect, he ought to have posessed a knowledge
of everything capable of being ascertained by natural means."

<span id="P949_251861"></span> <sup>21</sup> Or, "vanquishing him"
(Roeper).

<span id="P951_252463"></span> <sup>22</sup> This is known to us only by
some ancient quotations. The Naasseni had another work of repute among
them, the "Gospel according to Thomas." Bunsen conjectures that the two
"Gospels" may be the same.

<span id="P952_252834"></span> <sup>23</sup> autogenouj. Miller has auou
genouj, which Bunsen rejects in favour of the reading "self-begotten."

<span id="P953_253968"></span> <sup>24</sup> Schneidewin considers that
there have been left out in the MS. the words" or Attis" after Endymion.
Attis is subsequently mentioned with some degree of particularity.

<span id="P954_254540"></span> <sup>25</sup> Or, "creation."

<span id="P955_254675"></span> <sup>26</sup> Or, "Apis." See Diodorus
Siculus, iii. 58, 59. Pausanias, vii. 2O, writes the word Attes. See
also Minucius Felix, *Octav*., cap. xxi.

<span id="P957_255221"></span> <sup>27</sup> Or, "forbidden."

<span id="P958_255453"></span> <sup>28</sup> Gal. iii. 28, and Clement's
*Epist. ad Rom*., ii. 12. \[This is the apocryphal Clement reserved for
vol. viii. of this series. See also same text, Ignatius, vol. i. p.
81.\]

<span id="P959_255648"></span> <sup>29</sup> See 2 Cor. v. 17, Gal. vi
15.

<span id="P960_257234"></span> <sup>30</sup> Rom. i. 20-27.

<span id="P961_257568"></span> <sup>31</sup> alalw; some read allw.

<span id="P963_258067"></span> <sup>32</sup> Luke xvii. 21.

<span id="P964_258162"></span> <sup>33</sup> These words do not occur in
the "Gospel of Thomas concerning the Saviour's infancy," as given by
Fabricius and Thilo.

<span id="P965_258330"></span> <sup>34</sup> The Abbe Cruice mentions
the following works as of authority among the Naasseni, and from whence
they derived their system: *The Gospel of Perfection, Gospel of Eve, The
Questions of Mary, Concerning the Offspring of Mary, The Gospel of
Philip, The Gospel according to* (1) *Thomas*, (2) *the Egyptians*. (See
Epiphanius, *Haeres*., c. xxvi., and Origen, *Contr. Cels*., vi. 30, p.
296, ed. Spenc.) These heretics likewise make use of the Old Testament,
St. John's Gospel, and some of the Pauline epistles.

<span id="P966_259289"></span> <sup>35</sup> Miller refers to Littre,
*Traduct. des Aeuvres d'Hippocrate*, t. i. p. 396.

<span id="P967_259606"></span> <sup>36</sup> See Herodotus, ii. 2, 5.

<span id="P968_260158"></span> <sup>37</sup> See Origen, *Contr. Cels*.,
v. 38 (p. 257, ed. Spenc.).

<span id="P969_260388"></span> <sup>38</sup> Or, "brilliant."

<span id="P970_260539"></span> <sup>39</sup> Or, "untraceable."

<span id="P971_260716"></span> <sup>40</sup> Prov. xxiv. 16; Luke xvii.
4.

<span id="P973_260894"></span> <sup>41</sup> Or, "spirit."

<span id="P974_261285"></span> <sup>42</sup> See Epiphanius, *Haeres*.,
xxvi. 8.

<span id="P975_261402"></span> <sup>43</sup> Matt. xix. 17; Mark x. 18;
Luke xviii. 19.

<span id="P976_261660"></span> <sup>44</sup> Matt. v. 45.

<span id="P977_261966"></span> <sup>45</sup> Miller has oudeij. See
Plutarch, *De Isid. et Osirid*., c. li. p. 371.

<span id="P978_262093"></span> <sup>46</sup> Or, eisodou, i.e.,
entrance.

<span id="P979_262488"></span> <sup>47</sup> Matt. v. 15, 27.

<span id="P983_263666"></span> <sup>48</sup> *Odyssey*, xxiv. r.

<span id="P986_263846"></span> <sup>49</sup> Empedocles, v. 390, Stein.

<span id="P988_264091"></span> <sup>50</sup> Esaldaius, Miller (see
Origen, *Const. Cels*., v. 76, p. 297, ed. Spenc.).

<span id="P992_264382"></span> <sup>51</sup> *Odyssey*, xxiv. 2.

<span id="P994_264555"></span> <sup>52</sup> Ps. ii. 9.

<span id="P995_265031"></span> <sup>53</sup> Eph. v. 14.

<span id="P997_265260"></span> <sup>54</sup> See Plutarch, *De Iside et
Osiride*, c. xxxiv.

<span id="P998_265459"></span> <sup>55</sup> Rom. x. 18.

<span id="P999_265525"></span> <sup>56</sup> *Odyssey, xxiv. 5.*
