<span id="P9601_2968192"></span> <sup>122</sup> A city of Zeugitana,
sometimes written "Assapha."

<span id="P9603_2968681"></span> <sup>123</sup> A city of Byzacene.

<span id="P9605_2968967"></span> <sup>124</sup> "Lambesa," a city of
Numidia.

<span id="P9607_2969165"></span> <sup>125</sup> A city of Numidia,
otherwise Gausafna (Ptol.) and Gazofula(Procop.)

<span id="P9609_2969379"></span> <sup>126</sup> There are four cities in
Africa of this name.

<span id="P9611_2969674"></span> <sup>127</sup> A city of Numidia,
otherwise called "Octabum."

<span id="P9612_2969841"></span> <sup>128</sup> \[Noteworthy examples of
episcopal modesty. In the colleges of bishops, however, it is now usual
to call upon juniors first, that, if they should think differently from
older brethren, their free opinion need not be restrained by
deference.\]

<span id="P9614_2970215"></span> <sup>129</sup> A city oF Numidia.

<span id="P9615_2970467"></span> <sup>130</sup> \[This is Cyprian's
theory of the origin of the episcopate. Elucidation *infra*.\]

<span id="P9617_2970745"></span> <sup>131</sup> A city of Byzacena.

<span id="P9619_2971318"></span> <sup>132</sup> This is otherwise called
"Cululi," a city of Bytacena.

<span id="P9620_2971626"></span> <sup>133</sup> 2 John 10, 11.

<span id="P9622_2971915"></span> <sup>134</sup> This Litteus is
mentioned in Ep. lxxvi. p. 402, *supra*.

<span id="P9623_2971988"></span> <sup>135</sup> A city of Numidia. A
Roman colony was planted there under the Emperor Hadrian.

<span id="P9625_2972274"></span> <sup>136</sup> A city of Tripolis.

<span id="P9626_2972343"></span> <sup>137</sup> Probably the same to
whom 1xxiii. (p. 386, *supra*) was written.

<span id="P9627_2972425"></span> <sup>138</sup> A city of Tripolis.

<span id="P9628_2972482"></span> <sup>139</sup> A city of Tripolis, thus
distinguished from Leptis parva.

<span id="P9630_2972776"></span> <sup>140</sup> A city of Tripolis.

<span id="P9632_2973324"></span> <sup>141</sup> \[Here Cyprian sums up,
and gives the sentence of the council, after the example of St. James,
who presided in the Council of Jerusalem, Acts xv. 13, 199.\]

<span id="P9639_2974306"></span> <sup>142</sup> See p. 522, sec. 16
*supra*. All this interprets the *Petra*, not "Petrus."

<span id="P9647_2977039"></span> <sup>143</sup> \[A strong testimony in
its favour. It is quite possible that the less worthy portions are
corrupt interpolations.\]

<span id="P9657_2977252"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[See Ben Jonson,
*Volpone*, Ep. Dedicatory.\]

<span id="P9660_2977308"></span> <sup>2</sup> Obviously imitating
Tertullian's treatise *De Spectaculis*. \[See vol. iii. p. 79.\]

<span id="P9661_2977775"></span> <sup>3</sup> He then prosecutes the
subject, by going through the several kinds of public exhibitions, and
sets forth, a limit more diffusely than in the Epistle to Donatus, what
risks are incurred by the spectators, and especially in respect of those
exhibitions wherein, as he says, "representations of lust convey
instruction in obscenity." Finally, he briefly enumerates such
exhibitions as are worthy of the interest of a Christian man, and in
which he ought rightfully to find pleasure. \[For *Epistle to Donates*,
see p. 275, *supra*.\]

<span id="P9663_2979170"></span> <sup>4</sup> "In sacramento."

<span id="P9664_2980098"></span> <sup>5</sup> Elucidation I.

<span id="P9666_2980956"></span> <sup>6</sup> "Nabla."

<span id="P9667_2981522"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[In Edin. trans.
needlessly "the writings of the Scriptures."\]

<span id="P9669_2983778"></span> <sup>8</sup> " Cum persona professionis
suae loquatur."

<span id="P9670_2983871"></span> <sup>9</sup> Baluzius reads with less
probability "indecorum," "anything unbecoming." The reading adopted in
the text is, according to Fell, "*nde eorum*."

<span id="P9672_2984326"></span> <sup>10</sup> *Vid*. Ovid's *Fasti*,
lib. v.

<span id="P9673_2984659"></span> <sup>11</sup> The Oxford text here has
the reading, "Why does he speak of it? why does he," etc.

<span id="P9676_2989660"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[It is painfnl to
recognise, in the general licence of the press in our country, this very
feature of a corrupt civilization,-a delight in scandal, and in the
invasion of homes and private affairs, for the gratification of the
popular appetite.\]

<span id="P9678_2991956"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[Compare Clement, vol.
ii. p. 248, note 5, and p. 249, notes 2, 11.\]

<span id="P9679_2992797"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[This touches a point
important to the modern question. It is said, "Oh! but these Fathers
denounced only those heathen spectacles of which idolatry was part,"
etc. The reply is sufficiently made by our author.\]

<span id="P9681_2994459"></span> <sup>15</sup> There is much confusion
in the reading of this passage, which in the original runs, according to
Baluzius: "Nam cum mens hominis advitia ipsa ducatur, quid faciet, si
habuerit exempla naturae corporis lubrica quae sparta cornuit? Quid
faciet si fuerit impulsa?"

<span id="P9683_2995041"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[Compare Clement, vol.
p. 256, and note 1.

<span id="P9684_2996444"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[De Maistre, who is a
Christian, with all his hereditary prejudice and enslavement, has a fine
passage in the opening of his *Soirees de St. Petersbourg*, which the
reader will enjoy. It concludes with this saying: "Les coeurs pervers
n'ont jamais de belles nuits ni de beaux jours." P. 7. vol. i. See vol.
iv. p. 173, this series.\]

<span id="P9686_2997042"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[Always the sacred
Scriptures are held up as capable of yielding delight as well as profit
to the believer. The works of God and His word go together. Col. iii.
16.\]

<span id="P9687_2998734"></span> <sup>19</sup> \[There is much in the
above treatise which is not unworthy of Cyprian. As to questions of
authenticity, however, experts alone should venture upon an opinion. Non
nobis tantas componere lites.\]

<span id="P9692_2998960"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Erasmus doubts as to the
authorship, judging from the style. Pamelius is sure it is Cyprian's.\]

<span id="P9695_2999300"></span> <sup>2</sup> In place of reward, he
sets before them not only security from the fear of Gehenna, but also
the attainment of everlasting life, describing both alternatives briefly
in a poetical manner. He points out, that to some, martyrdom serves as a
crown, while to others who are baptized in their own blood, it serves as
redemption. Finally, when from the Scriptures he has stirred up his
readers to confession of the name of Christ, he asks them to remember
him when the Lord begins to honour martyrdom in them, since the Lord is
known not to deny such as they when they ask Him for anything.

<span id="P9699_3004046"></span> <sup>3</sup> "Habena;" but according to
Baluzius "avena," "an oatstraw."
