<span id="P9700_3004326"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[ Acts ix. 5. The
principle is recognised in the words, "Ye did it unto me," where Christ
identifies Himself with members of His body. Oh, the condescension! Heb.
ii. 11.\]

<span id="P9702_3005953"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[ Ps. lxiv. 3. The
revilings of the multitude are reckoned by the Psalmist among the most
cruel tortures of Christ: and we cannot doubt that the early Christians
found the like cruelty of the heathen a daily martyrdom, before they
came to their crowning passion. Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 712.\]

<span id="P9704_3007094"></span> <sup>6</sup> Ps. cxiii. 13.

<span id="P9705_3007219"></span> <sup>7</sup> Isa. vi. 10.

<span id="P9708_3009354"></span> <sup>8</sup> "Coguntur," or
"coquuntur," -"are matured."

<span id="P9710_3011947"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[The heathen attributed
this pestilence to the "atheism" of Christians, and hence persecuted
them the more fiercely; and, as it was better to die by martyrdom than
by the pestilence, he thus speaks. Death an advantage. Shaks., *Hen.
V*., act. iv. sc. 1.\]

<span id="P9714_3015264"></span> <sup>10</sup> Luke xxii. 8.

<span id="P9715_3015525"></span> <sup>11</sup> Wisd. iii. 7.

<span id="P9718_3018604"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[The sufferings of this
life are here supposed to be retributive in the case of those who must
be weaned from the world. Martyrs have weaned themselves, and go gladly
to their rest.\]

<span id="P9720_3020198"></span> <sup>13</sup> Ecclus. ii. 1.

<span id="P9721_3020327"></span> <sup>14</sup> Phil. i. 21.

<span id="P9723_3021026"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[The terrible pictures
in S. Stefano Rotondo (see p. 288, *supra*\] might seem to have been
taken from this graphic treatise. Can our faith and love be compared
with that of these sufferers?\]

<span id="P9724_3021703"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[To me, these dramatic
narrations of what was going on among the crowds that gazed upon the
tortures of Christ's witnesses, are very suggestive of the whole scene.
Compare pp. 295-296, *supra*.\]

<span id="P9726_3022815"></span> <sup>17</sup> Ecclus. ii. 4.

<span id="P9727_3023752"></span> <sup>18</sup> Or, "earth."

<span id="P9728_3024550"></span> <sup>19</sup> Wisd. iii. 4.

<span id="P9730_3025071"></span> <sup>20</sup> Matt. x. 39.

<span id="P9731_3025823"></span> <sup>21</sup> Matt. xv. 26.

<span id="P9733_3028802"></span> <sup>22</sup> Rom. viii. 18.

<span id="P9742_3038644"></span> <sup>23</sup> \[The adoption of "the
sign of the cross," after the immersion of baptism, is referable to this
martyr-age. It was meant to impress the idea of soldiership.\]

<span id="P9744_3040869"></span> <sup>24</sup> Matt. iii. 10.
\[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="P9745_3041093"></span> <sup>25</sup> John xii. 35.

<span id="P9747_3041441"></span> <sup>26</sup> 1 Cor. ix. 24.

<span id="P9748_3041697"></span> <sup>27</sup> Col. ii. 20;
"decernitis."

<span id="P9749_3042262"></span> <sup>28</sup> Gal. vi. 14. \[Compare
Ep. xxv. p. 303, *supra*.\]

<span id="P9750_3042687"></span> <sup>29</sup> Matt. x. 39.

<span id="P9751_3042793"></span> <sup>30</sup> 1 Cor. vi. 4.

<span id="P9752_3042915"></span> <sup>31</sup> 1 Cor. vii. 7.

<span id="P9754_3043885"></span> <sup>32</sup> Or, "Manes."

<span id="P9756_3045214"></span> <sup>33</sup> \[ Rev. vi. 9; also vol
i. p. 486, note 10, this series.\]

<span id="P9757_3045648"></span> <sup>34</sup> \[" Si tamen qui Christi
compares estis aliquando peccastis;" not very happily translated, but
extravagant at best.\]

<span id="P9758_3046602"></span> <sup>35</sup> \[Think, I say again, of
three hundred years of such "fiery trial," so marvellously sustained,
and we shall gain new views of Christ's power to perfect His own
strength in human weakness. The life of these Christians was a conscious
daily warfare against "the world, the flesh, and the devil;" and we must
recognise this in all judgments of their discipline and their modes of
thought.\]

<span id="P9763_3047038"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Not reckoned by Erasmus
as worthy of Cyprian. Pamelius . thinks otherwise.\]

<span id="P9765_3048003"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[This illustrates pp. 322
and 389, note 7.\]

<span id="P9768_3051018"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[" So dear to Heaven is
saintly Chastity, etc."-Milton, *Comus*, 455.\]

<span id="P9770_3053422"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[Holy men have generally
recognised this rule as ennobling the estate of matrimony. See Jeremy
Taylor, *Holy Living*, cap. ii. sec. 3.\]

<span id="P9772_3054419"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[This natural law,
renewed in Christ, is part of the honour which He has restored to
womanhood: honouring His mother therein as the second Eve. Matt. xix. 8;
Gen. ii. 24.\]

<span id="P9773_3054652"></span> <sup>6</sup> Matt. xix. 5.

<span id="P9774_3055466"></span> <sup>7</sup> Eph. v. 28, 29.

<span id="P9776_3055938"></span> <sup>8</sup> Lev. xx. 10.

<span id="P9777_3056040"></span> <sup>9</sup> 1 Thess. iv. 3.

<span id="P9778_3056174"></span> <sup>10</sup> 1 Cor. vi. 15.

<span id="P9781_3059823"></span> <sup>11</sup> "Irrogare."

<span id="P9785_3063780"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[Turtullian, vol. iv.
pp. 74, 97, etc.\]

<span id="P9786_3065204"></span> <sup>13</sup> This passage is allowed
by all to be corrupt. If we were to punctuate differently, to insert
"nisi" before "consummata," and change "longe est" into "non deesset,"
we get the following sense: "Therefore we should always meditate,
brethren, on chastity, as circumstances teach us, that it may be more
easy for us. It depends on no arts; for what is it but perfected will,
which, if it were not checked, would certainly not fail to arise? And it
is our own will, too: therefore it has not to be acquired, but we have
to cherish what is already our own."

<span id="P9788_3067658"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[" Kalendarium cujusvis
excedunt." The *kalendaria* were tablets of monthly accounts, in which
the monthly interest due, etc., were set down. "Exceed the entire
monthly income" would be better. Tertullian uses the same word, "exhaust
the *kalendarium*," rendered by our Edinburgh translator ( vol. iv. p.
18), a "fortune." In this treatise Tertullian is constantly copied and
quoted.\]

<span id="P9790_3069829"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[Laughter, vol. ii. p.
249, and contact p. 291.\]

<span id="P9792_3071197"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[Everything in antiquity
breathes this spirit of "searching the Scriptures." Compare Hippol., p.
219, note 4, *supra*.\]

<span id="P9797_3071373"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Almost wholly made up of
Scripture, and useful in any age to all Christians. Whatever its origin,
it breathes a truly primitive spirit. Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p.
657.\]
