<span id="P9912_3088259"></span> <sup>58</sup> It has arbor*um*,
however, instead of the singular.

<span id="P9913_3088401"></span> <sup>59</sup> *Theopneuston*, by Samuel
Hanson Cox, D.D,, New York, 1842.

<span id="P9914_3088549"></span> <sup>60</sup> Note, an extraordinary
instance, *Childe Harold*, Canto iv. st. 180.

<span id="P9915_3089146"></span> <sup>61</sup> Lexicographers give
keimai = jaceo.

<span id="P9921_3089687"></span> <sup>62</sup> *Polity*, etc., p. 416
(translation). This valuable work, translated and edited by the Rev. J.
C. Bellett, M.A. (London, 1883), is useful as to medieval usages, and as
supplementing Bingham. But the learned editor has not been sufficiently
prudent in noting his author's perpetual misconceptions of antiquity.

<span id="P9922_3091011"></span> <sup>63</sup> 1 Cor. xiv. 36.

<span id="P9923_3091120"></span> <sup>64</sup> Theodoret, book v. cap.
ix. A.D. 382. The bisbops say "last year" ( a.d. 381), speaking of the
council in session.

<span id="P9938_3091819"></span> <sup>1</sup> The ingenious conjecture
of Wordsworth, who surmises that kai eqnwn episkopon, in Photius, should
be read kai ewqinwn. *Hippolytus*, p. 30. Another conjecture is =Aqhnwn.
For the originals of these Fragments and learned notes, see Routh,
*Reliquae Sacrae*, ii. p. 127.

<span id="P9940_3093680"></span> <sup>2</sup> Eusebius quotes him in
several places (book ii. cap. xxv., book iii. capp. xxviii. and xxxi.),
and cites him in proof that St. Peter suffered on the Vatican, and St.
Paul on the *Via Ostiensis*. See Lardner, *redib*., vol. ii. pp. 394,
410.

<span id="P9943_3094586"></span> <sup>3</sup> Hist. Eccl., ii. 25, vi.
20.

<span id="P9944_3094671"></span> <sup>4</sup> Hist. Eccl., vi. 20.

<span id="P9945_3094999"></span> <sup>5</sup> Cod. 48.

<span id="P9950_3096609"></span> 36 p. 303, note 5 Rev. iii, 21.

<span id="P9958_3097252"></span> <sup>1</sup> A defender of the sect of
the Cataphrygians.

<span id="P9962_3097395"></span> <sup>2</sup> So Jerome, in the Epistle
to Marcellus, says: "There, too, is a holy church: there are the
trophies of the apostles and martyrs."

<span id="P9963_3097590"></span> <sup>3</sup> Thc mss.. and the
*Chronicon* of Georgius Syncellus read Vasicum, Basikanon. The reference
is to the Vatican as the traditional burial place of Peter, and to the
Ostian Road as that of Paul.

<span id="P9967_3098146"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[Vol. i. pp, 351-352,
416.\]

<span id="P9971_3098566"></span> <sup>5</sup> This extract is taken from
the Disputation of Caius, but the words are those of Proclus, as is
shown by the citation in Eusebius.

<span id="P9974_3098734"></span> <sup>6</sup> Two fragments of an
anonymous work ascribed by some to Caius. Artemon and his followers
maintained that Christ was mere ( yilon) man.

<span id="P9978_3099808"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[Elucidation, I.\]

<span id="P9979_3100276"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[See cap. xxiii. p. 114,
*supra*, and Euseb., iii. cap. 28.\]

<span id="P9983_3100855"></span> <sup>9</sup> This *may*, perhaps, be
the Caecilius Natalis who appears in the Octaviris of Minucius Felix, as
maintaining the cause of paganism against Octavius Januarius, and
becoming a convert to the truth through the discussion. Name, time, and
profession at least suit. \[A painful conjecture, and quite gratuitous.
See the *Octavius*, cap. xvi. note 6, p. 181, vol. iv., this series.\]

<span id="P9984_3101552"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[ -ou tote
episkopou,"the then bishop." *Text of Routh.*\]

<span id="P9985_3101673"></span> <sup>11</sup> There is another reading-
*named* ( klhqhnai) instead of *chosen*or *elected* (klhrwqhnai).

<span id="P9989_3102956"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[Thus early, primitive
canons are recognised as in force.\]

<span id="P9990_3103222"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[Here we have an early
foreshadowing of the schoolmen, whose rise was predicted by St. Bernard
in his protest against Abelard. See Hernard, *Opp*., tom. i. p. 410, *et
alibi*.\]

<span id="P9991_3103541"></span> <sup>14</sup> The connected form here
is the *hypothetical*, as e.g., "If it is day, it is light." The
*disjouned* is the *disjunctive*, as e.g., " It is, either day or
night." The words admit another rendering, viz.,"Whether it, when
connected or disjoined, will make the form of a syllogism."

<span id="P9992_3104022"></span> <sup>15</sup> There is a play in the
original on the word *geometry*.

<span id="P9993_3104153"></span> <sup>16</sup> Galen composed treaties
on the figures of syllogismis, and on philosophy in general. This is
also a notable testimony, as proceeding from a very ancient author,
almost contemporary with Galen himself. And from a great number of other
writers, as well as this one. it is evident that Galen was ranked as the
equal of Aristotle, Theophrastus, and even Plato. \[Galen died *circa*
a.d. 200.\]

<span id="P9994_3105208"></span> <sup>17</sup> In Nicephorus it is
*Asclepiodotus*, which is also the reading of Rufinus.

<span id="P9995_3105616"></span> <sup>18</sup> It appears from Theodoret
( *Haeret. Fab*., book ii. ch. v.), as well as from Nicephorus and
Rufinus, that we should read *Appolonides* for Apollonius.

<span id="P9996_3105878"></span> <sup>19</sup> There is another reading-
*by him*.

<span id="P9997_3106457"></span> <sup>20</sup> This paragraph, down to
the word "transcribed," is wanting in the Codex Regius.

<span id="P9998_3106954"></span> <sup>21</sup> \[Note the care and
jealousy with which the integrity of the *codices* was guarded. Comp.
*Uncan. and Apoc. Scriptures*, by Churton, London, 1884.\]
