[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc10)  [Next](esc12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE IX.

##### REV. i. 20.

##### The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks.  The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.

 

            IT has generally been believed that the seven churches to
whom the angel instructed John to write, were seven different and
distinct churches in Asia, and by almost all of our commentators at the
present day are understood to mean seven literal churches.  But your
speaker is forced, from the reasons which will hereafter be produced, to
believe that these seven churches of Asia are to be understood in a
figurative sense, alluding to seven periods of the church militant,
during the Christian dispensation, down to the first resurrection, and
the commencing of the glorious reign of Christ on the earth, commonly
called *The Millennium.*  If this view of the subject should prove to be
the correct exposition of the text, how important and interesting is the
subject to us who live in the last stage of the church!  Then we who
live at this day, are particularly, and *solemnly* and *awfully,*
admonished in what is said by Christ to *the church of the Laodiceans,*
that church corresponding with our stage of the church immediately
previous to the commencing of the millennial glory; and how necessary
that we should know that these admonitions do most deeply concern us!

            This view of the subject will then claim our first
attention.  Were the seven churches used as a figure of the whole
Christian dispensation, or were they not?  I answer, In my humble
opinion, they were.  Because, first, the book of Revelation does
evidently contain a prophecy of things which did not concern those seven
literal churches in Asia; for those churches have long since passed away
and become extinct; yet the book of Revelation contains prophecies which
are daily fulfilling, and have been for eighteen centuries.  It is also
said to be a revelation of things which must shortly come to pass.  "The
revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly come to pass."  Not things that have
been.  Yet if Christ is only giving admonitory advice to those seven
literal churches, then he is only relating their characters as they then
were, and so far as these churches were concerned it would cease to be a
prophecy, and the very first verse in Revelation would be violated. 
Again, 3d verse, "Blessed is he that readeth and they that hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein;
for the time is at hand."  We see that it is called a prophecy in this
verse, and must allude to the whole book; but who will pretend that the
three chapters in the beginning of Revelation are a prophecy, if we
understand them as relating the character of seven literal churches in
Asia only?  None, none.

            Again: the word *seven* is often used in the word of God as
a mystical number, meaning the whole, as seven spirits, seven stars,
seven angels, seven candlesticks, seven seals, seven trumpets, seven
vials, seven thunders, seven plagues, seven mountains, seven heads,
seven eyes, seven horns, seven crowns, seven kings, and *seven
churches.*  All these are used in Revelation and apply to or concerning
the whole Gospel period.  If, then, the number seven is used so often in
this book in a figurative sense, may we not reasonably suppose that it
is so used in the dedication of this book to the seven churches in Asia,
and the history of those seven churches be prophetic? for no scripture
is given for any private interpretation, and surely the instruction in
the introduction of the book carries us down to the coming of Christ in
the clouds--"Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him,
and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall
wail because of him; even so, amen.  I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the ending, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty."  And why all this descriptive grandeur in the address to
these seven churches, if they only were meant?  Surely there were other
churches of equal importance at that day.  Where were the churches at
Corinth, Cappadocia, Galatia, Thessalonica, Philippi, Collossee, Rome,
Jerusalem, Bithynia, &c.?  Our text shows that the seven churches were
to be understood in a figurative or mystical sense.  "The mystery of the
seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden
candlesticks.  The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and
the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches."  These
seven churches are represented by "seven lamps."  See Zach. iv. 2, "And
said unto me, What seest thou?  And I said, I have looked, and behold a
candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven
lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps which were upon the
top thereof."  These seven lamps are called "the eyes of the Lord which
run to and fro through the whole earth."  See Zach. iv. 10.  If this is
true, then it readily follows that the seven churches of Asia are only
used as a figure representing the church "through the whole earth." 
Again: the seven lamps, which are the seven churches, are called the
seven spirits of God.  Rev. iv. 5, "And there were seven lamps of fire
burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God."  I have
clearly proved, and I think it will be admitted by all, that the "seven
eyes of the Lord," and "the seven spirits of God," are the seven
churches to whom John was directed to write or dedicate his book, the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

            And I will now show that these comprehended the whole church
through the whole earth.  See Rev. v. 6, "And I beheld, and lo! in the
midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the
elders, stood a lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns, and seven
eyes, which are the "seven spirits of God sent forth into all the
earth."  Again: when we compare the several characteristic marks or
events, upon opening the seven seals, with those marks and instructions
to the seven churches, we shall be led to admire the beauty, harmony,
and consistency of the Revelation of Jesus Christ to his people.  And I
think the mind will rest satisfied that this view of the subject is the
truth, because it so exactly agrees with Christ's manner of teaching by
parables when he was with us in the flesh.

            Some may inquire, "Why were those seven churches in Asia
used as figures to represent the church militant in her several
conditions to the end of her militant state?"  I answer, )if we may be
allowed to answer the *whys* or *wherefores,*) Because the signification
of the names of those seven churches describe the spirit and qualities
of the several periods of the Christian church, which they are brought
forward to represent, which we shall attempt to show in its proper
place.

            I shall now endeavor to take up the churches in the order in
which they are laid down to us in Revelation. (Read Rev. ii. 1-7,
inclusive.)  1st. The word EPHESUS, *desirable chief.*  This is true
concerning the first age of the church, in the apostles' days, when the
Holy Ghost was given the power to work miracles, and the power to
distinguish between good and evil spirits, and when all were of one
heart and one mind, and the canon of the Holy Scriptures were filling
up, and the inspired apostles were setting things in order, and
establishing churches through the world.  Yes, my brethren, these were
desirable times surely.  But to proceed: This church is addressed by the
character "that holdeth the seven stars," the ministers and servants of
him who holdeth them "in his right hand," under his immediate care and
control, "who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks,"
and has said, where two or three are gathered together in his name,
there will he be in the midst of them, and has promised that whatsoever
they should ask in his name it should be granted unto them.  He says, "I
know thy works."  In that day they brought forth fruits meet for
repentance, and they went every where preaching that men should repent;
and Paul said, when preaching at Athens, "But now commandeth all men
every where to repent."  Yes, all, saint or sinner, high or low, rich or
poor; all, all must repent.  And O! my brethren, how much we need these
works at the present day!  "Remember, therefore, from whence thou art
fallen, and repent and do thy first works."  Again he says, "I know thy
labor."  Did not the apostles labor night and day?  2 Thess. iii. 8,
"Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought, but wrought with labor
and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of
you."  See 1 Thess. ii. 8,9, "So being affectionately desirous of you,
we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.  For ye remember,
brethren, our labor and travail; for laboring night and day, because we
would not be chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the gospel
of God."  Again he says, "And thy patience."  This, too, will apply to
the apostles' days.  For Paul says, 2 Cor. vi. 4, "But in all things
approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses."  Also, xii. 12, "Truly the
signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs,
and wonders, and mighty deeds.  And again the apostle says to Timothy,
"But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith,
longsuffering, charity, *patience.*"  And who can read the history of
the first age of the church, but will admit that works, labor and
patience, were prominent features of that age, and virtues which adorned
the Christian church in its infancy, more than any age since?  "And how
thou canst not bear them which are evil."  Who can read Paul's
instructions to his Corinthian brethren, in 1 Cor. v. 11, without seeing
this text fulfilled?  "But now I have written unto you not to keep
company, if any man that is called a brother \[as though such a one
could not be a real brother, but only called so\] be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner;
with such a one no not to eat."  And had the servants of Christ at the
present day the power of the apostles to discern the spirits by which we
are governed, how many in this congregation would blush when
*"fornicator"* is mentioned!  How many *"covetous"* would hide their
faces!  How many *"idolaters"* would bow their heads, or *"railers"*
would begin to murmur at the plainness of the speaker!  How many
*"drunkards"* would not have staggered into this house!  And how many
*"extortioners"* would have staid at home!  O God, thou knowest.  Or who
can read the 2d chapter of the 2d epistle of Peter, and John's first
epistle, Jude, and others, and not be convinced that the apostles could
not bear with them that were evil?  Again: "Thou hast tried them which
say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars."  This
sentence was fulfilled in the apostles' days.  Simon Magus, after he was
professedly a disciple of Christ, was found out by Peter to be in the
"gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity."  Hymeneus and Alexander,
whom Paul delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.  1
Tim. i. 20.  Also Philetus, Demas, and Alexander the coppersmith, were
all found to be liars, and many others who went out from them, as the
apostle says, because they were not of them.  And how many are there
now, my brethren, among us, who, when tribulation cometh, will be
offended, and go out from us!  Lord, is it I?  "And hast borne, and hast
patience, and for my name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted." 
Yes, my brethren, it was for the name of Jesus, that the primitive
Christians bore the persecutions of their day.  Acts xv. 25, 26, "It
seemed good unto us to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their lives for the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ."  Acts ix. 16, "For I will show him what great
things he must suffer for my name's sake."  Verse 41, "And they departed
from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name."  And, may I not inquire, how many
of us are willing and would rejoice to suffer shame for the name of
Christ?  Perhaps none.  We had rather be called Rabbi, Rev., Dr., &c. 
We are contending for our *names* at the present day; for Baptists,
Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Methodists, Free-wills, Campbellites,
&c.  If we do not contend earnestly for our sect, they will decrease,
and we shall come to nought.  And I say, May God speed it; so that you
all may fall on the word of God, and rally again under the name of
Jesus.  But we will proceed with our subject.  4th verse, "Nevertheless
I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love." 
Can this be true?  Did the apostolic church, in its purity, so soon
depart from the first principles of the gospel?  Yes, in Acts xv. 24,
"Forasmuch as we have heard that certain subverting your souls, saying,
ye must be circumcised, and keep the whole law, to whom we gave no such
commandment."  Gal. i. 6, "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him
that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel."  1
Timothy, i. 19, "Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having
put away, concerning faith, have made shipwreck."  2 Tim. i. 15, "This
thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia are turned away from me." 
And Paul further says, iv. 16, "At my first answer no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me.  I pray God lay not this sin to their charge."

            Many more evidences might be brought, to prove that many, in
that early state of the church, did fall away from the doctrine of
grace, which Paul and the apostles taught.  And now, my brethren, how is
it with us?  Are we built on the truth?  Have we a "Thus saith the
Lord," for all we believe and do?  Are we built on "the prophets and
apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone"?  Look well
to your foundation--the day is coming that will try every man's works.

            Verse 5, "Remember, therefore, from whence thou art fallen,
and repent and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove the candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent."  In this verse the great Head of the church admonishes the
Christians of their former sins in neglecting the doctrine of grace, and
falling into the popular errors of the day, which I have before noticed,
and warns them of their duty to repent, which is the first and great
command under the gospel.  He also gives them notice, that, except they
repent, he will remove the "desirable" state of the church into the
next, which would be a state of trial, persecution, and poverty.

            6th verse, "But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds
of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate."  What the deeds of the
Nicolaitans were, we are not able, from the word of God, to determine;
but from some things hinted at by some ancient authors, we have good
reason to believe that Nicolas, one of the seven deacons, departed from
the doctrine which the apostles taught, and preached a doctrine which
was repugnant to the gospel of Christ, viz., a community or plurality of
wives, which led Paul in his instructions to say, "Let the deacons be
the husband of one wife," 1 Tim. iii. 12.  "He that hath an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit saith to the churches."  Here we have another
evidence, that the branch of the church at Ephesus was not the only
church addressed in this epistle and prophecy; for, if so, what
propriety in using the word *churches,* in the plural, when only one
church in Asia was spoken of?  No, it could not be proper, neither would
it have been, as it is so used in every epistle through the whole seven,
had not Christ designed it for all the churches in a certain age.  There
is also an admonition contained in these last-quoted words, to read,
hear, and observe the prophecy now given by the Spirit to John, the
inspired servant of Christ; and for all the churches of the age spoken
of, to be careful to apply to themselves the admonitions, designed by
the Holy Spirit for their immediate benefit.  "To him that overcometh
will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God."  How precious is this promise to the faithful and
tried soul, who places all his hope, and strength, and dependence, on
one who is mighty to save, and on one who has promised to bring him off
conqueror over all the enemies of grace, and the powers of hell!  Yes,
and, more than all, he has overcome and entered within the veil, as a
forerunner for us who believe.  May we all, by faith, have a right to
this tree of life, this paradise of God.

            I will now examine the prophecy to the second church, which
I understand to commence about the close of the first century, and
lasted about two hundred years, until the days of Constantine, A.D. 312.

            8th verse, "And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna,
write."  The signification of the word *Smyrna,* is myrrh; denoting that
the church in this age would be a sweet-smelling savor to God, while she
was passing through the fiery ordeal of persecution and affliction,
which always has served to weed out those obnoxious plants of pride,
popularity, self-dependence--the bane and poison of true faith, piety,
and devotion.  And O, my brethren, could we learn wisdom, by what the
church has already suffered in the days of our forefathers, we should be
more humble, the more worldly peace and prosperity we enjoyed.  For it
is only in the midst of persecution and trial, that the church manifest
great purity of doctrine of life.  How well, then, might this age of the
church be compared to *myrrh,* when she must have been separated from
worldly honors, avarice, pride, popularity, and hypocrisy, when the
hypocrite and worldling had not motives to unite with and destroy the
union of the brotherhood, and when the hireling shepherd could expect no
fleece, that would suit his cupidity, to filch from the lambs of
Christ!  "These things saith the first and the last, which was dead and
is alive."  In these words we learn the character speaking to the
church.  It is no less than the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace.  "I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty." 
Now, their works were about to be tried; although God knew them that
were his, yet he designed to manifest to a world who would be faithful
even unto death, and to show that pure and undefiled religion would burn
with a brighter flame in tribulation and poverty, and the richness of
that faith, which would bring off the true Christian conqueror over the
powers of the world, the temptations of Satan, and corruptions of the
flesh.  "But thou art rich."  Yes, brethren, the true and genuine
Christian is *rich.*  For charity can suffer long in tribulation, and
the spirit of Christ will make us forsake all for his sake, and endure
poverty for the name of Jesus.  "And I know," says Christ, "the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, (that is, people of God,) and
are not, but are the synagogue of Satan."  Although Christ knew the
hypocrites and false professors that had rushed into his visible kingdom
during a time of prosperity that the church had experienced in its
Ephesian state, or apostolic age, yet now the time had come, when that
candlestick must be removed, and the next age of the church or
candlestick be set up; and the same means used by God to purify the
silver would purge out the dross, so that the kingdom would again be
cleansed of its worldly, hypocritical, and false professors.

            10, "Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer." 
The true child of God need not fear to suffer for Christ's sake, for the
sufferings of this present evil world will work out for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.  "Behold, the devil shall cast
some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days."  The devil in this verse means Pagan Rome.  See
Rev. xii. 9, 17, "And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent,
called the devil."  "And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went
to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ."  How exactly was this
prophecy fulfilled in the days of Nero, Domitian, and other Roman
emperors, and how faithful has history been to record the ten
persecutions between the days of John's prophecy and the emperor
Constantine!  In these ten persecutions of the Roman government, in the
text called *ten days,* we learn by the history of those days the church
suffered a great diminution in numbers by apostasy and fear; yet those
that remained steadfast made up in graces what they lost in numbers; and
it was truly a time of trial, for many were cast into prison, and many
suffered torture and death, rather than to offer sacrifices to their
Pagan gods.  "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life."  Yes, my brethren, if we can believe the history of those
days, many of the dear disciples of Christ were faithful unto death, and
have long enjoyed the crown of life promised in this prophecy.

            11, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith
to the churches.  He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second
death."  Here, then, we find some of those characters who will have part
in the first resurrection, the blessed martyrs who were slain for the
witness of Jesus.  See Rev. xx. 4.  And in this passage we are again
commanded to hear what the Spirit saith to the churches--all, all who
have ears; not the branch in Smyrna only, but all who have ears.  We
have long been in the habit of giving away Scripture to others when it
belongs to us and our children; let us therefore apply it home.

            12, "And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write." 
Very earthy elevated is the signification of the word *Pergamos;* and
this church represents the age of Constantine, which lasted more than
two hundred years, until the rise of anti-Christ, from A.D. 312 until
A.D. 538.  During this age the church became very earthy, having her
worldly policy, and, like the church in the present day, attending more
to the outward concerns, and the worldly part of religion, than to
inward piety and graces of the spirit, looking more for *forms* and
*ceremonies,* than for the *life, power,* and *spirit* of the religion
of Jesus, spending much of their time in building elegant chapels,
gorgeous temples, high places to educate their ministry, and adorning
them with pictures and pleasant things, and filling the hearts of their
worshippers with high, popular, and haughty notions.  Yes, my brethren,
the age of trial was gone; the holy and secret aspirations of piety fled
away, and, now she had obtained an earthly emperor, her divine Master
was forgotten.  And here was the falling away mentioned by Paul, 2
Thess. ii. 3, "Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall
not come except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition."  This, then, was the age that prepared
the church to receive that monster, the man of sin, the son of
perdition, into her bosom, which stung the church with the poison of
asps, and filled the temple of God with image worship, and the church
with idolatry, selfishness, avarice, and pride.

            "These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two
edges."  By the sharp sword with two edges, we must understand the word
of God, which denounces heavy judgments on the wicked, and cuts off the
corruptions and errors from the church.  The Psalmist says, cxlix. 5-7,
"Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them sing aloud upon their
beds.  Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged
sword in their hand, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishments upon the people."  Paul says, Heb. iv. 12, "For the word of
God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. 
And John saw, Rev. i. 16, "And he had in his right hand seven stars; and
out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword."  Then this is the
meaning of the passage under consideration, "These things saith he,"
which hath the word of God, and showing us the importance of attending
to the subject following, by the importance of the speaker, "He that is
Christ."  And now, while we read or hear, let us keep in memory that it
is no less a personage speaking, than Him of whom the prophets did
write; who holdeth the stars in his right hand, and created and
preserves all things by the word of his power.  Hear him.

            "I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where
Satan's seat is.  Here, again, we have an evidence that this church is
mystical, "dwelling in Satan's seat," the fourth kingdom, the great red
dragon, imperial Rome, whereon the great mystical whore of Babylon
sitteth.  The church, in this age, became immediately connected with
this power called Satan, which is the devil, *Pagan Rome.*  "And thou
holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith."  In this time of
popular religion, and when many, from political and worldly motives,
united their names to the people of God, still there were some who held
to the doctrine of Christ, and did not deny the faith.

            "Even in those days, wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr,
who was slain among you where Satan dwelleth."  It is supposed that
Antipas was not an individual, but a class of men who opposed the power
of the bishops or Popes in that day, being a combination of two words,
*Anti,* opposed, and *Papas,* father or Pope, and many of them suffered
martyrdom, at that time, in Constantinople and Rome, where the bishops
and Popes began to exercise the power which soon after brought into
subjection the kings of the earth, and trampled on the rights of the
church of Christ.  And, for myself, I see no reason to reject this
explanation of the word *Antipas* in this text, as the history of those
times are perfectly silent respecting such an individual as is here
named.  Yet many, who opposed the worship of saints and pictures, and
the infallibility of the bishop of Rome, were excommunicated,
persecuted, and finally driven out from among men, and in the next age
of the church had to flee into the wilderness.  All this happened in the
kingdom of Rome, "where Satan dwelleth."

            "But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast
there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed
unto idols, and to commit fornication."  The world have always been
endeavoring to draw the church of Christ into fellowship with them, and
to a mixed communion of idolatry, as Balaam taught Balak to draw the
children of Israel from their God and his commands, by mixing with the
Jews in their worship, and, at the same time, by degrees, introduce
their priests, their altars and idol worship into their camp.  In
Constantine's day this mode of warfare was introduced with great success
by Pagan worshippers, so that in little more than two centuries the
greater part of the professed Christian church became the image of the
beast of which we are now speaking, viz., Pagan Rome.  Here, then, we
see the rise of Papacy on the downfall of Pagan Rome.  Whosoever will
take the pains of comparing the Pagan manner of worship, forms, and
ceremonies with Papacy, cannot help being forcibly struck with the
similarity of the two.  One deified their departed heroes and poets, the
other her departed saints and votaries.  The one consulted her oracles
and priests for laws and instructions, the other her Popes and
cardinals.  The one had her altars, images, and statues, the other her
chapels, pictures, and crosses.  Both had them erected in every public
place, for the multitude to fall before and worship.  Both had their
holy fire, holy water, and both claimed to perform miracles; the one by
the response of her wooden oracles, and the other by her carnal
priesthood.  Here, then, we see how the church, in the fourth and fifth
century, was led over the stumbling-block of Paganism, to eat things
sacrificed to idols, and to commit fornication.

            "So, also, hast thou them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate."  This doctrine was promulgated in the
fourth century.  See the church history, and our former observations.

            "Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
fight against them with the sword of my mouth."  Again the Lord calls
for repentance, and threatens the judgments of his word upon them that
obey not.  O! may we take warning, my brethren, and tempt not the heavy
judgments of God upon us, for our idolatry and fellowship of that which
is not the religion of Jesus.

            "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith
unto the churches.  To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new
name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it."  Again,
all that have ears are commanded to hear, and those who remain faithful,
that do not fall away, receive a promise of spiritual food, and a name
and righteousness which none can know but they who receive it.

            18, "And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write." 
The signification of *Thyatira* is, a "sweet savor of labor or sacrifice
and contrition," and is a description of the church, after she is driven
into the wilderness by the anti-Christian beast.  This church lasted
until about the tenth century; and little of her history is known to the
world; but some authors have pretended to trace her into the north-west
part of Asia, and in the north-east part of Europe, where they lived
until about the tenth century, unknown unto the rest of the world, or
taking but little concern with the nations around them.  Yet it is said
they retained religion in its purity, and held to the doctrines of the
word of God.  At any rate this church is represented as being in a state
of heavy trial, and subject to seduction by some power represented by
*that woman Jezebel,* of which I shall speak in its place.  "These
things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of
fire, and his feet are like fine brass;" representing, as in all the
other declarations to the churches, that the character addressing them
is no less than the mighty God, the omniscient, omnipotent, and
omnipresent Jehovah, who says, "I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and patience, and thy works; and the last to be more
than the first."  When this church existed, which was when anti-Christ
began her reign, there was great need of the exercise of those graces of
the spirit which in this passage are enumerated.  1st. In works they had
to, and without doubt did, combat the anti-Christian doctrines which
began in the sixth century to overwhelm the Christian world, such as
worshipping angels, departed saints, subject to councils and bishops,
infallibility of the Pope, &c.  They, in charity, too, had many of their
brethren to sustain while combatting these errors against the power of
this beast.  They did much service in holding up the hands of their
pious teachers and pastors who were not led away by this wicked one. 
How much faith, too, must they have been in possession of to have
withstood the power of their councils, the excommunications of the Pope,
and a majority of their brethren who had fell into Papal errors! how
much *"patience"* to have remained unwavering amidst persecution when
driven from their homes, their country and friends, into the wilderness,
where God prepared a place for her! and how much more necessary were
their last works to support each other in exile, poverty, and distress,
the natural consequence of being driven from among men!  But these
things were so, according to the best account we can obtain of those
times.

            20, "Nothwithstanding, I have a few things against thee,
because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a
prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed to idols."  In this verse we have strong
testimony that the exposition we have given of the seven churches is
correct; for no character given the woman Jezebel will apply so exactly,
as the woman sitting on the scarlet-colored beast, full of names of
blasphemy, "having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication."

            *Jezebel* is a figurative name, alluding to Ahab's wife, who
slew the prophets of the Lord, led her husband into idolatry, and fed
the prophets of Baal at her own table.  A more striking figure could not
have been used to describe the Papal abomination.  See 1 Kings xviii.
xix. xxi. chapters.  It is very evident from history, as well as from
this verse in Revelation, that the church of Christ did suffer some of
the Papal monks to preach and teach among them.  See the history of the
Waldenses.

            21, "And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and
she repented not."  22, "Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them
that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent
of their deeds."  23, "And I will kill her children with death; and all
the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and
hearts, and I will give unto every one of you according to your works." 
We cannot be mistaken in the character given to this mystical Jezebel,
when we compare the descriptions here used, and the judgments
threatened, with other passages of like import in Revelation, where
mystical Babylon is described and threatened.  See Rev. ix. 20, 21, "And
the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils and
idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: neither repented they of their
murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their
thefts."

            If these last texts mean anti-Christ, of which I believe
none have any doubt, that is, no commentator that I have been able to
consult, then it is equally evident that this woman, called Jezebel, in
this prophecy of the church in Thyatira, means the same; and the
conclusion is strong the Thyatira church represents the churches in some
age of anti-Christ, and the prophecy contained in the verses we have
already quoted are the judgments God has and will pour out on that great
city that rules over the kings of the earth, and has for ages past
trodden the church under foot, and contaminated the people of God by her
seductions, sorceries, and fornications.

            24, "But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, As
many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of
Satan as they speak, I will put upon you none other burden."  25, "But
that which ye have already, hold fast till I come."  In these verses the
church which have not fellowshipped the anti-Christian doctrine, and
have not followed the practices of the satanic blasphemies of their
abominations, are here promised to experience no other persecution
except what they may experience from this beast or woman Jezebel, which
is another proof of this being anti-Christ; for the church in Thyatira
has long been extinct, if there ever was such a church, and was when the
man of sin was revealed; and yet they are promised to have none other
burden until he come, as it is more than implied; and this power is to
stand until he comes.  For Paul says, "Whom he shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his coming." 
This is Daniel's fourth kingdom, which was to be broken without hand,
and to be carried away like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor
before the wind, that no place be found for it.

            26, "And he that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the
end, to him will I give power over the nations," 27, ("And he shall rule
them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken
to shivers,) even as I received of my Father.  And I will give him the
morning star."  29, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith to the churches."

            In closing the prophecies to the churches, our divine
Instructor carries them down to that day when he shall come to be
admired in all them that believe, or to glorify his saints, to crown
them his in his kingdom of glory, to break in pieces all the kingdoms of
the earth as a potter's vessel is broken to shivers, as the last text
says, which proves that when Christ comes, he will bring all the saints
with him, and this too when the kingdoms of this world and anti-Christ
will be destroyed.  And this proves another important point in which
many good and pious people are greatly mistaken, viz., that there will
not be a thousand years' happy reign previous to Christ's coming the
second time without sin unto salvation.  What happy reign can there be
while the kingdoms of the earth stand as they now do; while the
anti-Christian beast has power to seduce and draw the servants of God
into idolatry, and lull to her serpentine folds thousands and tens of
thousands human beings yearly, and deceive the nations by her siren song
of *mother church;* while by means of her poison, subtle, secret, and
deep, she is undermining and sapping the foundation of every religious
sect but her own; of every civil government but such as will resign
their power unto her control?  And now, while I am speaking, she is
exerting an influence in this once favored land, by means of her
Jesuits, that will set father against son, and son against father, and
drench our country in blood.  Can this monster of murder, iniquity, and
blood, retain her life, her standing in society, and we have a happy
reign?  No.  She must and will sink like a millstone in the mighty deep,
and God will avenge the blood of his servants.  Her flesh must be eaten
by dogs; yea, the kings of the earth shall eat her flesh, and God shall
consume her with fire before the happy reign comes. *"Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly."*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture X. The Epistles to the Seven Churches of Asia, Considered
as Applying to Seven Periods of the Gospel Church, Part II](esc12)
