[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc16)  [Next](esc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE XV.

##### REV. xvi. 17.

##### And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

 

            THIS text is the account we have in the word of God of the
last plague that will ever visit our world, or the inhabitants who
hereafter will be permitted to dwell thereon.  That is evident, because
it is the seventh of the last seven.  For John says, Rev. xv. 1, "And I
saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having
the seven *last plagues;* for in them is filled up the wrath of God." 
And the wrath of God is filled up, that is, the cup of God's wrath of
which he will make all nations drink; and he will give unto Babylon "the
cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath."

            Then it cannot be uninteresting to those who wish or who may
desire to learn where and when the last plagues have been poured out,
and how many yet remain for us to experience.  These seven last plagues
have had their shadows in the plagues which God sent on slave-holding
Egypt, when he delivered his people, the Jews, from their Egyptian
bondage, the least of which plagues destroyed Pharaoh and his host, just
in the moment when Israel were shouting deliverance on the banks of the
Red Sea.  So likewise, in the seven last plagues, they are poured out
upon spiritual Egypt, slave-holding Babylon, who has enslaved the people
of God for centuries, and has trafficked in the bodies and souls of
men.  She, like Egypt, has appointed task-masters over the church, and
has endeavored to strangle her children in the birth.  She has commanded
the kings and rulers of the earth to destroy the children of the church,
as did the Egyptians the Hebrew midwives; but the church has found favor
in the eyes of some of the kings and princes of the earth, and the earth
has helped the woman, and her children are not all dead.  And their cry
has gone up to the Lord of Sabaoth, and he has come down in these seven
last plagues to deliver his people from the hand of the spoiler, and
from the power of the beast, the anti-Christian abomination; and when
this last vial is poured into the air, all the doctrines of men and
devils, and all the theories of men and the wisdom of this world will be
confounded and brought to nought.  The Lord will overwhelm with the red
and fiery wrath of his last judgment the kings of the earth, the beast
or Catholic church of abomination, the false prophet and all his
followers, the great men of the earth, mighty men and captains, tyrants,
slave-holders, rich and poor, bond and free: all who have worshipped the
beast or his image, will, like the host of Pharaoh, be destroyed in the
general conflagration of the world, and the saints will shout
deliverance in the New Jerusalem state.  I shall, therefore,

            I. Give the history of the seven last plagues, or the seven
vials of wrath.

            II. Show what may be understood by *"It is done."*

            I. Then we are to give the history of the seven vials or
last plagues; and for this purpose we must give a comment on the
sixteenth chapter of Revelation.  Verse 1, "And I heard a great voice
out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour
out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth."  This verse shows us
that these plagues are poured upon the earth at the command of him who
sits in the temple of God.  Verse 2, "And the first went, and poured out
his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon
the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped
his image."  This first vial was poured upon the earth, meaning the
kingdom of the beast or the Roman government.  A noisome, a grievous
sore, indicates the dissolution of the body afflicted, and that the
constitution is laboring under some inward disease, or affected by
contagion from without.  It is therefore a fit emblem to represent the
exposure of the corruptions of the church of Rome, and breaking out of
those loathsome diseases of internal abominations which had been hid for
ages from the world by the cunning craftiness of this Papal beast.  The
men spoken of in this passage are those who worship the beast, and who
are the professed followers of this corrupt society, and all who live
under the influence and control of the idolatrous city of nations, and
who traffic in her indulgences and abominable practices.  This vial then
began to be poured out when the Protestants first published to the world
the corruptions and abominable practices of the church of Rome, when the
world began to see the noisome and grievous sores that covered the men
who pretended to preach or proclaim the doctrine, laws, or commands of
the beast.  And of course this plague was sent on the Romish church
about the year A.D. 1529, under the preaching of Luther, Calvin, and
others who opposed and exposed the corruptions of the church of Rome.

            Verse 3, "And the second angel poured out his vial upon the
sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soul
died in the sea."  The *sea,* in prophetic language, is the centre of
some great nation, or society of men, as in a restless and turbulent
state; and the things living in the sea, are the persons living under
the power or control of this nation, or society.  *Living soul* denotes
those persons who have been born of the Spirit, and are in possession of
that living faith in God, and love for all men.  "As the blood of a dead
man."  There is something very striking in this figure--not an ordinary
figure of blood, which denotes war and mortal controversy, but cold,
congealed blood; the blood of a dead man denoting a massacre in cool
blood, without any resistance on the part of those murdered.  This vial
was, then, poured out in France, the principal kingdom in the Roman ten
horns, in the year A.D. 1572, at the massacre of the Huguenots on St.
Bartholomew's eve, when 50,000 were slain in one night, and the streets
ran blood, as Sully tells us, in some places ankle deep, in the city of
Paris.  This massacre was in cold blood; for the same historian tells
us, that the king stood in his balcony, and shot down his naked and
defenceless subjects as they were fleeing through the streets.  This
happened in France, the stoutest of the Papal horns--the chief
instrument in establishing, building up, and supporting that cruel,
murderous power of Papacy.

            Verse 4, "And the third angel poured out his vial upon the
rivers and fountains of waters, and they became blood."  By "rivers and
fountains of water," I understand the nations and states who live around
the centre, or sea, as it was called in the preceding vial.  By "blood,"
I understand destructive war.  "And I heard the angel of the waters say,
Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because
thou hast judged thus.  For they have shed the blood of saints and
prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. 
And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty,
true and righteous are thy judgments."  In these verses we have the
reasons given, why they were visited with this scourge of war, because,
in the preceding vial, they had shed the blood of saints; which proves
that the exposition of that vial, which I have already given, is
correct.  This vial, then, was poured out upon the nations that had
given their strength and their power to the beast; and the governments
were filled with war and blood.  This vial was poured out about A.D.
1630, and lasted nearly fifty years.  Spain and Portugal carried on a
bloody and destructive war for more than thirty years of this time. 
France was torn by civil and intestine wars during a long period.  The
civil wars in England began under king Charles I., 1642, which lasted
with but little cessation, until king George I. ascended the throne, in
1714.  Germany was filled with blood, between the contentions of the
Evangelical league and Catholic league, "which gave rise to a ruinous
war, which lasted thirty years."  See Guthrie, vol. i., page 443.  This
war was headed, on the part of the Protestants, by Gustavus Adolphus,
king of Sweden, who was killed at the battle of Lutzen, A.D. 1632, which
war lasted until the peace of Munster 1648.  The other kingdoms of the
ancient empire of Rome were more or less drenched in blood, and civil
wars, on account of their religious tenets, and contention of their
rulers and sovereign princes.  These were the heavy judgments which God
saw fit to inflict upon the kingdoms and states of the church of Rome,
for the innocent blood which she had shed of the Protestants who had
protested against her cruel and blasphemous practices.  "For they have
shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to
drink, for they are worthy."  "And the fourth angel poured out his vial
upon the sun, and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.  And
men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which
hath power over these plagues; and they repented not to give him
glory."  The sun is the great source of light and heat, and, in
prophetic language, is an emblem of the gospel, as explained in the 19th
Psalm, 4-10.  "Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their
words to the end of the world.  In them hath he set a tabernacle for the
sun," &c.  To "scorch men" with fire, signifies to make men angry;
"great heat," uncommonly angry, vengeful, malicious.  This vial was
poured out in the last century, when the gospel was proclaimed in these
kingdoms of the beast.  Now, during the greater part of the last
century, and in all the kingdoms where the gospel was preached, there
were manifested insidious attempts and a systematic opposition against
the gospel of Jesus Christ, or the Holy Scriptures.  This opposition was
headed by Frederick, king of Prussia, and aided by all the wits, men of
genius and learning, as they boasted, of all Europe and America; and in
their secret assemblies, or clubs, they went so far as to calculate
about what length of time it would take for them to destroy and
exterminate the religion of the "Galilean and his twelve fishermen;" and
no writers that ever wrote took such unwearied pains, showed so much
virulence and anger, blasphemed the name of God to such a degree, as
these writers; and none, either before or since, have ever dared to
exhibit the like.  "And they repented not to give him the glory."  I
believe it is not known, that any of these principal deistical writers
were converted to the religion of Jesus Christ before their death, to
give God the glory.  Yet I think we have some account of many of them
dying in horror, at the frightful view of the future, in consequence of
their blasphemous lives against the majesty of the King of kings. 
Therefore, in the history of the Deists in the eighteenth century, we
have the history of the plague of the fourth vial.  "And the fifth angel
poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full
of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the
God of heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and repented not
of their deeds."  "The seat of the beast" must mean those ten kingdoms
on which the woman sitteth, which is ancient Rome.  "Full of darkness"
must mean full of wickedness, confusion, and every evil work.  "Gnawed
their tongues for pain" shows shame, disgrace, and disappointment.  This
vial was poured out in the French revolution, about 1798.  When
Bonaparte began his extraordinary career, exalted to the pinnacle of
power, he dethrones the pope, (whose power and authority had made kings
and emperors quail at his feet, who had ruled over the nations with
despotic sway for more than 1200 years,) and makes Rome the second city
of France; conquers the ancient monarchies; deluges every country with
blood; masters every king; gathers spoils from every land, and humbles
cities in the dust; changes the laws of kingdoms, and destroys the most
sacred constitutions of the Roman states.  In this revolution among the
Roman kingdoms, and under this vial, the bastile was demolished, the
inquisition destroyed, torture suppressed, and the power of the Papal
clergy restrained.  Their kingdoms were full of darkness; they were
troubled, chafed, and grieved; a thousand plots were laid; many times
they confederated against him, the master spirit of the times; but they
prevailed not, until this vial had its accomplishment on the seat of the
beast.  Yet, after all this wonderful display of God's judgments upon
the beast and kingdoms of ancient Rome, they repented not, but,
Pharaoh-like, they blasphemed God, because of their pains and their
sores.  "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings
of the east might be prepared."  The scene has now changed from Europe
to Turkey.  The "river Euphrates" means, in prophecy, the people of that
country bordering on the river, and, of course, refers to the Turkish
power, as I have formerly shown in my lecture on the fifth and sixth
trumpet.  "Water thereof was dried up," is an emblem of the power and
strength of that kingdom being diminished, or taken away.  This vial was
poured out on Turkey, by the loss of a great share of the empire; first,
Russia on the north, in her last war with the Turks, took away a number
of provinces; then, by the revolt of Ali Pacha; then, by the rising of
the Greeks; since, by the Albanians and Georgians, and other distant
parts of the empire, becoming disaffected; which, all together, have so
wasted the power of the Turks, that, now, it is very doubtful whether
she can maintain her power against her own intestine enemies; and, to
compare her now with her former greatness, would be like comparing a
fordable stream with the great river Euphrates; so that the way now
appears to be prepared for the kings to come up to the battle of the
great day, in which the false prophet is now to take his part, as we
shall see in our next verse.

            "And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the
mouth of the false prophet; for they are the spirits of devils working
miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty." 
Now, if we can decipher this passage, we can tell what are now and what
will be the signs of the times.  "Three unclean spirits."  By this we
must understand three wicked principles.  "Frogs" I understand to show
us that it is political.  As frogs came over the land in the judgment on
Egypt, and pervaded every house, even the palace of the king, so do
politics.  "Mouth" denotes orders or commands.  The dragon is a figure
of the kings of the earth.  The beast is used to represent Papacy.  The
false prophet evidently represents Mahometanism.  These have all the
spirit of devils.  The devil pretends to claim power over all the
kingdoms of the world, (see Rev. xii. 9,) there called the devil. 
Papacy is said, in Rev. xiii. 2, to receive its power from the dragon,
and to come out of the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition; of
course, must belong to Satan's kingdom.  The false prophet, too, is to
be "cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone."  All these
powers have pretended to work miracles, to establish their authority
over the bodies and souls of men.  But what are the principles which
each of these teach their political followers?  The dragon and his
political party, in whatever nation they may appear, (as all three of
these political principles must pervade the whole earth,) will support
tyranny, slavery, and aggrandizement of the few at the expense of many. 
The beast and his political party will be known only by their hypocrisy,
bigotry, and superstition.  Their principal object will be to operate on
the hopes and fears of men, and so gain an ascendency over the minds of
the individuals who may be so unfortunate as to be found in their
ranks.  The false prophet will fill his party with notions of
infidelity, lust, and conquest.  And the spirit of all these parties,
working at one and the same time, in all nations, and among all people,
will produce an effect which only can be known to mortals in
experiencing the conflict.  "Behold, I come as a thief.  Blessed is he
that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they
see his shame."  This verse gives us notice of the near approach of him
who hath all power in heaven and earth.  "For when they say, Peace and
safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them, and they shall not
escape.  But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day shall
overtake you as a thief."  Watch, therefore, for if ye have put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, keep your garment, and let none take your crown, that
you may be found of him without spot and blameless.  "And he gathered
them together into a place called, in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon;"
that is, "Where the Lord will declare his precious fruit."  This
gathering is the same spoken of in Matt. xxv. 32, "And before him shall
be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as
a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats."  In the place Armageddon,
the Lord will manifest who are his; he will separate the chaff from the
wheat, the wicked from the just.  The wheat he will gather into his
garner; they will be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, while the
chaff will be burnt with unquenchable fire.  His own right hand shall
save us while his last plague shall be poured out upon the head of his
enemies.  "And the seventh angel poured his vial into the air; and there
came a great voice out of the temple of heaven from the throne, saying,
It is done."  The seventh and last vial of God's wrath will be poured
into the air about the year 1840, if my former calculations are correct,
when this judgment will have a quick and rapid circulation over the
whole globe.  Like the air, it will pervade every kingdom, circulate
into every nation, sow the seeds of anarchy in every society, and
disorganize every bond of union among men, except the gospel.  "And
there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and a great earthquake,
such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake,
and so great."  *Voices,* political strife.  *Thunders* is an emblem of
divisions.  *Lightning* is a representation of anger and war.  *Great
earthquake* denotes a great revolution.  And there will be, when this
vial is poured out, political strife among all nations, divisions among
all sects, societies, and associations of men upon earth.  Anger, war,
and bloodshed will fill the countries with horror and dismay; and a
great revolution, such as was not since men were upon earth, so mighty a
revolution and so great.  "And the great city was divided into three
parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and great Babylon came in
remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath."  The *great city* is the woman which reigneth
over the kings of the earth, says the angel, Rev. xvii. 18.  And the
*woman* is Papacy.  Papacy must also be divided into three parties, to
show her dissolution.  And the cities of the nations fell.  As *city*
denoted the papal power and religion, so does *cities* represent the
power and religion of all other nations.  Therefore all the power, and
all national religion, will fall in and under this vial, and the
anti-Christian power will be judged; all their sins, cruel persecutions,
and bloody deeds, will be brought into judgment into remembrance before
God, and he will fill to her the cup which she has made others drink,
and she in her turn must drink the dregs.  "And every island fled away,
and the mountains were not found."  *Islands* and *mountains* are
figures of great and small kingdoms and governments.  This text alludes
to the same time and circumstances which Nebuchadnezzar's dream does,
Daniel ii. 35, 45--when the stone cut out without hands shall smite the
image upon his feet, and all the kingdoms of the earth be carried away,
that no place shall be found for them.  In this verse it is, the
"mountains were not found."  "And there fell upon men a great hail out
of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed
God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was
exceeding great."  This closes the history of the seven last plagues,
and this storm of hail is the last part of the seventh vial; it is the
closing up of the judgments of God on an ungodly world.  Whether we are
to understand this hail figuratively or literally, I am not able to say;
but my prevailing opinion is , that we are to understand it literally,
for this reason--I have never been able in the word of God to find any
figurative explanation, although it is used in a number of places with
particular reference to the last day.  Isa. xxviii. 17, "Judgment also
will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the hail
shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the
hiding-places."  xxx. 30, "And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice
to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm, with the
indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with
scattering, and tempest, and hailstones."  Exek. xiii. 11, 13, "Say unto
them which daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall; there
shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hail-stones, shall fall;
and a stormy wind shall rend it.  Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, I
will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an
overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hail-stones in my fury, to
consume it."  Ezek. xxxviii. 22, "And I will plead against him with
pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands,
and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and
great hail-stones, fire and brimstone."  Also, Rev. xi. 19, "And there
were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and
great hail."

            By reading the connection of these texts, you cannot but be
struck with the agreement of the prophets in their descriptions of this
last and dreadful judgment of God upon the world.  All of them evidently
fix it on the last day; all call it apparently a rain of great
hail-stones, like those which fell upon Egypt in the days of Moses. 
Exodus ix. 23-25, "And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and
the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground;
and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.  So there was hail, and
fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like
it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.  And the hail
smote throughout all the land of Egypt, all that was in the field, both
man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake
every tree of the field."  This, it is evident, is the type of the last
part of the seventh plague.

            And now, my friends, will you believe?  Six of these plagues
have been accomplished in as literal a manner as we could expect, after
a fair and scriptural explanation of the figures and metaphors used. 
And again I ask, Do you believe?  You think, perhaps, you will wait
until you see the hail come, and then you will believe.  But will you
not recollect that our text says, "And they blasphemed God because of
the plague of the hail"?  Will you thus tempt God through six successive
judgments, and wait for the last before you will believe?  What hope or
prospect have you that the seventh will do what the six preceding could
not do--that is, make you believe?  Is there one rational conviction
that you will be then convinced?  No, not one.  Then will you not see
and learn wisdom by what is gone before?  Pharaoh had no space for
repentance under, or even just before the last plague.  And so it will
be with you; the door will have been shut before any part of the seventh
vial will be poured out, for then will be heard a great voice
reverberating through the upper vault of heaven, and, sounding even to
the dark cells of the pit of woe, shaking the middle air with its
deep-toned thunder, and, like the lightning, darting its vivid flash of
fire from east to west, will pierce the deafest ear, and make the
hardest heart to break, although a thousand fold more hard than the
adamantine rock, saying, *"It is done."*  This brings me to show,

            II. What we may understand by "It is done."

            The first question which naturally arises on the mind is,
What is done?  When Christ was about expiating for the sins of the
world; when he was closing up the work which his Father gave him to do
on earth in the flesh; when the spirit was about leaving the tenement of
clay which it had inhabited through a life of thirty-three years of
pain, sufferings, deprivations, sorrows, groans, and tears, made more
acute by temptations trying as the arch-demon of hell could invent;
suffering reproach from the haughty Pharisee, and the more obstinate
Sadducee, and contempt and ridicule from the base rabble of his own
people; persecuted even until death by the envy, malice, and hatred of
those who had received boons and blessings of life at this hands,--he
had saved them from disease, death, and the rage of demons; yet, in this
moment of great need, he was forsaken of all; they stood afar off; and
when he was about giving up the ghost, he cried, "It is finished!" and
bowed his head, and died.  The fratricide man could do no more; he had
followed him to death; beyond that the envy of his brother could not
reach him.  The rabble, who a few days before had cried, Hosannas to the
Son of David! this day were crying, Crucify him! crucify him! now could
cry no more, but with downcast looks, returned into the city.  The
Pharisees and rulers could do no more; they had plotted his death, and
obtained their object; but into the dark recess of the tomb they dare
not, they would not, follow.  The great red dragon (the Roman power) had
sought his life when a child, but the hour had not come.  Herod sought
his life when a man, but he could not succeed until the last day of the
seventy weeks should be accomplished.  Then the powers of earth, wicked
men, and devils, could combine to take the life of the Lord of glory. 
Then, while these powers had control, the heavens hid their face; nature
stood back aghast, and the material world shuddered with a groan.  Then,
at that awful, fitful period, he who had been the object of all this
malice, cried with a loud voice, "It is finished!"  The work on earth in
the flesh is finished; the temptations of Satan are finished; the
persecution of his brethren are finished; envy, malice, and hatred
towards the person of Christ are finished; the power of earth, hell, and
wicked men to do any thing with him, is finished; death has no more
terrors over him.  *It is finished.*

            Although Christ had finished his work, and had endured all
the sufferings which he was to finish; yet in his spiritual body, the
church, the measure of his sufferings was to be filled up.  His people
must pass through the same scenes in the world as their divine Master
had experienced from satanic temptations and the hatred of the world. 
"The world will hate you and persecute you for my name's sake, even as
they hated me before they hated you," says our blessed Redeemer. 
Therefore the same manifestations of cruelty, contempt, persecution, and
death, were to be acted over again in the church until the 2300 years
should be accomplished, when Christ would come again, receive home his
weary, persecuted people, conquer death, and him that had the power of
death, which is the devil.  "And there came a great voice out of the
temple of heaven from the throne, saying, It is done."  The power of
earth, hell, and wicked men over the dear people of God, is done.  Their
temptation in the flesh is done; their trials, persecutions, sufferings,
darkness, fears, and death itself, are done.  As the sufferings of the
head was finished in Christ, so will all the pains of the body be
completed when the seventh and last vial shall be poured into the air,
and cleanse the atmosphere from all noxious vapors, pestilence, and
death.  "Then shall the sanctuary be cleansed," and then will the great
voice from the throne say, It is done.  These old heavens and this old
earth will have passed away, and the New Jerusalem come "down from God
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband," Rev. xxi.
3-6.

            "And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold,
the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them and be their
God, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain, for the former things are passed away.  And he that sat upon
the throne said, Behold, I make all things new.  And he said unto me,
Write; for these words are true and faithful.  And he said unto me, It
is done."  Here we have the same expression as in our text, having the
same identical meaning, the same "great voice," in one as in the other;
the same throne, and the same voice speaking, alluding to the same
period of time when the old things are done away and the new heavens are
finished, to the same point in prophecy, "the end."  Therefore, as we
have passed the sixth vial, the seventh and last hangs trembling in the
air.  The drops of this vial are already contaminating the minds of men;
already we see the unclean spirit going forth; the great city is being
divided, and the signs of the heavens denote a moral conflict, and on
the earth a speedy revolution.

            Then, my friends, let us be wise; let us make peace with Him
who has power to save or to destroy.  For we learn by our subject that
the world and worldly scenes are passing away; every vestige of mortal
grandeur, every form of carnal pride, every fashion of human glory will
soon be eclipsed by the grandeur of that great white throne from whose
face the heavens and earth will flee away, and the great voice from the
throne will sound the last requiem, *"It is done."*

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"Yet when the sound shall tear the skies,<br />
And lightning burn the globe below,<br />
Saints, you may lift your joyful eyes;<br />
There's a new heaven and earth for you."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture XVI. The Parable of the Ten Virgins](esc18)
