[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh13) 
[Next](iggh15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI. A Red Lotus

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Indra: O ripe red fruit-lipped
lady, for all that thou canst say, thou canst not persuade me that thou
hast not done very ill in forsaking thy father's house for the arms of
this stranger.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wilt thou find
reasons to prove that it is the duty of all kings’ daughters to run away
with robbers that break into their palaces by night?

Then said Wanawallarí: O Brahman, my case is an exception and not a
rule, for all rules have exceptions. Moreover, though maybe thou wilt
disbelieve it, know, that even I would not have acted as I did, but for
just this husband and no other. For though I may appear to have acted in
this matter with indiscretion and frivolity, yet it has been not in
accordance with my nature, but against it; and therefore it furnishes no
rules, either for any other person, or even for myself. For once in a
way a coward may be brave, and a miser generous, and a wise man foolish,
or even a sane man mad: and so may a woman give herself away without
reserve to that one man who wakens the sleeping adoration in her heart,
and lights in her soul the everlasting fire, without forfeiting her
claim to be enrolled among the pure women of the world. And this I know
to be my case, for my conscience is at ease, and does not blame me. And
she who has her own soul on her side requires no other witness to her
purity. As once there was a king with many wives, who were all
unfaithful and untrue to him, but one. So having to go

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

upon a warlike expedition, he gave each of them a lotus, and said: Keep
this red lotus, and show it to me when I come again; and its colour
shall be a proof of thy fidelity. For I received it from the deity, and
it will never wither, so long as thou art true to me alone. And then he
went away. And as soon as he was gone, all those wives with one
exception amused themselves with other men. And very soon they all
looked to see their lotuses, and found them withered away and dead. And
they all became afraid, being conscious of their guilt, except the one.
Then presently news arrived that the king was coming back. And when he
arrived, all his wives appeared to meet him, rejoicing and adorned, with
protestations of affection. And the king said: Show me all your lotuses.
And they showed them, each her own: and to! they were all fresh and red
as when he gave them. Only that one good wife gave him a withered lotus.
And she said: O my lord, I know not how it is, that all these lotuses
are fresh. For here is my lotus dead and withered, contrary to thy word:
and yet my heart has never thought of any man but thee. Then all those
other wives exclaimed against her, for they hated her: and they said: O
king, she is corrupt, and we all know it: and now

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

here is the proof. But the king looked at them, and he laughed. And he
said: O ye fools, how could a lotus remain fresh for so many months? Now
are you all condemned by your own endeavours to conceal your guilt. But
she alone was acquitted by her heart, and did not fear the withering of
her lotus: and she alone is pure, and worthy to be my queen. For the
lotus that did not wither was the lotus of her heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Wind and the Leaves](iggh15)
