[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh21.md) 
[Next](iggh23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIX. The Triumph of Beauty

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> then, <span
class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> left him, and quitted the earth, and
flew up to heaven. And there she found all the gods assembled in Indra's
hall. And instantly she began to mock them. And she exclaimed: Now you
may see how vain it is for any or even all of you together to contend
with me. For this Rajpoot has attained prosperity in spite of your
dislike, by my favour; and as for Indra, he was utterly worsted by
beauty, when he met it in the form of a mortal woman. And after having
flouted them, she went away, laughing in triumph as she went, and
casting back upon them over her shoulder glances out of the corner of
her almond

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

eyes that pierced the heart of the gods like poisoned needles.

And then they looked at each other, and said: We have all been made
fools by this wicked <span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span>; and now
this is utterly intolerable. And Indra said: Though that mortal scoffer,
whom I forgave for the sake of his wife, was to blame, yet she will
bring him back to his duty. But the real culprit in this matter is this
mischievous goddess. For she took us all in by a show of submission, and
has shown favour to a mortal who flattered her vanity, out of a
capricious desire to tease and annoy us all. Therefore now we must
punish and put a stop to her proceedings: for if she be allowed to go
on, everything human and divine will be thrown into confusion. And now
she is young, and capable of improvement: but unless she is kept in
order, she will get worse and worse. Therefore we must look to it
without loss of time.

Thereupon they all came in a body to me <span
id="fr_38"></span>[f](#fn_38.md). But I said to them: This is not my
affair. Go to Náráyana, if you have any complaint to make against <span
class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span>. For to punish the wife is the duty
of none but the husband. And I sent

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

them away. Thereupon the gods hunted through the universe for Náráyana,
but for a long time in vain. And then at last they found him alone in
the very middle of the sea, lying on the leaf of a lotus as it floated
about on the waves, sucking  his left toe, and buried in meditation. And
as they came and ranged themselves in silence before him, the adorable
Harí politely took his toe from his mouth, and gazed at them curiously
with great dreamy eyes, as much as to say: What do you want of me?

Then the gods, with Indra for spokesman, having first bowed respectfully
before him, said: O Achyuta, we have come to complain to thee of the
conduct of thy wife: who has made us all ridiculous by taking the part
of a mortal that showered abuse on us, simply because he loaded her
alone with flattery and praise. And she laughs in our faces into the
bargain, though she is the youngest of us all. And now she has hidden
herself somewhere or other and cannot be found. Therefore our prayer to
thee is, that she may be taught by thee the due bounds of propriety and
decorum, and respect for her elders. For our dignity is diminished by
the wilful independence of her behaviour.

And then, that husband of <span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span>
whispered

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

very gently the name of his wife. And low though it was, the sound of
that whisper vibrated through the three worlds into the uttermost parts
of space: and the universe echoed to its tone like a lute whose strings
tremble at the touch of the wind. And as that ubiquitous murmur sank and
died away into a hush, the sea began to bubble and foam, and suddenly
the goddess of beauty rose up out of the lather of its waves for the
second time <span id="fr_39"></span>[g](#fn_39.md). And she stood with her
little feet resting on the back of a tortoise, and the sea water
dropping from her limbs that seemed to sparkle with the beauty of its
salt. And her neck resembled a shell, and on the pearl of its surface
was reflected the dark shadow of the green emeralds that hung round it;
and she held in one hand a dark blue lotus of exactly the same colour as
her long-cornered, lash-netted, shadowy eyes. And the graceful creepers
of her soft round arms, and the extremities of her smooth and tapering
legs, whose knees bent a little inwards, were loaded with rings of red
coral that blushed with envy at the colour of her lips, which smiled as
if conscious of their own superiority: while her bosom, whose two
breasts

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

were turned slightly away from each other like sisters that have
quarrelled, rose very gently up and down as if keeping time to the music
of the sea. And she held up with her left hand a coil of the blue hair
which fell in masses from her head, and encircled her like a cloud blown
by the breeze: and its end trailed away over the ocean waves. So she
stood in silence, bending a little forward, till a three-fold wrinkle
showed in the soft fold of her slender waist, while the foam plashed and
lapped over the back of the tortoise that supported her, hungry to kiss
the arched instep of her tiny pearly-toed feet. And her eyes looked far
away, fixed on the horizon of that sky-bounded ocean plain.

And the gods looked at her in silence, and then at each other. And each
knew what the other thought, though no one spoke. And each one said to
himself: How is it possible to accuse such a beautiful creature as this
of anything whatever, much less punish her. So they all stood gazing at
her, confounded and abashed, and intoxicated, and silent, while she
waited before them, and Wishnu watched both her and them with dreaming
eyes. And suddenly the gods turned, as if by mutual consent. And without
speaking, they all flew away together over the sea, and disappeared on
its edge like a flock of birds.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

And then Wishnu looked at his wife with a glance of ineffable affection.
And after a while he beckoned to her with a smile. Then <span
class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> came at once, and sat down at the
feet of her lord, and began to rub them gently with a hand softer than
the lotus which she laid beside them. And Wishnu watched her, opening
and closing his dreamy eyes, while the waves rocked their lotus couch
quietly up and down. And the sun set, and the night fell, leaving them
alone together in the darkness on the bosom of the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[76:f](iggh22.htm#fr_38.md) sc. Maheshwara.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[78:g](iggh22.htm#fr_39.md) The first time was when
she was born, at the churning of ocean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epilogue](iggh23.md)
