[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh22) 
[Next](iggh24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

# Epilogue.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### Epilogue.

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> then, Maheshwara ceased. And he put
up his hand, and took the *Kathaka* out of his hair, and set him down.
And he said: Thou hast heard: Go now, and tell thy story to the King.

But instead of going, the *Kathaka* fell with his face upon the snow.
And he exclaimed: O Maheshwara, O Shambu, O Three-eyed Trident-bearer, O
Lord of All and Giver of Boons, thou hast sanctified my ears with the
nectar of thy tale. Yet O! grant me yet one other boon. So Maheshwara
said: What is that? And the *Kathaka* said: O show me but a single
glimpse of that wave-born beauty, as she rose out of the sea before the
gods.

Then the Great God said privately to his wife: See now, how these
dim-sighted stupid mortals ask for they know not what, and rush
ignorantly upon their own destruction. And he said to the *Kathaka:*
Dost thou really desire to see that immortal beauty? The *Kathaka* said:
Yes. Then

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

said the god to Umá: Go quickly and find <span
class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span>, and tell her only that I have need
of her favour for a moment.

Then his wife flew away like a flash of lightning. And they waited there
in silence, the Great God and the mortal, while the diadem of the deity
shone out over the lonely peaks of snow. And after a while, the Daughter
of the Mountain returned, bringing <span
class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> with her. Then that beautiful one
said: I am here: and now, what favour has the Great God to confer upon
me?

And Maheshwara said, O darling of Náráyana, here is a poor devil of a
mortal, to whom I have granted a boon. Do me this favour: show thyself
for a single instant. And he said to the *Kathaka:* Look up now, and
see.

And the *Kathaka* raised his head, and looked up into the dark expanse
of sky, stretching over the pallid snowy moonlit peaks. And suddenly,
the goddess was revealed against it, like a picture painted on a wall.
And for a single fraction of an atom of an instant of time, there
flashed in his eyes the vision of that blinding loveliness, and over two
hills of snow a pair of dark blue eyes shot into his own, and withered
his heart like a blade of dry grass in a sheet of forest flame. And he

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

uttered a cry, and caught at his heart with both hands, and fell upon
the snow dead.

Then said Maheshwara: How could a mortal expect to endure such a beauty
as thine? But this dead body must not remain here. And he took it by the
foot with his purifying hand, and flung it away. Then that empty corpse
rushed with a whistle through the ice-cold air, and fell like a meteor
into the Ganges at Haradwára. But the soul of that unlucky *Kathaka*
instantly returned to earth and was born again. And he became a poet,
who wandered in the world all his life long, hunting with a heart on
fire for the eyes he could never find.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

 

 

 

PRINTED BY JAMES PARKER AND CO.,  
CROWN YARD, OXFORD.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: By the same Author](iggh24)
