[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh20) 
[Next](iggh22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### XVIII. The Favour of Fortune

<span class="smallcaps">So</span> Wanawallarí and her lover were carried
quickly back to the palace, and brought in by the guards before the
King. And when the King saw them, he clapped his hands: and he said: Ha!
so the flown bird and her decoy are caged. And now, what shall be done
to the daughter who brings disgrace upon her family by running away with
strolling Rajpoots? Or what does the thief deserve who breaks into the
palaces of kings by night and carries off their daughters and their
choicest gems?

Then said Wanawallarí: O father, let not anger blind thee to justice.
For though I have acted independently, I have done nothing, as thou
shalt find, to disgrace either myself or thee. For know, that this
husband of mine is, like myself, the child of a king, and even himself a
king. And as for me, did not Draupadí and Damayantí choose their own
husbands? And was not Shakuntalá wedded to Dushyanta by the Gándharwa
ceremony, and Bharata was their son? But the King said: Enough! O
daughter! Thy husband shall die with the rising of the sun, however it
may be with thee. Then said Wanawallarí: Then wilt thou be the murderer
of thy own flesh and blood: for he is

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

my husband, and I will die with him. And the King laughed. And he said:
O my daughter, that art no longer my daughter, dost thou really think to
persuade me that I am obliged to this Rajpoot for carrying thee away; or
to thee, for causing scandal by running away with him, like an
independent woman of no family, of thy own accord?

Then said Wanawallarí: O father, listen for a moment: and afterwards put
us both, if thou wilt, to death, and not him alone. This is no common
matter, and sure I am, that the deity has a hand in it. Tell me only
this, for thou knowest me well: was I one to act lightly? And the King
said with bitterness: It is that very thing which makes thy behaviour
incomprehensible. For I thought thee another Sitá: and lo! thou hast
leaped from thy window into the arms of a wandering Rajpoot! Who can
fathom the nature of women or the bottomless abyss of their frivolity?
They talk to one man, and look at another, and think of a third <span
id="fr_37"></span>[e](#fn_37). They are but deceit incarnate in a form
of illusion. For four things are insatiable

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of four: ocean, of rivers, and death, of mortals, and fire, of fuel, and
woman, of man.

Then said Wanawallarí: But one question I have to ask thee, and it is
the last: Of whom didst thou destine me to be the bride: Was it not the
King of Awantí? And the King said: Yes. Then Wanawallarí took her
husband by the hand. And she said: Here he is. And now I am his wife:
and be sure, that the deity himself has brought this about. For know,
that last night, this man climbed into my room. And I paused for a
moment ere I gave him to the guards, for I pitied him for his beauty and
his youth. And I said to him: Who art thou? And he said: I am the King
of Awantí. And I started, and I listened to his story; and as I
listened, he stole away my heart through my eyes and my ears. And I saw
before me, not that hideous Rákshasa for whom I was destined as a victim
of thy political necessity, but the God of Love in human form. And know,
that rather than become the bride of that other, who has driven away my
husband, and keeps by force a kingdom not his own, I would have thrown
myself down from my window, and I looked upon myself as already dead.
For I knew, that policy was thy first consideration, and that I must be

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

a sacrifice. And I looked upon him who is my husband, as I listened to
his tale, as one sent by the deity himself, and as new life in the form
of a man. For how could chance have brought into my window the very king
to whom I was betrothed, if not by the express agency of the deity
himself? Moreover, thy own interest was concerned: and if thou wilt let
thy reason speak, I have done thee no injury, but a service. For why
wouldst thou have had me the bride of that usurper, but to ally to thee
the kingdom which he holds? And how art thou injured, if thou hast
gained for the husband of thy daughter not the false king but the true?
Do my husband right, and instead of putting him to death, help him to
regain his throne: and thou shalt gain for a bad ally a good one: as I
have gained for myself a good husband for a bad one: and a kingdom for
all three of us.

Then the King exclaimed in amazement: This is but an idle tale,
concocted between thy lover and thyself to deceive me. And then Ranga
spoke. And he said: O King, till now I have not spoken, for I would not
beg my life, and I considered it as a thing gone past recall. But know,
that as to what concerns myself, thy daughter has told thee nothing but
the truth: and so far from arranging

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

it together, she never told me anything about it, and all that concerns
my uncle, and thyself, and her, is news to me, and I hear it for the
first time. So now put me, if thou wilt, to death, or if thou wilt, keep
me under guard, and make enquiry. And if it is not true, put me to a
hundred deaths instead of one. Or lend me, if thou wilt, but a little
force, and I will put myself upon my throne. For my subjects love me,
and submit to my uncle only from necessity; and be sure, that he covets
thy alliance only because he knows that he is weak, and cannot stand
without support. So do according to thy will. Only visit not thy anger
on thy daughter, for I only am to blame. And yet, I think that even I am
not without excuse. Look at her as she stands, and blame me if thou
canst; for even a god would fall if tempted by a beauty such as hers.
Yet know, that it was accident and not intention that brought about our
union. For I climbed up into thy tower, not knowing what was there. And
now, I am in thy hands.

And as he spoke, <span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> put beauty in
his limbs and courage in his voice. And the King watched him, against
his will, with admiration. And he said to himself: He says well, for my

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

daughter might turn a sage from his devotion. And he himself is one,
whom a maiden might be forgiven for admiring, for I have never seen a
finer man. Certainly, if only the tale were true, he would make a
son-in-law well fitted to my daughter. So when Ranga had made an end,
the King stood looking at him under his brows, balanced in the swing of
irresolution, between his anger, and his affection for his daughter, and
the influence of the tale. And as he stood in silence, Wanawallarí came
and knelt at his feet. And she said: O father, do not kill him, but
protect him, and it will be thy gain. But as for me, deal with me as
thou wilt. For I have acted rashly, and I deserve only punishment and
disgrace. I am only a weak woman, and his beauty carried me away. Yet
know, that thy posterity is within me, and there stands the father of
thy grandson. And dost thou think that such a man as that would beget a
son to bring disgrace on thee and me? And she looked at her father, with
tears falling from her eyes like rain. And they tell upon his anger, and
melted it, and overcame him. And he took her in his arms, and kissed
her, stroking her hair with his hand. And he said: Dear daughter, I
cannot be thy enemy, even if I would, and the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

tears in thy eyes have brought tears into my own. And if thou hast acted
very rashly, I will not follow thy example. Let thy husband stay with
me, and I will investigate the truth: and if it be as thou sayest, we
will see what can be done for him.

Then Wanawallarí caught him round the neck with a cry, and wept upon his
breast. And by the help of that King, Ranga regained his throne, and got
Wanawallarí for his queen. For a husband's fortune is the virtue of his
wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[70:e](iggh21.htm#fr_37) This is the ungallant
opinion of Bhartrihari, based it may be on some fierce fiery pang of a
jealous heart, long since gone to dust and ashes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. The Triumph of Beauty](iggh22)
