[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh10.md) 
[Next](iggh12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII. The Illusion of Beauty

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Indra: O lady of large eyes and
heavy lashes, thou arguest like a partisan in thy own favour: yet is thy
action only the result of

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

sudden passion, which made thee forget thy maiden modesty, and like an
*abhisáriká* hasten to thy husband's arms, moving not like a woman of
good family, but by self-will and independence, attracted by the beauty
of thy husband.

Then said Wanawallarí: O Brahman, in this I have done nothing unbecoming
a maiden of my caste. For the daughters of kings have had from the
beginning the privilege of choosing their own husbands. But they show
their family in this, that when once they have chosen, they abide by
their decision, and cling to their husband with a grasp that laughs at
the endeavours of even death to break its hold. And if I have done wrong
in yielding to the fascination of my husband, I will make amends for it
hereafter. And yet the fault is rather that of the Creator than my own.
Wouldst thou blame the lotus for intoxicating bees? Or why did the
Creator give beauty to women or to men, but to snare each other's souls?
And even the gods come under thy reproof, for which of them is not
subdued by the beauty of his wife? Nay, there are some who have even
gone astray, bewildered by the infatuation of beauty in a sex other than
their own <span id="fr_26"></span>[r](#fn_26.md). Why dost thou blame me

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

for obeying the nature of a woman, and worshipping that masculine beauty
which is my goal? For the three worlds are only an incarnation of action
such as mine, and thy accusation would rob this universe of motion and
life, which subsist only by virtue of reciprocal attraction. For beauty
dazzles and allures, and being itself only an illusion draws every
creature after it, like a cunning piper, into that vain revolving dance
which sages call the world; and which without its object would vanish
like a dream when the dreamer is awake. And we all move in an
everlasting round, like the drops of water in a waterfall, leaving an
impression of permanence upon the eye of the observer; yet is this
permanence only an illusion, and due to the perpetual flow of its
fleeting and fantastic atoms. And in our momentary life, one thing only
is essential, to taste if we can a single drop of the nectar of true
love, which is possible, for every atom, only if it can catch a glimpse
of that peculiar beauty which is the proper object of its soul. And
therefore, O Brahman, I am not ashamed of adoring the beauty of my
husband, but I glory and rejoice in it, like one who has found the fruit
of her birth. And like a moth, I flew into his candle, and be came a
willing victim. And I am ready to endure all the consequences of my
choice. And when I

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

waver in my allegiance to my lord, I will acknowledge the justice of thy
reproof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[41:r](iggh11.htm#fr_26.md) This, though she knew
it not, was a home-thrust: for of Indra, as of Zeus, there is a
scandalous chronicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Two Kings](iggh12.md)
