[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh19) 
[Next](iggh21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVII. Nectar

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> then with a cry of joy, she ran
towards him, while the colour leaped into her face. And he came towards
her very quickly, and said: See, here is food, and wine, and a cup out
of which we will drink together, and a lute for thee to play. But O! how
beautiful thou art; and I am faint

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and hungry, but only for the nectar of thy arms and thy lips. And she
put her arms round him, and they stood together for an instant, while
their souls met rapturously after separation, hovering in agitation at
the door <span id="fr_33"></span>[a](#fn_33) of their thirsty lips. And
then, after a while, she said: Come, thou art here, and thou art hungry,
and so am I. Let us eat first, and then it may be, thou shalt kiss me
again. But Ranga put his burden down, and took her in his arms. And he
kissed her, till her lips turned pale, as if for fear lest her breath
should abandon her. And then they sat together by the well, and eat and
drank, kissing each other between every mouthful, and smiling with tears
in their eyes, utterly forgetting their own names.

Then when they had finished eating, they got up and wandered about in
each other's arms, like a human symbol of myself <span
id="fr_34"></span>[b](#fn_34) and thee, watching the parrots screaming
in the fig trees, and the monkeys climbing over the roofs of the
deserted houses, and sighing by reason of excess of happiness, and
laughing without a cause, while the day passed away like a flash of
lightning, and the sun went to his rest in the mountain of his setting,
and the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

moon rose. And then Wanawallarí said: Come let us go back, and find the
wine, and we will have a drinking bout: thou shalt drink for both of us,
and I will sing and play to thee on the lute, and dance with my shadow
to attend me, to show thee my accomplishments <span
id="fr_35"></span>[c](#fn_35) and give thee pleasure in the light of the
moon. So they did. And Ranga sat under the tree, with the cup of red
wine in his hand, while she danced <span id="fr_36"></span>[d](#fn_36)
and played and sang to him, looking in the moonlight like a feminine
incarnation of the camphor-essence and beauty of the moon come down to
earth to entrance his soul and wean it from all care for earthly things.
And he watched her with intoxicated eyes, and said to himself: Surely
she is a portion of the celestial delight of heaven that has somehow
assumed the form of a woman; or a piece of sky-crystal tumbled by
accident to earth, laughing in its purity at the grossness of the
materials by which she is surrounded!

So they two delighted each other in that ruined

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

city, bathed in the moonlight, and the ecstasy of the mutual infatuation
of first love. But in the meanwhile, the jeweller, to whom Ranga had
taken Wanawallarí's bracelet, was filled with amazement when he saw it.
And he said to himself: Where did this Rajpoot get such a jewel, which
could not be matched in the city? So after buying it for a very low
price, he followed Ranga without his knowledge, and saw him making
purchases in the bazaar: and finally he dogged his footsteps at a
distance, when he returned to the empty city. And when those lovers met,
that curious jeweller looked round the corner of the street, and saw
them. But they never noticed him, for they were lost in oblivion of
everything in the world except themselves. Then still more astonished
than before, the jeweller said to himself: The beauty of this woman
exceeds that of all others as much as does that bracelet, which is
doubtless hers, all other jewels of its kind: and now there must be a
story in this matter. So after wafting a while, and watching them, he
returned slowly and reluctantly to his own house. And when he got there
he found the whole city in uproar. And when he enquired the reason, the
people said: Somebody or other has come by night and carried away the
King's daughter. And

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

there is a great reward for the man who can find out who took her, and
where she is.

And instantly the jeweller took his bracelet, and ran at full speed to
the King's palace. And being admitted, he told his story and showed the
bracelet. And the King recognised it as his daughter's; and sent,
without a moment's delay, guards, who led by the jeweller, went as
quickly as possible to the empty city. And while those lovers, forgetful
of everything, were intoxicating each other's eyes in the moonlight,
suddenly they heard a shout, and the King's guards rushed in and seized
them, and carried them away prisoners to the King.

But <span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> saw them go. And she
tossed her pretty head, and yawned. And she said: Now I have kept my
promise to the gods, and caused the King to discover the hiding - place
of these foolish lovers. And I have done enough for this fellow, and I
am beginning to be tired of him. Strange! how soon these mortals pall on
me! they have nothing permanently interesting about them, and any fancy
that I have for them passes off like a shadow almost as soon as it
arrives. But still, he is the best looking man that I ever saw. And so,
I will do him one more good turn, and then leave him to shift for
himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[65:a](iggh20.htm#fr_33) *Dantachada:* precisely
the Homeric ἕρκος ὁδόντων.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[65:b](iggh20.htm#fr_34) Maheshwara *loquitur*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[66:c](iggh20.htm#fr_35) There is a pun here:
she compares herself to a digit of the moon.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[66:d](iggh20.htm#fr_36) Dancing is associated
by the modern Hindoos with lax morality: but this cannot always have
been the case, for in most Hindoo romances the heroine is accomplished
in that art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. The Favour of Fortune](iggh21)
