[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh02) 
[Next](iggh04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PROLOGUE.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# In the Great God's Hair.

### PROLOGUE.

#### INVOCATION.

*Adoration to the Four Eightfold Divinities: the Eight Forms of the Lord
of Time: the Eight Cardinal Points of Space: the Eight Sections of the
Revelation of Panini: and the Eight Pairs of Petals of the Lotus of the
World* <span id="fr_2"></span>[a](#fn_2).

FAR away, in the quarter of the north, there stands a mighty mountain:
of supereminence so transcendent, that even the Mother of the
World <span id="fr_3"></span>[b](#fn_3) was willing to call him father:
of hue so pure, that even the snowy swans haunting the lake of Mánasa
blush in his presence as if ashamed of their own inferiority: of size so
gigantic, that the rising and the setting sun throws his shadow on the
sky, and

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the seven Rishis <span id="fr_4"></span>[c](#fn_4) in their daily
revolution turn their eyes upwards to his peak, glowing like a tongue of
flame at sunset or at dawn. And there on his northern face is the home
of the Lord of Creatures animate or inanimate. There one evening, when
the light of day was flying before the shadows that rose up pursuing it
out of the abysses of the valleys along the mountain sides, the Daughter
of the Mountain was playing at dice with her lord <span
id="fr_5"></span>[d](#fn_5). And she won from him, first his elephant
skin, and next his rosary of skulls. And finally she said: Now, then, I
will play thee for that which thou dost carry on thy head. And
Maheshwara perceived her intention. But he answered: Very well. So the
Goddess threw the dice, and won. And she exclaimed in delight: Ha! I
have won. Pay me the stake. Then Maheshwara gave her his moon. Thereupon
the goddess exclaimed in a rage: Thou art a deceiver. Thou dost owe me
Gangá, and yet offer me only thy moon <span id="fr_6"></span>[e](#fn_6).
What do I care for

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

thy moon? Then said the god: Why, O fair one, art thou angry? Is it not
this moon which I carry on my head? But Umá turned away from him in a
pet.

Then the crafty god, who had only teased her to enjoy the beauty of her
anger, preparing to conciliate her, said: Come, the game is over. So
now, give me my moon, which to thee is worse than useless, since thy own
face would rob it of its lustre, being itself a moon always at full.
Moreover, I cannot do without it. Then said the goddess: Why canst thou
not do without it? And Maheshwara said: Know, that were it withdrawn
from the forehead of me who am the world <span
id="fr_7"></span>[f](#fn_7), this universe would cease to exist. Then
said Umá: How can that be? And the god said: Of all created things, the
new moon is the fairest. And therefore it is that I wear it in my hair,
as a symbol of that power which is the pivot of all motion animate and
inanimate. For Beauty is the ruler of the world, and without it, all
would remain plunged in darkness, and motionless. And there is a story
connected with this. Then the goddess, filled with curiosity, exclaimed:
Tell me the story, and I will give thee thy moon,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

and forgive thy deceit. And Maheshwara said: Very well. For this was
just what he wished her to do.

Then Umá gave him his moon, and he set it in his yellow hair. And then
he sat down, with his back against a precipice, and took her on his lap.
And she laid her head on his breast, and prepared to listen to his tale.

But just as the god was about to begin, he looked down, and saw, far
away on the side of the hill below him, a man, toiling up painfully over
the cold white snow. And he looked in the middle of that vast wilderness
like an ant, lost among the blocks of salt in the desert. Then said the
god to Umá: Look! there is a man. What can he be doing here, where no
mortal ever comes? It were better to wait and see. Then the goddess
exclaimed: Thou art about to deceive me again. This is a trick, to cheat
me of my story. And Maheshwara said: Nay, thou shalt certainly hear it
without delay. But first let us discover, what is the object of this
poor mortal. And he called out to the man: Ho there! who art thou? and
why art thou climbing up alone through the ice and snow?

Then hearing the voice, which echoed like

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

thunder among the hills, that man fell face downwards upon the snow. And
he said: O Maheshwara, giver of boons, for surely it is thou that I hear
and no other, I am come to thee as a suppliant, and all my hope is in
thee. Know, that I am a *Kathaka* <span id="fr_8"></span>[g](#fn_8),
belonging to the household of the King of Pátaliputra, a city of the
plains. And every night before he went to rest, I told him a story, to
beguile him and bring sleep to his eyes. So for fourteen years I told
him stories, every night one. And then at last, one night, when the time
came for him to go to bed, I said to him: O King, my stock is finished,
and my fancy exhausted, and now I cannot tell thee any more. Then he
looked upon me with red, angry eyes. And he said: O dog, how is this?
Shall I not sleep, by reason of the poverty of thy faculty? So I fell on
my face before him, and said: Let the King show mercy. But I am empty,
and the fountain of my invention has run dry. Then he said: Know, that
thou art no longer my *Kathaka*, but another has thy place. And know,
moreover, that if in three months from to-day, for I will be merciful,
and allow thee time, thou dost not tell me a story more curious than
anything I have ever

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

heard, I will sever thy empty head from thy body, first tearing out thy
useless tongue, and uproot thy family and all thy relations from the
land, like a furious wind among the trees at the opening of the rainy
season. And immediately he sent and seized them, and holds them now as
hostages for my return. And so, seeing no other resource, I have come to
thy feet, travelling night and day without either food or rest. For thou
knowest all, past, present and to come, and now I am in thy hands.

Then said Maheshwara to his wife: Thou seest, we did well to wait: and
now, this unlucky Kathaka has arrived in the very nick of time. So let
him listen to our tale. But whether for his good or ill, time alone can
show. Then he took the *Kathaka*, and put him up into his hair. And at
the touch of his hand, that *Kathaka* was delivered in a moment from all
his fatigue and exhaustion, and he sat in the shadow of that matted
hair, illuminated like a forest of great trees by the diadem of the
deity, to overhear the tale.

And then the god began. And as he spoke, the Gándharwas, and the
Kinnaras, and the Siddhas and Widyádharas came noiselessly and collected
in the air, and listened with eager ears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:a](iggh03.htm#fr_2) The Lord of Time is Shiwa.
Panini's grammar is believed to have been revealed to him by the deity.
The Lotus of the world is the goddess of beauty.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:b](iggh03.htm#fr_3) Párwatí is the Daughter of
Himalaya.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:c](iggh03.htm#fr_4) The Great Bear.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:d](iggh03.htm#fr_5) As, if we may believe
Bhartrihari, they often do, for the lives of men.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:e](iggh03.htm#fr_6) Párwatí is represented in
Hindoo literature as being very jealous of Gangá (the river Ganges)
because Shiwa caught her, or it, upon his head.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:f](iggh03.htm#fr_7) *Bhawa* means both Shiwa
and the world.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[7:g](iggh03.htm#fr_8) A story teller.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. A Denier of Deity](iggh04)
