[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh04.md) 
[Next](iggh06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. A Rajpoot Marriage

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> then he stepped into the room, and
started, and stood amazed. For just before him there lay sleeping on a
jewelled couch a young woman, looking like a jasmine flower on a bed of
its own leaves. For the moon bathed her in his light, which clung to her
limbs as if it were in love with them: and

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

she resembled a feminine incarnation of the passion of love fallen into
a swoon of fatigue and pallor after having conquered the world. And the
long lashes of her shut eyes lay on her cheek like shadows as far as her
mouth, which smiled as she slept: while the breeze lifted the fringe of
the silk robe that covered her neck, and laid bare the beauty of her
throat, just where it met with the curve of her bosom, that rose and
fell gently as she breathed. And one hand was under her head, and the
other lay, like an open flower, hanging over the edge of the bed, from a
wrist like a young reed's stalk.

And as he stood motionless, like a target with the arrow of Love in his
heart, she woke up. For <span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span>
entered her dream and showed her a picture, and said to her: Wake, for I
have brought thee a husband more beautiful than Kama himself. And when
she opened her eyes and looked: to! there he was standing before her.
And instantly she started up, and stood gazing at him in astonishment.
For he answered so exactly to her dream that she could not believe her
eyes, and doubted whether she had not only dreamed that she woke, and
was still really asleep. And then after a while, she said: Art thou a
reality, or only

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

a thing in my dream? And he said: O sleeping beauty, I am a reality: but
I wish it were not so: for I would gladly forfeit my life to be only a
thing in thy dreams. Then she said: Who in the world art thou, and how
in the world hast thou climbed into my room, into which none ever come
but my female attendants and the birds of the air? And he said: O waking
beauty, I am Ranga, the King of Awanti, whom his relations have driven
from his kingdom. But what do I care: for had it been otherwise, I
should never have set eyes upon thee.

But when she heard his name, she started, and could not believe her own
ears. And she said: Tell me thy name over again. Then he did so. And she
said: Surely I must still be dreaming. Or art thou really sent by the
deity? Tell me thy story from the beginning. And so he did. And she
watched him as he spoke, with eyes that she could not take off him. For
<span class="smallcaps">Water-lily</span> bewildered her with his
beauty, and poured infatuation into his voice.

And when he had finished, she said to him: O thou son of a King, beyond
a doubt the deity must have brought thee, for there is in this matter a
thing wholly unknown to thee, so strange, that it

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

cannot have come about of itself. But now, listen, for I have a proposal
to make to thee. Know, that the King my father wishes to give me as a
bride to a neighbouring King for the sake of a political alliance. And
rather than be a bride of that King, I had intended to cast myself down
from this window into the street, for I cannot endure the sight of him
even in a picture. And now thou hast appeared, as if on purpose, to
provide me with a means of escape. Thou art poor and without a kingdom,
which it may be thou wilt never regain. But thou art my equal in
*caste*, and unless the Creator has made thy exterior a lie, my equal
also in spirit and soul. Wilt thou have me for a wife, as I am willing
to choose thee for a husband, and carry me down by the rope by which
thou didst bring thyself up? For I will choose thee for my husband, of
my own free will <span id="fr_13"></span>[e](#fn_13.md), and share all thy
poverty and evil fortune, and make it a blessing to thee. Swear to me
only that thou wilt deal with me loyally and share with me, as with thy
other self, all thy troubles and all thy

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

joys, in this world and the next, and I will place myself as a deposit
in thy hands. And it may be that I will change all thy evil fortune to
good: and if not, I will help thee to endure it with patience. And now,
say: is the bargain to thy mind? And think ere thou givest an answer:
for I will not be bought by thee with anything less than thy soul.

And when she had spoken, she looked straight at him, with beautiful
eyes, in which there was neither frivolity nor fear. And Ranga looked
back at her, and his heart swelled in his breast: for she touched it not
only by her beauty but by the strength of her soul. And he laughed for
joy, and said: Hear me, ye guardians of the quarters of heaven! O thou
fair woman, thy loveliness is wonderful, and yet it is the least part of
thy excellence. Now thou art worthy of one better than I am. And yet, if
thou wilt give thyself to me for a wife, I will be thy lord and thy
protector in this life and the next, and thou shalt be my divinity in
human form. And I will want food and clothing, before thou shalt want
sweetmeats and jewels. And he stooped down and touched her feet, and put
his hand on his head: and then stood and looked at her with a smile. And
she looked at him with

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

affection, and said: Thou art the man whom I have desired to have for a
husband, and now I see that my dream was a true one. And now I am thy
wife, and thy servant.

Then he said: Dear wife, now we must go down, and that quickly, before
we are discovered. And yet, though thou art light as a bamboo leaf, this
is a dangerous thing. Hast thou the courage to make the attempt? Then
she said: What is there to fear? For if we fall, we fall together, and
meet death at the same instant. But have no fear: for I will cling to
thy neck with my arms. Then Ranga laughed. And he said: Nay, I will not
risk my pearl on the strength of thy soft and slender arms. Then he took
from the bed a silk cover, and twisted it into a rope. And he bound it
tightly round her waist, and then tied it firmly to his own. And then he
drew her to the window, and looked down. And at that moment he saw the
watch, going its round a second time. So when it had passed, he said:
Now is our opportunity. But she said: Wait: let me bring with me all the
wealth that I have, for at present thou art poor. And she made a bundle
of clothes, and put into it all her jewels: and flung it down into the
street. And then he said: Art thou afraid?

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And she said: I am
afraid, but only for thee. Then he said: Shut thy eyes, and clasp me
round the neck, and hold. So she did. And then Ranga wove the rope round
his legs, and grasped it in his hands with a grip like that of death,
and let himself slowly down into the street. So he carried her down to
the ground, while the sweat stood in great drops upon his brow.

And when they touched the earth, she said: Thou art as strong as thou
art brave, and the deity has sent me a man. But Ranga clasped her in his
arms, and kissed her. And he said: Now I may kiss thee, for we have
faced death together, and I have made thee my own. But here we must not
stay even for a moment. And he picked up the bundle, and went away
quickly, carrying her in his arms, and counting the whole world as a
straw. And he said to her: Where shall we go, for in the city they would
discover thee? Then she said: Close to this city there is another, which
is empty and deserted, and inhabited only by parrots and monkeys. Let us
go there, and afterwards consider what is to be done. And I will show
thee the way.

So he carried her away to that empty city, never once setting her down,
for the joy he had in holding

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

her in his arms. And when at last they reached it, he stopped before a
courtyard, and went in, and saw in it a deserted cow-house, full of hay
and straw, And he put her down, and untied the knots, and set her free.
And then he said: Alas! that I should take thee from a palace, to bring
thee to such a ruined shed as this. And she said: Where the husband is,
there is the heaven of the wife. And he said again: Alas! I am an exile
and a wanderer, and I have taken thee from thy relations and thy home.
And she said: Is not the wife the child of her husband, and the husband
the father and mother of his wife? And what home does she need who has
taken refuge in the heart of her lord <span
id="fr_14"></span>[f](#fn_14.md)? Then he put his left arm round her, and
took her left hand in his right, and kissed it. And he said: What is thy
name? And she said: I am called Wanawallarí <span
id="fr_15"></span>[g](#fn_15.md). Then he said: Thou art well named, and
now I will be the tree of thy life. Come, and I will find thee a room in
this abandoned palace, that shall serve thee for a bridal chamber, and I
will make thee a nuptial

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

couch, of hay and straw. For this is our wedding night, and see, yonder
is the polar star <span id="fr_16"></span>[h](#fn_16.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[19:e](iggh05.htm#fr_13.md) This is the old
*swayamwara*, a recognised privilege of kings’ daughters. The reader
must not look at it with English eyes. An unceremonious marriage is a
constant feature in old Hindoo tales: and it is none the less a
marriage.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[23:f](iggh05.htm#fr_14.md) So, in the *Katha Sarit
Ságara*, speaks Rupashikhá.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[23:g](iggh05.htm#fr_15.md) 'Wood-creeper:'
'forest-flower.' (Pronounce *wan*- as *nun*, and -*wall*- as *dull*.)

<span id="fn_16"></span>[24:h](iggh05.htm#fr_16.md) The Pole Star is the
symbol of marriage, and the emblem of a bride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Water-Lily](iggh06.md)
