[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk02)  [Next](tpk04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PROMISED KEY

The glory that was Solomon greater still reigns in Ethiopia. We can see
all the Kings of the earth surrendering their crowns to His Majesty Ras
Tafari the King of Kings and Lord of Lords Earth's Rightful Ruler to
reign forever and ever.

Upon His Majesty Ras Tafari 's head are many diadems and on His garments
a name written King of Kings and Lord of Lords oh come let us adore him
for he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, The Conquering Lion of Judah,
The Elect of God and the Light of the world.

His Majesty Ras Tafari is the head over all man for he is the Supreme
God. His body is the fullness of him that fillet all in all. Now my dear
people let this be our goal, forward to the King of Kings must be the
cry of our social hope. Forward to the King of Kings to purify our
social standards and our way of living, and rebuild and inspire our
character. Forward to the King of Kings to learn the worth of manhood
and womanhood. Forward to the King of Kings to learn His code of Laws
from the mount demanding absolute Love, Purity, Honesty, and
Truthfulness. Forward to the King of Kings to learn His Laws and social
order, so that virtue will eventually gain the victory over body and
soul and that truth will drive away falsehood and fraud. Members of the
King of Kings arise for God's sake and put your armor on.

Dear inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere, the King of Kings warriors
can never be defeated, the Pope of Rome and his agents shall not prevail
against the King of Kings host warriors you all must stand up, stand up,
for the King of Kings.

All ye warriors of the King of Kings lift high King Alpha's Royal
Banner, from victory to victory King Alpha shall lead his army till
every enemy is vanquished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ethopia's Kingdom](tpk04)
