[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk03)  [Next](tpk05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ETHIOPIA'S KINGDOM

Dear inhabitants of this world King Ras Tafari and Queen Omega are the
foundation stones of the Resurrection of the Kingdom of Ethiopia.

Their prayer and labour for our Resurrection is past finding out; no
library in this world is able to contain the work of their hands for us,
for they work both day and night for our deliverance.

As for this generation of the 20th century you and I have no knowledge
how worlds are build and upon what triggers Kingdoms are set.

In King Alpha's Encyclopedia he will explain to us all, how worlds are
being built and upon what trigger Kingdoms are set on. He will also
explain to us the capacities of generations.

Speaking for the Universe and the womanhood of man Queen Omega the
Ethiopian woman is the crown woman of this world. She hands us Her
Rule-Book from the poles of supreme authority she is the Cannon Mistress
of creation.

King Alpha and Queen Omega are the paymasters of the world, Bible owner
and money mint. Do not forget they are Black People if you please.

Owing to the universal rend of our ancient and modem we are at this
juncture of our history scattered over the Globe into little sectional
groups.

All our local bands throughout the globe are bent towards King Alpha's
Royal Repository, the Royal Authority is to admit all Bands, Mission
Camps, Denominations into the supreme Royal Repository.

Queen Omega being the balming mistress of many worlds she charges the
powerhouse right now.

Ethiopia is the succeeding Kingdom of the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom. A man of
greater learning and a better Christian soul, than King Alpha is not to
be found on the face of the Globe. He makes the nations heart rejoices
with raging joy, we give him the glory. Ethiopia rulebook leads us into
different departments of the Kingdom, the records of the Kingdom are
with us unto this day. The Regulations points us to the basis of the
Kingdom.

Many will not see the truth, because they are spiritually blind. See
Matthew 3:13. The woman of Samaria first refused to obey the request of
our Lord because she was spiritually blind. But when the great Physician
opened up her eyes and healed her of her infirmities concerning her many
husbands in the city of Samaria, she found out that her first teachers
of denominations throughout the state or country of Samaria were false.
Then she cried aloud unto the inhabitants of the city and said Come see
a man that told me all that I ever did and is not a native of Samaria
but an Hebrew, is not this man the very Christ. Our cities of today are
inhabited with the same qualities of people as it was in the days of
Jesus and the woman of Samaria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Healing](tpk05)
