[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk09)  [Next](tpk11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# GOVERNMENT

Black Supremacy has taken charge of white supremacy by King Alpha and
Queen Omega the King of Kings. Instead of saying Civilization hereafter
we all shall say Black Supremacy. Just takes this drench of indomitable
fury and move for the Church triumphant right from the bridge of supreme
authority.

Black Supremacy will promote the mortals of every shade according to our
powers to go. The Black Museum will be opened day and night for life.
Education will be free and compulsory to all mortal beings, if you are
not an enemy of black Supremacy,

Man and women can marry right in School if you are of a respectable
proportion of dignity. Black must not marry white nor white black, race
enmity.

Always be a respectful diplomat, always give an intelligent reply to
every person that approach or write you on any subject always ask for
the full value inside the nature of any written subject. Do not put your
quick judgment on any person confidence is quick to move, just what the
people are that is just the state of your government. Do not follow the
Court House and Doctors they will fake you to death. Do not marry any
divorced person it is a curse, stick to your own wife and husband.

Do not watch and peep your wife or husband, you are only digging a grave
for yourself. Do not try to make your wife or husband or family feel
small because you have got more college filth in your head, hold them
up, they are the cause of you being what you are. I know thousands of
college hogs and dogs, professional swine's; also some very fine people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eternal Law Office](tpk11.md)
