[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tpk11)  [Next](tpk13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# EVE THE MOTHER OF EVIL

The Adamic tree of knowledge and Eve the mother of Evil, see Genesis 2nd
chapter. The Adamic apple tree my dear leper your name is Adam-Abraham
Anglo-Saxon apple tree, that look pretty and respectable to your eyes
don't it? Yes indeed--gross beauty is the Queen in hell, and Royal leper
Adam and Eve and Abraham and Anglo-Saxon are all white people if you
please.

King Alpha and Queen Omega said they are Black Arch Sovereign of most
Holy Times, and perfect Virginity, and Supreme Crown Head of Holy Times
The Pay Master and keeper of the Perfect Tree of Life and creators of
Creation, Dynasties and Kingdoms, Holy Genealogy and Holy Theocracy and
Celestial in Terrestrial Mediator if you wish to know their profession.

The Eternal Come Back King Alpha the Monarch Sovereign Pay-Master and
Owner of this world. Just make one Eternal come back at His Pay Office.

King Alpha and his wife Queen Omega were here on earth before if you
please. Old Alpha the Lion of Creation said to Queen Omega please hand
me the Pay Roll and the Militant and Balance Sheet. And your Majesty
will mount His Excellency's Great Circle Throne and throw Old Theocracy
above the Wheel of Holy Time, right into Holy Eternity to the Lion of
Alpha and Omega the King of kings forevermore.

King Alpha and Queen Omega are Black People if you please. They are
commonly called the Exodus if you please, the book of Exodus is theirs
if you please. Notice if you see Moses and Aaron and Abraham gave any
strong report of King Alpha and Queen Omega in their fake Bible if you
please. Well since a man has right to pay without work, this world can
also work with pay.

There is no book in the Bible for the Anglo Saxon Creation, there is no
book of Isaac or his father Abraham in the New Testament.

King Alpha the Most Sacred and Everlasting God, Heaven and Earth's
creator, said that Adam Abraham-Anglo Saxon whit people are not entitled
to any eternal reward according to his schedule.

My dear Ethiopians, Ethiopia is the crown head of this earth field since
heaven has been built by His Majesty Ras Tafari the living God. Thank
and praise the ever-living God as long as eternal ages roll.

King Alpha and Queen Omega said they are our parents, and the keeper of
the Tree of Life. He and his wife are not any family at all to Adam and
Eve and Abraham and Isaac and the Anglo Saxon Slave Owners; for that is
exactly how His Majesty King Noah the Black Monarch was drowned at
Antediluvia by Adam Abraham the Anarchy.

Judge Samson lost his tribunal and life by marrying the Philistine white
woman. See Judges 14, 15 and 10th chapters. See how the Philistine
Judges plotting out riddles with the woman how to get him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rapers](tpk13.md)
