[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06003) 
[Next](daf06005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade. Part I.

Schism Of The Greeks And Latins. - State Of Constantinople. - Revolt Of
The Bulgarians. - Isaac Angelus Dethroned By His Brother Alexius. -
Origin Of The Fourth Crusade. - Alliance Of The French And Venetians
With The Son Of Isaac. - Their Naval Expedition To Constantinople. - The
Two Sieges And Final Conquest Of The City By The Latins.

The restoration of the Western empire by Charlemagne was speedily
followed by the separation of the Greek and Latin churches.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) A religious and national animosity still
divides the two largest communions of the Christian world; and the
schism of Constantinople, by alienating her most useful allies, and
provoking her most dangerous enemies, has precipitated the decline and
fall of the Roman empire in the East.

In the course of the present History, the aversion of the Greeks for the
Latins has been often visible and conspicuous. It was originally derived
from the disdain of servitude, inflamed, after the time of Constantine,
by the pride of equality or dominion; and finally exasperated by the
preference which their rebellious subjects had given to the alliance of
the Franks. In every age the Greeks were proud of their superiority in
profane and religious knowledge: they had first received the light of
Christianity; they had pronounced the decrees of the seven general
councils; they alone possessed the language of Scripture and philosophy;
nor should the Barbarians, immersed in the darkness of the West,  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123) presume to argue on the high and
mysterious questions of theological science. Those Barbarians despised
in then turn the restless and subtile levity of the Orientals, the
authors of every heresy; and blessed their own simplicity, which was
content to hold the tradition of the apostolic church. Yet in the
seventh century, the synods of Spain, and afterwards of France, improved
or corrupted the Nicene creed, on the mysterious subject of the third
person of the Trinity.  <span id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_124) In the
long controversies of the East, the nature and generation of the Christ
had been scrupulously defined; and the well-known relation of father and
son seemed to convey a faint image to the human mind. The idea of birth
was less analogous to the Holy Spirit, who, instead of a divine gift or
attribute, was considered by the Catholics as a substance, a person, a
god; he was not begotten, but in the orthodox style he proceeded. Did he
proceed from the Father alone, perhaps by the Son? or from the Father
and the Son? The first of these opinions was asserted by the Greeks, the
second by the Latins; and the addition to the Nicene creed of the word
filioque, kindled the flame of discord between the Oriental and the
Gallic churches. In the origin of the disputes the Roman pontiffs
affected a character of neutrality and moderation:  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[4](#fn_125) they condemned the innovation, but they
acquiesced in the sentiment, of their Transalpine brethren: they seemed
desirous of casting a veil of silence and charity over the superfluous
research; and in the correspondence of Charlemagne and Leo the Third,
the pope assumes the liberality of a statesman, and the prince descends
to the passions and prejudices of a priest.  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[5](#fn_126) But the orthodoxy of Rome spontaneously
obeyed the impulse of the temporal policy; and the filioque, which Leo
wished to erase, was transcribed in the symbol and chanted in the
liturgy of the Vatican. The Nicene and Athanasian creeds are held as the
Catholic faith, without which none can be saved; and both Papists and
Protestants must now sustain and return the anathemas of the Greeks, who
deny the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as well as from the
Father. Such articles of faith are not susceptible of treaty; but the
rules of discipline will vary in remote and independent churches; and
the reason, even of divines, might allow, that the difference is
inevitable and harmless. The craft or superstition of Rome has imposed
on her priests and deacons the rigid obligation of celibacy; among the
Greeks it is confined to the bishops; the loss is compensated by dignity
or annihilated by age; and the parochial clergy, the papas, enjoy the
conjugal society of the wives whom they have married before their
entrance into holy orders. A question concerning the Azyms was fiercely
debated in the eleventh century, and the essence of the Eucharist was
supposed in the East and West to depend on the use of leavened or
unleavened bread. Shall I mention in a serious history the furious
reproaches that were urged against the Latins, who for a long while
remained on the defensive? They neglected to abstain, according to the
apostolical decree, from things strangled, and from blood: they fasted
(a Jewish observance!) on the Saturday of each week: during the first
week of Lent they permitted the use of milk and cheese;  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[6](#fn_127) their infirm monks were indulged in the
taste of flesh; and animal grease was substituted for the want of
vegetable oil: the holy chrism or unction in baptism was reserved to the
episcopal order: the bishops, as the bridegrooms of their churches, were
decorated with rings; their priests shaved their faces, and baptized by
a single immersion. Such were the crimes which provoked the zeal of the
patriarchs of Constantinople; and which were justified with equal zeal
by the doctors of the Latin church.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[7](#fn_128)

Bigotry and national aversion are powerful magnifiers of every object of
dispute; but the immediate cause of the schism of the Greeks may be
traced in the emulation of the leading prelates, who maintained the
supremacy of the old metropolis superior to all, and of the reigning
capital, inferior to none, in the Christian world. About the middle of
the ninth century, Photius,  <span id="fr_129"></span>[8](#fn_129) an
ambitious layman, the captain of the guards and principal secretary, was
promoted by merit and favor to the more desirable office of patriarch of
Constantinople. In science, even ecclesiastical science, he surpassed
the clergy of the age; and the purity of his morals has never been
impeached: but his ordination was hasty, his rise was irregular; and
Ignatius, his abdicated predecessor, was yet supported by the public
compassion and the obstinacy of his adherents. They appealed to the
tribunal of Nicholas the First, one of the proudest and most aspiring of
the Roman pontiffs, who embraced the welcome opportunity of judging and
condemning his rival of the East. Their quarrel was embittered by a
conflict of jurisdiction over the king and nation of the Bulgarians; nor
was their recent conversion to Christianity of much avail to either
prelate, unless he could number the proselytes among the subjects of his
power. With the aid of his court the Greek patriarch was victorious; but
in the furious contest he deposed in his turn the successor of St.
Peter, and involved the Latin church in the reproach of heresy and
schism. Photius sacrificed the peace of the world to a short and
precarious reign: he fell with his patron, the Caesar Bardas; and Basil
the Macedonian performed an act of justice in the restoration of
Ignatius, whose age and dignity had not been sufficiently respected.
From his monastery, or prison, Photius solicited the favor of the
emperor by pathetic complaints and artful flattery; and the eyes of his
rival were scarcely closed, when he was again restored to the throne of
Constantinople. After the death of Basil he experienced the vicissitudes
of courts and the ingratitude of a royal pupil: the patriarch was again
deposed, and in his last solitary hours he might regret the freedom of a
secular and studious life. In each revolution, the breath, the nod, of
the sovereign had been accepted by a submissive clergy; and a synod of
three hundred bishops was always prepared to hail the triumph, or to
stigmatize the fall, of the holy, or the execrable, Photius.  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[9](#fn_130) By a delusive promise of succor or
reward, the popes were tempted to countenance these various proceedings;
and the synods of Constantinople were ratified by their epistles or
legates. But the court and the people, Ignatius and Photius, were
equally adverse to their claims; their ministers were insulted or
imprisoned; the procession of the Holy Ghost was forgotten; Bulgaria was
forever annexed to the Byzantine throne; and the schism was prolonged by
their rigid censure of all the multiplied ordinations of an irregular
patriarch. The darkness and corruption of the tenth century suspended
the intercourse, without reconciling the minds, of the two nations. But
when the Norman sword restored the churches of Apulia to the
jurisdiction of Rome, the departing flock was warned, by a petulant
epistle of the Greek patriarch, to avoid and abhor the errors of the
Latins. The rising majesty of Rome could no longer brook the insolence
of a rebel; and Michael Cerularius was excommunicated in the heart of
Constantinople by the pope's legates. Shaking the dust from their feet,
they deposited on the altar of St. Sophia a direful anathema,  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[10](#fn_131) which enumerates the seven mortal
heresies of the Greeks, and devotes the guilty teachers, and their
unhappy sectaries, to the eternal society of the devil and his angels.
According to the emergencies of the church and state, a friendly
correspondence was some times resumed; the language of charity and
concord was sometimes affected; but the Greeks have never recanted their
errors; the popes have never repealed their sentence; and from this
thunderbolt we may date the consummation of the schism. It was enlarged
by each ambitious step of the Roman pontiffs: the emperors blushed and
trembled at the ignominious fate of their royal brethren of Germany; and
the people were scandalized by the temporal power and military life of
the Latin clergy.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[11](#fn_132)

The aversion of the Greeks and Latins was nourished and manifested in
the three first expeditions to the Holy Land. Alexius Comnenus contrived
the absence at least of the formidable pilgrims: his successors, Manuel
and Isaac Angelus, conspired with the Moslems for the ruin of the
greatest princes of the Franks; and their crooked and malignant policy
was seconded by the active and voluntary obedience of every order of
their subjects. Of this hostile temper, a large portion may doubtless be
ascribed to the difference of language, dress, and manners, which severs
and alienates the nations of the globe. The pride, as well as the
prudence, of the sovereign was deeply wounded by the intrusion of
foreign armies, that claimed a right of traversing his dominions, and
passing under the walls of his capital: his subjects were insulted and
plundered by the rude strangers of the West: and the hatred of the
pusillanimous Greeks was sharpened by secret envy of the bold and pious
enterprises of the Franks. But these profane causes of national enmity
were fortified and inflamed by the venom of religious zeal. Instead of a
kind embrace, a hospitable reception from their Christian brethren of
the East, every tongue was taught to repeat the names of schismatic and
heretic, more odious to an orthodox ear than those of pagan and infidel:
instead of being loved for the general conformity of faith and worship,
they were abhorred for some rules of discipline, some questions of
theology, in which themselves or their teachers might differ from the
Oriental church. In the crusade of Louis the Seventh, the Greek clergy
washed and purified the altars which had been defiled by the sacrifice
of a French priest. The companions of Frederic Barbarossa deplore the
injuries which they endured, both in word and deed, from the peculiar
rancor of the bishops and monks. Their prayers and sermons excited the
people against the impious Barbarians; and the patriarch is accused of
declaring, that the faithful might obtain the redemption of all their
sins by the extirpation of the schismatics.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[12](#fn_133) An enthusiast, named Dorotheus, alarmed
the fears, and restored the confidence, of the emperor, by a prophetic
assurance, that the German heretic, after assaulting the gate of
Blachernes, would be made a signal example of the divine vengeance. The
passage of these mighty armies were rare and perilous events; but the
crusades introduced a frequent and familiar intercourse between the two
nations, which enlarged their knowledge without abating their
prejudices. The wealth and luxury of Constantinople demanded the
productions of every climate these imports were balanced by the art and
labor of her numerous inhabitants; her situation invites the commerce of
the world; and, in every period of her existence, that commerce has been
in the hands of foreigners. After the decline of Amalphi, the Venetians,
Pisans, and Genoese, introduced their factories and settlements into the
capital of the empire: their services were rewarded with honors and
immunities; they acquired the possession of lands and houses; their
families were multiplied by marriages with the natives; and, after the
toleration of a Mahometan mosque, it was impossible to interdict the
churches of the Roman rite.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[13](#fn_134) The
two wives of Manuel Comnenus  <span id="fr_135"></span>[14](#fn_135)
were of the race of the Franks: the first, a sister-in-law of the
emperor Conrad; the second, a daughter of the prince of Antioch: he
obtained for his son Alexius a daughter of Philip Augustus, king of
France; and he bestowed his own daughter on a marquis of Montferrat, who
was educated and dignified in the palace of Constantinople. The Greek
encountered the arms, and aspired to the empire, of the West: he
esteemed the valor, and trusted the fidelity, of the Franks;  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[15](#fn_136) their military talents were unfitly
recompensed by the lucrative offices of judges and treasures; the policy
of Manuel had solicited the alliance of the pope; and the popular voice
accused him of a partial bias to the nation and religion of the Latins.
 <span id="fr_137"></span>[16](#fn_137) During his reign, and that of
his successor Alexius, they were exposed at Constantinople to the
reproach of foreigners, heretics, and favorites; and this triple guilt
was severely expiated in the tumult, which announced the return and
elevation of Andronicus.  <span id="fr_138"></span>[17](#fn_138) The
people rose in arms: from the Asiatic shore the tyrant despatched his
troops and galleys to assist the national revenge; and the hopeless
resistance of the strangers served only to justify the rage, and sharpen
the daggers, of the assassins. Neither age, nor sex, nor the ties of
friendship or kindred, could save the victims of national hatred, and
avarice, and religious zeal; the Latins were slaughtered in their houses
and in the streets; their quarter was reduced to ashes; the clergy were
burnt in their churches, and the sick in their hospitals; and some
estimate may be formed of the slain from the clemency which sold above
four thousand Christians in perpetual slavery to the Turks. The priests
and monks were the loudest and most active in the destruction of the
schismatics; and they chanted a thanksgiving to the Lord, when the head
of a Roman cardinal, the pope's legate, was severed from his body,
fastened to the tail of a dog, and dragged, with savage mockery, through
the city. The more diligent of the strangers had retreated, on the first
alarm, to their vessels, and escaped through the Hellespont from the
scene of blood. In their flight, they burnt and ravaged two hundred
miles of the sea-coast; inflicted a severe revenge on the guiltless
subjects of the empire; marked the priests and monks as their peculiar
enemies; and compensated, by the accumulation of plunder, the loss of
their property and friends. On their return, they exposed to Italy and
Europe the wealth and weakness, the perfidy and malice, of the Greeks,
whose vices were painted as the genuine characters of heresy and schism.
The scruples of the first crusaders had neglected the fairest
opportunities of securing, by the possession of Constantinople, the way
to the Holy Land: domestic revolution invited, and almost compelled, the
French and Venetians to achieve the conquest of the Roman empire of the
East.

In the series of the Byzantine princes, I have exhibited the hypocrisy
and ambition, the tyranny and fall, of Andronicus, the last male of the
Comnenian family who reigned at Constantinople. The revolution, which
cast him headlong from the throne, saved and exalted Isaac Angelus,
 <span id="fr_139"></span>[18](#fn_139) who descended by the females
from the same Imperial dynasty. The successor of a second Nero might
have found it an easy task to deserve the esteem and affection of his
subjects; they sometimes had reason to regret the administration of
Andronicus. The sound and vigorous mind of the tyrant was capable of
discerning the connection between his own and the public interest; and
while he was feared by all who could inspire him with fear, the
unsuspected people, and the remote provinces, might bless the inexorable
justice of their master. But his successor was vain and jealous of the
supreme power, which he wanted courage and abilities to exercise: his
vices were pernicious, his virtues (if he possessed any virtues) were
useless, to mankind; and the Greeks, who imputed their calamities to his
negligence, denied him the merit of any transient or accidental benefits
of the times. Isaac slept on the throne, and was awakened only by the
sound of pleasure: his vacant hours were amused by comedians and
buffoons, and even to these buffoons the emperor was an object of
contempt: his feasts and buildings exceeded the examples of royal
luxury: the number of his eunuchs and domestics amounted to twenty
thousand; and a daily sum of four thousand pounds of silver would swell
to four millions sterling the annual expense of his household and table.
His poverty was relieved by oppression; and the public discontent was
inflamed by equal abuses in the collection, and the application, of the
revenue. While the Greeks numbered the days of their servitude, a
flattering prophet, whom he rewarded with the dignity of patriarch,
assured him of a long and victorious reign of thirty-two years; during
which he should extend his sway to Mount Libanus, and his conquests
beyond the Euphrates. But his only step towards the accomplishment of
the prediction was a splendid and scandalous embassy to Saladin,  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[19](#fn_140) to demand the restitution of the holy
sepulchre, and to propose an offensive and defensive league with the
enemy of the Christian name. In these unworthy hands, of Isaac and his
brother, the remains of the Greek empire crumbled into dust. The Island
of Cyprus, whose name excites the ideas of elegance and pleasure, was
usurped by his namesake, a Comnenian prince; and by a strange
concatenation of events, the sword of our English Richard bestowed that
kingdom on the house of Lusignan, a rich compensation for the loss of
Jerusalem.

The honor of the monarchy and the safety of the capital were deeply
wounded by the revolt of the Bulgarians and Walachians. Since the
victory of the second Basil, they had supported, above a hundred and
seventy years, the loose dominion of the Byzantine princes; but no
effectual measures had been adopted to impose the yoke of laws and
manners on these savage tribes. By the command of Isaac, their sole
means of subsistence, their flocks and herds, were driven away, to
contribute towards the pomp of the royal nuptials; and their fierce
warriors were exasperated by the denial of equal rank and pay in the
military service. Peter and Asan, two powerful chiefs, of the race of
the ancient kings,  <span id="fr_141"></span>[20](#fn_141) asserted
their own rights and the national freedom; their daemoniac impostors
proclaimed to the crowd, that their glorious patron St. Demetrius had
forever deserted the cause of the Greeks; and the conflagration spread
from the banks of the Danube to the hills of Macedonia and Thrace. After
some faint efforts, Isaac Angelus and his brother acquiesced in their
independence; and the Imperial troops were soon discouraged by the bones
of their fellow-soldiers, that were scattered along the passes of Mount
Haemus. By the arms and policy of John or Joannices, the second kingdom
of Bulgaria was firmly established. The subtle Barbarian sent an embassy
to Innocent the Third, to acknowledge himself a genuine son of Rome in
descent and religion,  <span id="fr_142"></span>[21](#fn_142) and humbly
received from the pope the license of coining money, the royal title,
and a Latin archbishop or patriarch. The Vatican exulted in the
spiritual conquest of Bulgaria, the first object of the schism; and if
the Greeks could have preserved the prerogatives of the church, they
would gladly have resigned the rights of the monarchy.

The Bulgarians were malicious enough to pray for the long life of Isaac
Angelus, the surest pledge of their freedom and prosperity. Yet their
chiefs could involve in the same indiscriminate contempt the family and
nation of the emperor. "In all the Greeks," said Asan to his troops,
"the same climate, and character, and education, will be productive of
the same fruits. Behold my lance," continued the warrior, "and the long
streamers that float in the wind. They differ only in color; they are
formed of the same silk, and fashioned by the same workman; nor has the
stripe that is stained in purple any superior price or value above its
fellows."  <span id="fr_143"></span>[22](#fn_143) Several of these
candidates for the purple successively rose and fell under the empire of
Isaac; a general, who had repelled the fleets of Sicily, was driven to
revolt and ruin by the ingratitude of the prince; and his luxurious
repose was disturbed by secret conspiracies and popular insurrections.
The emperor was saved by accident, or the merit of his servants: he was
at length oppressed by an ambitious brother, who, for the hope of a
precarious diadem, forgot the obligations of nature, of loyalty, and of
friendship.  <span id="fr_144"></span>[23](#fn_144) While Isaac in the
Thracian valleys pursued the idle and solitary pleasures of the chase,
his brother, Alexius Angelus, was invested with the purple, by the
unanimous suffrage of the camp; the capital and the clergy subscribed to
their choice; and the vanity of the new sovereign rejected the name of
his fathers for the lofty and royal appellation of the Comnenian race.
On the despicable character of Isaac I have exhausted the language of
contempt, and can only add, that, in a reign of eight years, the baser
Alexius  <span id="fr_145"></span>[24](#fn_145) was supported by the
masculine vices of his wife Euphrosyne. The first intelligence of his
fall was conveyed to the late emperor by the hostile aspect and pursuit
of the guards, no longer his own: he fled before them above fifty miles,
as far as Stagyra, in Macedonia; but the fugitive, without an object or
a follower, was arrested, brought back to Constantinople, deprived of
his eyes, and confined in a lonesome tower, on a scanty allowance of
bread and water. At the moment of the revolution, his son Alexius, whom
he educated in the hope of empire, was twelve years of age. He was
spared by the usurper, and reduced to attend his triumph both in peace
and war; but as the army was encamped on the sea-shore, an Italian
vessel facilitated the escape of the royal youth; and, in the disguise
of a common sailor, he eluded the search of his enemies, passed the
Hellespont, and found a secure refuge in the Isle of Sicily. After
saluting the threshold of the apostles, and imploring the protection of
Pope Innocent the Third, Alexius accepted the kind invitation of his
sister Irene, the wife of Philip of Swabia, king of the Romans. But in
his passage through Italy, he heard that the flower of Western chivalry
was assembled at Venice for the deliverance of the Holy Land; and a ray
of hope was kindled in his bosom, that their invincible swords might be
employed in his father's restoration.

About ten or twelve years after the loss of Jerusalem, the nobles of
France were again summoned to the holy war by the voice of a third
prophet, less extravagant, perhaps, than Peter the hermit, but far below
St. Bernard in the merit of an orator and a statesman. An illiterate
priest of the neighborhood of Paris, Fulk of Neuilly,  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[25](#fn_146) forsook his parochial duty, to assume
the more flattering character of a popular and itinerant missionary. The
fame of his sanctity and miracles was spread over the land; he
declaimed, with severity and vehemence, against the vices of the age;
and his sermons, which he preached in the streets of Paris, converted
the robbers, the usurers, the prostitutes, and even the doctors and
scholars of the university. No sooner did Innocent the Third ascend the
chair of St. Peter, than he proclaimed in Italy, Germany, and France,
the obligation of a new crusade.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[26](#fn_147)
The eloquent pontiff described the ruin of Jerusalem, the triumph of the
Pagans, and the shame of Christendom; his liberality proposed the
redemption of sins, a plenary indulgence to all who should serve in
Palestine, either a year in person, or two years by a substitute;  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[27](#fn_148) and among his legates and orators who
blew the sacred trumpet, Fulk of Neuilly was the loudest and most
successful. The situation of the principal monarchs was averse to the
pious summons. The emperor Frederic the Second was a child; and his
kingdom of Germany was disputed by the rival houses of Brunswick and
Swabia, the memorable factions of the Guelphs and Ghibelines. Philip
Augustus of France had performed, and could not be persuaded to renew,
the perilous vow; but as he was not less ambitious of praise than of
power, he cheerfully instituted a perpetual fund for the defence of the
Holy Land Richard of England was satiated with the glory and misfortunes
of his first adventure; and he presumed to deride the exhortations of
Fulk of Neuilly, who was not abashed in the presence of kings. "You
advise me," said Plantagenet, "to dismiss my three daughters, pride,
avarice, and incontinence: I bequeath them to the most deserving; my
pride to the knights templars, my avarice to the monks of Cisteaux, and
my incontinence to the prelates." But the preacher was heard and obeyed
by the great vassals, the princes of the second order; and Theobald, or
Thibaut, count of Champagne, was the foremost in the holy race. The
valiant youth, at the age of twenty-two years, was encouraged by the
domestic examples of his father, who marched in the second crusade, and
of his elder brother, who had ended his days in Palestine with the title
of King of Jerusalem; two thousand two hundred knights owed service and
homage to his peerage;  <span id="fr_149"></span>[28](#fn_149) the
nobles of Champagne excelled in all the exercises of war;  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[29](#fn_150) and, by his marriage with the heiress
of Navarre, Thibaut could draw a band of hardy Gascons from either side
of the Pyrenaean mountains. His companion in arms was Louis, count of
Blois and Chartres; like himself of regal lineage, for both the princes
were nephews, at the same time, of the kings of France and England. In a
crowd of prelates and barons, who imitated their zeal, I distinguish the
birth and merit of Matthew of Montmorency; the famous Simon of Montfort,
the scourge of the Albigeois; and a valiant noble, Jeffrey of
Villehardouin,  <span id="fr_151"></span>[30](#fn_151) marshal of
Champagne,  <span id="fr_152"></span>[31](#fn_152) who has condescended,
in the rude idiom of his age and country,  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[32](#fn_153) to write or dictate  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[33](#fn_154) an original narrative of the councils
and actions in which he bore a memorable part. At the same time,
Baldwin, count of Flanders, who had married the sister of Thibaut,
assumed the cross at Bruges, with his brother Henry, and the principal
knights and citizens of that rich and industrious province.  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[34](#fn_155) The vow which the chiefs had pronounced
in churches, they ratified in tournaments; the operations of the war
were debated in full and frequent assemblies; and it was resolved to
seek the deliverance of Palestine in Egypt, a country, since Saladin's
death, which was almost ruined by famine and civil war. But the fate of
so many royal armies displayed the toils and perils of a land
expedition; and if the Flemings dwelt along the ocean, the French barons
were destitute of ships and ignorant of navigation. They embraced the
wise resolution of choosing six deputies or representatives, of whom
Villehardouin was one, with a discretionary trust to direct the motions,
and to pledge the faith, of the whole confederacy. The maritime states
of Italy were alone possessed of the means of transporting the holy
warriors with their arms and horses; and the six deputies proceeded to
Venice, to solicit, on motives of piety or interest, the aid of that
powerful republic.

In the invasion of Italy by Attila, I have mentioned  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[35](#fn_156) the flight of the Venetians from the
fallen cities of the continent, and their obscure shelter in the chain
of islands that line the extremity of the Adriatic Gulf. In the midst of
the waters, free, indigent, laborious, and inaccessible, they gradually
coalesced into a republic: the first foundations of Venice were laid in
the Island of Rialto; and the annual election of the twelve tribunes was
superseded by the permanent office of a duke or doge. On the verge of
the two empires, the Venetians exult in the belief of primitive and
perpetual independence.  <span id="fr_157"></span>[36](#fn_157) Against
the Latins, their antique freedom has been asserted by the sword, and
may be justified by the pen. Charlemagne himself resigned all claims of
sovereignty to the islands of the Adriatic Gulf: his son Pepin was
repulsed in the attacks of the lagunas or canals, too deep for the
cavalry, and too shallow for the vessels; and in every age, under the
German Caesars, the lands of the republic have been clearly
distinguished from the kingdom of Italy. But the inhabitants of Venice
were considered by themselves, by strangers, and by their sovereigns, as
an inalienable portion of the Greek empire:  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[37](#fn_158) in the ninth and tenth centuries, the
proofs of their subjection are numerous and unquestionable; and the vain
titles, the servile honors, of the Byzantine court, so ambitiously
solicited by their dukes, would have degraded the magistrates of a free
people. But the bands of this dependence, which was never absolute or
rigid, were imperceptibly relaxed by the ambition of Venice and the
weakness of Constantinople. Obedience was softened into respect,
privilege ripened into prerogative, and the freedom of domestic
government was fortified by the independence of foreign dominion. The
maritime cities of Istria and Dalmatia bowed to the sovereigns of the
Adriatic; and when they armed against the Normans in the cause of
Alexius, the emperor applied, not to the duty of his subjects, but to
the gratitude and generosity of his faithful allies. The sea was their
patrimony:  <span id="fr_159"></span>[38](#fn_159) the western parts of
the Mediterranean, from Tuscany to Gibraltar, were indeed abandoned to
their rivals of Pisa and Genoa; but the Venetians acquired an early and
lucrative share of the commerce of Greece and Egypt. Their riches
increased with the increasing demand of Europe; their manufactures of
silk and glass, perhaps the institution of their bank, are of high
antiquity; and they enjoyed the fruits of their industry in the
magnificence of public and private life. To assert her flag, to avenge
her injuries, to protect the freedom of navigation, the republic could
launch and man a fleet of a hundred galleys; and the Greeks, the
Saracens, and the Normans, were encountered by her naval arms. The
Franks of Syria were assisted by the Venetians in the reduction of the
sea coast; but their zeal was neither blind nor disinterested; and in
the conquest of Tyre, they shared the sovereignty of a city, the first
seat of the commerce of the world. The policy of Venice was marked by
the avarice of a trading, and the insolence of a maritime, power; yet
her ambition was prudent: nor did she often forget that if armed galleys
were the effect and safeguard, merchant vessels were the cause and
supply, of her greatness. In her religion, she avoided the schisms of
the Greeks, without yielding a servile obedience to the Roman pontiff;
and a free intercourse with the infidels of every clime appears to have
allayed betimes the fever of superstition. Her primitive government was
a loose mixture of democracy and monarchy; the doge was elected by the
votes of the general assembly; as long as he was popular and successful,
he reigned with the pomp and authority of a prince; but in the frequent
revolutions of the state, he was deposed, or banished, or slain, by the
justice or injustice of the multitude. The twelfth century produced the
first rudiments of the wise and jealous aristocracy, which has reduced
the doge to a pageant, and the people to a cipher.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[39](#fn_160)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[1](daf06004.htm#fr_122) In the successive
centuries, from the ixth to the xviiith, Mosheim traces the schism of
the Greeks with learning, clearness, and impartiality; the filioque
(Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 277,) Leo III. p. 303 Photius, p. 307, 308.
Michael Cerularius, p. 370, 371, &c.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[2](daf06004.htm#fr_123) (Phot. Epist. p. 47,
edit. Montacut.) The Oriental patriarch continues to apply the images of
thunder, earthquake, hail, wild boar, precursors of Antichrist, &c., &c.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[3](daf06004.htm#fr_124) The mysterious subject
of the procession of the Holy Ghost is discussed in the historical,
theological, and controversial sense, or nonsense, by the Jesuit
Petavius. (Dogmata Theologica, tom. ii. l. vii. p. 362 - 440.)

<span id="fn_125"></span>[4](daf06004.htm#fr_125) Before the shrine of
St. Peter he placed two shields of the weight of 94 1/2 pounds of pure
silver; on which he inscribed the text of both creeds, (utroque
symbolo,) pro amore et cautela orthodoxae fidei, (Anastas. in Leon. III.
in Muratori, tom. iii. pars. i. p. 208.) His language most clearly
proves, that neither the filioque, nor the Athanasian creed were
received at Rome about the year 830.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[5](daf06004.htm#fr_126) The Missi of
Charlemagne pressed him to declare, that all who rejected the filioque,
or at least the doctrine, must be damned. All, replies the pope, are not
capable of reaching the altiora mysteria qui potuerit, et non voluerit,
salvus esse non potest, (Collect. Concil. tom. ix. p. 277 - 286.) The
potuerit would leave a large loophole of salvation!

<span id="fn_127"></span>[6](daf06004.htm#fr_127) In France, after some
harsher laws, the ecclesiastical discipline is now relaxed: milk,
cheese, and butter, are become a perpetual, and eggs an annual,
indulgence in Lent, (Vie privee des Francois, tom. ii. p. 27 - 38.)

<span id="fn_128"></span>[7](daf06004.htm#fr_128) The original monuments
of the schism, of the charges of the Greeks against the Latins, are
deposited in the epistles of Photius, (Epist Encyclica, ii. p. 47 - 61,)
and of Michael Cerularius, (Canisii Antiq. Lectiones, tom. iii. p. i. p.
281 - 324, edit. Basnage, with the prolix answer of Cardinal Humbert.)

<span id="fn_129"></span>[8](daf06004.htm#fr_129) The xth volume of the
Venice edition of the Councils contains all the acts of the synods, and
history of Photius: they are abridged, with a faint tinge of prejudice
or prudence, by Dupin and Fleury.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[9](daf06004.htm#fr_130) The synod of
Constantinople, held in the year 869, is the viiith of the general
councils, the last assembly of the East which is recognized by the Roman
church. She rejects the synods of Constantinople of the years 867 and
879, which were, however, equally numerous and noisy; but they were
favorable to Photius.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[10](daf06004.htm#fr_131) See this anathema in
the Councils, tom. xi. p. 1457 - 1460.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[11](daf06004.htm#fr_132) Anna Comnena
(Alexiad, l. i. p. 31 - 33) represents the abhorrence, not only of the
church, but of the palace, for Gregory VII., the popes and the Latin
communion. The style of Cinnamus and Nicetas is still more vehement. Yet
how calm is the voice of history compared with that of polemics!

<span id="fn_133"></span>[12](daf06004.htm#fr_133) His anonymous
historian (de Expedit. Asiat. Fred. I. in Canisii Lection. Antiq. tom.
iii. pars ii. p. 511, edit. Basnage) mentions the sermons of the Greek
patriarch, quomodo Graecis injunxerat in remissionem peccatorum
peregrinos occidere et delere de terra. Tagino observes, (in Scriptores
Freher. tom. i. p. 409, edit. Struv.,) Graeci haereticos nos appellant:
clerici et monachi dictis et factis persequuntur. We may add the
declaration of the emperor Baldwin fifteen years afterwards: Haec est
(gens) quae Latinos omnes non hominum nomine, sed canum dignabatur;
quorum sanguinem effundere pene inter merita reputabant, (Gesta
Innocent. III., c. 92, in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii.
pars i. p. 536.) There may be some exaggeration, but it was as effectual
for the action and reaction of hatred.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[13](daf06004.htm#fr_134) See Anna Comnena,
(Alexiad, l. vi. p. 161, 162,) and a remarkable passage of Nicetas, (in
Manuel, l. v. c. 9,) who observes of the Venetians, &c.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[14](daf06004.htm#fr_135) Ducange, Fam. Byzant.
p. 186, 187.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[15](daf06004.htm#fr_136) Nicetas in Manuel. l.
vii. c. 2. Regnante enim (Manuele) . . apud eum tantam Latinus populus
repererat gratiam ut neglectis Graeculis suis tanquam viris mollibus et
effoeminatis, . . . . solis Latinis grandia committeret negotia . . . .
erga eos profusa liberalitate abundabat . . . . ex omni orbe ad eum
tanquam ad benefactorem nobiles et ignobiles concurrebant. Willelm. Tyr.
xxii. c. 10.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[16](daf06004.htm#fr_137) The suspicions of the
Greeks would have been confirmed, if they had seen the political
epistles of Manuel to Pope Alexander III., the enemy of his enemy
Frederic I., in which the emperor declares his wish of uniting the
Greeks and Latins as one flock under one shephero, &c (See Fleury, Hist.
Eccles. tom. xv. p. 187, 213, 243.)

<span id="fn_138"></span>[17](daf06004.htm#fr_138) See the Greek and
Latin narratives in Nicetas (in Alexio Comneno, c. 10) and William of
Tyre, (l. xxii. c. 10, 11, 12, 13;) the first soft and concise, the
second loud, copious, and tragical.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[18](daf06004.htm#fr_139) The history of the
reign of Isaac Angelus is composed, in three books, by the senator
Nicetas, (p. 228 - 290;) and his offices of logothete, or principal
secretary, and judge of the veil or palace, could not bribe the
impartiality of the historian. He wrote, it is true, after the fall and
death of his benefactor.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[19](daf06004.htm#fr_140) See Bohadin, Vit.
Saladin. p. 129 - 131, 226, vers. Schultens. The ambassador of Isaac was
equally versed in the Greek, French, and Arabic languages; a rare
instance in those times. His embassies were received with honor,
dismissed without effect, and reported with scandal in the West.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[20](daf06004.htm#fr_141) Ducange, Familiae,
Dalmaticae, p. 318, 319, 320. The original correspondence of the
Bulgarian king and the Roman pontiff is inscribed in the Gesta Innocent.
III. c. 66 - 82, p. 513 - 525.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[21](daf06004.htm#fr_142) The pope acknowledges
his pedigree, a nobili urbis Romae prosapia genitores tui originem
traxerunt. This tradition, and the strong resemblance of the Latin and
Walachian idioms, is explained by M. D'Anville, (Etats de l'Europe, p.
258 - 262.) The Italian colonies of the Dacia of Trajan were swept away
by the tide of emigration from the Danube to the Volga, and brought back
by another wave from the Volga to the Danube. Possible, but strange!

<span id="fn_143"></span>[22](daf06004.htm#fr_143) This parable is in
the best savage style; but I wish the Walach had not introduced the
classic name of Mysians, the experiment of the magnet or loadstone, and
the passage of an old comic poet, (Nicetas in Alex. Comneno, l. i. p.
299, 300.)

<span id="fn_144"></span>[23](daf06004.htm#fr_144) The Latins aggravate
the ingratitude of Alexius, by supposing that he had been released by
his brother Isaac from Turkish captivity This pathetic tale had
doubtless been repeated at Venice and Zara but I do not readily discover
its grounds in the Greek historians.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[24](daf06004.htm#fr_145) See the reign of
Alexius Angelus, or Comnenus, in the three books of Nicetas, p. 291 -
352.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[25](daf06004.htm#fr_146) See Fleury, Hist.
Eccles. tom. xvi. p. 26, &c., and Villehardouin, No. 1, with the
observations of Ducange, which I always mean to quote with the original
text.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[26](daf06004.htm#fr_147) The contemporary life
of Pope Innocent III., published by Baluze and Muratori, (Scriptores
Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii. pars i. p. 486 - 568, is most valuable for
the important and original documents which are inserted in the text. The
bull of the crusade may be read, c. 84, 85.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[27](daf06004.htm#fr_148) Por-ce que cil
pardon, fut issi gran, si s'en esmeurent mult licuers des genz, et mult
s'en croisierent, porce que li pardons ere su gran. Villehardouin, No.
1. Our philosophers may refine on the causes of the crusades, but such
were the genuine feelings of a French knight.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[28](daf06004.htm#fr_149) This number of fiefs
(of which 1800 owed liege homage) was enrolled in the church of St.
Stephen at Troyes, and attested A.D. 1213, by the marshal and butler of
Champagne, (Ducange, Observ. p. 254.)

<span id="fn_150"></span>[29](daf06004.htm#fr_150) Campania . . . .
militiae privilegio singularius excellit . . . . in tyrociniis . . . .
prolusione armorum, &c., Duncage, p. 249, from the old Chronicle of
Jerusalem, A.D. 1177 - 1199.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[30](daf06004.htm#fr_151) The name of
Villehardouin was taken from a village and castle in the diocese of
Troyes, near the River Aube, between Bar and Arcis. The family was
ancient and noble; the elder branch of our historian existed after the
year 1400, the younger, which acquired the principality of Achaia,
merged in the house of Savoy, (Ducange, p. 235 - 245.)

<span id="fn_152"></span>[31](daf06004.htm#fr_152) This office was held
by his father and his descendants; but Ducange has not hunted it with
his usual sagacity. I find that, in the year 1356, it was in the family
of Conflans; but these provincial have been long since eclipsed by the
national marshals of France.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[32](daf06004.htm#fr_153) This language, of
which I shall produce some specimens, is explained by Vigenere and
Ducange, in a version and glossary. The president Des Brosses
(Mechanisme des Langues, tom. ii. p. 83) gives it as the example of a
language which has ceased to be French, and is understood only by
grammarians.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[33](daf06004.htm#fr_154) His age, and his own
expression, moi qui ceste oeuvre dicta. (No. 62, &c.,) may justify the
suspicion (more probable than Mr. Wood's on Homer) that he could neither
read nor write. Yet Champagne may boast of the two first historians, the
noble authors of French prose, Villehardouin and Joinville.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[34](daf06004.htm#fr_155) The crusade and
reigns of the counts of Flanders, Baldwin and his brother Henry, are the
subject of a particular history by the Jesuit Doutremens,
(Constantinopolis Belgica; Turnaci, 1638, in 4to.,) which I have only
seen with the eyes of Ducange.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[35](daf06004.htm#fr_156) History, &c., vol.
iii. p. 446, 447.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[36](daf06004.htm#fr_157) The foundation and
independence of Venice, and Pepin's invasion, are discussed by Pagi
(Critica, tom. iii. A.D. 81), No. 4, &c.) and Beretti, (Dissert.
Chorograph. Italiae Medii Aevi, in Muratori, Script. tom. x. p. 153.)
The two critics have a slight bias, the Frenchman adverse, the Italian
favorable, to the republic.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[37](daf06004.htm#fr_158) When the son of
Charlemagne asserted his right of sovereignty, he was answered by the
loyal Venetians, (Constantin. Porphyrogenit. de Administrat Imperii,
pars ii. c. 28, p. 85;) and the report of the ixth establishes the fact
of the xth century, which is confirmed by the embassy of Liutprand of
Cremona. The annual tribute, which the emperor allows them to pay to the
king of Italy, alleviates, by doubling, their servitude; but the hateful
word must be translated, as in the charter of 827, (Laugier, Hist. de
Venice, tom. i. p. 67, &c.,) by the softer appellation of subditi, or
fideles.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[38](daf06004.htm#fr_159) See the xxvth and
xxxth dissertations of the Antiquitates Medii Aevi of Muratori. From
Anderson's History of Commerce, I understand that the Venetians did not
trade to England before the year 1323. The most flourishing state of
their wealth and commerce, in the beginning of the xvth century, is
agreeably described by the Abbe Dubos, (Hist. de la Ligue de Cambray,
tom. ii. p. 443 - 480.)

<span id="fn_160"></span>[39](daf06004.htm#fr_160) The Venetians have
been slow in writing and publishing their history. Their most ancient
monuments are, 1. The rude Chronicle (perhaps) of John Sagorninus,
(Venezia, 1765, in octavo,) which represents the state and manners of
Venice in the year 1008. 2. The larger history of the doge, (1342 -
1354,) Andrew Dandolo, published for the first time in the xiith tom. of
Muratori, A.D. 1728. The History of Venice by the Abbe Laugier, (Paris,
1728,) is a work of some merit, which I have chiefly used for the
constitutional part.

Note: It is scarcely necessary to mention the valuable work of Count
Daru, "History de Venise," of which I hear that an Italian translation
has been published, with notes defensive of the ancient republic. I have
not yet seen this work. - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade. Part II.](daf06005)
