[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06005) 
[Next](daf06007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade. Part III.

But these generous deliverers were unwilling to release their hostage,
till they had obtained from his father the payment, or at least the
promise, of their recompense. They chose four ambassadors, Matthew of
Montmorency, our historian the marshal of Champagne, and two Venetians,
to congratulate the emperor. The gates were thrown open on their
approach, the streets on both sides were lined with the battle axes of
the Danish and English guard: the presence-chamber glittered with gold
and jewels, the false substitute of virtue and power: by the side of the
blind Isaac his wife was seated, the sister of the king of Hungary: and
by her appearance, the noble matrons of Greece were drawn from their
domestic retirement, and mingled with the circle of senators and
soldiers. The Latins, by the mouth of the marshal, spoke like men
conscious of their merits, but who respected the work of their own
hands; and the emperor clearly understood, that his son's engagements
with Venice and the pilgrims must be ratified without hesitation or
delay. Withdrawing into a private chamber with the empress, a
chamberlain, an interpreter, and the four ambassadors, the father of
young Alexius inquired with some anxiety into the nature of his
stipulations. The submission of the Eastern empire to the pope, the
succor of the Holy Land, and a present contribution of two hundred
thousand marks of silver. - "These conditions are weighty," was his
prudent reply: "they are hard to accept, and difficult to perform. But
no conditions can exceed the measure of your services and deserts."
After this satisfactory assurance, the barons mounted on horseback, and
introduced the heir of Constantinople to the city and palace: his youth
and marvellous adventures engaged every heart in his favor, and Alexius
was solemnly crowned with his father in the dome of St. Sophia. In the
first days of his reign, the people, already blessed with the
restoration of plenty and peace, was delighted by the joyful catastrophe
of the tragedy; and the discontent of the nobles, their regret, and
their fears, were covered by the polished surface of pleasure and
loyalty The mixture of two discordant nations in the same capital might
have been pregnant with mischief and danger; and the suburb of Galata,
or Pera, was assigned for the quarters of the French and Venetians. But
the liberty of trade and familiar intercourse was allowed between the
friendly nations: and each day the pilgrims were tempted by devotion or
curiosity to visit the churches and palaces of Constantinople. Their
rude minds, insensible perhaps of the finer arts, were astonished by the
magnificent scenery: and the poverty of their native towns enhanced the
populousness and riches of the first metropolis of Christendom.  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[68](#fn_191) Descending from his state, young
Alexius was prompted by interest and gratitude to repeat his frequent
and familiar visits to his Latin allies; and in the freedom of the
table, the gay petulance of the French sometimes forgot the emperor of
the East.  <span id="fr_192"></span>[69](#fn_192) In their most serious
conferences, it was agreed, that the reunion of the two churches must be
the result of patience and time; but avarice was less tractable than
zeal; and a larger sum was instantly disbursed to appease the wants, and
silence the importunity, of the crusaders.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[70](#fn_193) Alexius was alarmed by the approaching
hour of their departure: their absence might have relieved him from the
engagement which he was yet incapable of performing; but his friends
would have left him, naked and alone, to the caprice and prejudice of a
perfidious nation. He wished to bribe their stay, the delay of a year,
by undertaking to defray their expense, and to satisfy, in their name,
the freight of the Venetian vessels. The offer was agitated in the
council of the barons; and, after a repetition of their debates and
scruples, a majority of votes again acquiesced in the advice of the doge
and the prayer of the young emperor. At the price of sixteen hundred
pounds of gold, he prevailed on the marquis of Montferrat to lead him
with an army round the provinces of Europe; to establish his authority,
and pursue his uncle, while Constantinople was awed by the presence of
Baldwin and his confederates of France and Flanders. The expedition was
successful: the blind emperor exulted in the success of his arms, and
listened to the predictions of his flatterers, that the same Providence
which had raised him from the dungeon to the throne, would heal his
gout, restore his sight, and watch over the long prosperity of his
reign. Yet the mind of the suspicious old man was tormented by the
rising glories of his son; nor could his pride conceal from his envy,
that, while his own name was pronounced in faint and reluctant
acclamations, the royal youth was the theme of spontaneous and universal
praise.  <span id="fr_194"></span>[71](#fn_194)

By the recent invasion, the Greeks were awakened from a dream of nine
centuries; from the vain presumption that the capital of the Roman
empire was impregnable to foreign arms. The strangers of the West had
violated the city, and bestowed the sceptre, of Constantine: their
Imperial clients soon became as unpopular as themselves: the well-known
vices of Isaac were rendered still more contemptible by his infirmities,
and the young Alexius was hated as an apostate, who had renounced the
manners and religion of his country. His secret covenant with the Latins
was divulged or suspected; the people, and especially the clergy, were
devoutly attached to their faith and superstition; and every convent,
and every shop, resounded with the danger of the church and the tyranny
of the pope.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[72](#fn_195) An empty treasury
could ill supply the demands of regal luxury and foreign extortion: the
Greeks refused to avert, by a general tax, the impending evils of
servitude and pillage; the oppression of the rich excited a more
dangerous and personal resentment; and if the emperor melted the plate,
and despoiled the images, of the sanctuary, he seemed to justify the
complaints of heresy and sacrilege. During the absence of Marquis
Boniface and his Imperial pupil, Constantinople was visited with a
calamity which might be justly imputed to the zeal and indiscretion of
the Flemish pilgrims.  <span id="fr_196"></span>[73](#fn_196) In one of
their visits to the city, they were scandalized by the aspect of a
mosque or synagogue, in which one God was worshipped, without a partner
or a son. Their effectual mode of controversy was to attack the infidels
with the sword, and their habitation with fire: but the infidels, and
some Christian neighbors, presumed to defend their lives and properties;
and the flames which bigotry had kindled, consumed the most orthodox and
innocent structures. During eight days and nights, the conflagration
spread above a league in front, from the harbor to the Propontis, over
the thickest and most populous regions of the city. It is not easy to
count the stately churches and palaces that were reduced to a smoking
ruin, to value the merchandise that perished in the trading streets, or
to number the families that were involved in the common destruction. By
this outrage, which the doge and the barons in vain affected to
disclaim, the name of the Latins became still more unpopular; and the
colony of that nation, above fifteen thousand persons, consulted their
safety in a hasty retreat from the city to the protection of their
standard in the suburb of Pera. The emperor returned in triumph; but the
firmest and most dexterous policy would have been insufficient to steer
him through the tempest, which overwhelmed the person and government of
that unhappy youth. His own inclination, and his father's advice,
attached him to his benefactors; but Alexius hesitated between gratitude
and patriotism, between the fear of his subjects and of his allies.
 <span id="fr_197"></span>[74](#fn_197) By his feeble and fluctuating
conduct he lost the esteem and confidence of both; and, while he invited
the marquis of Monferrat to occupy the palace, he suffered the nobles to
conspire, and the people to arm, for the deliverance of their country.
Regardless of his painful situation, the Latin chiefs repeated their
demands, resented his delays, suspected his intentions, and exacted a
decisive answer of peace or war. The haughty summons was delivered by
three French knights and three Venetian deputies, who girded their
swords, mounted their horses, pierced through the angry multitude, and
entered, with a fearful countenance, the palace and presence of the
Greek emperor. In a peremptory tone, they recapitulated their services
and his engagements; and boldly declared, that unless their just claims
were fully and immediately satisfied, they should no longer hold him
either as a sovereign or a friend. After this defiance, the first that
had ever wounded an Imperial ear, they departed without betraying any
symptoms of fear; but their escape from a servile palace and a furious
city astonished the ambassadors themselves; and their return to the camp
was the signal of mutual hostility.

Among the Greeks, all authority and wisdom were overborne by the
impetuous multitude, who mistook their rage for valor, their numbers for
strength, and their fanaticism for the support and inspiration of
Heaven. In the eyes of both nations Alexius was false and contemptible;
the base and spurious race of the Angeli was rejected with clamorous
disdain; and the people of Constantinople encompassed the senate, to
demand at their hands a more worthy emperor. To every senator,
conspicuous by his birth or dignity, they successively presented the
purple: by each senator the deadly garment was repulsed: the contest
lasted three days; and we may learn from the historian Nicetas, one of
the members of the assembly, that fear and weaknesses were the guardians
of their loyalty. A phantom, who vanished in oblivion, was forcibly
proclaimed by the crowd:  <span id="fr_198"></span>[75](#fn_198) but the
author of the tumult, and the leader of the war, was a prince of the
house of Ducas; and his common appellation of Alexius must be
discriminated by the epithet of Mourzoufle,  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[76](#fn_199) which in the vulgar idiom expressed the
close junction of his black and shaggy eyebrows. At once a patriot and a
courtier, the perfidious Mourzoufle, who was not destitute of cunning
and courage, opposed the Latins both in speech and action, inflamed the
passions and prejudices of the Greeks, and insinuated himself into the
favor and confidence of Alexius, who trusted him with the office of
great chamberlain, and tinged his buskins with the colors of royalty. At
the dead of night, he rushed into the bed-chamber with an affrighted
aspect, exclaiming, that the palace was attacked by the people and
betrayed by the guards. Starting from his couch, the unsuspecting prince
threw himself into the arms of his enemy, who had contrived his escape
by a private staircase. But that staircase terminated in a prison:
Alexius was seized, stripped, and loaded with chains; and, after tasting
some days the bitterness of death, he was poisoned, or strangled, or
beaten with clubs, at the command, or in the presence, of the tyrant.
The emperor Isaac Angelus soon followed his son to the grave; and
Mourzoufle, perhaps, might spare the superfluous crime of hastening the
extinction of impotence and blindness.

The death of the emperors, and the usurpation of Mourzoufle, had changed
the nature of the quarrel. It was no longer the disagreement of allies
who overvalued their services, or neglected their obligations: the
French and Venetians forgot their complaints against Alexius, dropped a
tear on the untimely fate of their companion, and swore revenge against
the perfidious nation who had crowned his assassin. Yet the prudent doge
was still inclined to negotiate: he asked as a debt, a subsidy, or a
fine, fifty thousand pounds of gold, about two millions sterling; nor
would the conference have been abruptly broken, if the zeal, or policy,
of Mourzoufle had not refused to sacrifice the Greek church to the
safety of the state.  <span id="fr_200"></span>[77](#fn_200) Amidst the
invectives of his foreign and domestic enemies, we may discern, that he
was not unworthy of the character which he had assumed, of the public
champion: the second siege of Constantinople was far more laborious than
the first; the treasury was replenished, and discipline was restored, by
a severe inquisition into the abuses of the former reign; and
Mourzoufle, an iron mace in his hand, visiting the posts, and affecting
the port and aspect of a warrior, was an object of terror to his
soldiers, at least, and to his kinsmen. Before and after the death of
Alexius, the Greeks made two vigorous and well-conducted attempts to
burn the navy in the harbor; but the skill and courage of the Venetians
repulsed the fire-ships; and the vagrant flames wasted themselves
without injury in the sea.  <span id="fr_201"></span>[78](#fn_201) In a
nocturnal sally the Greek emperor was vanquished by Henry, brother of
the count of Flanders: the advantages of number and surprise aggravated
the shame of his defeat: his buckler was found on the field of battle;
and the Imperial standard,  <span id="fr_202"></span>[79](#fn_202) a
divine image of the Virgin, was presented, as a trophy and a relic to
the Cistercian monks, the disciples of St. Bernard. Near three months,
without excepting the holy season of Lent, were consumed in skirmishes
and preparations, before the Latins were ready or resolved for a general
assault. The land fortifications had been found impregnable; and the
Venetian pilots represented, that, on the shore of the Propontis, the
anchorage was unsafe, and the ships must be driven by the current far
away to the straits of the Hellespont; a prospect not unpleasing to the
reluctant pilgrims, who sought every opportunity of breaking the army.
From the harbor, therefore, the assault was determined by the
assailants, and expected by the besieged; and the emperor had placed his
scarlet pavilions on a neighboring height, to direct and animate the
efforts of his troops. A fearless spectator, whose mind could entertain
the ideas of pomp and pleasure, might have admired the long array of two
embattled armies, which extended above half a league, the one on the
ships and galleys, the other on the walls and towers raised above the
ordinary level by several stages of wooden turrets. Their first fury was
spent in the discharge of darts, stones, and fire, from the engines; but
the water was deep; the French were bold; the Venetians were skilful;
they approached the walls; and a desperate conflict of swords, spears,
and battle- axes, was fought on the trembling bridges that grappled the
floating, to the stable, batteries. In more than a hundred places, the
assault was urged, and the defence was sustained; till the superiority
of ground and numbers finally prevailed, and the Latin trumpets sounded
a retreat. On the ensuing days, the attack was renewed with equal vigor,
and a similar event; and, in the night, the doge and the barons held a
council, apprehensive only for the public danger: not a voice pronounced
the words of escape or treaty; and each warrior, according to his
temper, embraced the hope of victory, or the assurance of a glorious
death.  <span id="fr_203"></span>[80](#fn_203) By the experience of the
former siege, the Greeks were instructed, but the Latins were animated;
and the knowledge that Constantinople might be taken, was of more avail
than the local precautions which that knowledge had inspired for its
defence. In the third assault, two ships were linked together to double
their strength; a strong north wind drove them on the shore; the bishops
of Troyes and Soissons led the van; and the auspicious names of the
pilgrim and the paradise resounded along the line.  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[81](#fn_204) The episcopal banners were displayed on
the walls; a hundred marks of silver had been promised to the first
adventurers; and if their reward was intercepted by death, their names
have been immortalized by fame.  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[\*\_0011](#fn_205) Four towers were scaled; three
gates were burst open; and the French knights, who might tremble on the
waves, felt themselves invincible on horseback on the solid ground.
Shall I relate that the thousands who guarded the emperor's person fled
on the approach, and before the lance, of a single warrior? Their
ignominious flight is attested by their countryman Nicetas: an army of
phantoms marched with the French hero, and he was magnified to a giant
in the eyes of the Greeks.  <span id="fr_206"></span>[82](#fn_206) While
the fugitives deserted their posts and cast away their arms, the Latins
entered the city under the banners of their leaders: the streets and
gates opened for their passage; and either design or accident kindled a
third conflagration, which consumed in a few hours the measure of three
of the largest cities of France.  <span id="fr_207"></span>[83](#fn_207)
In the close of evening, the barons checked their troops, and fortified
their stations: They were awed by the extent and populousness of the
capital, which might yet require the labor of a month, if the churches
and palaces were conscious of their internal strength. But in the
morning, a suppliant procession, with crosses and images, announced the
submission of the Greeks, and deprecated the wrath of the conquerors:
the usurper escaped through the golden gate: the palaces of Blachernae
and Boucoleon were occupied by the count of Flanders and the marquis of
Montferrat; and the empire, which still bore the name of Constantine,
and the title of Roman, was subverted by the arms of the Latin pilgrims.
 <span id="fr_208"></span>[84](#fn_208)

Constantinople had been taken by storm; and no restraints, except those
of religion and humanity, were imposed on the conquerors by the laws of
war. Boniface, marquis of Montferrat, still acted as their general; and
the Greeks, who revered his name as that of their future sovereign, were
heard to exclaim in a lamentable tone, "Holy marquis-king, have mercy
upon us!" His prudence or compassion opened the gates of the city to the
fugitives; and he exhorted the soldiers of the cross to spare the lives
of their fellow- Christians. The streams of blood that flowed down the
pages of Nicetas may be reduced to the slaughter of two thousand of his
unresisting countrymen;  <span id="fr_209"></span>[85](#fn_209) and the
greater part was massacred, not by the strangers, but by the Latins, who
had been driven from the city, and who exercised the revenge of a
triumphant faction. Yet of these exiles, some were less mindful of
injuries than of benefits; and Nicetas himself was indebted for his
safety to the generosity of a Venetian merchant. Pope Innocent the Third
accuses the pilgrims for respecting, in their lust, neither age nor sex,
nor religious profession; and bitterly laments that the deeds of
darkness, fornication, adultery, and incest, were perpetrated in open
day; and that noble matrons and holy nuns were polluted by the grooms
and peasants of the Catholic camp.  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[86](#fn_210) It is indeed probable that the license
of victory prompted and covered a multitude of sins: but it is certain,
that the capital of the East contained a stock of venal or willing
beauty, sufficient to satiate the desires of twenty thousand pilgrims;
and female prisoners were no longer subject to the right or abuse of
domestic slavery. The marquis of Montferrat was the patron of discipline
and decency; the count of Flanders was the mirror of chastity: they had
forbidden, under pain of death, the rape of married women, or virgins,
or nuns; and the proclamation was sometimes invoked by the vanquished
 <span id="fr_211"></span>[87](#fn_211) and respected by the victors.
Their cruelty and lust were moderated by the authority of the chiefs,
and feelings of the soldiers; for we are no longer describing an
irruption of the northern savages; and however ferocious they might
still appear, time, policy, and religion had civilized the manners of
the French, and still more of the Italians. But a free scope was allowed
to their avarice, which was glutted, even in the holy week, by the
pillage of Constantinople. The right of victory, unshackled by any
promise or treaty, had confiscated the public and private wealth of the
Greeks; and every hand, according to its size and strength, might
lawfully execute the sentence and seize the forfeiture. A portable and
universal standard of exchange was found in the coined and uncoined
metals of gold and silver, which each captor, at home or abroad, might
convert into the possessions most suitable to his temper and situation.
Of the treasures, which trade and luxury had accumulated, the silks,
velvets, furs, the gems, spices, and rich movables, were the most
precious, as they could not be procured for money in the ruder countries
of Europe. An order of rapine was instituted; nor was the share of each
individual abandoned to industry or chance. Under the tremendous
penalties of perjury, excommunication, and death, the Latins were bound
to deliver their plunder into the common stock: three churches were
selected for the deposit and distribution of the spoil: a single share
was allotted to a foot-soldier; two for a sergeant on horseback; four to
a knight; and larger proportions according to the rank and merit of the
barons and princes. For violating this sacred engagement, a knight
belonging to the count of St. Paul was hanged with his shield and coat
of arms round his neck; his example might render similar offenders more
artful and discreet; but avarice was more powerful than fear; and it is
generally believed that the secret far exceeded the acknowledged
plunder. Yet the magnitude of the prize surpassed the largest scale of
experience or expectation.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[88](#fn_212) After
the whole had been equally divided between the French and Venetians,
fifty thousand marks were deducted to satisfy the debts of the former
and the demands of the latter. The residue of the French amounted to
four hundred thousand marks of silver,  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[89](#fn_213) about eight hundred thousand pounds
sterling; nor can I better appreciate the value of that sum in the
public and private transactions of the age, than by defining it as seven
times the annual revenue of the kingdom of England.  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[90](#fn_214)

In this great revolution we enjoy the singular felicity of comparing the
narratives of Villehardouin and Nicetas, the opposite feelings of the
marshal of Champagne and the Byzantine senator.  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[91](#fn_215) At the first view it should seem that
the wealth of Constantinople was only transferred from one nation to
another; and that the loss and sorrow of the Greeks is exactly balanced
by the joy and advantage of the Latins. But in the miserable account of
war, the gain is never equivalent to the loss, the pleasure to the pain;
the smiles of the Latins were transient and fallacious; the Greeks
forever wept over the ruins of their country; and their real calamities
were aggravated by sacrilege and mockery. What benefits accrued to the
conquerors from the three fires which annihilated so vast a portion of
the buildings and riches of the city? What a stock of such things, as
could neither be used nor transported, was maliciously or wantonly
destroyed! How much treasure was idly wasted in gaming, debauchery, and
riot! And what precious objects were bartered for a vile price by the
impatience or ignorance of the soldiers, whose reward was stolen by the
base industry of the last of the Greeks! These alone, who had nothing to
lose, might derive some profit from the revolution; but the misery of
the upper ranks of society is strongly painted in the personal
adventures of Nicetas himself His stately palace had been reduced to
ashes in the second conflagration; and the senator, with his family and
friends, found an obscure shelter in another house which he possessed
near the church of St. Sophia. It was the door of this mean habitation
that his friend, the Venetian merchant, guarded in the disguise of a
soldier, till Nicetas could save, by a precipitate flight, the relics of
his fortune and the chastity of his daughter. In a cold, wintry season,
these fugitives, nursed in the lap of prosperity, departed on foot; his
wife was with child; the desertion of their slaves compelled them to
carry their baggage on their own shoulders; and their women, whom they
placed in the centre, were exhorted to conceal their beauty with dirt,
instead of adorning it with paint and jewels Every step was exposed to
insult and danger: the threats of the strangers were less painful than
the taunts of the plebeians, with whom they were now levelled; nor did
the exiles breathe in safety till their mournful pilgrimage was
concluded at Sclymbria, above forty miles from the capital. On the way
they overtook the patriarch, without attendance and almost without
apparel, riding on an ass, and reduced to a state of apostolical
poverty, which, had it been voluntary, might perhaps have been
meritorious. In the mean while, his desolate churches were profaned by
the licentiousness and party zeal of the Latins. After stripping the
gems and pearls, they converted the chalices into drinking-cups; their
tables, on which they gamed and feasted, were covered with the pictures
of Christ and the saints; and they trampled under foot the most
venerable objects of the Christian worship. In the cathedral of St.
Sophia, the ample veil of the sanctuary was rent asunder for the sake of
the golden fringe; and the altar, a monument of art and riches, was
broken in pieces and shared among the captors. Their mules and horses
were laden with the wrought silver and gilt carvings, which they tore
down from the doors and pulpit; and if the beasts stumbled under the
burden, they were stabbed by their impatient drivers, and the holy
pavement streamed with their impure blood. A prostitute was seated on
the throne of the patriarch; and that daughter of Belial, as she is
styled, sung and danced in the church, to ridicule the hymns and
processions of the Orientals. Nor were the repositories of the royal
dead secure from violation: in the church of the Apostles, the tombs of
the emperors were rifled; and it is said, that after six centuries the
corpse of Justinian was found without any signs of decay or
putrefaction. In the streets, the French and Flemings clothed themselves
and their horses in painted robes and flowing head-dresses of linen; and
the coarse intemperance of their feasts  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[92](#fn_216) insulted the splendid sobriety of the
East. To expose the arms of a people of scribes and scholars, they
affected to display a pen, an inkhorn, and a sheet of paper, without
discerning that the instruments of science and valor were alike feeble
and useless in the hands of the modern Greeks.

Their reputation and their language encouraged them, however, to despise
the ignorance and to overlook the progress of the Latins.  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[93](#fn_217) In the love of the arts, the national
difference was still more obvious and real; the Greeks preserved with
reverence the works of their ancestors, which they could not imitate;
and, in the destruction of the statues of Constantinople, we are
provoked to join in the complaints and invectives of the Byzantine
historian.  <span id="fr_218"></span>[94](#fn_218) We have seen how the
rising city was adorned by the vanity and despotism of the Imperial
founder: in the ruins of paganism, some gods and heroes were saved from
the axe of superstition; and the forum and hippodrome were dignified
with the relics of a better age. Several of these are described by
Nicetas,  <span id="fr_219"></span>[95](#fn_219) in a florid and
affected style; and from his descriptions I shall select some
interesting particulars. 1. The victorious charioteers were cast in
bronze, at their own or the public charge, and fitly placed in the
hippodrome: they stood aloft in their chariots, wheeling round the goal:
the spectators could admire their attitude, and judge of the
resemblance; and of these figures, the most perfect might have been
transported from the Olympic stadium. 2. The sphinx, river-horse, and
crocodile, denote the climate and manufacture of Egypt and the spoils of
that ancient province. 3. The she-wolf suckling Romulus and Remus, a
subject alike pleasing to the old and the new Romans, but which could
really be treated before the decline of the Greek sculpture. 4. An eagle
holding and tearing a serpent in his talons, a domestic monument of the
Byzantines, which they ascribed, not to a human artist, but to the magic
power of the philosopher Apollonius, who, by this talisman, delivered
the city from such venomous reptiles. 5. An ass and his driver, which
were erected by Augustus in his colony of Nicopolis, to commemorate a
verbal omen of the victory of Actium. 6. An equestrian statue which
passed, in the vulgar opinion, for Joshua, the Jewish conqueror,
stretching out his hand to stop the course of the descending sun. A more
classical tradition recognized the figures of Bellerophon and Pegasus;
and the free attitude of the steed seemed to mark that he trod on air,
rather than on the earth. 7. A square and lofty obelisk of brass; the
sides were embossed with a variety of picturesque and rural scenes,
birds singing; rustics laboring, or playing on their pipes; sheep
bleating; lambs skipping; the sea, and a scene of fish and fishing;
little naked cupids laughing, playing, and pelting each other with
apples; and, on the summit, a female figure, turning with the slightest
breath, and thence denominated the wind's attendant. 8. The Phrygian
shepherd presenting to Venus the prize of beauty, the apple of discord.
9. The incomparable statue of Helen, which is delineated by Nicetas in
the words of admiration and love: her well-turned feet, snowy arms, rosy
lips, bewitching smiles, swimming eyes, arched eyebrows, the harmony of
her shape, the lightness of her drapery, and her flowing locks that
waved in the wind; a beauty that might have moved her Barbarian
destroyers to pity and remorse. 10. The manly or divine form of
Hercules,  <span id="fr_220"></span>[96](#fn_220) as he was restored to
life by the masterhand of Lysippus; of such magnitude, that his thumb
was equal to his waist, his leg to the stature, of a common man:  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[97](#fn_221) his chest ample, his shoulders broad,
his limbs strong and muscular, his hair curled, his aspect commanding.
Without his bow, or quiver, or club, his lion's skin carelessly thrown
over him, he was seated on an osier basket, his right leg and arm
stretched to the utmost, his left knee bent, and supporting his elbow,
his head reclining on his left hand, his countenance indignant and
pensive. 11. A colossal statue of Juno, which had once adorned her
temple of Samos, the enormous head by four yoke of oxen was laboriously
drawn to the palace. 12. Another colossus, of Pallas or Minerva, thirty
feet in height, and representing with admirable spirit the attributes
and character of the martial maid. Before we accuse the Latins, it is
just to remark, that this Pallas was destroyed after the first siege, by
the fear and superstition of the Greeks themselves.  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[98](#fn_222) The other statues of brass which I have
enumerated were broken and melted by the unfeeling avarice of the
crusaders: the cost and labor were consumed in a moment; the soul of
genius evaporated in smoke; and the remnant of base metal was coined
into money for the payment of the troops. Bronze is not the most durable
of monuments: from the marble forms of Phidias and Praxiteles, the
Latins might turn aside with stupid contempt;  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[99](#fn_223) but unless they were crushed by some
accidental injury, those useless stones stood secure on their pedestals.
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[100](#fn_224) The most enlightened of the
strangers, above the gross and sensual pursuits of their countrymen,
more piously exercised the right of conquest in the search and seizure
of the relics of the saints.  <span id="fr_225"></span>[101](#fn_225)
Immense was the supply of heads and bones, crosses and images, that were
scattered by this revolution over the churches of Europe; and such was
the increase of pilgrimage and oblation, that no branch, perhaps, of
more lucrative plunder was imported from the East.  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[102](#fn_226) Of the writings of antiquity, many
that still existed in the twelfth century, are now lost. But the
pilgrims were not solicitous to save or transport the volumes of an
unknown tongue: the perishable substance of paper or parchment can only
be preserved by the multiplicity of copies; the literature of the Greeks
had almost centred in the metropolis; and, without computing the extent
of our loss, we may drop a tear over the libraries that have perished in
the triple fire of Constantinople.  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[103](#fn_227)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_191"></span>[68](daf06006.htm#fr_191) Compare, in the rude
energy of Villehardouin, (No. 66, 100,) the inside and outside views of
Constantinople, and their impression on the minds of the pilgrims: cette
ville (says he) que de toutes les autres ere souveraine. See the
parallel passages of Fulcherius Carnotensis, Hist. Hierosol. l. i. c. 4,
and Will. Tyr. ii. 3, xx. 26.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[69](daf06006.htm#fr_192) As they played at
dice, the Latins took off his diadem, and clapped on his head a woollen
or hairy cap, (Nicetas, p. 358.) If these merry companions were
Venetians, it was the insolence of trade and a commonwealth.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[70](daf06006.htm#fr_193) Villehardouin, No.
101. Dandolo, p. 322. The doge affirms, that the Venetians were paid
more slowly than the French; but he owns, that the histories of the two
nations differed on that subject. Had he read Villehardouin? The Greeks
complained, however, good totius Graeciae opes transtulisset, (Gunther,
Hist. C. P. c 13) See the lamentations and invectives of Nicetas, (p.
355.)

<span id="fn_194"></span>[71](daf06006.htm#fr_194) The reign of Alexius
Comnenus occupies three books in Nicetas, p. 291-352. The short
restoration of Isaac and his son is despatched in five chapters, p. 352
- 362.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[72](daf06006.htm#fr_195) When Nicetas
reproaches Alexius for his impious league, he bestows the harshest names
on the pope's new religion, (p. 348.) Such was the sincere language of
every Greek to the last gasp of the empire.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[73](daf06006.htm#fr_196) Nicetas (p. 355) is
positive in the charge, and specifies the Flemings, though he is wrong
in supposing it an ancient name. Villehardouin (No. 107) exculpates the
barons, and is ignorant (perhaps affectedly ignorant) of the names of
the guilty.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[74](daf06006.htm#fr_197) Compare the
suspicions and complaints of Nicetas (p. 359 - 362) with the blunt
charges of Baldwin of Flanders, (Gesta Innocent III. c. 92, p. 534,) cum
patriarcha et mole nobilium, nobis promises perjurus et mendax.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[75](daf06006.htm#fr_198) His name was Nicholas
Canabus: he deserved the praise of Nicetas and the vengeance of
Mourzoufle, (p. 362.)

<span id="fn_199"></span>[76](daf06006.htm#fr_199) Villehardouin (No.
116) speaks of him as a favorite, without knowing that he was a prince
of the blood, Angelus and Ducas. Ducange, who pries into every corner,
believes him to be the son of Isaac Ducas Sebastocrator, and second
cousin of young Alexius.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[77](daf06006.htm#fr_200) This negotiation,
probable in itself, and attested by Nicetas, (p 65,) is omitted as
scandalous by the delicacy of Dandolo and Villehardouin. Note: Wilken
places it before the death of Alexius, vol. v. p. 276. - M

<span id="fn_201"></span>[78](daf06006.htm#fr_201) Baldwin mentions both
attempts to fire the fleet, (Gest. c. 92, p. 534, 535;) Villehardouin,
(No. 113 - 15) only describes the first. It is remarkable that neither
of these warriors observe any peculiar properties in the Greek fire.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[79](daf06006.htm#fr_202) Ducange (No. 119)
pours forth a torrent of learning on the Gonfanon Imperial. This banner
of the Virgin is shown at Venice as a trophy and relic: if it be genuine
the pious doge must have cheated the monks of Citeaux

<span id="fn_203"></span>[80](daf06006.htm#fr_203) Villehardouin (No.
126) confesses, that mult ere grant peril; and Guntherus (Hist. C. P. c.
13) affirms, that nulla spes victoriae arridere poterat. Yet the knight
despises those who thought of flight, and the monk praises his
countrymen who were resolved on death.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[81](daf06006.htm#fr_204) Baldwin, and all the
writers, honor the names of these two galleys, felici auspicio.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[\*\_0011](daf06006.htm#fr_205) Pietro Alberti,
a Venetion noble and Andrew d'Amboise a French knight. - M.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[82](daf06006.htm#fr_206) With an allusion to
Homer, Nicetas calls him eighteen yards high, a stature which would,
indeed, have excused the terror of the Greek. On this occasion, the
historian seems fonder of the marvellous than of his country, or perhaps
of truth. Baldwin exclaims in the words of the psalmist, persequitur
unus ex nobis centum alienos.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[83](daf06006.htm#fr_207) Villehardouin (No.
130) is again ignorant of the authors of this more legitimate fire,
which is ascribed by Gunther to a quidam comes Teutonicus, (c. 14.) They
seem ashamed, the incendiaries!

<span id="fn_208"></span>[84](daf06006.htm#fr_208) For the second siege
and conquest of Constantinople, see Villehardouin (No. 113 - 132,)
Baldwin's iid Epistle to Innocent III., (Gesta c. 92, p. 534 - 537,)
with the whole reign of Mourzoufle, in Nicetas, (p 363 - 375;) and
borrowed some hints from Dandolo (Chron. Venet. p. 323 - 330) and
Gunther, (Hist. C. P. c. 14 - 18,) who added the decorations of prophecy
and vision. The former produces an oracle of the Erythraean sibyl, of a
great armament on the Adriatic, under a blind chief, against Byzantium,
&c. Curious enough, were the prediction anterior to the fact.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[85](daf06006.htm#fr_209) Ceciderunt tamen ea
die civium quasi duo millia, &c., (Gunther, c. 18.) Arithmetic is an
excellent touchstone to try the amplifications of passion and rhetoric.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[86](daf06006.htm#fr_210) Quidam (says Innocent
III., Gesta, c. 94, p. 538) nec religioni, nec aetati, nec sexui
pepercerunt: sed fornicationes, adulteria, et incestus in oculis omnium
exercentes, non solum maritatas et viduas, sed et matronas et virgines
Deoque dicatas, exposuerunt spurcitiis garcionum. Villehardouin takes no
notice of these common incidents.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[87](daf06006.htm#fr_211) Nicetas saved, and
afterwards married, a noble virgin, (p. 380,) whom a soldier, had almost
violated.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[88](daf06006.htm#fr_212) Of the general mass
of wealth, Gunther observes, ut de pauperius et advenis cives ditissimi
redderentur, (Hist. C. P. c. 18; (Villehardouin, (No. 132,) that since
the creation, ne fu tant gaaignie dans une ville; Baldwin, (Gesta, c.
92,) ut tantum tota non videatur possidere Latinitas.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[89](daf06006.htm#fr_213) Villehardouin, No.
133 - 135. Instead of 400,000, there is a various reading of 500,000.
The Venetians had offered to take the whole booty, and to give 400 marks
to each knight, 200 to each priest and horseman, and 100 to each
foot-soldier: they would have been great losers, (Le Beau, Hist. du. Bas
Empire tom. xx. p. 506. I know not from whence.)

<span id="fn_214"></span>[90](daf06006.htm#fr_214) At the council of
Lyons (A.D. 1245) the English ambassadors stated the revenue of the
crown as below that of the foreign clergy, which amounted to 60,000
marks a year, (Matthew Paris, p. 451 Hume's Hist. of England, vol. ii.
p. 170.)

<span id="fn_215"></span>[91](daf06006.htm#fr_215) The disorders of the
sack of Constantinople, and his own adventures, are feelingly described
by Nicetas, p. 367 - 369, and in the Status Urb. C. P. p. 375 - 384. His
complaints, even of sacrilege, are justified by Innocent III., (Gesta,
c. 92;) but Villehardouin does not betray a symptom of pity or remorse

<span id="fn_216"></span>[92](daf06006.htm#fr_216) If I rightly
apprehend the Greek of Nicetas's receipts, their favorite dishes were
boiled buttocks of beef, salt pork and peas, and soup made of garlic and
sharp or sour herbs, (p. 382.)

<span id="fn_217"></span>[93](daf06006.htm#fr_217) Nicetas uses very
harsh expressions, (Fragment, apud Fabric. Bibliot. Graec. tom. vi. p.
414.) This reproach, it is true, applies most strongly to their
ignorance of Greek and of Homer. In their own language, the Latins of
the xiith and xiiith centuries were not destitute of literature. See
Harris's Philological Inquiries, p. iii. c. 9, 10, 11.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[94](daf06006.htm#fr_218) Nicetas was of Chonae
in Phrygia, (the old Colossae of St. Paul:) he raised himself to the
honors of senator, judge of the veil, and great logothete; beheld the
fall of the empire, retired to Nice, and composed an elaborate history
from the death of Alexius Comnenus to the reign of Henry.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[95](daf06006.htm#fr_219) A manuscript of
Nicetas in the Bodleian library contains this curious fragment on the
statues of Constantinople, which fraud, or shame, or rather
carelessness, has dropped in the common editions. It is published by
Fabricius, (Bibliot. Graec. tom. vi. p. 405 - 416,) and immoderately
praised by the late ingenious Mr. Harris of Salisbury, (Philological
Inquiries, p. iii. c. 5, p. 301 - 312.)

<span id="fn_220"></span>[96](daf06006.htm#fr_220) To illustrate the
statue of Hercules, Mr. Harris quotes a Greek epigram, and engraves a
beautiful gem, which does not, however, copy the attitude of the statue:
in the latter, Hercules had not his club, and his right leg and arm were
extended.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[97](daf06006.htm#fr_221) I transcribe these
proportions, which appear to me inconsistent with each other; and may
possibly show, that the boasted taste of Nicetas was no more than
affectation and vanity.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[98](daf06006.htm#fr_222) Nicetas in Isaaco
Angelo et Alexio, c. 3, p. 359. The Latin editor very properly observes,
that the historian, in his bombast style, produces ex pulice elephantem.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[99](daf06006.htm#fr_223) In two passages of
Nicetas (edit. Paris, p. 360. Fabric. p. 408) the Latins are branded
with the lively reproach and their avarice of brass is clearly
expressed. Yet the Venetians had the merit of removing four bronze
horses from Constantinople to the place of St. Mark, (Sanuto, Vite del
Dogi, in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. xxii. p. 534.)

<span id="fn_224"></span>[100](daf06006.htm#fr_224) Winckelman, Hist. de
l'Art. tom. iii. p. 269, 270.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[101](daf06006.htm#fr_225) See the pious
robbery of the abbot Martin, who transferred a rich cargo to his
monastery of Paris, diocese of Basil, (Gunther, Hist. C. P. c. 19, 23,
24.) Yet in secreting this booty, the saint incurred an excommunication,
and perhaps broke his oath. (Compare Wilken vol. v. p. 308. - M.)

<span id="fn_226"></span>[102](daf06006.htm#fr_226) Fleury, Hist. Eccles
tom. xvi. p. 139 - 145.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[103](daf06006.htm#fr_227) I shall conclude
this chapter with the notice of a modern history, which illustrates the
taking of Constantinople by the Latins; but which has fallen somewhat
late into my hands. Paolo Ramusio, the son of the compiler of Voyages,
was directed by the senate of Venice to write the history of the
conquest: and this order, which he received in his youth, he executed in
a mature age, by an elegant Latin work, de Bello Constantinopolitano et
Imperatoribus Comnenis per Gallos et Venetos restitutis, (Venet. 1635,
in folio.) Ramusio, or Rhamnusus, transcribes and translates, sequitur
ad unguem, a Ms. of Villehardouin, which he possessed; but he enriches
his narrative with Greek and Latin materials, and we are indebted to him
for a correct state of the fleet, the names of the fifty Venetian nobles
who commanded the galleys of the republic, and the patriot opposition of
Pantaleon Barbus to the choice of the doge for emperor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI: Partition Of The Empire By The French And Venetians.
Part I.](daf06007)
