[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06032) 
[Next](daf06034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century. Part II.

Yet the courage of Arnold was not devoid of discretion: he was
protected, and had perhaps been invited, by the nobles and people; and
in the service of freedom, his eloquence thundered over the seven hills.
Blending in the same discourse the texts of Livy and St. Paul, uniting
the motives of gospel, and of classic, enthusiasm, he admonished the
Romans, how strangely their patience and the vices of the clergy had
degenerated from the primitive times of the church and the city. He
exhorted them to assert the inalienable rights of men and Christians; to
restore the laws and magistrates of the republic; to respect the name of
the emperor; but to confine their shepherd to the spiritual government
of his flock.  <span id="fr_975"></span>[26](#fn_975) Nor could his
spiritual government escape the censure and control of the reformer; and
the inferior clergy were taught by his lessons to resist the cardinals,
who had usurped a despotic command over the twenty-eight regions or
parishes of Rome.  <span id="fr_976"></span>[27](#fn_976) The revolution
was not accomplished without rapine and violence, the diffusion of blood
and the demolition of houses: the victorious faction was enriched with
the spoils of the clergy and the adverse nobles. Arnold of Brescia
enjoyed, or deplored, the effects of his mission: his reign continued
above ten years, while two popes, Innocent the Second and Anastasius the
Fourth, either trembled in the Vatican, or wandered as exiles in the
adjacent cities. They were succeeded by a more vigorous and fortunate
pontiff. Adrian the Fourth,  <span id="fr_977"></span>[28](#fn_977) the
only Englishman who has ascended the throne of St. Peter; and whose
merit emerged from the mean condition of a monk, and almost a beggar, in
the monastery of St. Albans. On the first provocation, of a cardinal
killed or wounded in the streets, he cast an interdict on the guilty
people; and from Christmas to Easter, Rome was deprived of the real or
imaginary comforts of religious worship. The Romans had despised their
temporal prince: they submitted with grief and terror to the censures of
their spiritual father: their guilt was expiated by penance, and the
banishment of the seditious preacher was the price of their absolution.
But the revenge of Adrian was yet unsatisfied, and the approaching
coronation of Frederic Barbarossa was fatal to the bold reformer, who
had offended, though not in an equal degree, the heads of the church and
state. In their interview at Viterbo, the pope represented to the
emperor the furious, ungovernable spirit of the Romans; the insults, the
injuries, the fears, to which his person and his clergy were continually
exposed; and the pernicious tendency of the heresy of Arnold, which must
subvert the principles of civil, as well as ecclesiastical,
subordination. Frederic was convinced by these arguments, or tempted by
the desire of the Imperial crown: in the balance of ambition, the
innocence or life of an individual is of small account; and their common
enemy was sacrificed to a moment of political concord. After his retreat
from Rome, Arnold had been protected by the viscounts of Campania, from
whom he was extorted by the power of Caesar: the praefect of the city
pronounced his sentence: the martyr of freedom was burned alive in the
presence of a careless and ungrateful people; and his ashes were cast
into the Tyber, lest the heretics should collect and worship the relics
of their master.  <span id="fr_978"></span>[29](#fn_978) The clergy
triumphed in his death: with his ashes, his sect was dispersed; his
memory still lived in the minds of the Romans. From his school they had
probably derived a new article of faith, that the metropolis of the
Catholic church is exempt from the penalties of excommunication and
interdict. Their bishops might argue, that the supreme jurisdiction,
which they exercised over kings and nations, more especially embraced
the city and diocese of the prince of the apostles. But they preached to
the winds, and the same principle that weakened the effect, must temper
the abuse, of the thunders of the Vatican.

The love of ancient freedom has encouraged a belief that as early as the
tenth century, in their first struggles against the Saxon Othos, the
commonwealth was vindicated and restored by the senate and people of
Rome; that two consuls were annually elected among the nobles, and that
ten or twelve plebeian magistrates revived the name and office of the
tribunes of the commons.  <span id="fr_979"></span>[30](#fn_979) But
this venerable structure disappears before the light of criticism. In
the darkness of the middle ages, the appellations of senators, of
consuls, of the sons of consuls, may sometimes be discovered.  <span
id="fr_980"></span>[31](#fn_980) They were bestowed by the emperors, or
assumed by the most powerful citizens, to denote their rank, their
honors,  <span id="fr_981"></span>[32](#fn_981) and perhaps the claim of
a pure and patrician descent: but they float on the surface, without a
series or a substance, the titles of men, not the orders of government;
 <span id="fr_982"></span>[33](#fn_982) and it is only from the year of
Christ one thousand one hundred and forty-four that the establishment of
the senate is dated, as a glorious aera, in the acts of the city. A new
constitution was hastily framed by private ambition or popular
enthusiasm; nor could Rome, in the twelfth century, produce an antiquary
to explain, or a legislator to restore, the harmony and proportions of
the ancient model. The assembly of a free, of an armed, people, will
ever speak in loud and weighty acclamations. But the regular
distribution of the thirty-five tribes, the nice balance of the wealth
and numbers of the centuries, the debates of the adverse orators, and
the slow operations of votes and ballots, could not easily be adapted by
a blind multitude, ignorant of the arts, and insensible of the benefits,
of legal government. It was proposed by Arnold to revive and
discriminate the equestrian order; but what could be the motive or
measure of such distinction?  <span id="fr_983"></span>[34](#fn_983) The
pecuniary qualification of the knights must have been reduced to the
poverty of the times: those times no longer required their civil
functions of judges and farmers of the revenue; and their primitive
duty, their military service on horseback, was more nobly supplied by
feudal tenures and the spirit of chivalry. The jurisprudence of the
republic was useless and unknown: the nations and families of Italy who
lived under the Roman and Barbaric laws were insensibly mingled in a
common mass; and some faint tradition, some imperfect fragments,
preserved the memory of the Code and Pandects of Justinian. With their
liberty the Romans might doubtless have restored the appellation and
office of consuls; had they not disdained a title so promiscuously
adopted in the Italian cities, that it has finally settled on the humble
station of the agents of commerce in a foreign land. But the rights of
the tribunes, the formidable word that arrested the public counsels,
suppose or must produce a legitimate democracy. The old patricians were
the subjects, the modern barons the tyrants, of the state; nor would the
enemies of peace and order, who insulted the vicar of Christ, have long
respected the unarmed sanctity of a plebeian magistrate.  <span
id="fr_984"></span>[35](#fn_984)

In the revolution of the twelfth century, which gave a new existence and
aera to Rome, we may observe the real and important events that marked
or confirmed her political independence. I. The Capitoline hill, one of
her seven eminences,  <span id="fr_985"></span>[36](#fn_985) is about
four hundred yards in length, and two hundred in breadth. A flight of a
hundred steps led to the summit of the Tarpeian rock; and far steeper
was the ascent before the declivities had been smoothed and the
precipices filled by the ruins of fallen edifices. From the earliest
ages, the Capitol had been used as a temple in peace, a fortress in war:
after the loss of the city, it maintained a siege against the victorious
Gauls, and the sanctuary of the empire was occupied, assaulted, and
burnt, in the civil wars of Vitellius and Vespasian.  <span
id="fr_986"></span>[37](#fn_986) The temples of Jupiter and his kindred
deities had crumbled into dust; their place was supplied by monasteries
and houses; and the solid walls, the long and shelving porticos, were
decayed or ruined by the lapse of time. It was the first act of the
Romans, an act of freedom, to restore the strength, though not the
beauty, of the Capitol; to fortify the seat of their arms and counsels;
and as often as they ascended the hill, the coldest minds must have
glowed with the remembrance of their ancestors. II. The first Caesars
had been invested with the exclusive coinage of the gold and silver; to
the senate they abandoned the baser metal of bronze or copper:  <span
id="fr_987"></span>[38](#fn_987) the emblems and legends were inscribed
on a more ample field by the genius of flattery; and the prince was
relieved from the care of celebrating his own virtues. The successors of
Diocletian despised even the flattery of the senate: their royal
officers at Rome, and in the provinces, assumed the sole direction of
the mint; and the same prerogative was inherited by the Gothic kings of
Italy, and the long series of the Greek, the French, and the German
dynasties. After an abdication of eight hundred years, the Roman senate
asserted this honorable and lucrative privilege; which was tacitly
renounced by the popes, from Paschal the Second to the establishment of
their residence beyond the Alps. Some of these republican coins of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries are shown in the cabinets of the
curious. On one of these, a gold medal, Christ is depictured holding in
his left hand a book with this inscription: "The vow of the Roman senate
and people: Rome the capital of the world;" on the reverse, St. Peter
delivering a banner to a kneeling senator in his cap and gown, with the
name and arms of his family impressed on a shield.  <span
id="fr_988"></span>[39](#fn_988) III. With the empire, the praefect of
the city had declined to a municipal officer; yet he still exercised in
the last appeal the civil and criminal jurisdiction; and a drawn sword,
which he received from the successors of Otho, was the mode of his
investiture and the emblem of his functions.  <span
id="fr_989"></span>[40](#fn_989) The dignity was confined to the noble
families of Rome: the choice of the people was ratified by the pope; but
a triple oath of fidelity must have often embarrassed the praefect in
the conflict of adverse duties.  <span id="fr_990"></span>[41](#fn_990)
A servant, in whom they possessed but a third share, was dismissed by
the independent Romans: in his place they elected a patrician; but this
title, which Charlemagne had not disdained, was too lofty for a citizen
or a subject; and, after the first fervor of rebellion, they consented
without reluctance to the restoration of the praefect. About fifty years
after this event, Innocent the Third, the most ambitious, or at least
the most fortunate, of the Pontiffs, delivered the Romans and himself
from this badge of foreign dominion: he invested the praefect with a
banner instead of a sword, and absolved him from all dependence of oaths
or service to the German emperors.  <span
id="fr_991"></span>[42](#fn_991) In his place an ecclesiastic, a present
or future cardinal, was named by the pope to the civil government of
Rome; but his jurisdiction has been reduced to a narrow compass; and in
the days of freedom, the right or exercise was derived from the senate
and people. IV. After the revival of the senate,  <span
id="fr_992"></span>[43](#fn_992) the conscript fathers (if I may use the
expression) were invested with the legislative and executive power; but
their views seldom reached beyond the present day; and that day was most
frequently disturbed by violence and tumult. In its utmost plenitude,
the order or assembly consisted of fifty-six senators,  <span
id="fr_993"></span>[44](#fn_993) the most eminent of whom were
distinguished by the title of counsellors: they were nominated, perhaps
annually, by the people; and a previous choice of their electors, ten
persons in each region, or parish, might afford a basis for a free and
permanent constitution. The popes, who in this tempest submitted rather
to bend than to break, confirmed by treaty the establishment and
privileges of the senate, and expected from time, peace, and religion,
the restoration of their government. The motives of public and private
interest might sometimes draw from the Romans an occasional and
temporary sacrifice of their claims; and they renewed their oath of
allegiance to the successor of St. Peter and Constantine, the lawful
head of the church and the republic.  <span
id="fr_994"></span>[45](#fn_994)

The union and vigor of a public council was dissolved in a lawless city;
and the Romans soon adopted a more strong and simple mode of
administration. They condensed the name and authority of the senate in a
single magistrate, or two colleagues; and as they were changed at the
end of a year, or of six months, the greatness of the trust was
compensated by the shortness of the term. But in this transient reign,
the senators of Rome indulged their avarice and ambition: their justice
was perverted by the interest of their family and faction; and as they
punished only their enemies, they were obeyed only by their adherents.
Anarchy, no longer tempered by the pastoral care of their bishop,
admonished the Romans that they were incapable of governing themselves;
and they sought abroad those blessings which they were hopeless of
finding at home. In the same age, and from the same motives, most of the
Italian republics were prompted to embrace a measure, which, however
strange it may seem, was adapted to their situation, and productive of
the most salutary effects.  <span id="fr_995"></span>[46](#fn_995) They
chose, in some foreign but friendly city, an impartial magistrate of
noble birth and unblemished character, a soldier and a statesman,
recommended by the voice of fame and his country, to whom they delegated
for a time the supreme administration of peace and war. The compact
between the governor and the governed was sealed with oaths and
subscriptions; and the duration of his power, the measure of his
stipend, the nature of their mutual obligations, were defined with
scrupulous precision. They swore to obey him as their lawful superior:
he pledged his faith to unite the indifference of a stranger with the
zeal of a patriot. At his choice, four or six knights and civilians, his
assessors in arms and justice, attended the Podesta,  <span
id="fr_996"></span>[47](#fn_996) who maintained at his own expense a
decent retinue of servants and horses: his wife, his son, his brother,
who might bias the affections of the judge, were left behind: during the
exercise of his office he was not permitted to purchase land, to
contract an alliance, or even to accept an invitation in the house of a
citizen; nor could he honorably depart till he had satisfied the
complaints that might be urged against his government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_975"></span>[26](daf06033.htm#fr_975) He advised the
Romans,

Consiliis armisque sua moderamina summa Arbitrio tractare suo: nil juris
in hac re Pontifici summo, modicum concedere regi Suadebat populo. Sic
laesa stultus utraque Majestate, reum geminae se fecerat aulae.

Nor is the poetry of Gunther different from the prose of Otho.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[27](daf06033.htm#fr_976) See Baronius (A.D.
1148, No. 38, 39) from the Vatican MSS. He loudly condemns Arnold (A.D.
1141, No. 3) as the father of the political heretics, whose influence
then hurt him in France.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[28](daf06033.htm#fr_977) The English reader
may consult the Biographia Britannica, Adrian IV.; but our own writers
have added nothing to the fame or merits of their countrymen.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[29](daf06033.htm#fr_978) Besides the historian
and poet already quoted, the last adventures of Arnold are related by
the biographer of Adrian IV. (Muratori. Script. Rerum Ital. tom. iii. P.
i. p. 441, 442.)

<span id="fn_979"></span>[30](daf06033.htm#fr_979) Ducange (Gloss.
Latinitatis Mediae et Infimae Aetatis, Decarchones, tom. ii. p. 726)
gives me a quotation from Blondus, (Decad. ii. l. ii.:) Duo consules ex
nobilitate quotannis fiebant, qui ad vetustum consulum exemplar
summaererum praeessent. And in Sigonius (de Regno Italiae, l. v. Opp.
tom. ii. p. 400) I read of the consuls and tribunes of the xth century.
Both Blondus, and even Sigonius, too freely copied the classic method of
supplying from reason or fancy the deficiency of records.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[31](daf06033.htm#fr_980) In the panegyric of
Berengarius (Muratori, Script. Rer. Ital. tom. ii. P. i. p. 408) a Roman
is mentioned as consulis natus in the beginning of the xth century.
Muratori (Dissert. v.) discovers, in the years 952 and 956, Gratianus in
Dei nomine consul et dux, Georgius consul et dux; and in 1015, Romanus,
brother of Gregory VIII., proudly, but vaguely, styles himself consul et
dux et omnium Roma norum senator.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[32](daf06033.htm#fr_981) As late as the xth
century, the Greek emperors conferred on the dukes of Venice, Naples,
Amalphi, &c., the title of consuls, (see Chron. Sagornini, passim;) and
the successors of Charlemagne would not abdicate any of their
prerogative. But in general the names of consul and senator, which may
be found among the French and Germans, signify no more than count and
lord, (Signeur, Ducange Glossar.) The monkish writers are often
ambitious of fine classic words.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[33](daf06033.htm#fr_982) The most
constitutional form is a diploma of Otho III., (A. D 998,) consulibus
senatus populique Romani; but the act is probably spurious. At the
coronation of Henry I., A.D. 1014, the historian Dithmar (apud Muratori,
Dissert. xxiii.) describes him, a senatoribus duodecem vallatum, quorum
sex rasi barba, alii prolixa, mystice incedebant cum baculis. The senate
is mentioned in the panegyric of Berengarius, (p. 406.)

<span id="fn_983"></span>[34](daf06033.htm#fr_983) In ancient Rome the
equestrian order was not ranked with the senate and people as a third
branch of the republic till the consulship of Cicero, who assumes the
merit of the establishment, (Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 3. Beaufort,
Republique Romaine, tom. i. p. 144 - 155.)

<span id="fn_984"></span>[35](daf06033.htm#fr_984) The republican plan
of Arnold of Brescia is thus stated by Gunther: -

Quin etiam titulos urbis renovare vetustos; Nomine plebeio secernere
nomen equestre, Jura tribunorum, sanctum reparare senatum, Et senio
fessas mutasque reponere leges. Lapsa ruinosis, et adhuc pendentia muris
Reddere primaevo Capitolia prisca nitori.

But of these reformations, some were no more than ideas, others no more
than words.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[36](daf06033.htm#fr_985) After many disputes
among the antiquaries of Rome, it seems determined, that the summit of
the Capitoline hill next the river is strictly the Mons Tarpeius, the
Arx; and that on the other summit, the church and convent of Araceli,
the barefoot friars of St. Francis occupy the temple of Jupiter,
(Nardini, Roma Antica, l. v. c. 11 - 16.)

Note: The authority of Nardini is now vigorously impugned, and the
question of the Arx and the Temple of Jupiter revived, with new
arguments by Niebuhr and his accomplished follower, M. Bunsen. Roms
Beschreibung, vol. iii. p. 12, et seqq - M.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[37](daf06033.htm#fr_986) Tacit. Hist. iii. 69,
70.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[38](daf06033.htm#fr_987) This partition of the
noble and baser metals between the emperor and senate must, however, be
adopted, not as a positive fact, but as the probable opinion of the best
antiquaries, (see the Science des Medailles of the Pere Joubert, tom.
ii. p. 208 - 211, in the improved and scarce edition of the Baron de la
Bastie.)

Note: Dr Cardwell (Lecture on Ancient Coins, p. 70, et seq.) assigns
convincing reasons in support of this opinion. - M.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[39](daf06033.htm#fr_988) In his xxviith
dissertation on the Antiquities of Italy, (tom. ii. p. 559 - 569,)
Muratori exhibits a series of the senatorian coins, which bore the
obscure names of Affortiati, Infortiati, Provisini, Paparini. During
this period, all the popes, without excepting Boniface VIII, abstained
from the right of coining, which was resumed by his successor Benedict
XI., and regularly exercised in the court of Avignon.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[40](daf06033.htm#fr_989) A German historian,
Gerard of Reicherspeg (in Baluz. Miscell. tom. v. p. 64, apud Schmidt,
Hist. des Allemands, tom. iii. p. 265) thus describes the constitution
of Rome in the xith century: Grandiora urbis et orbis negotia spectant
ad Romanum pontificem itemque ad Romanum Imperatorem, sive illius
vicarium urbis praefectum, qui de sua dignitate respicit utrumque,
videlicet dominum papam cui facit hominum, et dominum imperatorem a quo
accipit suae potestatis insigne, scilicet gladium exertum.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[41](daf06033.htm#fr_990) The words of a
contemporary writer (Pandulph. Pisan. in Vit. Paschal. II. p. 357, 358)
describe the election and oath of the praefect in 1118, inconsultis
patribus .... loca praefectoria .... Laudes praefectoriae ....
comitiorum applausum .... juraturum populo in ambonem sublevant ....
confirmari eum in urbe praefectum petunt.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[42](daf06033.htm#fr_991) Urbis praefectum ad
ligiam fidelitatem recepit, et per mantum quod illi donavit de
praefectura eum publice investivit, qui usque ad id tempus juramento
fidelitatis imperatori fuit obligatus et ab eo praefecturae tenuit
honorem, (Gesta Innocent. III. in Muratori, tom. iii. P. i. p. 487.)

<span id="fn_992"></span>[43](daf06033.htm#fr_992) See Otho Frising.
Chron. vii. 31, de Gest. Frederic. I., l. i. c. 27

<span id="fn_993"></span>[44](daf06033.htm#fr_993) Cur countryman, Roger
Hoveden, speaks of the single senators, of the Capuzzi family, &c.,
quorum temporibus melius regebatur Roma quam nunc (A.D. 1194) est
temporibus lvi. senatorum, (Ducange, Gloss. tom. vi. p. 191, Senatores.)

<span id="fn_994"></span>[45](daf06033.htm#fr_994) Muratori (dissert.
xlii. tom. iii. p. 785 - 788) has published an original treaty:
Concordia inter D. nostrum papam Clementem III. et senatores populi
Romani super regalibus et aliis dignitatibus urbis, &c., anno 44 Degrees
senatus. The senate speaks, and speaks with authority: Reddimus ad
praesens .... habebimus .... dabitis presbyteria .... jurabimus pacem et
fidelitatem, &c. A chartula de Tenementis Tusculani, dated in the 47th
year of the same aera, and confirmed decreto amplissimi ordinis senatus,
acclamatione P. R. publice Capitolio consistentis. It is there we find
the difference of senatores consiliarii and simple senators, (Muratori,
dissert. xlii. tom. iii. p. 787 - 789.)

<span id="fn_995"></span>[46](daf06033.htm#fr_995) Muratori (dissert.
xlv. tom. iv. p. 64 - 92) has fully explained this mode of government;
and the Occulus Pastoralis, which he has given at the end, is a treatise
or sermon on the duties of these foreign magistrates.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[47](daf06033.htm#fr_996) In the Latin writers,
at least of the silver age, the title of Potestas was transferred from
the office to the magistrate: - Hujus qui trahitur praetextam sumere
mavis; An Fidenarum Gabiorumque esse Potestas.

Juvenal. Satir. x. 99.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century. Part
III.](daf06034)
