[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06029) 
[Next](daf06031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of Eastern Empire. Part II.

Among the implements of destruction, he studied with peculiar care the
recent and tremendous discovery of the Latins; and his artillery
surpassed whatever had yet appeared in the world. A founder of cannon, a
Dane  <span id="fr_859"></span>[\*\_0055](#fn_859) or Hungarian, who had
been almost starved in the Greek service, deserted to the Moslems, and
was liberally entertained by the Turkish sultan. Mahomet was satisfied
with the answer to his first question, which he eagerly pressed on the
artist. "Am I able to cast a cannon capable of throwing a ball or stone
of sufficient size to batter the walls of Constantinople? I am not
ignorant of their strength; but were they more solid than those of
Babylon, I could oppose an engine of superior power: the position and
management of that engine must be left to your engineers." On this
assurance, a foundry was established at Adrianople: the metal was
prepared; and at the end of three months, Urban produced a piece of
brass ordnance of stupendous, and almost incredible magnitude; a measure
of twelve palms is assigned to the bore; and the stone bullet weighed
above six hundred pounds.  <span id="fr_860"></span>[24](#fn_860)  <span
id="fr_861"></span>[\*\*\_0055](#fn_861) A vacant place before the new
palace was chosen for the first experiment; but to prevent the sudden
and mischievous effects of astonishment and fear, a proclamation was
issued, that the cannon would be discharged the ensuing day. The
explosion was felt or heard in a circuit of a hundred furlongs: the
ball, by the force of gunpowder, was driven above a mile; and on the
spot where it fell, it buried itself a fathom deep in the ground. For
the conveyance of this destructive engine, a frame or carriage of thirty
wagons was linked together and drawn along by a team of sixty oxen: two
hundred men on both sides were stationed, to poise and support the
rolling weight; two hundred and fifty workmen marched before to smooth
the way and repair the bridges; and near two months were employed in a
laborious journey of one hundred and fifty miles. A lively philosopher
 <span id="fr_862"></span>[25](#fn_862) derides on this occasion the
credulity of the Greeks, and observes, with much reason, that we should
always distrust the exaggerations of a vanquished people. He calculates,
that a ball, even of two hundred pounds, would require a charge of one
hundred and fifty pounds of powder; and that the stroke would be feeble
and impotent, since not a fifteenth part of the mass could be inflamed
at the same moment. A stranger as I am to the art of destruction, I can
discern that the modern improvements of artillery prefer the number of
pieces to the weight of metal; the quickness of the fire to the sound,
or even the consequence, of a single explosion. Yet I dare not reject
the positive and unanimous evidence of contemporary writers; nor can it
seem improbable, that the first artists, in their rude and ambitious
efforts, should have transgressed the standard of moderation. A Turkish
cannon, more enormous than that of Mahomet, still guards the entrance of
the Dardanelles; and if the use be inconvenient, it has been found on a
late trial that the effect was far from contemptible. A stone bullet of
eleven hundred pounds' weight was once discharged with three hundred and
thirty pounds of powder: at the distance of six hundred yards it
shivered into three rocky fragments; traversed the strait; and leaving
the waters in a foam, again rose and bounded against the opposite hill.
 <span id="fr_863"></span>[26](#fn_863)

While Mahomet threatened the capital of the East, the Greek emperor
implored with fervent prayers the assistance of earth and heaven. But
the invisible powers were deaf to his supplications; and Christendom
beheld with indifference the fall of Constantinople, while she derived
at least some promise of supply from the jealous and temporal policy of
the sultan of Egypt. Some states were too weak, and others too remote;
by some the danger was considered as imaginary by others as inevitable:
the Western princes were involved in their endless and domestic
quarrels; and the Roman pontiff was exasperated by the falsehood or
obstinacy of the Greeks. Instead of employing in their favor the arms
and treasures of Italy, Nicholas the Fifth had foretold their
approaching ruin; and his honor was engaged in the accomplishment of his
prophecy.  <span id="fr_864"></span>[\*\_0056](#fn_864) Perhaps he was
softened by the last extremity o their distress; but his compassion was
tardy; his efforts were faint and unavailing; and Constantinople had
fallen, before the squadrons of Genoa and Venice could sail from their
harbors.  <span id="fr_865"></span>[27](#fn_865) Even the princes of the
Morea and of the Greek islands affected a cold neutrality: the Genoese
colony of Galata negotiated a private treaty; and the sultan indulged
them in the delusive hope, that by his clemency they might survive the
ruin of the empire. A plebeian crowd, and some Byzantine nobles basely
withdrew from the danger of their country; and the avarice of the rich
denied the emperor, and reserved for the Turks, the secret treasures
which might have raised in their defence whole armies of mercenaries.
 <span id="fr_866"></span>[28](#fn_866) The indigent and solitary prince
prepared, however, to sustain his formidable adversary; but if his
courage were equal to the peril, his strength was inadequate to the
contest. In the beginning of the spring, the Turkish vanguard swept the
towns and villages as far as the gates of Constantinople: submission was
spared and protected; whatever presumed to resist was exterminated with
fire and sword. The Greek places on the Black Sea, Mesembria, Acheloum,
and Bizon, surrendered on the first summons; Selybria alone deserved the
honors of a siege or blockade; and the bold inhabitants, while they were
invested by land, launched their boats, pillaged the opposite coast of
Cyzicus, and sold their captives in the public market. But on the
approach of Mahomet himself all was silent and prostrate: he first
halted at the distance of five miles; and from thence advancing in
battle array, planted before the gates of St. Romanus the Imperial
standard; and on the sixth day of April formed the memorable siege of
Constantinople.

The troops of Asia and Europe extended on the right and left from the
Propontis to the harbor; the Janizaries in the front were stationed
before the sultan's tent; the Ottoman line was covered by a deep
intrenchment; and a subordinate army enclosed the suburb of Galata, and
watched the doubtful faith of the Genoese. The inquisitive Philelphus,
who resided in Greece about thirty years before the siege, is confident,
that all the Turkish forces of any name or value could not exceed the
number of sixty thousand horse and twenty thousand foot; and he upbraids
the pusillanimity of the nations, who had tamely yielded to a handful of
Barbarians. Such indeed might be the regular establishment of the
Capiculi,  <span id="fr_867"></span>[29](#fn_867) the troops of the
Porte who marched with the prince, and were paid from his royal
treasury. But the bashaws, in their respective governments, maintained
or levied a provincial militia; many lands were held by a military
tenure; many volunteers were attracted by the hope of spoil and the
sound of the holy trumpet invited a swarm of hungry and fearless
fanatics, who might contribute at least to multiply the terrors, and in
a first attack to blunt the swords, of the Christians. The whole mass of
the Turkish powers is magnified by Ducas, Chalcondyles, and Leonard of
Chios, to the amount of three or four hundred thousand men; but Phranza
was a less remote and more accurate judge; and his precise definition of
two hundred and fifty-eight thousand does not exceed the measure of
experience and probability.  <span id="fr_868"></span>[30](#fn_868) The
navy of the besiegers was less formidable: the Propontis was overspread
with three hundred and twenty sail; but of these no more than eighteen
could be rated as galleys of war; and the far greater part must be
degraded to the condition of store-ships and transports, which poured
into the camp fresh supplies of men, ammunition, and provisions. In her
last decay, Constantinople was still peopled with more than a hundred
thousand inhabitants; but these numbers are found in the accounts, not
of war, but of captivity; and they mostly consisted of mechanics, of
priests, of women, and of men devoid of that spirit which even women
have sometimes exerted for the common safety. I can suppose, I could
almost excuse, the reluctance of subjects to serve on a distant
frontier, at the will of a tyrant; but the man who dares not expose his
life in the defence of his children and his property, has lost in
society the first and most active energies of nature. By the emperor's
command, a particular inquiry had been made through the streets and
houses, how many of the citizens, or even of the monks, were able and
willing to bear arms for their country. The lists were intrusted to
Phranza;  <span id="fr_869"></span>[31](#fn_869) and, after a diligent
addition, he informed his master, with grief and surprise, that the
national defence was reduced to four thousand nine hundred and seventy
Romans. Between Constantine and his faithful minister this comfortless
secret was preserved; and a sufficient proportion of shields,
cross-bows, and muskets, were distributed from the arsenal to the city
bands. They derived some accession from a body of two thousand
strangers, under the command of John Justiniani, a noble Genoese; a
liberal donative was advanced to these auxiliaries; and a princely
recompense, the Isle of Lemnos, was promised to the valor and victory of
their chief. A strong chain was drawn across the mouth of the harbor: it
was supported by some Greek and Italian vessels of war and merchandise;
and the ships of every Christian nation, that successively arrived from
Candia and the Black Sea, were detained for the public service. Against
the powers of the Ottoman empire, a city of the extent of thirteen,
perhaps of sixteen, miles was defended by a scanty garrison of seven or
eight thousand soldiers. Europe and Asia were open to the besiegers; but
the strength and provisions of the Greeks must sustain a daily decrease;
nor could they indulge the expectation of any foreign succor or supply.

The primitive Romans would have drawn their swords in the resolution of
death or conquest. The primitive Christians might have embraced each
other, and awaited in patience and charity the stroke of martyrdom. But
the Greeks of Constantinople were animated only by the spirit of
religion, and that spirit was productive only of animosity and discord.
Before his death, the emperor John Palaeologus had renounced the
unpopular measure of a union with the Latins; nor was the idea revived,
till the distress of his brother Constantine imposed a last trial of
flattery and dissimulation.  <span id="fr_870"></span>[32](#fn_870) With
the demand of temporal aid, his ambassadors were instructed to mingle
the assurance of spiritual obedience: his neglect of the church was
excused by the urgent cares of the state; and his orthodox wishes
solicited the presence of a Roman legate. The Vatican had been too often
deluded; yet the signs of repentance could not decently be overlooked; a
legate was more easily granted than an army; and about six months before
the final destruction, the cardinal Isidore of Russia appeared in that
character with a retinue of priests and soldiers. The emperor saluted
him as a friend and father; respectfully listened to his public and
private sermons; and with the most obsequious of the clergy and laymen
subscribed the act of union, as it had been ratified in the council of
Florence. On the twelfth of December, the two nations, in the church of
St. Sophia, joined in the communion of sacrifice and prayer; and the
names of the two pontiffs were solemnly commemorated; the names of
Nicholas the Fifth, the vicar of Christ, and of the patriarch Gregory,
who had been driven into exile by a rebellious people.

But the dress and language of the Latin priest who officiated at the
altar were an object of scandal; and it was observed with horror, that
he consecrated a cake or wafer of unleavened bread, and poured cold
water into the cup of the sacrament. A national historian acknowledges
with a blush, that none of his countrymen, not the emperor himself, were
sincere in this occasional conformity.  <span
id="fr_871"></span>[33](#fn_871) Their hasty and unconditional
submission was palliated by a promise of future revisal; but the best,
or the worst, of their excuses was the confession of their own perjury.
When they were pressed by the reproaches of their honest brethren, "Have
patience," they whispered, "have patience till God shall have delivered
the city from the great dragon who seeks to devour us. You shall then
perceive whether we are truly reconciled with the Azymites." But
patience is not the attribute of zeal; nor can the arts of a court be
adapted to the freedom and violence of popular enthusiasm. From the dome
of St. Sophia the inhabitants of either sex, and of every degree, rushed
in crowds to the cell of the monk Gennadius,  <span
id="fr_872"></span>[34](#fn_872) to consult the oracle of the church.
The holy man was invisible; entranced, as it should seem, in deep
meditation, or divine rapture: but he had exposed on the door of his
cell a speaking tablet; and they successively withdrew, after reading
those tremendous words: "O miserable Romans, why will ye abandon the
truth? and why, instead of confiding in God, will ye put your trust in
the Italians? In losing your faith you will lose your city. Have mercy
on me, O Lord! I protest in thy presence that I am innocent of the
crime. O miserable Romans, consider, pause, and repent. At the same
moment that you renounce the religion of your fathers, by embracing
impiety, you submit to a foreign servitude." According to the advice of
Gennadius, the religious virgins, as pure as angels, and as proud as
daemons, rejected the act of union, and abjured all communion with the
present and future associates of the Latins; and their example was
applauded and imitated by the greatest part of the clergy and people.
From the monastery, the devout Greeks dispersed themselves in the
taverns; drank confusion to the slaves of the pope; emptied their
glasses in honor of the image of the holy Virgin; and besought her to
defend against Mahomet the city which she had formerly saved from
Chosroes and the Chagan. In the double intoxication of zeal and wine,
they valiantly exclaimed, "What occasion have we for succor, or union,
or Latins? Far from us be the worship of the Azymites!" During the
winter that preceded the Turkish conquest, the nation was distracted by
this epidemical frenzy; and the season of Lent, the approach of Easter,
instead of breathing charity and love, served only to fortify the
obstinacy and influence of the zealots. The confessors scrutinized and
alarmed the conscience of their votaries, and a rigorous penance was
imposed on those who had received the communion from a priest who had
given an express or tacit consent to the union. His service at the altar
propagated the infection to the mute and simple spectators of the
ceremony: they forfeited, by the impure spectacle, the virtue of the
sacerdotal character; nor was it lawful, even in danger of sudden death,
to invoke the assistance of their prayers or absolution. No sooner had
the church of St. Sophia been polluted by the Latin sacrifice, than it
was deserted as a Jewish synagogue, or a heathen temple, by the clergy
and people; and a vast and gloomy silence prevailed in that venerable
dome, which had so often smoked with a cloud of incense, blazed with
innumerable lights, and resounded with the voice of prayer and
thanksgiving. The Latins were the most odious of heretics and infidels;
and the first minister of the empire, the great duke, was heard to
declare, that he had rather behold in Constantinople the turban of
Mahomet, than the pope's tiara or a cardinal's hat.  <span
id="fr_873"></span>[35](#fn_873) A sentiment so unworthy of Christians
and patriots was familiar and fatal to the Greeks: the emperor was
deprived of the affection and support of his subjects; and their native
cowardice was sanctified by resignation to the divine decree, or the
visionary hope of a miraculous deliverance.

Of the triangle which composes the figure of Constantinople, the two
sides along the sea were made inaccessible to an enemy; the Propontis by
nature, and the harbor by art. Between the two waters, the basis of the
triangle, the land side was protected by a double wall, and a deep ditch
of the depth of one hundred feet. Against this line of fortification,
which Phranza, an eye-witness, prolongs to the measure of six miles,
 <span id="fr_874"></span>[36](#fn_874) the Ottomans directed their
principal attack; and the emperor, after distributing the service and
command of the most perilous stations, undertook the defence of the
external wall. In the first days of the siege the Greek soldiers
descended into the ditch, or sallied into the field; but they soon
discovered, that, in the proportion of their numbers, one Christian was
of more value than twenty Turks: and, after these bold preludes, they
were prudently content to maintain the rampart with their missile
weapons. Nor should this prudence be accused of pusillanimity. The
nation was indeed pusillanimous and base; but the last Constantine
deserves the name of a hero: his noble band of volunteers was inspired
with Roman virtue; and the foreign auxiliaries supported the honor of
the Western chivalry. The incessant volleys of lances and arrows were
accompanied with the smoke, the sound, and the fire, of their musketry
and cannon. Their small arms discharged at the same time either five, or
even ten, balls of lead, of the size of a walnut; and, according to the
closeness of the ranks and the force of the powder, several breastplates
and bodies were transpierced by the same shot. But the Turkish
approaches were soon sunk in trenches, or covered with ruins. Each day
added to the science of the Christians; but their inadequate stock of
gunpowder was wasted in the operations of each day. Their ordnance was
not powerful, either in size or number; and if they possessed some heavy
cannon, they feared to plant them on the walls, lest the aged structure
should be shaken and overthrown by the explosion.  <span
id="fr_875"></span>[37](#fn_875) The same destructive secret had been
revealed to the Moslems; by whom it was employed with the superior
energy of zeal, riches, and despotism. The great cannon of Mahomet has
been separately noticed; an important and visible object in the history
of the times: but that enormous engine was flanked by two fellows almost
of equal magnitude:  <span id="fr_876"></span>[38](#fn_876) the long
order of the Turkish artillery was pointed against the walls; fourteen
batteries thundered at once on the most accessible places; and of one of
these it is ambiguously expressed, that it was mounted with one hundred
and thirty guns, or that it discharged one hundred and thirty bullets.
Yet in the power and activity of the sultan, we may discern the infancy
of the new science. Under a master who counted the moments, the great
cannon could be loaded and fired no more than seven times in one day.
 <span id="fr_877"></span>[39](#fn_877) The heated metal unfortunately
burst; several workmen were destroyed; and the skill of an artist  <span
id="fr_878"></span>[\*\_0057](#fn_878) was admired who bethought himself
of preventing the danger and the accident, by pouring oil, after each
explosion, into the mouth of the cannon.

The first random shots were productive of more sound than effect; and it
was by the advice of a Christian, that the engineers were taught to
level their aim against the two opposite sides of the salient angles of
a bastion. However imperfect, the weight and repetition of the fire made
some impression on the walls; and the Turks, pushing their approaches to
the edge of the ditch, attempted to fill the enormous chasm, and to
build a road to the assault.  <span id="fr_879"></span>[40](#fn_879)
Innumerable fascines, and hogsheads, and trunks of trees, were heaped on
each other; and such was the impetuosity of the throng, that the
foremost and the weakest were pushed headlong down the precipice, and
instantly buried under the accumulated mass. To fill the ditch was the
toil of the besiegers; to clear away the rubbish was the safety of the
besieged; and after a long and bloody conflict, the web that had been
woven in the day was still unravelled in the night. The next resource of
Mahomet was the practice of mines; but the soil was rocky; in every
attempt he was stopped and undermined by the Christian engineers; nor
had the art been yet invented of replenishing those subterraneous
passages with gunpowder, and blowing whole towers and cities into the
air.  <span id="fr_880"></span>[41](#fn_880) A circumstance that
distinguishes the siege of Constantinople is the reunion of the ancient
and modern artillery. The cannon were intermingled with the mechanical
engines for casting stones and darts; the bullet and the battering-ram
 <span id="fr_881"></span>[\*\_0058](#fn_881) were directed against the
same walls: nor had the discovery of gunpowder superseded the use of the
liquid and unextinguishable fire. A wooden turret of the largest size
was advanced on rollers this portable magazine of ammunition and
fascines was protected by a threefold covering of bulls' hides:
incessant volleys were securely discharged from the loop-holes; in the
front, three doors were contrived for the alternate sally and retreat of
the soldiers and workmen. They ascended by a staircase to the upper
platform, and, as high as the level of that platform, a scaling-ladder
could be raised by pulleys to form a bridge, and grapple with the
adverse rampart. By these various arts of annoyance, some as new as they
were pernicious to the Greeks, the tower of St. Romanus was at length
overturned: after a severe struggle, the Turks were repulsed from the
breach, and interrupted by darkness; but they trusted that with the
return of light they should renew the attack with fresh vigor and
decisive success. Of this pause of action, this interval of hope, each
moment was improved, by the activity of the emperor and Justiniani, who
passed the night on the spot, and urged the labors which involved the
safety of the church and city. At the dawn of day, the impatient sultan
perceived, with astonishment and grief, that his wooden turret had been
reduced to ashes: the ditch was cleared and restored; and the tower of
St. Romanus was again strong and entire. He deplored the failure of his
design; and uttered a profane exclamation, that the word of the
thirty-seven thousand prophets should not have compelled him to believe
that such a work, in so short a time, could have been accomplished by
the infidels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_859"></span>[\*\_0055](daf06030.htm#fr_859) Gibbon has
written Dane by mistake for Dace, or Dacian. Chalcondyles, Von Hammer,
p. 510. - M.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[24](daf06030.htm#fr_860) The Attic talent
weighed about sixty minae, or avoirdupois pounds (see Hooper on Ancient
Weights, Measures, &c.;) but among the modern Greeks, that classic
appellation was extended to a weight of one hundred, or one hundred and
twenty-five pounds, (Ducange.) Leonardus Chiensis measured the ball or
stone of the second cannon Lapidem, qui palmis undecim ex meis ambibat
in gyro.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[\*\*\_0055](daf06030.htm#fr_861) 1200,
according to Leonardus Chiensis. Von Hammer states that he had himself
seen the great cannon of the Dardanelles, in which a tailor who had run
away from his creditors, had concealed himself several days Von Hammer
had measured balls twelve spans round. Note. p. 666. - M.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[25](daf06030.htm#fr_862) See Voltaire, (Hist.
Generale, c. xci. p. 294, 295.) He was ambitious of universal monarchy;
and the poet frequently aspires to the name and style of an astronomer,
a chemist, &c.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[26](daf06030.htm#fr_863) The Baron de Tott,
(tom. iii. p. 85 - 89,) who fortified the Dardanelles against the
Russians, describes in a lively, and even comic, strain his own prowess,
and the consternation of the Turks. But that adventurous traveller does
not possess the art of gaining our confidence.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[\*\_0056](daf06030.htm#fr_864) See the curious
Christian and Mahometan predictions of the fall of Constantinople, Von
Hammer, p. 518. - M.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[27](daf06030.htm#fr_865) Non audivit, indignum
ducens, says the honest Antoninus; but as the Roman court was afterwards
grieved and ashamed, we find the more courtly expression of Platina, in
animo fuisse pontifici juvare Graecos, and the positive assertion of
Aeneas Sylvius, structam classem &c. (Spond. A.D. 1453, No. 3.)

<span id="fn_866"></span>[28](daf06030.htm#fr_866) Antonin. in Proem. -
Epist. Cardinal. Isidor. apud Spondanum and Dr. Johnson, in the tragedy
of Irene, has happily seized this characteristic circumstance: -

The groaning Greeks dig up the golden caverns. The accumulated wealth of
hoarding ages; That wealth which, granted to their weeping prince, Had
ranged embattled nations at their gates.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[29](daf06030.htm#fr_867) The palatine troops
are styled Capiculi, the provincials, Seratculi; and most of the names
and institutions of the Turkish militia existed before the Canon Nameh
of Soliman II, from which, and his own experience, Count Marsigli has
composed his military state of the Ottoman empire.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[30](daf06030.htm#fr_868) The observation of
Philelphus is approved by Cuspinian in the year 1508, (de Caesaribus, in
Epilog. de Militia Turcica, p. 697.) Marsigli proves, that the effective
armies of the Turks are much less numerous than they appear. In the army
that besieged Constantinople Leonardus Chiensis reckons no more than
15,000 Janizaries.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[31](daf06030.htm#fr_869) Ego, eidem (Imp.)
tabellas extribui non absque dolore et moestitia, mansitque apud nos
duos aliis occultus numerus, (Phranza, l. iii. c. 8.) With some
indulgence for national prejudices, we cannot desire a more authentic
witness, not only of public facts, but of private counsels.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[32](daf06030.htm#fr_870) In Spondanus, the
narrative of the union is not only partial, but imperfect. The bishop of
Pamiers died in 1642, and the history of Ducas, which represents these
scenes (c. 36, 37) with such truth and spirit, was not printed till the
year 1649.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[33](daf06030.htm#fr_871) Phranza, one of the
conforming Greeks, acknowledges that the measure was adopted only
propter spem auxilii; he affirms with pleasure, that those who refused
to perform their devotions in St. Sophia, extra culpam et in pace
essent, (l. iii. c. 20.)

<span id="fn_872"></span>[34](daf06030.htm#fr_872) His primitive and
secular name was George Scholarius, which he changed for that of
Gennadius, either when he became a monk or a patriarch. His defence, at
Florence, of the same union, which he so furiously attacked at
Constantinople, has tempted Leo Allatius (Diatrib. de Georgiis, in
Fabric. Bibliot. Graec. tom. x. p. 760 - 786) to divide him into two
men; but Renaudot (p. 343 - 383) has restored the identity of his person
and the duplicity of his character.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[35](daf06030.htm#fr_873) It, may be fairly
translated a cardinal's hat. The difference of the Greek and Latin
habits imbittered the schism.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[36](daf06030.htm#fr_874) We are obliged to
reduce the Greek miles to the smallest measure which is preserved in the
wersts of Russia, of 547 French toises, and of 104 2/5 to a degree. The
six miles of Phranza do not exceed four English miles, (D'Anville,
Mesures Itineraires, p. 61, 123, &c.)

<span id="fn_875"></span>[37](daf06030.htm#fr_875) At indies doctiores
nostri facti paravere contra hostes machina menta, quae tamen avare
dabantur. Pulvis erat nitri modica exigua; tela modica; bombardae, si
aderant incommoditate loci primum hostes offendere, maceriebus alveisque
tectos, non poterant. Nam si quae magnae erant, ne murus concuteretur
noster, quiescebant. This passage of Leonardus Chiensis is curious and
important.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[38](daf06030.htm#fr_876) According to
Chalcondyles and Phranza, the great cannon burst; an incident which,
according to Ducas, was prevented by the artist's skill. It is evident
that they do not speak of the same gun.

Note: They speak, one of a Byzantine, one of a Turkish, gun. Von Hammer
note, p. 669

<span id="fn_877"></span>[39](daf06030.htm#fr_877) Near a hundred years
after the siege of Constantinople, the French and English fleets in the
Channel were proud of firing 300 shot in an engagement of two hours,
(Memoires de Martin du Bellay, l. x., in the Collection Generale, tom.
xxi. p. 239.)

<span id="fn_878"></span>[\*\_0057](daf06030.htm#fr_878) The founder of
the gun. Von Hammer, p. 526.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[40](daf06030.htm#fr_879) I have selected some
curious facts, without striving to emulate the bloody and obstinate
eloquence of the abbe de Vertot, in his prolix descriptions of the
sieges of Rhodes, Malta, &c. But that agreeable historian had a turn for
romance; and as he wrote to please the order he had adopted the same
spirit of enthusiasm and chivalry.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[41](daf06030.htm#fr_880) The first theory of
mines with gunpowder appears in 1480 in a Ms. of George of Sienna,
(Tiraboschi, tom. vi. P. i. p. 324.) They were first practised by
Sarzanella, in 1487; but the honor and improvement in 1503 is ascribed
to Peter of Navarre, who used them with success in the wars of Italy,
(Hist. de la Ligue de Cambray, tom. ii. p. 93 - 97.)

<span id="fn_881"></span>[\*\_0058](daf06030.htm#fr_881) The
battering-ram according to Von Hammer, (p. 670,) was not used - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of
Eastern Empire. Part III.](daf06031)
