[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sum01)  [Next](sum03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE

The Sumerians were a non-Semitic, non-Indo-European people who
flourished in southern Babylonia from the beginning of the fourth to the
end of the third [millennium](errata.htm#0.md) B. C. During this long
stretch of time the Sumerians, whose racial and linguistic affiliations
are still unclassifiable, represented the dominant cultural group of the
entire Near East. This cultural dominance manifested itself in three
directions:

1\. It was the Sumerians who developed and probably invented the
cuneiform system of writing which was adopted by nearly all the peoples
of the Near East and without which the cultural progress of western Asia
would have been largely impossible.

2\. The Sumerians developed religious and spiritual concepts together
with a remarkably well integrated pantheon which influenced profoundly
all the peoples of the Near East, including the Hebrews and the Greeks.
Moreover, by way of Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism, not a few
of these spiritual and religious concepts have permeated the modern
civilized world.

3\. The Sumerians produced a vast and highly developed literature,
largely poetic in character, consisting of epics and myths, hymns and
lamentations, proverbs and "words of wisdom." These compositions are
inscribed in cuneiform script on clay tablets which date largely from
approximately 1750 B. C. [a](sum11.htm#xref_a.md) In the course of the past
hundred years, approximately five [b](sum11.htm#xref_b.md) thousand such
literary pieces have been excavated in the mounds of ancient Sumer. Of
this number, over two thousand, more than two-thirds of our source
material, were excavated by the University of Pennsylvania in the mound
covering ancient Nippur in the course of four grueling campaigns lasting
from 1889 to 1900; these Nippur tablets and fragments represent,
therefore, the major

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

source for the reconstruction of the Sumerian compositions. As literary
products, these Sumerian compositions rank high among the creations of
civilized man. They compare not unfavorably with the ancient Greek and
Hebrew masterpieces, and like them mirror the spiritual and intellectual
life of an otherwise little known civilization. Their significance for a
proper appraisal of the cultural and spiritual development of the Near
East can hardly be overestimated. The Assyrians and Babylonians took
them over almost in toto. The Hittites translated them into their own
language and no doubt imitated them widely. The form and contents of the
Hebrew literary creations and to a certain extent even those of the
ancient Greeks were profoundly influenced by them. As practically *the
oldest written literature of any significant amount ever uncovered*, it
furnishes new, rich, and unexpected source material to the archaeologist
and anthropologist, to the ethnologist and student of folklore, to the
students of the history of religion and of the history of literature.

In spite of their unique and extraordinary significance, and although
the large majority of the tablets on which they were inscribed were
excavated almost half a century ago, the translation and interpretation
of the Sumerian literary compositions have made relatively little
progress to date. The translation of Sumerian is a highly complicated
process. It is only in comparatively recent years that the grammar has
been scientifically established, while the lexical problems are still
numerous and far from resolved. By far the major obstacle to a
trustworthy reconstruction and translation of the compositions, however,
is the fact that the greater part of the tablets and fragments on which
they are inscribed, and which are now largely located in the Museum of
the Ancient Orient at Istanbul and in the University Museum at
Philadelphia, have been lying about uncopied and unpublished, and thus
unavailable for study. To remedy this situation, I travelled to Istanbul
in 1937, and, with the aid of a Guggenheim fellowship, devoted some
twenty months to the copying of 170 tablets and fragments in the

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Nippur collection of the Museum of the Ancient
Orient. And largely with the help of a grant from the American
Philosophical Society, the better part of the past three years has been
devoted to the studying of the unpublished literary pieces in the Nippur
collection of the University Museum; their copying has already
begun. [c](sum11.htm#xref_c.md)

It is the utilization of this vast quantity of unpublished Sumerian
literary tablets and fragments in the University Museum, approximately
675 pieces according to my investigations, which will make possible the
restoration and translation of the Sumerian literary compositions and
lay the groundwork for a study of Sumerian culture, especially in its
more spiritual aspects; a study which, considering the age of the
culture involved, that of the third millennium B. C., will long remain
unparalleled for breadth of scope and fullness of detail. As the writer
visualizes it, the preparation and publication of this survey would be
most effective in the form of a seven-volume series bearing the general
title, *Studies in Sumerian Culture*. The first volume, the present
*Memoir*, is therefore largely introductory in character; it contains a
detailed description of our sources together with a brief outline of the
more significant mythological concepts of the Sumerians as evident from
their epics and myths.

The five subsequent volumes, as planned by the author, will consist
primarily of source material, that is, they will contain the
transliterated texts of the restored Sumerian compositions, together
with a translation and commentary as well as the autograph copies of all
the pertinent uncopied material in the University Museum utilized for
the reconstruction of the texts. Each of these five volumes will be
devoted to a particular class of Sumerian composition: (1) epics; (2)
myths; (3) hymns; (4) lamentations; (5) "wisdom." It cannot be too
strongly stressed that on the day this task is completed and Sumerian
literature is restored and made available to scholar and layman, the
humanities will be enriched by one of the most magnificent groups of
documents ever brought to light. As the earliest

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

creative writings, these documents hold a unique position in the history
of civilization. Moreover, because of their profound and enduring
influence on the spiritual and religious development of the entire Near
East, they are veritable untapped mines and treasure-houses of
significant source material and invaluable data ready for exploitation
by all the relevant humanities.

The seventh volume, *Sumerian Religion: A Comparative Study*, intended
as the last of the series, will sketch the religious and spiritual
concepts of the Sumerians as revealed in their own literature. Moreover,
it will endeavor to trace the influence of these Sumerian concepts on
the spiritual and cultural development of the entire Near East. This
work is left to the last for cogent if obvious reasons; it is only after
the Sumerian literary compositions have been scientifically
reconstructed and trustworthily translated that we shall be in a
position to treat adequately and with reasonable certainty that
all-important but very difficult and complicated subject. While, then,
the first six volumes are to contain primarily the data and the sources,
it is the seventh which will attempt to formulate the results and the
conclusions for the historian and the layman. And the hope is not
unjustified that, as a result of this method of preparation and
publication, the final formulation will prove both significant and
reliable.

I wish to express my sincerest and most heartfelt thanks to the Jayne
Memorial Foundation and its board of trustees, which selected me as the
annual lecturer for 1942 to speak on the subject of Sumerian mythology.
I also acknowledge my gratitude to the board of managers of the
University Museum; to Dr. George C. Vaillant, its director; to Mr.
Horace H. F. Jayne, his predecessor; and to Professor Leon Legrain, the
curator of its Babylonian section, for their scientific co-operation in
making the Sumerian literary tablets available to me for study. Profound
thanks are due to the Ministry of Education of the Turkish Republic and
its Department of Antiquities, for permitting me to study and copy part
of the Sumerian

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

literary tablets in the Nippur collection of the Museum of the Ancient
Orient at Istanbul. The Oriental Seminar of the University of
Pennsylvania acted in a sense as a sounding board for the reading of the
first draft of the contents of this study; the spontaneous interest and
enthusiasm with which it was received by the participating students and
colleagues were of considerable spiritual support in the intricate and
at times almost despairing process of penetrating the meaning of the
texts. In the matter of financial support I am deeply indebted to the
John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation for selecting me as one of its
fellows for the years 1937-38 and 1938-39; it thus enabled me to travel
to Istanbul and devote some twenty months to research activity in its
Museum of the Ancient Orient. To the Oriental Institute of the
University of Chicago I am indebted for several minor financial
contributions. But primarily it is the American Philosophical Society
which has made the preparation of this study possible; it is the
extraordinary vision and generosity of this society which is enabling me
to reconstruct and translate in a scientific and trustworthy manner the
extant Sumerian literary compositions; to piece together and recover for
the world at large the oldest literature ever uncovered, and one of the
most significant.

To the Macmillan Company and the University of Chicago Press I am
indebted for permission to reproduce several illustrations; specific
acknowledgment of this courtesy is made in the captions of plates V,
VII, X, XII, XIV, and XIX.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

### NOTE TO THE REVISED EDITION

References and Notes to the original edition will be found on page
[104](sum10.htm#page_104.md). Supplementary Notes and Corrections will be
found on page [120](sum11.htm#page_120.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sum03.md)
