[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sum10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

# SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

<span id="xref_a">a</span>. The date 2000 B. C. assigned to the clay
tablets on which the Sumerian compositions are inscribed should be
reduced by about 250 years as a result of recent studies which point to
a date as low as about 1750 B. C. for Hammurabi, a key figure in
Mesopotamian chronology.

<span id="xref_b">b</span>. The number of Sumerian literary tablets and
fragments are now known to be approximately five thousand, rather than
three thousand. Close to four thousand come from Nippur, if we include
the tablets found in the recent joint University Museum-Oriental
Institute Expedition (19481952). The Sumerian literary tablets in the
Hilprecht Collection of the Friedrich-Schiller University (Jena) have
been studied by me in the fall of 1955 and again in 1957; for full
details see the study "Sumerische literarische Texte in der
Hilprecht-Sammlung" (*Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der
Friedrich-Schiller Universität Jena*, 1955/6, pages 753-763), and
*History Begins at Sumer* (see following note) pages 226-236. A first
volume of the Hilprecht Collection, consisting of fifty-seven of the
more important tablets and fragments will be published in the near
future by the Friedrich-Schiller University and the German Academy of
Science. The tablets from Ur, as I learned during a stay in London, are
over four hundred in number. Most of these have been copied over the
years by C. J. Gadd, and will be published in the course of the next few
years.

<span id="xref_c">c</span>. The publication of the Sumerian literary
works has taken a different form than that projected at the time of the
publication of *Sumerian Mythology* (1944). I have since realized that
the definitive edition of each of the Sumerian myths, epic tales, hymns,
lamentations, essays, and proverb collections, consisting of copies or
photographs of the tablets together with transliterations, translations,
and commentaries, could not possibly be produced by one man, no matter
how concentrated his scholarly efforts, especially since the text of
many of the compositions must be pieced together from dozens of
individual tablets and fragments scattered throughout the museums the
world over. As of today, I have published detailed studies of (1) "Enki
and Ninhursag: a Sumerian 'Paradise' Myth"; (2) "Inanna's Descent to the
Nether World"; (3) "Inanna and Bilulu" (coauthor Thorkild Jacobsen); (4)
"Dumuzi and Enkimdu: The Wooing of Inanna"; (5) "Enmerkar and the Lord
of Aratta"; (6) "Gilgamesh and the Land of the Living"; (7) "Lamentation
Over the Destruction of Ur"; (8) "Schooldays," as well as a number of
smaller pieces; for full bibliographical details, see my "Sumerian
Literature: A General Survey"

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

in the *Albright Festschrift* now in press. Two important editions of
Sumerian compositions to appear in the near future are "Enki and the
World Order: The Organization of the Earth and Its Cultural Processes,"
and "Two Elegies in a Pushkin Museum Tablet," prepared as a result of a
recent visit to the Soviet Union. I have also sketched the contents and
cited translations from a number of the Sumerian literary compositions
in my *From the Tablets of Sumer* (1956), of which a revised and
enlarged edition has appeared under the title *History Begins at Sumer*
(1959).

In recent years, moreover I have drawn in several younger scholars to
prepare definitive editions of a number of Sumerian literary works with
my guidance and help. Thus Father Bergmann of the Pontifical Biblical
Institute at Rome has prepared for publication "The Deeds and Exploits
of Ninurta" (see pp. [79](sum08.htm#page_79)-83 of *Sumerian
Mythology*); "The Return of Ninurta to Nippur"; and the large and
important "Collection of Temple Hymns." G. Castellino, of the University
of Rome, has prepared for publication two hymns of King Shulgi, and a
"Hymn to (the sun-god) Utu." Dr. Edmund Gordon, former Research
Associate in the University Museum, and now teaching at Harvard
University, has prepared for publication a large part of the Sumerian
proverbs. As a result of all this scholarly activity, I am planning the
publication of a volume entitled "*Sumerian Literature: A Representative
Crossection*," consisting of translations only, of the more important
Sumerian literary works, which should prove of fundamental value to the
humanist and student of literature and culture in general.

<span id="xref_d">d</span>. A number of important Sumerian inscriptional
finds were made during the war-years and afterwards at Harma, Uqair, and
Nippur; see my *Iraqi Excavations During the War Years* (*University
Museum Bulletin*, vol. XIII, no. 2, pp. 1-29), and "Mercy, Wisdom, and
Justice: Some New Documents from Nippur" (*University Museum Bulletin*,
vol. XVI, no. 2, pp. 28-39).

<span id="xref_e">e</span>. For a fairly representative cross-section of
the Sumerian hymnal material, see now Adam Falkenstein's contribution to
*Sumerische und Akkadische Hymnen und Gebete* (1953); see also my review
in *Bibliotheca Orientalis* (Leiden) vol. XI, pages 170-176.

<span id="xref_f">f</span>. For a detailed and illuminating sketch of
Sumerian "wisdom" literature, see E. I. Gordon's study "A New Look at
the Wisdom of Sumer and Akkad" to appear in the coming issue of
*Bibliotheca Orientalis* (Leiden).

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span id="xref_g">g</span>. In addition to the "catalogue" tablet
discussed there are now six more "catalogues" available; see
"Götter-Hymnen und Kult Gesänge der Sumerer auf zwei
Keilschrift-'Katalogen' in der Hilprecht Sammlung" (*Wissenschaftliche
[Zeitschrift](errata.htm#13) der Friedrich-Schiller Universität Jena*,
1956/7, pages 389-395) and the *Introduction to Nos. 53-55* of the
forthcoming volume of Sumerian literary texts from the "Hilprecht
Sammlung" (see note b above).

<span id="xref_h">h</span>. The dates for the Third Dynasty of Ur and
the classical Sumerian period [should](errata.htm#14) be lowered by
about a century; see also note  [a](sum11.htm#xref_a) above.

<span id="xref_i">i</span>. For the probable influence of Sumerian
literature on the Bible, see my "Sumerian Literature and the Bible" in
*Studia Biblica et Orientalia*, vol. III (1959), pages 185-204.

<span id="xref_j">j</span>. For a modification of one of the episodes in
this poem based upon tablets which were unknown at the time Sumerian
Mythology was written, see my "Gilgamesh: Some New Sumerian Data" in the
Proceedings of the Septième Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale, now
in press.

<span id="xref_k">k</span>. The "question and answer passage" can now be
restored almost entirely; for details see note 16 of my "Death and the
Nether World According to the Sumerian Literary Texts" in a forthcoming
volume of *Iraq*, dedicated to Leonard Woolley.

<span id="xref_l">l</span>. The first seven lines of the poem which were
omitted altogether in *Sumerian Mythology* because of their fragmentary
condition will now be found transliterated and translated in the article
mentioned in note  [j](sum11.htm#xref_j).

<span id="xref_m">m</span>. From the Pushkin Museum tablet inscribed
with two elegies (see note  [c](sum11.htm#xref_c) above), we learn for
the first time that the Sumerian thinkers held to the view that the sun
after setting, continues its journey through the Nether World at night,
turning night into day, as it were; and that the moon, too, spends its
"day of rest," that is the twenty-eighth day of each month, in the
Nether World.

<span id="xref_n">n</span>. A modified interpretation of the first part
of the myth will now be found in *History Begins at Sumer*, pages 84-86.

<span id="xref_o">o</span>. Thorkild Jacobsen offers a translation in
volume 5 of the *Journal of Near Eastern Studies* which differs
significantly from mine, and draws the conclusion that man, after
"developing" below the surface of the earth, "shot forth" from the earth
through a hole made by Enlil in the top

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

crust of the earth. But his translation of the relevant lines is by no
mean, certain, as I hope to show in a future study of the composition.

<span id="xref_p">p</span>. A full edition of the myth will now be found
in *Supplementary Study* No. 1 of the *Bulletin of the American Schools
of Oriental Research*; see also *Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to
the Old Testament* (James Pritchard, Editor) pages 37-40.

<span id="xref_q">q</span>. A definitive edition of this myth will
appear in a forthcoming number of the *Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der
Friedrich-Schiller Universität Jena* (see note  [c](sum11.htm#xref_c)
above).

<span id="xref_r">r</span>. For a translation of this "hymnal" myth, see
now, Adam Falkenstein in *Sumerische und Akkadische Hymnen und Gebete*,
pp. 133-137.

<span id="xref_s">s</span>. Pages 68-75. For another version of the
creation of man, suggested by Thorkild Jacobsen, see note
 [o](sum11.htm#xref_o) above.

<span id="xref_t">t</span>. For a modified version of this myth see now
*History Begins at Sumer*, pages 172-174.

<span id="xref_u">u</span>. For a revised edition of "Inanna's Descent
to the Nether World" see now *Journal of Cuneiform Studies*, vol. V, pp.
1-17; for a number of newly identified pieces see my "Death and the
Nether World According to the Sumerian Literary Texts" in the
forthcoming Woolley [Festschrift](errata.htm#15) (see note
 [k](sum11.htm#xref_k)).

<span id="xref_v">v</span>. The "Flood" tablet published by Poebel still
remains unduplicated.

<span id="xref_w">w</span>. The "'Marriage of Martu" tablet published by
Chiera still remains unduplicated.

<span id="xref_x">x</span>. For a detailed study of this poem see
Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. II, pp. 39-70; see also *Ancient Near
Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament*, pp. 41-42.
