[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tl00)  [Next](tl02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

THE Bible tells of a remote time when men journeyed from the East and
found a plain in the land of Shinar. . . . "And they said to one
another, 'Come, let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach
heaven.'" Centuries after the building of this Tower of Babel, an Arab
poet, El Deraoui, wrote of another tower, the Pharos, the great
lighthouse off the northern coast of Egypt, "On its height a dome
enshadowed me and thence I saw my friends the stars. I thought the sea
below me was a cloud and that I had set up my tent in the midst of the
heavens."

Since ancient times, towers have made a poetic appeal. Towers of many
kinds, in all ages and in all countries, have met varying needs. There
have been watchtowers, lighthouse towers, cathedral towers, clock
towers, bell towers, towers to commemorate victory, towers to guide the
air-men, towers to receive radio messages, towers to honor the living,
towers to celebrate the dead. Whether low towers or lofty towers, all
have significance. Around many of the towers, legends have clung--some
of these legends very well known. When the towers are not so well known,
local legends in regard to the country or its people may be associated
with them. Because towers will always stand midway between fact and
poetry, the legends relating to them, more often than not, look in these
two directions. Inspired architecture and poetry naturally go hand in
hand.

This little book has brought together some of the more

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

or less familiar legends, not with any aim of giving historical or
geographical facts, but merely with a desire to record some of the
characteristic tales that blend with a few of the noble towers of the
earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tl02)
