[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tl13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

# BIBLIOGRAPHY and NOTES

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### A FEW FACTS ABOUT THE TOWERS AND THE LEGENDS

THE PHAROS, Alexandria, Egypt.

The Pharos was considered one of the seven wonders of the. world. The
lantern and upper stories fell, about 700 A.D. Some restorations were
made in 880, and again in 980, but an earthquake, in 1100, partly
destroyed the octagonal second story, and another earthquake, in the
fifteenth century, entirely destroyed the tower.

It is not known whether the mirror on top of the Pharos was fine glass,
or was a polished steel reflector for the sun's rays by day, and for the
beacon fire at night, or was a telescope, invented at the great school
of Alexandria. Whatever the mysterious mirror really was, it represented
the highest scientific achievement of that time.

The mythical account of the founding of Alexandria and the story of Lady
Marina may be found in *The Egyptian History Treating of the Pyramids,
The Inundation of the Nile, and other Prodigies of Egypt, According to
the Opinions and Traditions of the Arabians. Written Originally in the
Arabian Tongue by Murtadi the Son of Gaphiphus. Rendered into French by
Monsieur Vattier, Arabic Professor to the King of France. And thence
faithfully done into English by J. Davies of Kidwelly*. (London. Printed
by R. B. for Thomas Basset at the Gregory near Cliffords-Inn in Fleet
Street. 1672.)

Other books that have been consulted for the story of the Pharos, are
these:

Breasted, James H., *History of the Ancient Egyptians*. (New York,
Scribner, 1911.)

Budge, E. A. T. W., *History of Egypt*, Vol. 8. (London, K. Paul,
Trench, Trübner & Co., 1902.)

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

Forster, Edward M., *Alexandria; a History and a Guide*. (Alexandria,
Morris, 1922.)

Rostovtzeff, Mikhail I., *History of the Ancient World*. (Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1926.)

Thiersch, H., *Pharos Antike, Islam und Occident*. (Leipzig & Berlin,
Teubner, 1901.)

 

THE TOWER OF THE WINDS, Athens, Greece.

Little is known of Andronicus, the builder of the Tower of the Winds. He
was born about 100 B.C. in Cyrrhus, Syria, and after his sojourn in
Greece, came to be called Andronicus Kyrrhestes (Andronicus of Cyrrhus),
the astronomer. The tower, or horologium, is of Pentelic marble, and is
forty-two feet high, and twenty-six feet in its greatest diameter.

The familiar tales of Aeolus and of Odysseus are taken, chiefly, from G.
H. Palmer's translation of *The Odyssey* (Boston, Houghton, Mifflin &
Co., 1891, and 1929.)

Other books consulted:

Coleridge, Edward P., *Res Graecae*. (London, George Bell & Sons, 1898.)
(This book contains a plan of Athens showing the location of the Tower
of the Winds.)

Delves-Broughton, Mrs. V., *Handbook to the Antiquities of Athens*.
(Athens, S. C. Vlastos; and London, Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent &
Co., 1896.)

Frazer, Sir James G., *Studies in Greek Scenery, Legend and History*.
(London and New York, The Macmillan Co., 1919.)

Gardner, Ernest A., *Ancient Athens*. (London and New York, The
Macmillan Co., 1902.)

Gardner, Percy and Jevons, F.B., *Manual of Greek Antiquities*. (London,
Charles Griffen & Co., 1898.)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Harrison and Verrall, *Mythology and Monuments of Ancient Athens*.
(London, The Macmillan Co., 1890.)

Weller, Charles H., *Athens and its Monuments*. (New York, The Macmillan
Co., 1924.)

 

THE PORCELAIN PAGODA, Nanking, China.

The pagodas of China are regarded by the Chinese as temples or shrines.
The Porcelain Pagoda was destroyed in the T’ai’ping rebellion, in 1853.
Early historians have given vivid descriptions of this pagoda, and have
called it the most beautiful building in China.

A detailed version of the story of the moon-cakes is given in *Forgotten
Tales of Ancient China* by Verne Dyson. This old legend, and the stories
of the jade hare, the moon toad, the phoenix and the rainbow bridge are
found in various Chinese writings. Frances Jenkins Olcott in *Wonder
Tales from China Seas* gives delightful renderings of them.

Other books consulted:

Fergusson, James, *History of Indian and Eastern Architecture*. (London,
J. Murray, 1910.)

Fletcher, Sir Banister, *A History of Architecture*. (New York,
Scribner, 1921.)

Longfellow, H. W., *Keramos and Other Poems*. (Boston, Houghton, Osgood
& Co., 1878.)

Kendall, Elizabeth K., *A Wayfarer in China*. (Boston, Houghton, Mifflin
& Co., 1913.)

Murray, Hugh and others, *An Historical and Descriptive Account of
China*. (Edinburgh, Oliver & Boyd, 1836.)

Williams, Samuel Wells, *The Middle Kingdom*. (New York, Scribner,
1904.)

 

KUTB MINAR, OR KUTUB MINAR, Northern India.

The tower of Kutb Minar stands a few miles southwest of Delhi, Northern
India, in a corner of the outer court of the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

mosque erected by Kutb-ud-din. This Kutb-ud-din was the favorite general
of the Mussulman, Muhammed Ghori, and the tower was built, in 1193, to
mark the capture of Delhi, which gave the Mussulmans rule over the
Punjab. The design of the tower is Mohammedan, except for the Hindu
ornamentation of the western façade. The height of the tower is two
hundred and thirty-eight feet.

The story of Mother Star, and her sons and daughter, is based upon a
legend well known in India. Interesting versions of the legend are given
in Donald A. MacKenzie's *Indian Fairy Stories* (London and Glasgow,
Blackie & Sons, 1915), and in Joseph Jacob's *Indian Fairy Tales*
(London, David Nutt, 1892).

Other books consulted:

By several authors, *All About Delhi* (a compilation). (Madras, G. A.
Natesan & Co., 1911.)

Fanshawe, H. C., *Delhi Past and Present*. (London, J. Murray, 1902.)

MacKenzie, Donald A., *Indian Myth and Legend*. (London, The Gresham
Publishing Co., 1913.)

Sister Nivedita (Noble, M. E.) and Coomaraswamy, A. K., *Myths of the
Hindus and Buddhists*. (New York, H. Holt & Co., 1914.)

 

THE CARILLON TOWER OF GHENT, Belgium.

In the early Middle Ages, there grew up the trading town of Gent
(Ghent), on the island formed by the junction of the Lys and Schelde
rivers. The town hall and the belfry were the chief buildings in this
old town. The belfry, or bell tower, was erected in the first part of
the fourteenth century. The bells of the carillon, today, number
fifty-two, the diameter of the largest bell being six and five-sixth
feet, and that of the smallest about eight inches. The bell, Roland, is
named in honor of the famous paladin, Roland, who fought under
Charlemagne, and whose horn could be heard twenty miles.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The gilded figure
of the dragon, on top of the tower, was brought, some writers say, from
Bruges, in 1382. According to other writers, it was made in Ghent. All
agree that the figure is Oriental in design.

Legends about the dragon himself, Buccoleon, differ widely. In a
generally accepted account, the dragon, at first, comes with the
crusaders to Constantinople, and, later, is brought from Constantinople
to Ghent by Philip Van Artevelde. The more lively rendering, by William
E. Griffis in his *Belgian Fairy Tales* (New York, Thomas Crowell Co.,
1919), has furnished the basis of the story given here.

Other books consulted:

Brangwyn, Frank, *Belgium*. (New York, Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1916.)

Rice, William G., *Carillon Music and Singing Towers of the Old World
and the New* (New York, Dodd, Mead & Co., 1925); and *Carillons of
Belgium and Holland*.

(London, John Lane, 1914.)

Robida, A., Les Vieilles Villes des Flandres. (Paris, Librairie
Dorbon-Ainè.)

 

THE CATHEDRAL OF LAON, Laon, France.

Laon Cathedral was commenced in the first part of the twelfth century
and had its final dedication in the first quarter of the thirteenth
century. Seven towers were planned and begun. Five towers were
completed--the west towers, the towers of the north and south transepts,
and the central lantern. Spires were originally on the two towers of the
west façade. The figures of the oxen are on the west towers.

One legend, connected with the building of the cathedral, asserts that
many of the oxen attached themselves, of their own will, to the heavy
stones at the foot of the steep hill and drew them up, undirected, to
the church. The story of the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

tired ox is told very briefly in *Les Légendes Historiques du
Département de L’Aisne*, by M. A. Poquet (Laon, H. Jacob et Cie., 1879.)
It was first told by Guibert de Nogent in the history of his life
written in Latin in the early part of the twelfth century (published
with an introduction in French by Georges Bourbon, Paris, Libraire
Alphonse Picard et Fils, 1907.)

Other books consulted:

Bouxin, Auguste, *La Cathédrale Notre-Dame-de-Laon*. (Laon, Cortilliot
et Cie., 1890.)

Pennell, Elizabeth Robins, *French Cathedrals* (illustrated by Joseph
Pennell). (New York, The Century Co., 1909.)

Porter, Arthur Kingsley, *Mediaeval Architecture: its Origin and
Development*. (Boston, The Baker & Taylor Co., 1909.)

Simpson, F. M., *History of Architectural Development*, Vol. II.
(London, Longmans, Green & Co., 1913.)

 

THE GIRALDA, Seville, Spain.

The Giralda, the bell tower, stands at the northeast corner of the
Seville Cathedral, and is about two hundred and ninety-five feet high.
The tower was begun in the twelfth century. The belfry and upper section
were destroyed by an earthquake in 1395, and were rebuilt in 1568. The
tower is mainly of Moorish design.

A very early version of the story of the monk is given briefly in
*Cantigas de Santa Maria*, by Don Alfonso el Sabia (King Alfonso X, The
Wise), edited by L. A. de Cuoto, Madrid, 1889. The legend is told in
*Cantiga* 103, Vol. II.

Longfellow, in *The Golden Legend*, has given his poetic version of the
story.

Other books consulted:

Bates, Katharine Lee, *Spanish Highways and Byways*. (New York,
Macmillan, 1900.)

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Gallichan, Walter M., *The Story of Seville*. (London, J. M. Dent & Co.,
1903.)

Irving, Washington, *The Alhambra*. (New York, Putnam, 1891.)

Villiers-Wardwell, Mrs., *Spain of the Spanish*. (New York, Scribner,
1909.)

 

THE CAMPANILE OF GIOTTO, Florence, Italy.

The Campanile of Giotto, or The Shepherd's Tower, as Ruskin called it,
was begun, in 1334, by Giotto di Bondone. After his death it was
continued by Andrea Pisano and by Francesco Talenti. The lower series of
bas-reliefs is the work of Giotto, Andrea Pisano, and Luca della Robbia.

The legend of the "folletto" is given in brief by Charles G. Leland in
*Legends of Florence*. (New York, The Macmillan Co., 1895.)

Other books consulted:

Bryant, Lorinda M., *Children's Book of Celebrated Towers*. (New York,
The Century Co., 1925.)

Cole, Timothy, *Old Italian Masters*. (New York, The Century Co., 1892.)
(In this book, the chapter on Giotto gives a tradition of Cimabue and
the boy Giotto that differs from the one made use of in "The Goblin of
Giotto's Tower.")

De Selincourt, Basil, *Giotto*. (London, Buckworth & Co., 1911.)

Perkins, F. Mason, *Giotto*. (London, George Bell & Sons, 1902.)

Quilter, Harry, *Giotto*. (London, Sampson Low, Marston, Searle &
Rivington, 1880.)

 

ARDMORE TOWER, Ireland.

Ardmore Tower, one of the most beautiful of the old round towers, stands
on high land in the parish of Ardmore, on the southern coast of Ireland.
It is ninety-five feet high, with a

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

conical roof. The doorway is about eight feet above the level of the
floor inside. Saint Declan, in the sixth century, founded a church and
monastery at Ardmore, but the belfry or round tower is the only part
left. The early name of the place was Ard-na-gcaorach.

In the story of The Leprechaun of Ardmore Tower, several Irish legends
are woven together. The leprechaun is pleasantly described by P. W.
Joyce in his *Social History of Ancient Ireland* (London and New York,
Longmans, Green & Co., 1903). The legend of the Firbolgs and of the
Danaans may be found in T. W. Rolleston's *Myths and Legends of the
Celtic Race* (London, G. G. Harrap & Co., 1911). In this book, by
Rolleston, is also the translation of Amergin's lay, by de Jubainville
and Rolleston. A vivid account of Oisin in the Land of Youth is given by
Rolleston in *The High Deeds of Finn and Other Bardic Romances of
Ancient Ireland* (London, G. G. Harrap & Co., 1910).

Other books consulted:

Dunraven, Lord, *Notes on Irish Architecture*, Vol. II. Edited by
Margaret Stokes. (London, Geo. Bell & Sons, 1877.)

 

THE SINGING TOWER, Florida, United States.

The Singing Tower, or Carillon Tower, stands on the highest elevation in
Florida, in Mountain Lake Sanctuary at Lake Wales. Frederick Law
Olmsted, the landscape-architect, laid out Mountain Lake Park, of which
Mountain Lake Sanctuary is a fourteen-and-a-half-acre part. The
sanctuary and tower, both the gift of Edward W. Bok, are designed "to
increase the love of beauty and the spirit of restfulness." The tower,
planned by Milton B. Medary and dedicated in 1929, is two hundred and
five feet high, octagonal at the top. It was decorated by Lee Lawrie,
the sculptor, with carvings of birds and flowers characteristic of
Florida. The main door, wrought by Samuel Yellen, the iron-worker,
represents, in its

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

design, all forms of life. The outer covering of the tower is a layer of
pink Georgia marble and Florida coquina rock of tan color. The carillon
consists of seventy-one bells, the largest weighing eleven tons, the
smallest, seventeen pounds.

In regard to the nightingales in the sanctuary, Mr. Bok, in an article
published in May, 1929, makes the following statement: "A dozen
nightingales were imported from Eng-land, and every day in the season
can their golden notes be heard. . .. Though the mocking bird can borrow
the nightingale's song it cannot borrow the nightingale's throat."

The story of The Tower That Sings embodies various American Indian
legends and primitive ideas. The description of the "first people" is
given in J. Curtin's *Creation Myths of Primitive America* (Boston,
Little, Brown & Co., 1898). The Navajo *Mountain Song* is the version
given by Natalie Curtis, page 352 in *The Indians' Book*, (New York,
Harper Brothers, 1907). A complete account of the naming of the stars is
given by George A. Dorsey in *Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee* (Journal
of American Folk Lore. 1904).

Other books consulted:

Bartsch, Paul, *Bird Rookeries of the Tortugas*. (Report of the
Smithsonian Institute, 1917.)

Bok, Edward W., *America's Taj Mahal* (Scribner's Magazine, Feb., 1929);
and *The Most Beautiful Spot in America* (The Ladies Home Journal, May,
1929).

Brinton, Daniel G., *The American Race* (New York, N. D. C. Hodges,
1891); and *Myths of the New World* (New York, Leypoldt & Holt, 1868);
and *American Hero-Myths* (Philadelphia, H. C. Watts, 1882).

Coues, Elliott, *Key to North American Birds*. (Boston, The Page Co.,
1903.)

Fletcher, Alice G., *The Hako Ceremony* (U. S. Bureau of Ethnology, 22nd
Report); and *Indian Story and Song from North America* (Boston, Small,
Maynard & Co., 1909).

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Gatschet, Albert S., *Migration Legend of the Creeks*. (Brinton's
Library of Aboriginal American Literature, Vol. I., Philadelphia, D. G.
Brinton.)

Ingersoll, Ernest, *Birds in Legend, Fable and Folk-lore*. (New York,
Longmans, Green, 1923.)

 

 
