[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100004)  [Next](2100006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span> <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xiii"></span>

## <span id="iii.iii-p0.1"></span>III. Historical Summary and Chronological Tables.

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>340. Birth of St. Ambrose (probably at
Trèves), youngest son of Ambrose, Prefect of the Gauls. Constantine II.
killed at Aquileia. Death of Eusebius.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>341. Seventh Council of Antioch. Second
exile of St. Athanasius.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>343. Photinus begins teaching his heresy.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>347. Birth of St. John Chrysostom. Council
of Sardica. St. Athanasius restored.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>348. Birth of Prudentius the Christian
poet.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>349. Synod of Sirmium against Photinus.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>350. Death of the Emperor Constans. St.
Hilary, Bishop of Poitiers. Magnentius proclaimed Emperor of the West.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span>351. Photinus condemned by a semi-Arian
synod.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>352. Liberius, Pope in succession to
Julius.

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>353–4. About this date St. Ambrose is
taken by his mother to live at Rome, where his sister Marcellina
received the veil at the hands of Liberius at Christmas, either <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 353, or more
probably 354. Suicide of Magnentius the Emperor.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>354. Birth of St. Augustine. Death of the
Emperor Gallus.

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>355. Liberius the Pope, Dionysius, Bishop
of Milan, and Lucifer, Bishop of Cagliari, banished by an Arian synod at
Milan. Third exile of St. Athanasius.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>356. Banishment of St. Hilary of Poitiers.

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>357. Liberius subscribes (as the Arians
say) an Arian Creed, and returns to Rome <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p15.1"></span>a.d.</span> 358.

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span>359. Council of Ariminum. Macedonius of
Constantinople deposed. Eudoxius consecrated Bishop.

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>361. Julian Emperor.

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span>362. Fourth exile of St. Athanasius.

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>363. Death of the Emperor Julian. St.
Athanasius restored. Felix Pope.

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span>364. Death of the Emperor Jovian.
Valentinian and Valens Emperors.

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span>366. Death of Liberius in September.
Damasus elected in his place, but the see is also claimed by Ursinus.

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span>367. Gratian, though only a boy, declared
Augustus by his father Valentinian.

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span>368–74. Successful career of St. Ambrose
in legal business and as “consular.”

<span id="iii.iii-p24"></span>370. St. Basil, Bishop of Cæsarea.

<span id="iii.iii-p25"></span>372. St. Gregory of Nazianzus, Bishop of
Susium.

<span id="iii.iii-p26"></span>373. Death of St. Athanasius.

<span id="iii.iii-p27"></span>374. Death of Auxentius, the Arian Bishop
of Milan, and election of St. Ambrose, though still only a catechumen,
by acclamation. St. Martin Bishop of Tours.

<span id="iii.iii-p28"></span>374–5. St. Ambrose sends a deputation of
clerics to St. Basil to ask for the body of St. Dionysius, late Catholic
Bishop of Milan. \[St. Basil, Ep. 197<span id="iii.iii-p28.1"></span>.\]

<span id="iii.iii-p29"></span>375. Death of Valentinian in November. His
son Valentinian is admitted by Gratian to be Emperor of the East, though
only four years old.

<span id="iii.iii-p30"></span>377. St. Ambrose writes the three books,
*De Virginibus;* one, *De Viduis;* which is followed by the book, *De
Virginitate.*

<span id="iii.iii-p31"></span>378. The first two books, *De Fide,*
written at the request of Gratian, who was setting out to the relief of
Valens against the Goths. Valens is overcome and killed at Adrianople.
Many Christians having been made captives, St. Ambrose sells Church
plate to redeem them.

<span id="iii.iii-p32"></span>379. Theodosius is proclaimed Augustus.
Death of St. Basil and of St. Ephrem Syrum. Gratian, on his way back
from Thrace, requests St. Ambrose to come to meet him and receives the
first two books of the treatise *De Fide*, and asks for a further one of
the Holy Spirit; the latter was written two years later. Death of
Satyrus, brother of St. Ambrose. The two treatises on his death written.

<span id="iii.iii-p33"></span>379–80. Famine in Rome.—See *De Off*. III.
46–48.

<span id="iii.iii-p34"></span>380. Baptism of Theodosius at
Thessalonica. Books III.–V. of the *De Fide* written about this time.
The basilica which had been sequestered by Gratian is restored to the
Church.

<span id="iii.iii-p35"></span>380. Synod at Rome under Damasus at which
St. Ambrose was present. Probably in the same year St. Ambrose
consecrated Anemius Bishop of Sirmium in spite of Arian opposition.

<span id="iii.iii-p36"></span>381. Death at Constantinople of
Athanaricus, leader of the Goths. The three books, *De Spiritu Sancto*,
written. Death of Peter, Bishop of Alexandria. The Œcumenical Council of
Constantinople commences under the presidency of Meletius of Antioch.
Also at Aquileia a council, at which St. Ambrose took a leading part,
was held against the heretics Palladius and Secundianus. An account is
given of the proceedings in Epistles 9–12.

<span id="iii.iii-p37"></span>381–2. St. Ambrose presides over a council
of Italian bishops to take into consideration the troubles at Antioch
and Constantinople. Epistles 13, to Theodosius, and 14, his reply, state
the proceedings. Theodosius summoned a council to consider the same
matters at Constantinople.

<span id="iii.iii-p38"></span>382. Gratian orders the removal of the
image of Victory from the forum at Rome. \[Eph. 17:0, Eph. 18:0<span
id="iii.iii-p38.1"></span>.\] Acholius, Bishop of Thessalonica, dies and
is succeeded by Anysius.

<span id="iii.iii-p39"></span>383. The Priscillianists endeavour in vain
to gain Damasus and St. Ambrose to their side by means of a visit to
Rome and Milan. On the 25th of August Gratian is assassinated at Lyons
by the instigation of Maximus. A great dearth at Rome. \[*De Off*. III.
7, 49; Ep. 18<span id="iii.iii-p39.1"></span>.\]

<span id="iii.iii-p40"></span>383–4. First legation of St. Ambrose to
Maximus on behalf of Justina the Empress and her son Valentinian II.

<span id="iii.iii-p41"></span>384. The memorial of Symmachus the prefect
of the city to Valentinian, requesting the restoration of the Altar of
Victory, and the reply of St. Ambrose. \[Eph. 17:0, Eph. 18:0<span
id="iii.iii-p41.1"></span>.\] A synod at Bordeaux against the
Priscillianists. Death of Damasus, who is succeeded by Siricius as Pope.

<span id="iii.iii-p42"></span>385. Priscillian and his companions are
condemned to death at Trèves at the instigation of the Spanish Bishops
Idacius and Ithacius. The Ithacians consecrate Felix as Bishop. \[Ep.
42<span id="iii.iii-p42.1"></span>–51.\] The persecution at Milan of
Catholics by Justina in Holy Week. \[Ep. 20<span
id="iii.iii-p42.2"></span>.\] The law of Valentinian II., granting
Arians equal rights with Catholics. Auxentius claims the see of Milan.
\[Sermon against Auxentius and Ep. 21<span id="iii.iii-p42.3"></span>.\]
The deposit which a widow had entrusted to the Church at Trent having
been carried off by imperial order, St. Ambrose succeeds in procuring
its restitution. \[*De Off*. II. 29, 150, 151.\] New basilica at Milan
consecrated.

<span id="iii.iii-p43"></span>386. Finding of the bodies of St.
Gervasius and Protasius \[Ep. 22<span id="iii.iii-p43.1"></span>\].
Epistle 23 to the bishops of the province of Æmilia on the right day for
the observance of Easter.

<span id="iii.iii-p44"></span>386–7. The exposition of the Gospel
according to St. Luke written.

<span id="iii.iii-p45"></span>387. Baptism of St. Augustine at Milan by
St. Ambrose at Easter. Second mission of St. Ambrose to Maximus. \[Ep.
24<span id="iii.iii-p45.1"></span>.\] Expulsion of St. Ambrose from
Trèves because of his refusal to communicate with the murderer of his
sovereign. In the later part of the year Maximus crosses into Italy and
enters Milan.

<span id="iii.iii-p46"></span>388. At Constantinople the Arians destroy
the residence of the Catholic Bishop Nectarius. \[Ep. 40<span
id="iii.iii-p46.1"></span>, § 13.\] Death of Justina, and conversion of
Valentinian II. by Theodosius. Theodosius marches against Maximus, who
is everywhere defeated \[Ep. 40<span id="iii.iii-p46.2"></span>, § 23\],
and executed at Aquileia. Third application concerning the Altar of
Victory.

<span id="iii.iii-p47"></span>390. The excessive cruelty with which
Theodosius punished a sedition at Thessalonica brought on him exclusion
from communion, and a severe rebuke at the hands of St. Ambrose. The
Emperor’s penitence and readmission to communion. A synod is held at
Milan against the Ithacian heretics, and Felix, Bishop of Trèves. \[Ep.
51<span id="iii.iii-p47.1"></span>.\]

<span id="iii.iii-p48"></span>391–2. The deputation of part of the Roman
Senate to Valentinian to request the restoration of the Altar of Victory
in the Forum. \[Ep. 57<span id="iii.iii-p48.1"></span>, § 5.\] The
treatise *De institutione Virginis*, written about this time, as also,
*De Officiis*.

<span id="iii.iii-p49"></span>392. Valentinian II. killed at Vienne by
Arbogastes \[Ep. 53<span id="iii.iii-p49.1"></span>, § 2; *De ob.
Valent*. 25 ff.\]. His body is brought to Milan. The address,
*Consolatio de ob. Val*. A further delegation from the Senate is sent to
Eugenius respecting the Altar of Victory \[Ep. 57<span
id="iii.iii-p49.2"></span>, § 6 ff.\].

<span id="iii.iii-p50"></span>393. On the arrival of Eugenius at Milan
St. Ambrose leaves the city for Bononia Faventia and Florence. The
letters to Eugenius and Sabinus written about this time.

<span id="iii.iii-p51"></span>393–4. At Florence St. Ambrose dedicates a
basilica, in which he deposits the bodies of the martyrs Vitalis and
Agricola, which he had brought from Bononia. His address on this
occasion was that which is inscribed, *Exhortatio Virginitatis*. He
writes Ep. 59<span id="iii.iii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.iii-p52"></span>394. Theodosius sets out from
Constantinople against Eugenius. About the beginning of August St.
Ambrose returns to Milan. Eugenius defeated by Theodosius and slain,
Sept. 6. St. Ambrose intercedes and obtains pardon for the followers of
Eugenius. After this St. Ambrose writes the *Enarrationes* on [Psalms
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii-p52.1"></span>–40
and Eph. 61:0, Eph. 62:0<span id="iii.iii-p52.2"></span>.

<span id="iii.iii-p53"></span>395. Death of Theodosius at Milan. St.
Ambrose’s oration *De obitu Theodosii*. Honorius and Arcadius Emperors.
St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo. Death of Rufinus.

<span id="iii.iii-p54"></span>396. Dissensions at Vercellæ, the occasion
of writing Ep. 63<span id="iii.iii-p54.1"></span>, and of a visit to
that Church.

<span id="iii.iii-p55"></span>397. St. Ambrose consecrates a bishop for
Ticinum, and shortly after falls ill. He commenced the *Enarratio* on
[Psalm 43](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii-p55.1"></span>, which he left unfinished; and died in the
night between Good Friday and Easter Eve, having recommended
Simplicianus as his successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV. On the Doctrine of St. Ambrose.](2100006)
