[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100244)  [Next](2100246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p1"></span>Continuing the exposition of the
disputed passage, which he had begun, Ambrose brings forward four
reasons why we affirm that something cannot be, and shows that the first
three fail to apply to Christ, and infers that the only reason why the
Son can do nothing of Himself is His Unity in Power with the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p2"></span>49. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p2.1"></span>In</span> what sense can the Son do nothing
of Himself? Let us ask what it is that He cannot do. There are many
different sorts of impossibilities. One thing is naturally impossible,
another is naturally possible, but impossible by reason of some
weakness. Again, there are things which are rendered possible by
strength, impossible by unskilfulness or weakness, of body and mind.
Further, there are things which it is impossible to change, by reason of
the law of an unchangeable purpose, the endurance of a firm will, and,
again, faithfulness in friendship.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p3"></span>50. To make this clearer, let us
consider the matter in the light of examples. It is impossible for a
bird to pursue a course of learning in any science or become trained to
any art: it is impossible for a stone to move in any direction, inasmuch
as it can only be moved by the motion of another body. Of itself, then,
a stone is incapable of moving, and passing from its place. Again, an
eagle cannot be taught in the ways of human learning.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p4"></span>51. It is, to take another example,
impossible for a sick man to do a strong man’s work; but in this case
the reason of the impossibility is of a different kind, for the man is
rendered unable, by sickness, to do what he is naturally capable of
doing. In this case, then, the cause of the impossibility is sickness,
and this kind of impossibility is different from the first, since the
man is hindered by bodily weakness from the possibility of doing. <span
id="fr_2371"></span>[2372](#fn_2371)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p6"></span>52. Again, there is a third cause of
impossibility. A man may be naturally capable, and his bodily health may
allow of his doing some work, which he is yet unable to do by reason of
want of skill, or because his rank in life disqualifies him; because,
that is, he lacks the required learning or is a slave. <span
id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p8"></span>53. Which of these three different
causes of impossibility, think you, which we have enumerated (setting
aside the fourth) can we meetly assign to the case of the Son of God? Is
He naturally insensible and immovable, like a stone? He is indeed a
stone of stumbling to the wicked, a cornerstone for the faithful; <span
id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) but He is not insensible, upon Whom
the faithful affection of sentient peoples are stayed. He is not an
immovable rock, “for they drank of a Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ.” <span id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) The work of
the Father, then, is not rendered impossible to Christ by diversity of
nature.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p11"></span>54. Perchance we may suppose some
things were made impossible for Him by reason of weakness. But He was
not weakly Who could heal the weaknesses of others by His word of
authority. Seemed <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-Page_269"></span>He weak when bidding the paralytic take
up his bed and walk? <span id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) He
charged the man to perform an action of which health was the necessary
condition, even whilst the patient was yet praying a remedy for his
disease. Not weak was the Lord of hosts when He gave sight to the
blind, <span id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376) made the crooked to
stand upright, raised the dead to life, <span
id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377) anticipated the effects of medicine
at our prayers, and cured them that besought Him, and when to touch the
fringe of His robe was to be purified. <span
id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p16"></span>55. Unless, peradventure, you thought
it was weakness, you wretches, when you saw His wounds. Truly, they were
wounds piercing His Body, but there was no weakness betokened by that
wound, whence flowed the Life of all, and therefore was it that the
prophet said: “By His stripes we are healed.” <span
id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379) Was He, then, Who was not weak in
the hour when He was wounded, weak in regard of His Sovereignty? How,
then, I ask? When He commanded the devils, and forgave the offences of
sinners? <span id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380) Or when He made
entreaty to the Father?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p19"></span>56. Here, indeed, our adversaries may
perchance enquire: “How can the Father and the Son be One, if the Son at
one time commands, at another entreats?” True, They are One; true also,
He both commands and prays: yet whilst in the hour when He commands He
is not alone, so also in the hour of prayer He is not weak. He is not
alone, for whatsoever things the Father doeth, the same things doeth the
Son also, in like manner. He is not weak, for though in the flesh He
suffered weakness for our sins yet that was the chastisement of our
peace upon Him, <span id="fr_2381"></span>[2382](#fn_2381) not lack of
sovereign Power in Himself.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p21"></span>57. Moreover, that thou mayest know
that it is after His Manhood that He entreats, and in virtue of His
Godhead that He commands, it is written for thee in the Gospel that He
said to Peter: “I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” <span
id="fr_2382"></span>[2383](#fn_2382) To the same Apostle, again, when on
a former occasion he said, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God,” He made answer: “Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
My Church, and I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven.” <span id="fr_2383"></span>[2384](#fn_2383) Could He not, then,
strengthen the faith of the man to whom, acting on His own authority, He
gave the kingdom, whom He called the Rock, thereby declaring him to be
the foundation of the Church? Consider, then, the manner of His
entreaty, the occasions of His commanding. He entreats, when He is shown
to us as on the eve of suffering: He commands, when He is believed to be
the Son of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p24"></span>58. We see, then, that two sorts of
impossibility furnish no explanation, <span
id="fr_2384"></span>[2385](#fn_2384) inasmuch as the Power of God can be
neither insensible nor weakly. Will you then proffer the third kind \[as
an account of the matter\], namely, that He can do nothing, just as an
unskilled apprentice can do nothing without his master’s instructions,
or a slave can do nothing without his lord. Then didst Thou speak
falsely, Lord Jesu, in calling Thyself Master and Lord, and Thou didst
deceive Thy disciples by Thy words: “Ye call Me Master and Lord, and ye
say well, for so I am.” <span id="fr_2385"></span>[2386](#fn_2385) Nay,
but Thou, O Truth, wouldst never have deceived men, least of all them
whom Thou didst call friends. <span id="fr_2386"></span>[2387](#fn_2386)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p28"></span>59. Yet if our enemies sunder Thee from
the Creator, as being unskilled, let them see how they affirm that skill
was lacking to Thee, that is to say, to the Divine Wisdom; for all that,
however, they cannot divide the unity of substance that Thou hast with
the Father. It is not, indeed, by nature, but by reason of ignorance,
that the difference exists between the craftsman and the unskilled; but
neither is handicraft attributable to the Father, nor ignorance to Thee,
for there is no such thing as ignorant wisdom.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p29"></span>60. Therefore, if insensibility is no
attribute of the Son, and if neither weakness, nor ignorance, nor
servility, let unbelievers put it to their minds for meditation that
both by nature and sovereignty the Son is One with the Father, and by
its working His power is not at cross-purpose with the Father, inasmuch
as “all things that the Father hath done, the Son doeth likewise,” for
no one can do in like fashion the same work that another has done,
unless he shares in the unity of the same nature, whilst he is also not
inferior in method of working.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p30"></span>61. Yet I would still enquire *what* it
is that the Son cannot do, unless He see the Father doing it. I will
take the fool’s line, and propound some examples drawn from things of a
lower world. “I am become a fool; ye have compelled me.” <span
id="fr_2387"></span>[2388](#fn_2387) What indeed is more foolish than to
debate over the majesty of God, which rather occasions questionings,
than godly instruction which is in faith. <span
id="fr_2388"></span>[2389](#fn_2388) But to arguments let argu<span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.v-Page_270"></span>ments
reply; let words make answer to them, but love to us, the love which is
in God, issuing of a pure heart and good conscience and faith unfeigned.
And so I stickle not to introduce even the ludicrous for the confutation
of so vain a thesis.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p33"></span>62. How, then, does the Son see the
Father? A horse sees a painting, which naturally it is unable to
imitate. Not thus does the Son behold the Father. A child sees the work
of a grown man, but he cannot reproduce it; certainly not thus, again,
does the Son see the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p34"></span>63. If, then, the Son can, by virtue of
a common hidden power of the same nature which He has with the Father,
both see and act in an invisible manner, and by the fulness of His
Godhead execute every decree of His Will, what remains for us but to
believe that the Son, by reason of indivisible unity of power, does
nothing, save what He has seen the Father doing, forasmuch as because of
His incomparable love the Son does nothing of Himself, since He wills
nothing that is against His Father’s Will? Which truly is the proof not
of weakness but of unity. <span id="fr_2389"></span>[2390](#fn_2389)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2371"></span>[268:2372](2100245.htm#fr_2371) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p5"></span> Cf. Aristotle, *Eth. Nic.* I. viii. 15.

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[268:2373](2100245.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p7"></span> Cf. Aristotle, *Eth. Nic.* I. viii. 15.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[268:2374](2100245.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p9"></span> [1 Pet.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007), [Isa.
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[268:2375](2100245.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p10"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[269:2376](2100245.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p12"></span> S. [Mark ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[269:2377](2100245.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p13"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[269:2378](2100245.htm#fr_2377) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p14"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[269:2379](2100245.htm#fr_2378) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p15"></span> S. [Mark vi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#056)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[269:2380](2100245.htm#fr_2379) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p17"></span> [Isa. liii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[269:2381](2100245.htm#fr_2380) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p18"></span> S. [Luke v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2381"></span>[269:2382](2100245.htm#fr_2381) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p20"></span> [Isa. liii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2382"></span>[269:2383](2100245.htm#fr_2382) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p22"></span> S. [Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2383"></span>[269:2384](2100245.htm#fr_2383) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p23"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2384"></span>[269:2385](2100245.htm#fr_2384) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p25"></span> *i.e.* we are not to suppose that in
S. [John v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p25.1"></span> Jesus refers to any sort of physical
impossibility, to any external restraint or limitation.

<span id="fn_2385"></span>[269:2386](2100245.htm#fr_2385) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p26"></span> S. [John xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2386"></span>[269:2387](2100245.htm#fr_2386) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p27"></span> S. [John
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2387"></span>[269:2388](2100245.htm#fr_2387) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p31"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2388"></span>[269:2389](2100245.htm#fr_2388) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p32"></span> [1 Tim.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004), [1 Tim.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2389"></span>[270:2390](2100245.htm#fr_2389) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.v-p35"></span> Our Lord did not simply assert that He
and His Father are One, without revealing to those, at least, who had
faith to perceive it, what is one great bond of that Unity, showing men,
so far as man can comprehend the matter, what that Unity consists in,
viz., absolute and perfect harmony of will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The fourth kind of impossibility (§49) is now taken
into consideration, and it is shown that the Son does nothing that the
Father approves not, there being between Them perfect unity of will and
power.](2100246)
