[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100368)  [Next](2100370) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

### <span id="v.iv-p0.1"></span>Epistle XVIII.

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>Reply of St. Ambrose to the Memorial of
Symmachus, in which after complimenting Valentinian he deals with three
points of the Memorial. He replies to his opponent’s personification of
Rome in a singularly telling manner, and proves that the famine spoken
of by Symmachus had nothing to do with the cessation of heathen rites.

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>Ambrose</span>, Bishop, to the most blessed prince
and most gracious Emperor Valentianus, the august.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>1. Since the illustrious Symmachus, Prefect of
the city, has sent petition to your Grace that the altar, which was
taken away from the Senate House of the city of Rome, should be restored
to its place; and you, O Emperor, although still young in years and
experience, yet a veteran in the power of faith, did not approve the
prayer of the heathen, I presented a request the moment I heard of it,
in which, though I stated such things as it seemed necessary to suggest,
I requested that a copy of the Memorial might be given to me.

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span>2. So, then, not being in doubt as to your
faith, but anxiously considering the risk, and sure of a kindly
consideration, I am replying in this document to the assertions of the
Memorial, making this sole request, that you will not expect elegance of
language but the force of facts. For, as the divine Scripture teaches,
the tongue of wise and studious men is golden, which, gifted with
glittering words and shining with the brilliancy of splendid utterance
as if of some rich colour, captivates the eyes of the mind with the
appearance of beauty and dazzles with the sight. But this gold, if you
consider it carefully, is of value outwardly but within is base metal.
Ponder well, I pray you, and examine the sect of the heathen, their
utterances, sound, weighty, and grand, but defend what is without
capacity for truth. They speak of God and worship idols.

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>3. The illustrious Prefect of the city has in
his Memorial set forth three propositions which he considers of force:
that Rome, as he says, asks for her rites again, that pay be given to
her priests and Vestal Virgins, and that a general famine followed upon
the refusal of the priests’ stipends.

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>4. In his first proposition Rome complains
with sad and tearful words, asking, as he says, for the restoration of
the rites of her ancient ceremonies. These sacred rites, he says,
repulsed Hannibal from the walls, and the Senones from the Capitol. And
so at the same time that the power of the sacred rites is proclaimed,
their weakness is betrayed. So that Hannibal long insulted the Roman
rites, and while the gods were fighting against him, arrived a conqueror
at the very walls of the city. Why did they suffer themselves to be
besieged, for whom their gods were fighting in arms?

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>5. And why should I say anything of the
Senones, whose entrance into the inmost Capitol the remnant of the
Romans could not have prevented, had not a goose by its frightened
cackling betrayed them? See what sort of protectors the Roman temples
have. Where was Jupiter at that time? Was he speaking in the goose?

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span>6. But why should I deny that their sacred
rites fought for the Romans? For Hannibal also worshipped the same gods.
Let them choose then which they will. If these sacred rites conquered in
the Romans, then they were overcome in the Carthaginians; if they
triumphed in the Carthaginians, they certainly did not benefit the
Romans.

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span>7. Let, then, that invidious complaint of the
Roman people come to an end. Rome has given no such charge. She speaks
with other words. “Why do you daily stain me with the useless blood of
the harmless herd? Trophies of victory depend not on the entrails of the
flocks, but on the strength of those who fight. I subdued the world by a
different discipline. Camillus was my soldier, who slew those who had
taken the Tarpeian rock, and brought back the standards taken from the
Capitol; valour laid those low whom religion had not driven off. What
shall I say of Attilius \[Regulus\], who gave the service of his death?
Africanus found his triumphs not amongst the altars of the Capitol, but
amongst the lines of Hannibal. Why do you bring forward the rites of our
ancestors? I hate the rites of Neros. Why should I speak of the Em<span
id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_418"></span>perors of
two months, <span id="fr_3425"></span>[3426](#fn_3425) and the ends of
rulers closely joined to their commencements. Or is it perchance a new
thing for the barbarians to cross their boundaries? Were they, too,
Christians in whose wretched and unprecedented cases, <span
id="fr_3426"></span>[3427](#fn_3426) the one, a captive Emperor, and,
under the other, the captive world made manifest that their rites which
promised victory were false. Was there then no Altar of Victory? I mourn
over my downfall, my old age is tinged with that shameful bloodshed. I
do not blush to be converted with the whole world in my old age. It is
undoubtedly true that no age is too late to learn. Let that old age
blush which cannot amend itself. Not the old age of years is worthy of
praise but that of character. There is no shame in passing to better
things. This alone was common to me with the barbarians, that of old I
knew not God. Your sacrifice is a rite of being sprinkled with the blood
of beasts. Why do you seek the voice of God in dead animals? Come and
learn on earth the heavenly warfare; we live here, but our warfare is
there. Let God Himself, Who made me, teach me the mystery of heaven, not
man, who knew not himself. Whom rather than God should I believe
concerning God? How can I believe you, who confess that you know not
what you worship?”

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span>8. By one road, says he, one cannot attain to
so great a secret. What you know not, that we know by the voice of God.
And what you seek by fancies, we have found out from the very Wisdom and
Truth of God. Your ways, therefore, do not agree with ours. You implore
peace for your gods from the Emperors, we ask for peace for the Emperors
themselves from Christ. You worship the works of your own hands, we
think it an offence that anything which can be made should be esteemed
God. God wills not that He should be worshipped in stones. And, in fine,
your philosophers themselves have ridiculed these things.

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>9. But if you deny Christ to be God, because
you believe not that He died (for you are ignorant that death was of the
body not of the Godhead, which has brought it to pass that now no one of
those who believe dies), what is more thoughtless than you who honour
with insult, and disparage with honour, for you consider a piece of wood
to be your god. O worship full of insult! You believe not that Christ
could die, O perversity founded on respect!

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>10. But, says he, let the altars be restored
to the images, and their ornaments to the shrines. Let this demand be
made of one who shares in their superstitions; a Christian Emperor has
learnt to honour the altar of Christ alone. Why do they exact of pious
hands and faithful lips the ministry to their sacrilege? Let the voice
of our Emperor utter the Name of Christ alone, and speak of Him only,
Whom he is conscious of, for, “the King’s heart is in the hand of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_3427"></span>[3428](#fn_3427) Has any heathen
Emperor raised an altar to Christ? While they demand the restoration of
things which have been, by their own example they show us how great
reverence Christian Emperors ought to pay to the religion which they
follow, since heathen ones offered all to their superstitions.

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span>11*a*. We began long since, and now they
follow those whom they excluded. We glory in yielding our blood, an
expense moves them. We consider these things in the place of victories,
they think them loss. Never did they confer on us a greater benefit than
when they ordered Christians to be beaten and proscribed and slain.
Religion made a reward of that which unbelief thought to be a
punishment. See their greatness of soul! We have increased through loss,
through want, through punishment; they do not believe that their rites
can continue without contributions.

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span>11. Let the Vestal Virgins, he says, retain
their privileges. Let those speak thus, who are unable to believe that
virginity can exist without reward, let those who do not trust virtue,
encourage by gain. But how many virgins have the promised rewards gained
for them? Hardly are seven Vestal Virgins received. See the whole number
whom the fillets and chaplets for the head, the dye of the purple robes,
the pomp of the litter surrounded by a company of attendants, the
greatest privileges, immense profits, and a prescribed time of virginity
have gathered together.

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>12. Let them lift up the eyes of soul and
body, let them look upon a people of modesty, a people of purity, an
assembly of virginity. Not fillets are the ornament <span
id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_419"></span>of their
heads, but a veil common in use but ennobled by chastity, the enticement
of beauty not sought out but laid aside, none of those purple insignia,
no delicious luxuries, but the practice of fasts, no privileges, no
gains; all things, in fine, of such a kind that one would think them
restrained from enjoyment whilst practising their duties. But whilst the
duty is being practised the enjoyment of it is aroused. Chastity is
increased by its own sacrifices. That is not virginity which is bought
with a price, and not kept through a love of virtue; that is not purity
which is bought by auction for money, which is bid for a time. The first
victory of chastity is to conquer the desire of wealth, for the pursuit
of gain is a temptation to modesty. Let us, however, lay down that
bountiful provision should be granted to virgins. What an amount will
overflow upon Christians! What treasury will supply such riches? Or if
they think that gifts should be conferred on the Vestals alone, are they
not ashamed that they who claimed the whole for themselves under heathen
Emperors should think that we ought to have no common share under
Christian Princes?

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span>13. They complain, also, that public support
is not considered due to their priests and ministers. What a storm of
words has resounded on this point! But on the other hand even the
inheritance of private property is denied us by recent laws, <span
id="fr_3428"></span>[3429](#fn_3428) and no one complains; for we do not
consider it an injury, because we grieve not at the loss. If a priest
seeks the privilege of declining the municipal burdens, <span
id="fr_3429"></span>[3430](#fn_3429) he has to give up his ancestral and
all other property. If the heathen suffered this how would they urge
their complaint, that a priest must purchase the free time necessary for
his ministry by the loss of all his patrimony, and buy the power to
exercise his public ministry at the expense of all his private means;
and, alleging his vigils for the public safety, must console himself
with the reward of domestic want, because he has not sold a service but
obtained a favour.

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>14. Compare the cases. You wish to excuse a
decurio, when it is not allowed the Church to excuse a priest. Wills are
written on behalf of ministers of the temples, no profane person is
excepted, no one of the lowest condition, no one shamelessly immodest,
the clergy alone are excluded from the common right, by whom alone
common prayer is offered for all, and common service rendered, no
legacies even of grave widows, no gifts are permitted. And where no
fault can be found in the character, a penalty is notwithstanding
imposed on the office. That which a Christian widow has bequeathed to
the priests of a temple is valid, her legacy to the ministers of God is
invalid. And I have related this not in order to complain, but that they
may know what I do not complain of; for I prefer that we should be
poorer in money than in grace.

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span>15. But they say that what has been given or
left to the Church has not been touched. Let them also state who has
taken away gifts from the temples, which has been done to
Christians. <span id="fr_3430"></span>[3431](#fn_3430) If these things
had been done to the heathen the wrong would have been rather a requital
than an injury. Is it now only at last that justice is alleged as a
pretext, and a claim made for equity? Where was this feeling when, after
plundering the goods of all Christians, they grudged them the very
breath of life, and forbade them the use of that last burial nowhere
denied to any dead? The sea restored those whom the heathen had thrown
into it. This is the victory of faith, that they themselves now blame
the acts of their ancestors whose deeds they condemn. But what reason is
there in seeking benefits from those whose deeds they condemn?

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span>16. No one, however, has denied gifts to the
shrines, and legacies to the soothsayers, their land alone has been
taken away, because they did not use religiously that which they claimed
in right of religion. Why did they not practise what we did if they
allege our example? The Church has no possessions of her own except the
Faith. Hence are her returns, her increase. The possessions of the
Church are the maintenance of the poor. <span
id="fr_3431"></span>[3432](#fn_3431) Let them count up how many captives
the temples have ransomed, what food they have contributed for the poor,
to what exiles they have supplied the means of living. Their lands then
have been taken away, not their rights.

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span><span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_420"></span>17. See what was done, and a public famine
avenged, as they say, the sad impiety that what was before profitable
only for the comfort of the priests began to be profitable to the use of
all. For this reason then, as they say, was the bark shipped from the
copses, and fainting men’s mouths supped up the unsavoury sap. For this
reason changing corn for the Chaonian acorn, going back once more to the
food of cattle and the nourishment of wretched provisions, they shook
the oaks and solaced their dire hunger in the woods. These, forsooth,
were new prodigies on earth, which had never happened before, while
heathen superstition was fervent throughout the world! When in truth
before did the crop mock the prayers of the grasping husbandman with
empty straw, and the blade of corn sought in the furrows fail the hope
of the rustic crew?

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span>18. And from what did the Greeks derive the
oracles of their oaks except from their thinking that the support of
their sylvan food was the gift of heavenly religion? For such do they
believe to be the gifts of their gods. Who but heathen people worshipped
the trees of Dodona, when they gave honour to the sorry food of the
woodland? It is not likely that their gods in anger inflicted on them as
a punishment that which they used when appeased to confer as a gift. And
what justice would there be if, being grieved that support was refused
to a few priests, they denied it to all, since the vengeance would be
more unbearable than the fault? The cause, then, is not adequate to
bring such suffering on a failing world, as that the full-grown hope of
the year should perish suddenly while the crops were green.

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span>19. And, certainly, many years ago the lights
of the temples were taken away throughout the world; has it only now at
length come into the mind of the gods of the heathen to avenge the
injury? And did the Nile fail to overflow in its accustomed course, in
order to avenge the losses of the priests of the city, whilst it did not
avenge its own?

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span>20. But let it be that they suppose that the
injuries done to their gods were avenged in the past year. Why have they
been unnoticed in the present year? For now neither do the country
people feed upon torn up roots, nor seek refreshment from the berries of
the wood, nor pluck its food from thorns, but joyful in their prosperous
labours, while wondering at their harvest, made up for their fasting by
the full accomplishment of their wishes; for the earth rendered her
produce with interest.

<span id="v.iv-p31"></span>21. Who, then, is so unused to human matters
as to be astonished at the differences of years? And yet even last year
we know that many provinces abounded with produce. What shall I say of
the Gauls which were more productive than usual? The Pannonias sold corn
which they had not sown, and Phætia Secunda experienced harm of her own
fertility, for she who was wont to be safe in her scarcity, stirred up
an enemy against herself by her fertility. The fruits of the autumn fed
Liguria and the Venetias. So, then, the former year did not wither
because of sacrilege, and the latter flourished with the fruits of
faith. Let them too deny if they can that the vineyards abounded with an
immense produce. And so we have both received a harvest with interest
and possess the benefit of a more abundant vintage.

<span id="v.iv-p32"></span>22. The last and most important point
remains, whether, O Emperors, you ought to restore those helps which
have profited you; for he says: ‘Let them defend you, and be worshipped
by us.’ This it is, most faithful princes, which we cannot endure, that
they should taunt us that they supplicate their gods in your names, and
without your commands, commit an immense sacrilege, interpreting your
shutting your eyes as consent. Let them have their guardians to
themselves, let these, if they can, protect their worshippers. For, if
they are not able to help those by whom they are worshipped, how can
they protect you by whom they are not worshipped?

<span id="v.iv-p33"></span>23. But, he says, the rites of our ancestors
ought to be retained. But what, seeing that all things have made
progress towards what is better? The world itself, which at first was
compacted of the germs of the elements throughout the void, in a
yielding sphere, or was dark with the shapeless confusion of the work as
yet without order, did it not afterwards receive (the distinction
between sky, sea, and earth being established), the forms of things
whereby it appears beautiful? The lands freed from the misty darkness
wondered at the new sun. The day does not shine in the beginning, but as
time proceeds, it is bright with increase of light, and grows warm with
increase of heat.

<span id="v.iv-p34"></span>24. The moon herself, by which in the
prophetic oracles the Church is represented, when first rising again,
she waxes to her monthly age, is hidden from us in darkness, and filling
up her horns little by little, so <span id="page_421">p. 421</span>
<span id="v.iv-Page_421"></span>completing them opposite to the sun,
glows with the brightness of clear shining.

<span id="v.iv-p35"></span>25. The earth in former times was without
experience of being worked for fruits; afterwards when the careful
husbandman began to lord it over the fields, and to clothe the shapeless
soil with vines, it put off its wild disposition, being softened by
domestic cultivation.

<span id="v.iv-p36"></span>26. The first age of the year itself, which
has tinged us with a likeness to itself as things begin to grow, as it
goes on becomes springlike with flowers soon about to fall, and grows up
to full age in fruits at the end.

<span id="v.iv-p37"></span>27. We too, inexperienced in age, have an
infancy of our senses, but changing as years go on, lay aside the
rudiments of our faculties.

<span id="v.iv-p38"></span>28. Let them say, then, that all things ought
to have remained in their first beginnings, that the world covered with
darkness is now displeasing, because it has brightened with the shining
of the sun. And how much more pleasant is it to have dispelled the
darkness of the mind than that of the body, and that the ray of faith
should have shone than that of the sun. So, then, the primeval state of
the world as of all things has passed away, that the venerable old age
of hoary faith might follow. Let those whom this touches find fault with
the harvest, because its abundance comes late; let them find fault with
the vintage, because it is at the close of the year; let them find fault
with the olive, because it is the latest of fruits.

<span id="v.iv-p39"></span>29. So, then, our harvest is the faith of
souls; the grace of the Church is the vintage of merits, which from the
beginning of the world flourished in the Saints, but in the last age has
spread itself over the people, that all might notice that the faith of
Christ has entered minds which were not rude (for there is no crown of
victory without an adversary), but the opinion being exploded which
before prevailed, that which was true is rightly preferred.

<span id="v.iv-p40"></span>30. If the old rites pleased, why did Rome
also take up foreign ones? I pass over the ground hidden by costly
building, and shepherds’ cottages glittering with degenerate gold. Why,
that I may reply to the very matter which they complain of, have they
eagerly received the images of captured cities, and conquered gods, and
the foreign rites of alien superstition? Whence is the pattern for
Cybele washing her chariots in a stream counterfeiting the Almo? Whence
were the Phrygian bards, and the deities of unjust Carthage always
hateful to the Romans? And her whom the Africans worship as Celestis,
the Persians as Nitra, and the greater number as Venus, according to a
difference of name, not a variety of deities. So they believed that
Victory was a goddess, which is certainly a gift, not a power; is
granted and does not rule, results from the aid of legions not the power
of religions. Is that goddess then great whom the number of soldiers
claims, or the event of battle gives?

<span id="v.iv-p41"></span>31. They ask to have her altar erected in the
Senate House of the city of Rome, that is where the majority who meet
together are Christians! There are altars in all the temples, and an
altar also in the temple of Victories. Since they take pleasure in
numbers they celebrate their sacrifices everywhere. To claim a sacrifice
on this one altar, what is it but to insult the Faith? Is it to be borne
that a heathen should sacrifice and a Christian be present? Let them
imbibe, he says, let them imbibe, even against their will, the smoke
with their eyes, the music with their ears, the ashes with their
throats, the incense with their nostrils, and let the dust stirred up
from our hearths cover their faces though they detest it. Are not the
baths, the colonnades, the streets filled with images sufficient for
them? Shall there not be a common lot in that common assembly? The
faithful portion of the senate will be bound by the voices of those that
call upon the gods, by the oaths of those that swear by them. If they
oppose they will seem to exhibit their falsehood, if they acquiesce, to
acknowledge what is sacrilege.

<span id="v.iv-p42"></span>32. Where, says he, shall we swear obedience
to your Grace’s laws and decrees? Does then your mind, which is
contained in the laws, gain assent and bind to faithfulness by heathen
ceremonies? The faith is attacked, not only of those who are present but
also of those who are absent, and what is more, O Emperors, your faith,
too, is attacked, for you compel if you command. Constantius of august
memory, though not yet initiated in the sacred Mysteries, thought that
he would be polluted if he saw that altar. He commanded it to be
removed, he did not command it to be replaced. The removal has the
authority of an act, the restoration has not that of a command.

<span id="v.iv-p43"></span>33. Let no one flatter himself because he is
absent. He who joins himself to others in mind is more present than he
whose assent is given by bodily presence. For it is more to be united in
mind than to be joined in body. The Senate has you as the presidents who
convene the assembly, it <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_422"></span>comes together for you; it gives its
conscience to you, not to the gods of the heathen; it prefers you to its
children, but not to its faith. This is a love to be desired, this is a
love greater than any dominion, if faith which preserves dominion be
secure.

<span id="v.iv-p44"></span>34. But perhaps it may move some that if this
be so, a most faithful Emperor <span
id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432) has been forsaken, as if forsooth
the reward of merits were to be estimated by the transitory measure of
things present. For what wise man is ignorant that human affairs are
ordered in a kind of round and cycle, for they have not always the same
success, but their state varies and they suffer vicissitudes.

<span id="v.iv-p46"></span>35. Whom have the Roman temples sent out more
prosperous than Cneius Pompeius? Yet, when he had encompassed the earth
with three triumphs, defeated in battle, a fugitive from war, and an
exile beyond the bounds of his own empire, he fell by the hand of an
eunuch of Canopus.

<span id="v.iv-p47"></span>36. Whom has the whole land of the East given
to the world more noble than Cyrus, king of the Persians? He too, after
conquering the most powerful princes who opposed him, and retaining
them, when conquered, as prisoners, perished, overthrown by the arms of
a woman. <span id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433) And that king who
was acknowledged to have treated even the vanquished with honour, had
his head cut off, placed in a vessel full of blood, and was bidden to be
satiated, being thus subject to the mocking of a woman’s power. So in
the course of that life of his like is not repaid by like, but far
otherwise.

<span id="v.iv-p49"></span>37. And whom do we find more devoted to
sacrificing than Hamilcar, leader of the Carthaginians? <span
id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434) Who, having offered sacrifice
between the ranks during the whole time of the battle, when he saw that
his side was conquered, threw himself into the fire which he was
feeding, that he might extinguish even with his own body those fires
which he had found to profit him nothing.

<span id="v.iv-p51"></span>38. What, then, shall I say of Julian? Who,
having credulously trusted the answers of the soothsayers, destroyed his
own means of retreat. <span id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435)
Therefore even in like cases there is not a like offence, for our
promises have deceived no one.

<span id="v.iv-p53"></span>39. I have answered those who provoked me as
though I had not been provoked, for my object was to refute the
Memorial, not to expose superstition. But let their very memorial make
you, O Emperor, more careful. For after narrating of former princes,
that the earlier of them practised the ceremonies of their fathers, and
the later did not abolish them; and saying in addition that, if the
religious practice of the older did not make a precedent, the connivance
of the later ones did; it plainly showed what you owe, both to your
faith, viz., that you should not follow the example of heathen rites,
and to your affection, that you should not abolish the decrees of your
brother. For if for their own side alone they have praised the
connivance of those princes, who, though Christians, yet in no way
abolished the heathen decrees, how much more ought you to defer to
brotherly love, so that you, who ought to overlook some things even if
you did not approve them in order not to detract from your brother’s
statutes, should now maintain what you judge to be in agreement both
with your own faith, and the bond of brotherhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3425"></span>[418:3426](2100369.htm#fr_3425) <span
id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span> Perhaps by a rhetorical exaggeration
reference is made to Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, who reigned less than
three years between them; or else to Pertinax and his successor Julian,
each of whom was murdered under three months.

<span id="fn_3426"></span>[418:3427](2100369.htm#fr_3426) <span
id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span> These emperors were Valerian, taken prisoner
by Sapor and treated with great indignity by the Persians, <span
class="sc"><span id="v.iv-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 260; and his son
Gallienus, under whom a number of generals, nicknamed the “Thirty
Tyrants,” claimed and exercised independent authority. “Gallienus made
but feeble and desultory attempts to put any of them down, turning into
wretched jests each new humiliation, and taking refuge in sensuality
from the hopeless task of state reorganization.”—*Dict. Chr. Biog. s.
voc.*

<span id="fn_3427"></span>[418:3428](2100369.htm#fr_3427) <span
id="v.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span> [Prov. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001)<span id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3428"></span>[419:3429](2100369.htm#fr_3428) <span
id="v.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span> The law of Valentinian, *de Episcopis,* of
which St. Jerome says \[Ep. LII. *ad Nepotianum,* vol. 6, p. 92, of this
series\]: “I do not complain of the law, but I grieve that we have
deserved a statute so harsh”…“yet even so,” he adds, “rapacity goes on
unchecked.” With the conversion of Constantine the world entered into
the Church, and bishops becoming great personages, ambition and worldly
passions gained a hold on many, and the scandals and evil of succeeding
centuries seem likely to last, till the world once more turns against
the Church of God. (Comp. Fr. Puller, *Primitive Saints and the See of
Rome,* chap. iv.)

<span id="fn_3429"></span>[419:3430](2100369.htm#fr_3429) <span
id="v.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span> Exemption had been granted to the clergy
from municipal offices by Constantine, but in consequence of abuse the
privilege had been restrained. (See note on Ep. XL. § 29.)

<span id="fn_3430"></span>[419:3431](2100369.htm#fr_3430) <span
id="v.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span> See Sozomen, *Eccl. Hist.* V. 5; Theodoret,
*Eccl. Hist.* III. 8.

<span id="fn_3431"></span>[419:3432](2100369.htm#fr_3431) <span
id="v.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span> Cf. *de Off. Min.* II. 78, 137, 138.

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[422:3433](2100369.htm#fr_3432) <span
id="v.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p45"></span> Gratian, murdered <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv-p45.1"></span>a.d.</span> 383. St. Ambrose on [Ps.
lxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#000)<span id="v.iv-p45.2"></span>
\[lxi.\] § 23, gives some details mentioned by no other writer. The
Emperor was noted for his great conscientiousness, and especially for
purity.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[422:3434](2100369.htm#fr_3433) <span
id="v.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p48"></span> Tomyris, queen of the Massagetæ.—Herodot. I.
214.

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[422:3435](2100369.htm#fr_3434) <span
id="v.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p50"></span> Herod. VII. 167.

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[422:3436](2100369.htm#fr_3435) <span
id="v.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p52"></span> Sozomen, *H.E.* VI. 1. Cf. St. Aug. *de Civ.
Dei,* IV. 29; V. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XX: To Marcellina as to the Arian Party.](2100370)
