[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100086)  [Next](2100088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p1"></span>We must strive for preferment only by
right means. An office undertaken must be carried out wisely and with
moderation. The inferior clergy should not detract from the bishop’s
reputation by feigned virtues; nor again, should the bishop be jealous
of a cleric, but he should be just in all things and especially in
giving judgment.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>119. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>I think</span>, then, that one should
strive to win preferment, especially in the Church, only by good actions
and with a right aim; so that there may be no proud conceit, no idle
carelessness, no shameful disposition of mind, no unseemly ambition. A
plain simplicity of mind is enough for everything, and commends itself
quite sufficiently.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p3"></span>120. When in office, again, it is not
right to be harsh and severe, nor may one be too easy; lest on the one
hand we should seem to be exercising a despotic power, and on the other
to be by no means filling the office we had taken up.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p4"></span>121. We must strive also to win many
by kindnesses and duties that we can do, and to preserve the favour
already shown us. For they will with good reason forget the <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-Page_62"></span>benefits of former times if they are
now vexed at some great wrong. For it often enough happens that those
one has shown favour to and allowed to rise step by step, are driven
away, if one decides in some unworthy way to put another before them.
But it is seemly for a priest to show such favour in his kindnesses and
his decisions as to guard equity, and to show regard to the other clergy
as to parents.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p5"></span>122. Those who once stood approved
should not now become overbearing, but rather, as mindful of the grace
they have received, stand firm in their humility. A priest ought not to
be offended if either cleric or attendant or any ecclesiastic should win
regard for himself, by showing mercy, or by fasting, or by uprightness
of life, or by teaching and reading. For the grace of the Church is the
praise of the teacher. It is a good thing that the work of another
should be praised, if only it be done without any desire to boast. For
each one should receive praise from the lips of his neighbour, and not
from his own mouth, and each one should be commended by the work he has
done, not merely by the wishes he had.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p6"></span>123. But if any one is disobedient to
his bishop and wishes to exalt and upraise himself, and to overshadow
his bishop’s merits by a feigned appearance of learning or humility or
mercy, he is wandering from the truth in his pride; for the rule of
truth is, to do nothing to advance one’s own cause whereby another loses
ground, nor to use whatever good one has to the disgrace or blame of
another.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p7"></span>124. Never protect a wicked man, nor
allow the sacred things to be given over to an unworthy one; on the
other hand, do not harass and press hard on a man whose fault is not
clearly proved. Injustice quickly gives offence in every case, but
especially in the Church, where equity ought to exist, where like
treatment should be given to all, so that a powerful person may not
claim the more, nor a rich man appropriate the more. For whether we be
poor or rich, we are one in Christ. Let him that lives a holier life
claim nothing more thereby for himself; for he ought rather to be the
more humble for it.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxiv-p8"></span>125. In giving judgment let us have
no respect of persons. Favour must be put out of sight, and the case be
decided on its merits. Nothing is so great a strain on another’s good
opinion or confidence, as the fact of our giving away the cause of the
weaker to the more powerful in any case that comes before us. The same
happens if we are hard on the poor, whilst we make excuses for the rich
man when guilty. Men are ready enough to flatter those in high
positions, so as not to let them think themselves injured, or to feel
vexed as though overthrown. But if thou fearest to give offence then do
not undertake to give judgment. If thou art a priest or some cleric do
not urge it. It is allowable for thee to be silent in the matter, if it
be a money affair, though it is always due to consistency to be on the
side of equity. But in the cause of God, where there is danger to the
whole Church, it is no small sin to act as though one saw nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Benefits should be conferred on the poor rather than
on the rich, for these latter either think a return is expected from
them, or else they are angry at seeming to be indebted for such an
action. But the poor man makes God the debtor in his place, and freely
owns to the benefits he has received. To these remarks is added a
warning to despise riches.](2100088)
