[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100016)  [Next](2100018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p1"></span>We must guard also against a visible
enemy when he incites us by silence; by the help of which alone we can
escape from those greater than ourselves, and maintain that humility
which we must display towards all.

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p2"></span>17. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.v-p2.1"></span>But</span> we must also guard against him who
can be seen, and who provokes us, and spurs us on, and exasperates us,
and supplies what will excite us to licentiousness or lust. If, then,
any one reviles us, irritates, stirs us up to violence, tries to make us
quarrel; let us keep silence, let us not be ashamed to become dumb. For
he who irritates us and does us an injury is committing sin, and wishes
us to become like himself.

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p3"></span>18. Certainly if thou art silent, and
hidest thy feelings, he is wont to say: “Why are you silent? Speak if
you dare; but you dare not, you are dumb, I have made you speechless.”
If thou art silent, he is the more excited. He thinks himself beaten,
laughed at, little thought of, and ridiculed. If thou answerest, he
thinks he has become the victor, because he has found one like himself.
For if thou art silent, men will say: “That man has been abusive, but
this one held him in contempt.” If thou return the abuse, they will say:
“Both have been abusive.” Both will be condemned, neither will be
acquitted. Therefore it is his object to irritate, so that I may speak
and act as he does. But it is the duty of a just man to hide his
feelings and say nothing, to preserve the fruit of a good conscience, to
trust himself rather to the judgment of good men than to the insolence
of a calumniator, and to be satisfied with the stability of his own
character. For that is: “To keep silence even from good words;” <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) since one who has a good conscience ought
not to be troubled by false words, nor ought he to make more of
another’s abuse than of the witness of his own heart.

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p5"></span>19. So, then, let a man guard also his
humility. If, however, he is unwilling to appear too humble, he thinks
as follows, and says within himself: “Am I to allow this man to despise
me, and say such things to my face against me, as though I could not
open my mouth before him? Why should I not also say something whereby I
can grieve him? Am I to let him do me wrong, as though I were not a man,
and as though I could not avenge myself? Is he to bring charges against
me as though I could not bring together worse ones against him?”

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p6"></span>20. Whoever speaks like this is not
gentle and humble, nor is he without temptation. The tempter stirs him
up, and himself puts such thoughts in his heart. Often and often, too,
the evil spirit employs another person, and gets him to say such things
to him; but do thou set thy foot firm on the rock. Although a slave
should abuse, let the just man be silent, and if a weak man utter
insults, let him be silent, and if a poor man should make accusations,
let him not answer. These are the weapons of the just man, so that he
may conquer by giving way, as those skilled in throwing the javelin are
wont to conquer by giving way, and in flight to wound their pursuers
with severer blows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[4:54](2100017.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.i.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p4"></span> [Psa.
39.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.ii.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. In this matter we must imitate David's silence and
humility, so as not even to seem deserving of harm.](2100018)
