[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100240)  [Next](2100242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p1"></span>The marvel is, not that men have failed
to know Christ, but that they have not listened to the words of the
Scriptures. Christ, indeed, was not known, even of angels, save by
revelation, nor again, by His forerunner. Follows a description of
Christ’s triumphal ascent into heaven, and the excellence of its glory
over the assumption of certain prophets. Lastly, from exposition of the
conversation with angels upon this occasion, the omnipotence of the Son
is proved, as against the Arians.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p2.1"></span>On</span> consideration, your Majesty, of
the reason wherefore men have so far gone astray, or that
many—alas!—should follow diverse ways of belief concerning the Son of
God, the marvel seems to be, not at all that human knowledge has been
baffled in dealing with superhuman things, but that it has not submitted
to the authority of the Scriptures.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p3"></span>2. What reason, indeed, is there to
wonder, if by their worldly wisdom men failed to comprehend the mystery
of God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, in Whom all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge are hidden, <span
id="fr_2329"></span>[2330](#fn_2329) that mystery of which not even
angels have been able to take knowledge, save by revelation?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p5"></span><span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-Page_263"></span>3. For who could by force of
imagination, and not by faith, follow the Lord Jesus, now descending
from the highest heaven to the shades below, now rising again from Hades
to the heavenly places; in a moment self-emptied, that He might dwell
amongst us, and yet never made less than He was, the Son being ever in
the Father and the Father in the Son?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p6"></span>4. Even Christ’s forerunner, though only
in so far as representing the synagogue, <span
id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330) doubted concerning Him, even he who
was appointed to go before the face of the Lord, and at last sending
messengers, enquired: “Art Thou He that should come, or do we look for
another?” <span id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p9"></span>5. Angels, too, stood spellbound in
wonder at the heavenly mystery. And so, when the Lord rose again, and
the heights of heaven could not bear the glory of His rising from the
dead, Who of late, so far as regarded His flesh, had been confined in
the narrow bounds of a sepulchre, even the heavenly hosts doubted and
were amazed.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p10"></span>6. For a Conqueror came, adorned with
wondrous spoils, the Lord was in His holy Temple, before Him went angels
and archangels, marvelling at the prey wrested from death, and though
they knew that nothing can be added to God from the flesh, because all
things are lower than God, nevertheless, beholding the trophy of the
Cross, whereof “the government was upon His shoulder,” and the spoils
borne by the everlasting Conqueror, they, as if the gates could not
afford passage for Him Who had gone forth from them, though indeed they
can never o’erspan His greatness—they sought some broader and more lofty
passage for Him on His return—so entirely had He remained undiminished
by His self-emptying.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p11"></span>7. However, it was meet that a new way
should be prepared before the face of the new Conqueror—for a Conqueror
is always, as it were, taller and greater in person than others; but,
forasmuch as the Gates of Righteousness, which are the Gates of the Old
and the New Testament, wherewith heaven is opened, are eternal, they are
not indeed changed, but raised, for it was not merely one man but the
whole world that entered, in the person of the All-Redeemer.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p12"></span>8. Enoch had been translated, Elias
caught up, but the servant is not above his Master. For “No man hath
ascended into heaven, but He Who came down from heaven;” <span
id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332) and even of Moses, though his
corpse was never seen on earth, we do nowhere read as of one abiding in
celestial glory, unless it was after that the Lord, by the earnest of
His own Resurrection, burst the bonds of hell and exalted the souls of
the godly. Enoch, then, was translated, and Elias caught up; both as
servants, both in the body, but not after resurrection from the dead,
nor with the spoils of death and the triumphal train of the Cross, had
they been seen of angels.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p14"></span>9. And therefore \[the angels\]
descrying the approach of the Lord of all, first and only Vanquisher of
Death, bade their princes that the gates should be lifted up, saying in
adoration, “Lift up the gates, such as are princes amongst you, and be
ye lifted up, O everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come
in.” <span id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p16"></span>10. Yet there were still, even amongst
the hosts of heaven, some that were amazed, overcome with astonishment
at such pomp and glory as they had never yet beheld, and therefore they
asked: “Who is the King of glory?” <span
id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334) Howbeit, seeing that the angels (as
well as ourselves) acquire their knowledge step by step, and are capable
of advancement, they certainly must display differences of power and
understanding, for God alone is above and beyond the limits imposed by
gradual advance, possessing, as He does, every perfection from
everlasting.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p18"></span>11. Others, again,—those, to wit, who
had been present at His rising again, those who had seen or who already
recognized Him,—made reply: “It is the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in battle.”

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p19"></span>12. Then, again, sang the multitude of
angels, in triumphal chorus: “Lift up the gates, O ye that are their
princes, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory
shall come in.”

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p20"></span>13. And back again came the challenge
of them that stood astonished: “Who is that King of glory? For we saw
Him having neither form nor comeliness; <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) if then it be not He, *who* is that
King of glory?”

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p22"></span>14. Whereto answer they which know:
“The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of glory.” Therefore, the Lord of
Hosts, He is the Son. How then do the Arians call Him fallible, Whom we
believe to be Lord of Hosts, even as we believe of the Father? How can
they draw distinctions between <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-Page_264"></span>the sovereign powers of Each, when we
have found the Son, even as also the Father, entitled “Lord of Saboath”?
For, in this very passage, the reading in many copies is: “The Lord of
Sabaoth, He is the King of glory.” Now the translators have, for the
“Lord of Sabaoth,” rendered in some places “the Lord of Hosts,” in
others “the Lord the King,” and in others “the Lord Omnipotent.”
Therefore, since He Who ascended is the Son, and, again, He Who ascended
is the Lord of Sabaoth, it surely follows that the Son of God is
omnipotent!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2329"></span>[262:2330](2100241.htm#fr_2329) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p4"></span> [Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[263:2331](2100241.htm#fr_2330) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p7"></span> St. Ambrose perhaps meant that John
Baptist had, for a space, lost the prophetic Light, when he doubted, and
sent disciples to enquire of Jesus. The darkness of the dungeon had
drawn a cloud over the prisoner’s soul, and for a time he was in the
state described by [Isaiah ix. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p7.1"></span>, walking in darkness and the shadow of
death, the state of the people of Israel (represented by the synagogue)
at the time of our Lord’s Advent. See S. [Matt. iv.
12-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[263:2332](2100241.htm#fr_2331) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p8"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[263:2333](2100241.htm#fr_2332) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p13"></span> S. [John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[263:2334](2100241.htm#fr_2333) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p15"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>.
St. Ambrose follows the LXX.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[263:2335](2100241.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p17"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[263:2336](2100241.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p21"></span> [Isa. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. None can ascend to heaven without faith; in any case,
he who hath so ascended thither will be cast out wherefore, faith must
be zealously preserved. We ourselves each have a heaven within, the
gates whereof must be opened and be raised by confession of the Godhead
of Christ, which gates are not raised by Arians, nor by those who seek
the Son amongst earthly things, and who must therefore, like the
Magdalene, be sent back to the apostles, against whom the gates of hell
shall not prevail. Scriptures are cited to show that the servant of the
Lord must not diminish aught of his Master's honour.](2100242)
