[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100231)  [Next](2100233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p1"></span>*Observations on the words of John the
Baptist (*<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>*[John i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p1.2"></span>),
which may be referred to divine fore-ordinance, but at any rate, as
explained by the foregoing considerations, must be understood of the
Incarnation. The precedence of Christ is mystically expounded, with
reference to the history of Ruth.*

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p2"></span>63. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p2.1"></span>But</span> \[say they\] it is written: “After
me cometh a Man, Who is made before me, because He was before me;” <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) and so they <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> <span id="iv.iv.v.x-Page_252"></span>argue: “See, He Who was
aforetime is ‘made.’” Let us take the words by themselves. “After me
cometh a Man.” He, then, Who came is a Man, and this is the Man Who “was
made.” But the word “man” connotes sex, and sex is attributed to human
nature, but never to the Godhead.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p4"></span>64. I might argue: The Man \[Christ
Jesus\] was in pre-existence so far as His body was foreknown, though
His power is from everlasting—for both the Church and the Saints were
foreordained before the worlds began. But here I lay aside this
argument, and urge that the being made concerns not the Godhead, but the
nature of the Incarnation, even as John himself said: “This is He of
Whom I said: After me cometh a Man, Who was made before me.”

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p5"></span>65. The Scripture, then, having, as I
showed above, discovered the twofold nature in Christ, that you might
understand the presence of both Godhead and Manhood, here begins with
the flesh; for it is the custom of Holy Writ to begin without fixed rule
sometimes with the Godhead of Christ, and descend to the visible tokens
of Incarnation; sometimes, on the other hand, to start from its
humility, and rise to the glory of the Godhead, as oftentimes in the
Prophets and Evangelists, and in St. Paul. Here, then, after this use,
the writer begins with the Incarnation of our Lord, and then proclaims
His Divinity, not to confound, but to distinguish, the human and the
divine. But Arians, like Jew vintners, <span
id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) mix water with the wine,
confounding the divine generation with the human, and ascribing to the
majesty of God what is properly said only of the lowliness of the flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p7"></span>66. I have no fears of a certain
objection they are likely to put forward, namely, that in the words
cited we have “a *man*”—for some have, “Who cometh after me.” But here,
too, let them observe what precedes. “The Word,” it is said, “was made
flesh.” <span id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) Having said that the
Word was made *flesh*, the Evangelist added no mention of *man*. We
understand “man” there in the mention of “flesh,” and “flesh” by the
mention of “man.” After the statement made, then, that “the Word was
made *flesh*,” there was no need here to particularly mention “man,”
whom he already intended by using the name “flesh.”

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p9"></span>67. Later on, St. John uses the lamb,
that “taketh away the sins of the world,” as an example; and to teach
you plainly the Incarnation of Him, of Whom he had spoken before, he
says: “This is He of Whom I said before: After me cometh a Man, Who is
made before me,” to wit, of Whom I said that He was “made” as being man,
not as being God. However, to show that it was He Who was before the
worlds, and none other, that became flesh, lest we should suppose two
Sons of God, he adds: “because He was before me.” If the words “was
made” had referred to the divine generation, what need was there that
the writer should add this, and repeat himself? But, having first said,
with regard to the Incarnation only, “After me cometh a Man, Who is made
before me,” he added: “because He was before me,” because it was needful
to teach the eternity of \[Christ’s\] Godhead; and this is the reason
why St. John acknowledged Christ’s priority, that He, Who is His own
Father’s eternal Power, may be presented as on that account duly
preferred. <span id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p11"></span>68. But the abounding activity of the
spiritual understanding makes it a pleasing exercise to sally forth and
drive into a corner the Arians, who will understand the term “made” in
this passage, not of the manhood, but of the Godhead \[of Christ\]. What
ground, indeed, is left for them to take their stand upon, when the
Baptist has declared that “after me cometh One Who is made before me,”
that is, Who, though in the course of earthly life He comes after me,
yet is placed above the degree of my worth and grace, and Who has title
to be worshipped as God. For the words “cometh after me” belong to an
event in time, but “was before me” signify Christ’s eternity; and “is
made before me” refer to His pre-eminence, forasmuch as, indeed, the
mystery of the Incarnation is above human deserving. <span
id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p13"></span><span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-Page_253"></span>69. Again, St. John Baptist also taught
in less weighty language what ideas they were he had combined, saying:
“After me cometh a Man, Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear,” setting
forth at least the more excellent dignity \[of Christ\], though not the
eternity of His Divine Generation. Now these words are so fully intended
of the Incarnation, that Scripture hath given us, in an earlier book, a
human counterpart of the mystic sandal. For, by the Law, when a man
died, the marriage bond with his wife was passed on to his brother, or
other man next of kin, in order that the seed of the brother or next of
kin might renew the life of the house, and thus it was that Ruth, though
she was foreign-born, but yet had possessed a husband of the Jewish
people, who had left a kinsman of near relation, being seen and loved of
Boaz whilst gleaning and maintaining herself and her mother-in-law with
that she gleaned, was yet not taken of Boaz to wife, until she had first
loosed the shoe from \[the foot of\] him whose wife she ought, by the
Law, to have become. <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p15"></span>70. The story is a simple one, but deep
are its hidden meanings, for that which was done was the outward
betokening of somewhat further. If indeed we should rack the sense so as
to fit the letter exactly, we should almost find the words an occasion
of a certain shame and horror, that we should regard them as intending
and conveying the thought of common bodily intercourse; but it was the
foreshadowing of One Who was to arise from Jewry—whence Christ was,
after the flesh—Who should, with the seed of heavenly teaching, revive
the seed of his dead kinsman, that is to say, the people, and to Whom
the precepts of the Law, in their spiritual significance, assigned the
sandal of marriage, for the espousals of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p16"></span>71. Moses was not the Bridegroom, for to
him cometh the word, “Loose thy shoe from off thy foot,” <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) that he might give place to his
Lord. Nor was Joshua, the son of Nun, the Bridegroom, for to him also it
was told, saying, “Loose thy shoe from off thy foot,” <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) lest, by reason of the likeness of
his name, he should be thought the spouse of the Church. None other is
the Bridegroom but Christ alone, of Whom St. John said: “He Who hath the
bride is the Bridegroom.” <span id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234)
They, therefore, loose their shoes, but His shoe cannot be loosed, even
as St. John said: “I am not worthy to loose the latchet of His
shoe.” <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p21"></span>72. Christ alone, then, is the
Bridegroom to Whom the Church, His bride, comes from the nations, and
gives herself in wedlock; aforetime poor and starving, but now rich with
Christ’s harvest; gathering in the hidden bosom of her mind handfuls of
the rich crop and gleanings of the Word, that so she may nourish with
fresh food her who is worn out, bereaved by the death of her son, and
starving, even the mother of the dead people,—leaving not the widow and
destitute, whilst she seeks new children.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p22"></span>73. Christ, then, alone is the
Bridegroom, grudging not even to the synagogue the sheaves of His
harvest. Would that the synagogue had not of her own will shut herself
out! She had sheaves that she might herself have gathered, but, her
people being dead, she, like one bereaved by the death of her son, began
to gather sheaves, whereby she might live, by the hand of the Church—the
which sheaves they who come in joyfulness shall carry, even as it is
written: “Yet surely shall they come with joy, bringing their sheaves
with them.” <span id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p24"></span>74. Who, indeed, but Christ could dare
to claim the Church as His bride, whom He alone, and none other, hath
called from Libanus, saying: “Come hither from Libanus, my bride; come
hither from Libanus”? <span id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) Or of
Whom else could the Church have said: “His throat is sweetness, and He
is altogether desirable”? <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238) And
seeing that we entered upon this discussion from speaking of the shoes
of His feet,—to Whom else but the Word of God incarnate can those words
apply? “His legs are pillars of marble, set upon bases of gold.” <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) For Christ alone walks in the souls
and makes His path in the minds of His saints, in which, as upon bases
of gold and foundations of precious stone the heavenly Word has left His
footprints ineffaceably impressed.

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p28"></span>75. Clearly we see, then, that both the
man and the type point to the mystery of the Incarnation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[251:2227](2100232.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p3"></span> S. [John i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[252:2228](2100232.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p6"></span> Cf. Athanasius, *Third Oration Against
the Arians,* § 35—“But should any man, noticing the divinity revealed in
the action of the Word, deny the reality of the body, or marking the
things peculiar to the body, deny the presence of the Word in flesh or
judging from His human experiences and behaviour, conceive a low esteem
of the Word, such a person, like the Jew vintner, mixing water with his
wine, will hold the Cross a scandal, and, like a heathen philosopher,
regard the preaching as folly—which is just the state of the ungodly
followers of Arius.” Horace, *Sat.* I. v. 3, 4—“*inde Forum Appî,
Differtum nautis, cauponibus atque malignis.*”

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[252:2229](2100232.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p8"></span> S. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[252:2230](2100232.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p10"></span> The explanation of St. John Baptist’s
words in the Fourth Gospel is to be found, indeed, in the same Gospel
([John 1.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p10.1"></span>) and in the other three Gospels. See [Matt.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011), [Mark
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#007), [Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p10.2"></span>. In S. [John i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p10.3"></span>,
the Baptist says of Jesus Christ not merely “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p10.4"></span>πρότερός μου ἦν</span>” but “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.v.x-p10.5"></span>πρῶτός μου
ἦν</span>”—*i.e.* “first in relation to me” (and every other human
being), “the principle of my very being.” The Arians understood the
phrase as if the ordinary comparative, suitable for expressing the
ordinary priority of human beings to each other, had been used.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[252:2231](2100232.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p12"></span> Or the meaning may be understood by
reference to the fact that in the Man Christ Jesus there was seen, and
felt, grace, authority, and power such as was more than earthly, more
than human. “Full of grace are Thy lips, because God hath blessed thee
for ever.” So it was that He spake as never man spake, teaching with
authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[253:2232](2100232.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p14"></span> [Deut.
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005), [Ruth
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[253:2233](2100232.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p17"></span> [Ex. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[253:2234](2100232.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p18"></span> [Josh. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[253:2235](2100232.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p19"></span> S. [John iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[253:2236](2100232.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p20"></span> S. [John i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[253:2237](2100232.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p23"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[253:2238](2100232.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p25"></span> [Song of Solomon iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[253:2239](2100232.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p26"></span> [Song of Solomon v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[253:2240](2100232.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p27"></span> [Song of Solomon v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. St. Ambrose returns to the main question, and shows
that whenever Christ is said to have “been made” (or “become”), this
must be understood with reference to His Incarnation, or to certain
limitations. In this sense several passages of Scripture--especially of
St. Paul--are expounded. The eternal Priesthood of Christ, prefigured in
Melchizedek. Christ possesses not only likeness, but oneness with the
Father.](2100233)
