[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100035)  [Next](2100037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p1"></span>There are three things to be noticed
in the actions of our life. First, our passions are to be controlled by
our reason; next, we ought to observe a suitable moderation in our
desires; and, lastly, everything ought to be done at the right time and
in the proper order. All these qualities shone forth so conspicuously in
the holy men of Old Testament time, that it is evident they were well
furnished with what men call the cardinal virtues.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>105. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>I think</span> I have said enough on the
art of speaking. Let us now consider what beseems an active life. We
note that there are three things <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155)
to be regarded in connection with this subject. One is, that passion
should not resist our reason. In that way only can our duties be brought
into line with what is seemly. For if passion yields to reason we can
easily maintain what is seemly in our duties. Next, we must take care
lest, either by showing greater zeal or less than the matter we take up
demands, we look as though we were taking up a small matter with great
parade or were treating a great matter with but little care. Thirdly, as
regards moderation in our endeavours and works, and also with regard to
order in doing things and in the right timing of things, I think that
everything should be open and straightforward.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p4"></span>106. But first comes that which I may
call the foundation of all, namely, that our passions should obey our
reason. The second <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-Page_19"></span>and third are really the
same—moderation in either case. There is room with us for the survey of
a pleasing form, which is accounted beauty, and the consideration of
dignity. Next follows the consideration of the order and the timing of
things. These, then, are the three points, and we must see whether we
can show them in perfection in any one of the saints.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p5"></span>107. First there is our father
Abraham, <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) who was formed and
called for the instruction of generations to come. When bidden to go
forth from his own country and kindred and from his father’s house,
though bound and held back by many ties of relationship, did he not give
proof that in him passion was subject to reason? Who does not delight in
the sweet charms of his native land, his kindred, and his own home?
Their sweetness then delighted him. But the thought of the heavenly
command and of an eternal reward influenced him more. Did he not reflect
that he could not take his wife with him without the greatest danger,
unused as she was to hardships, and so tender to bear insults, and so
beautiful as to be likely to arouse the lust of profligate men? Yet he
decided somewhat deliberately to undergo all this rather than to escape
it by making excuses. Lastly, when he had gone into Egypt, he advised
her to say she was his sister, not his wife.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p7"></span>108. See here what passions are at
work! He feared for the chastity of his wife, he feared for his own
safety, he had his suspicions about the lust of the Egyptians, and yet
the reasonableness of performing his duty to God prevailed with him. For
he thought that by the favour of God he could be safe everywhere, but if
he offended the Lord he could not abide unharmed even at home. Thus
reason conquered passion, and brought it into subjection to itself.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>109. When his nephew was taken
captive, <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) without being terrified
or dismayed at the hordes of so many kings, he resumed the war. And
after the victory was gained he refused his share of the spoil, which he
himself had really won. Also, when a son was promised him, though he
thought of the lost vigour of his body, now as good as dead, and the
barrenness of his wife, and his own great age, he believed God, though
it was against the law of nature. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p11"></span>110. Note how everything meets
together here. Passion was not wanting, but it was checked. Here was a
mind equable in action, which neither treated great things as
unimportant or little things as great. Here there was moderation in
different affairs, order in things, fitness of occasion, due measure in
words. He was foremost in faith, conspicuous in virtue, vigorous in
battle, in victory not greedy, at home hospitable, and to his wife
attentive.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p12"></span>111. Jacob also, his holy grandson,
loved to pass his time at home free from danger; but his mother wished
him to live in foreign parts, and so give place to his brother’s
anger. <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) Sound counsels prevailed
over natural feelings. An exile from home, banished from his parents,
yet everywhere, in all he did, he observed due measure, such as was
fitting, and made use of his opportunities at the right time. So dear
was he to his parents at home, that the one, moved by the promptness of
his compliance, gave him his blessing, the other inclined towards him
with tender love. In the judgment of his brother, also, he was placed
first, when he thought that he ought to give up his food to his
brother. <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) For though according to
his natural inclinations he wished for food, yet when asked for it he
gave it up from a feeling of brotherly affection. He was a faithful
shepherd of the flock for his master, an attentive son-in-law to his
father-in-law; he was active in work, sparing in his meals, conspicuous
in making amends, lavish in repaying. Nay, so well did he calm his
brother’s anger that he received his favour, though he had feared his
enmity. <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p16"></span>112. What shall I say of
Joseph? <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) He certainly had a
longing for freedom, and yet endured the bonds of servitude. How meek he
was in slavery, how unchanging in virtue, how kindly in prison! Wise,
too, in interpreting, and self-restrained in exercising his power! In
the time of plenty was he not careful? In the time of famine was he not
fair? Did he not praiseworthily do everything in order, and use
opportunities at their season; giving justice to his people by the
restraining guidance of his office?

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p18"></span>113. Job also, both in prosperity and
adversity, was blameless, patient, pleasing, and acceptable to God. He
was harassed with pain, yet could find consolation.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p19"></span>114. David also was brave in war,
patient in time of adversity, peaceful at Jerusalem, in the hour of
victory merciful, on committing sin repentant, in his old age
foreseeing. He preserved due measure in his actions, and <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-Page_20"></span>took
his opportunities as they came. He has set them down in the songs of
succeeding years; and so it seems to me that he has by his life no less
than by the sweetness of his hymns poured forth an undying song of his
own merits to God.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p20"></span>115. What duty connected with the
chief virtues was wanting in these men? <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) In the first place they showed
prudence, which is exercised in the search of the truth, and which
imparts a desire for full knowledge; next, justice, which assigns each
man his own, does not claim another’s, and disregards its own advantage,
so as to guard the rights of all; thirdly, fortitude, which both in
warfare and at home is conspicuous in greatness of mind and
distinguishes itself in the strength of the body; fourthly, temperance,
which preserves the right method and order in all things that we think
should either be done or said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[18:156](2100036.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 39, § 141.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[19:157](2100036.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> [Gen. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[19:158](2100036.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p9"></span> [Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[19:159](2100036.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p10"></span> [Gen.
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004), [Gen.
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[19:160](2100036.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p13"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#042)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[19:161](2100036.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p14"></span> [Gen. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>. St. Ambrose at times gets carried away
by his subject and says more than is warranted by the words of the
Bible. Cf. also II. § 101; II. § 154; III. § 64.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[19:162](2100036.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p15"></span> [Gen. xxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[19:163](2100036.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p17"></span> [Gen.
xxxix](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#000)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[20:164](2100036.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxiv-p21"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. A reason is given why this book did not open with a
discussion of the above-mentioned virtues. It is also concisely pointed
out that the same virtues existed in the ancient fathers.](2100037)
