[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100309)  [Next](2100311) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p1"></span>As to the words of St. Peter to Simon
Magus, from which the Novatians infer that there was no forgiveness for
the latter, it is pointed out that St. Peter, knowing his evil heart,
might well use words of doubt, and then by some Old Testament instances
it is pointed out that “perchance” does not exclude forgiveness. The
apostles transmitted to us that penitence, the fruits of which are shown
in the case of David. St. Ambrose then adduces the example of the
Ephraimites, whose penitence must be followed in order to gain the
divine mercy and the sacraments.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p2"></span>29. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p2.1"></span>The</span> Novatians bring up a question
from the words of the Apostle Peter. Because he said, “if perchance,”
they think that he did not imply that forgiveness would be granted on
repentance. But let them consider concerning whom the words were spoken:
of Simon, who did not believe through faith, but was meditating
trickery. So too the Lord to him who said, “Lord, I will follow Thee
withersoever Thou goest,” replied, “Foxes have holes.” <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) For He knew that the man’s
sincerity was not wholly perfect. If, then, the Lord refused to him who
was not baptized permission to follow Him, because He saw that he was
not sincere, do you wonder that the Apostle did not absolve him who
after baptism was guilty of deceit, and whom he declared to be still in
the bond of iniquity?

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p4"></span>30. But let this be my answer to them.
As to myself, I say that Peter did not doubt, and I do not think that so
great a question can be burked by the questionable interpretation of a
single word. For if they think that Peter doubted, did God doubt, Who
said to the prophet Jeremiah: “Stand in the court of the Lord’s house,
and thou shalt give an answer to all Judah, to those who come to worship
in the Lord’s house, even all the words which I have appointed for thee
to answer them. Keep not back a word, perchance they will hearken and be
converted.” <span id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) Let them say,
then, that God also knew not what would happen.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p6"></span>31. But ignorance is not implied in
that word, but the common custom of holy Scripture is observed, in order
to simplicity of utterance. Inasmuch as the Lord says also to Ezekiel:
“Son of man, I will send thee unto the house of Israel, to those who
have angered Me, both themselves and their fathers, unto this day, and
thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord, if perchance they will
hear and be afraid.” <span id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) Did He
not know that they could or could not be converted? So, then, that
expression is not always a proof of doubt.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p8"></span>32. Lastly, the wise men of this world,
who stake all their reputation on expressions and words, do not
everywhere use the Latin word *forte*, “perchance,” or its Greek
equivalent <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p8.1"></span>τάχα</span>, as an expression of doubt. And
so they say that their earliest poet used the words,

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p9"></span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p9.1"></span>ἦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p9.2"></span>῾ τάχα χήρη</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p10"></span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p10.1"></span>ἔσομαι</span>,

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p11"></span>which is, “I shall soon be a widow;”
and the passage goes on:

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p12"></span>… <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p12.1"></span>τάχα γάρ σε κατακνέουσιν ᾽Αχαιοὶ</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p13.1"></span>πάντες εφορμηθέντες</span>. <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088)

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p15"></span>But he had no doubt that when all were
Joining in the attack one might well be laid low by all.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p16"></span>33. But let us use our own instances
rather than foreign ones. You find in the Gospel that the Son Himself
says of the Father (when He had sent His servants to His vineyard, and
they had been slain), that the Father said, “I will send My well-beloved
Son, perchance they will reverence Him.” <span
id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) And in another place the Son says
of Himself: “Ye know neither Me nor My Father; for if ye knew Me, ye
would perchance know My Father also.” <span
id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090)

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p19"></span>34. If, then, Peter used those words
which were used by God without any prejudice to His knowledge, why
should we not assume that Peter also used them without prejudice to his
belief? For he could not doubt concerning the gift of Christ, Who had
given him the power of forgiving sins; especially <span id="page_350">p.
350</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.v-Page_350"></span>since he was bound not
to leave any place for the craftiness of heretics who desire to deprive
men of hope, in order the more easily to insinuate into the despairing
their opinion as to the reiteration of baptism.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p20"></span>35. But the apostles, having this
baptism according to the direction of Christ, taught repentance,
promised forgiveness, and remitted guilt, as David taught when he said:
“Blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed
sin.” <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091) He calls each blessed,
both him whose sins are remitted by the font, and him whose sin is
covered by good works. For he who repents ought not only to wash away
his sin by his tears, but also to cover and hide his former
transgressions by amended deeds, that sin may not be imputed to him.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p22"></span>36. Let us, then, cover our falls by
our subsequent acts; let us purify ourselves by tears, that the Lord our
God may hear us when we lament, as He heard Ephraim when weeping, as it
is written: “I have surely heard Ephraim weeping.” <span
id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) And He expressly repeats the very
words of Ephraim: “Thou hast chastised me and I was chastised, like a
calf I was not trained.” <span id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) For
a calf disports itself, and leaves its stall, and so Ephraim was
untrained like a calf far away from the stall; because he had forsaken
the stall of the Lord, followed Jeroboam, <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) and worshipped the calves, which
future event was prophetically indicated through Aaron, <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095) namely, that the people of the Jews
would fall after this manner. And so repenting, Ephraim says: “Turn Thou
me, and I shall be turned, for Thou art the Lord my God. Surely in the
end of my captivity I repented, and after I learned I mourned over the
days of confusion, and subjected myself to Thee because I received
reproach and made Thee known.” <span
id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096)

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p28"></span>37. We see how to repent, with what
words and with what acts, that the days of sin are called “days of
confusion;” for there is confusion when Christ is denied.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p29"></span>38. Let us, then, submit ourselves to
God, and not be subject to sin, and when we ponder the remembrance of
our offences, let us blush as though at some disgrace, and not speak of
them as a glory to us, as some boast of overcoming modesty, or putting
down the feeling of justice. Let our conversion be such, that we who did
not know God may now ourselves declare Him to others, that the Lord,
moved by such a conversion on our part, may answer to us: “Ephraim is
from youth a dear son, a pleasant child, for since My words are
concerning him, I will verily remember him, therefore have I hastened to
be over him; I will surely have mercy on him, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097)

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p31"></span>39. And what mercy He promises us, the
Lord also shows, when He says further on: “I have satiated every thirsty
soul, and have satisfied every hungry soul. Therefore, I awaked and
beheld, and My sleep was sweet unto Me.” <span
id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) We observe that the Lord promises
His sacraments to those who sin. Let us, then, all be converted to the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[349:3086](2100310.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p3"></span> S. [Matt.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[349:3087](2100310.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p5"></span> [Jer.
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003)<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[349:3088](2100310.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p7"></span> [Ezek.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[349:3089](2100310.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p14"></span> Hom. *Il.* III. 408. St. Ambrose is
hardly right in assuming that Homer used <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p14.1"></span>τάχα</span> with the sense of “perchance,”
though this is common in later Greek. In Homer it means quickly.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[349:3090](2100310.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p17"></span> S. [Matt. xxi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#037)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[349:3091](2100310.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p18"></span> S. [John viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[350:3092](2100310.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p21"></span> [Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[350:3093](2100310.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p23"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[350:3094](2100310.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p24"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[350:3095](2100310.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p25"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
47.23](../../../bib/apo/sir047.htm#023)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[350:3096](2100310.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p26"></span> [Ex.
xxxi](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#000)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[350:3097](2100310.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p27"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019)<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p27.1"></span>
\[very loosely\].

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[350:3098](2100310.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p30"></span> [Jer.
31.20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[350:3099](2100310.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p32"></span> [Jer.
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. St. Ambrose teaches out of the prophet Isaiah what
they must do who have fallen. Then referring to our Lord's proverbial
expression respecting piping and dancing, he condemns dances. Next by
the example of Jeremiah he sets forth the necessary accompaniments of
repentance. And lastly, in order to show the efficacy of this medicine
of penance, he enumerates the names of many who have used it for
themselves or for others.](2100311)
