[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100258)  [Next](2100260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p1"></span>Ambrose answers those who press the
words of the Lord to the mother of Zebedee’s children, by saying that
they were spoken out of kindness, because Christ was unwilling to cause
her grief. Ample reason for such tenderness is brought forward. The Lord
would rather leave the granting of that request to the Father, than
declare it to be impossible. This answer of Christ’s, however, is not to
His detriment, as is shown both by His very words, and also by comparing
them with other passages.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p2"></span>54. “<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>How</span>,” they say, “can the Son of God
be the only true God, like to the Father, when He Himself said to the
sons of Zebedee: ‘Ye shall drink indeed of My cup; but to sit on My
right hand or on My left, is not Mine to give to you, but to those for
whom it has been prepared of My Father’?” <span
id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) This, then, is, as you desire, your
proof of divine inequality; though in it you ought rather to reverence
the Lord’s kindness and to adore His grace; if, that is, you could but
perceive the deep secrets of the virtue and wisdom of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p4"></span>55. For think of her who, with and for
her sons, makes this request. It is a mother, who in her anxiety for the
honour of her sons, though somewhat unrestrained in the measure of her
desires, may for all that yet find pardon. It is a mother, old in years,
devout in her zeal, deprived of consolation; who at that time, when she
might have been helped and supported by the aid of her able bodied
offspring, suffered her children to leave her, and preferred the reward
her sons should receive in following <span id="page_292">p. 292</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-Page_292"></span>Christ to her own pleasure. For
they when called by the Lord, at the first word, as we read, left their
nets and their father and followed Him. <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p6"></span>56. She then, somewhat yielding to the
devotion of a mother’s zeal, besought the Saviour, saying: “Grant that
these my two sons may sit the one on Thy right hand, the other on Thy
left in Thy kingdom.” <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583)
Although it was an error, it was an error of a mother’s affections; for
a mother’s heart knows no patience. Though eager for the object of her
desires, yet her longing was pardonable, for she was not greedy for
money, but for grace. Not shameless was her request, for she thought not
of herself, but of her children. Contemplate the mother, reflect upon
her.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p8"></span>57. But it is nothing wonderful if the
feelings of parents for their children seem nothing to you, who think
the love of the Almighty Father for His only-begotten Son a trifling
matter. The Lord of heaven and earth was ashamed (to speak as accords
with the assumption of our flesh and the virtues of the soul)—He was
ashamed, I say, and, to use His own word, disturbed, to refuse a share
even in His own seat to a mother making request for her sons. You
maintain sometimes that the proper Son of the eternal God stands to give
service, at other times you would have His co-session to be as that of
an attendant, that is, not because there is a oneness of majesty, but
because it is the order of the Father; and you deny to the Son of God,
Who is true God, that which He plainly was unwilling to refuse to men.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p9"></span>58. For He thought of the mother’s
love, who solaced her old age with the thought of her sons’ reward, and,
though harassed with a mother’s longings, endured the absence of those
dearest pledges of her love.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p10"></span>59. Think also of the woman, that is,
the weaker sex, whom the Lord had not yet strengthened by His own
Passion. Think, I say, of a descendant of Eve, the first woman, sinking
under the inheritance of unrestrained passion, which had been passed on
to all; one, too, whom the Lord had not yet redeemed with His own Blood,
and from whom He had not yet washed out in His Blood the desire
implanted in the hearts of all for unbounded honour even beyond what is
right. Thus the woman offended owing to an inherited tendency to wrong.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p11"></span>60. And what wonder if a mother
should strive to win preference for her children (which is far better
than if she had done it for herself), when even the Apostles themselves,
as we read, strove amongst themselves, as to who should have the
preference? <span id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p13"></span>61. The physician, therefore, ought
not to wound a mother who has been deprived of all, nor a suffering
mind, with shameful reproaches, lest when the request had been made and
had been proudly denied, she should grieve over the condemnation of her
petition as being unreasonable.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p14"></span>62. Lastly, the Lord, Who knew that a
mother’s affection is to be honoured, answered not the woman, but her
sons, saying: “Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?”
When they say: “We are able,” Jesus says to them: “Ye shall drink indeed
of My cup; but to sit on My right hand and on My left is not Mine to
give to you, but to those for whom it is prepared of My Father.” <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p16"></span>63. How patient and kind the Lord is;
how deep is His wisdom and good His love! For wishing to show that the
disciples asked for no slight thing, but one they could not obtain, He
reserved His own peculiar rights for His Father’s honour, not fearing to
detract aught from His own rights: “Who thought it not robbery to be
equal with God;” <span id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) and loving,
too, His disciples (for “He loved them,” as it is written, “unto the
end”), <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) He was unwilling to
seem to refuse to those whom He loved what they desired; He, I say, the
good and holy Lord, Who would rather keep some of His own prerogative
secret, than lay aside aught of His love. “For charity suffereth long,
and is kind; charity envieth not, and seeketh not her own.” <span
id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p20"></span>64. Lastly, that you may learn it was
no sign of weakness, but rather of tenderness, that He said: “It is not
Mine to give to you;” note that when the sons of Zebedee make the
request without their mother, He said nothing about the Father; for thus
it is written: “It is not Mine to give to you, but those for whom it has
been prepared.” <span id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) So the
Evangelist Mark has stated it. But when the mother makes this request on
her sons’ behalf, as we find it in Matthew, He says: “It is not Mine to
give to you, but to those for whom it has been prepared of My
Father.” <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) Here He added: “of
My Father,” for a mother’s feelings demanded greater tenderness.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p23"></span>65. But if they think that by saying,
<span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-Page_293"></span>“For whom it hath been prepared of My
Father,” He assigned greater power to His Father, or detracted aught
from His own; let them say whether they think there is any detraction
from the Father’s power, because the Son in the Gospel says of the
Father: “The Father judgeth no man.” <span
id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p25"></span>66. But if we think it impious to
believe that the Father has handed over all judgment to the Son in such
wise that He has it not Himself,—for He has it, and cannot lose what the
Divine Majesty has by its very nature,—we ought to consider it equally
impious to suppose that the Son cannot give what either men can merit,
or any creature can receive; especially as He Himself has said: “I go
unto My Father, and whatsoever ye shall ask of Him in My name, that will
I do.” <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) For if the Son cannot
give what the Father can give, the Truth has lied, and cannot do what
the Father has been asked for in His name. He therefore did not say:
“For whom it has been prepared of My Father,” in order that requests
should be made only of the Father. For all things which are asked of the
Father, He has declared that He will give. Lastly, He did not say:
“Whatsoever ye shall ask of Me, that will I do;” but: “Whatsoever ye
shall ask of Him in My name, that will I do.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[291:2582](2100259.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[292:2583](2100259.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p5"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[292:2584](2100259.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p7"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[292:2585](2100259.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p12"></span> S. [Luke xxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[292:2586](2100259.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p15"></span> S. [Matt.
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[292:2587](2100259.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p17"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[292:2588](2100259.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p18"></span> S. [John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[292:2589](2100259.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[292:2590](2100259.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p21"></span> S. [Mark x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[292:2591](2100259.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p22"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[293:2592](2100259.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p24"></span> S. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[293:2593](2100259.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p26"></span> S. [John
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.vi-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Wishing to answer the above-stated objection somewhat
more fully, he maintains that this request, had it not been impossible
in itself, would have been possible for Christ to grant; especially as
the Father has given all judgment to Him; which gift we must understand
to have been given without any feature of imperfection. However, he
proves that the request must be reckoned amongst the impossibilities. To
make it really possible, he teaches that Christ's answer must be taken
in accordance with His human nature, and shows this next by an
exposition of the passage. Lastly, he once more confirms the reply he
has given on the impossibility of Christ's session.](2100260)
