[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100213)  [Next](2100215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p1"></span>The objection that the Son, being sent
by the Father, is, in that regard at least, inferior, is met by the
answer that He was also sent by the Spirit, Who is yet not considered
greater than the Son. Furthermore, the Spirit, in His turn, is sent by
the Father to the Son, in order that Their unity in action might be
shown forth. It is our duty, therefore, carefully to distinguish what
utterances are to be fitly ascribed to Christ as God, and what to be
ascribed to Him as man.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p2"></span>74. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p2.1"></span>I have</span> no fears in the matter of that
commonly advanced objection, that Christ is inferior because He was
sent. For even if He be inferior, yet this is not so proved; <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) on the other hand, His equal title
to honour is in truth proved. Since all honour the Son as they honour
the Father, <span id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005) it is certain
that the Son is not, in so far as being sent, inferior.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p5"></span>75. Regard not, therefore, the narrow
bounds of human language, but the plain meaning of the words, and
believe facts accomplished. Bethink you that our Lord Jesus Christ said
in Isaiah that He had been sent by the Spirit. <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) Is the Son, therefore, less than
the Spirit because He was sent by the Spirit? Thus you have the record,
that the Son declares Himself sent by the Father and His Spirit. “I am
the beginning,” He saith, <span id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007)
“and I live for ever, and My hand hath laid the foundations of the
earth, My right hand hath made the heaven to stand abidingly;” <span
id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008) and further on: “I have spoken, and
I have called; I have brought him, and have made his way to prosper.
Draw ye near to Me, and hear these things: not in secret have I spoken
from the beginning. When they were made, I was there: and now hath the
Lord and His Spirit sent Me.” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009)
Here, indeed, He Who made the heaven and the earth Himself saith that He
is sent by the Lord and His Spirit. Ye see, then, that the poverty of
language takes not from the honour of His mission. He, then, is sent by
the Father; by the Spirit also is He sent.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p10"></span>76. And that you may gather that there
is no separating difference of majesty, the Son in turn sends the
Spirit, even as He Himself hath said: “But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send you from My Father—the Spirit of truth, who cometh
forth from My Father.” <span id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) That
this same Comforter is also to be sent by the Father He has already
taught, saying, “But the Comforter, that Holy Spirit, whom the Father
will send in My name.” <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) Behold
their unity, inasmuch as whom God the Father sends, the Son sends also,
and Whom the Father sends, the Spirit sends also. Else, if the Arians
will not admit that the Son was sent, because we read that the Son is
the right hand of the Father, then they themselves will confess with
respect to the Father, what they deny concerning the Son, unless
perchance they discover for themselves either another Father or another
Son.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p13"></span>77. A truce, then, to vain wranglings
over words, for the kingdom of God, as it is written, consisteth not in
persuasive words, but in power plainly shown forth. Let us take heed to
the distinction of the Godhead from the flesh. In each there speaks one
and the same Son of God, for each nature is present in Him; yet while it
is the same Person Who speaks, He speaks not always in the same manner.
Behold in Him, now the <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-Page_234"></span>glory of God, now the affections of man.
As God He speaks the things of God, because He is the Word; as man He
speaks the things of man, because He speaks in my nature.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p14"></span>78. “This is the living bread, which
came down from heaven.” <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012) This
bread is His flesh, even as He Himself said: “This bread which I will
give is My flesh.” <span id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) This is He
Who came down from heaven, this is He Whom the Father hath sanctified
and sent into this world. Even the letter itself teaches us that not the
Godhead but the flesh needed sanctification, for the Lord Himself said,
“And I sanctify Myself for them,” <span
id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) in order that thou mayest
acknowledge that He is both sanctified in the flesh for us, and
sanctifies by virtue of His Divinity.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p18"></span>79. This is the same One Whom the
Father sent, but “born of a woman, born under the law,” <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) as the Apostle hath said. This is
He Who saith: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me; wherefore He hath
anointed Me, to bring good tidings to the poor hath He sent Me:” <span
id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) This is He Who saith: “My doctrine
is not Mine, but His, Who sent Me. If any man will do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of
Myself.” <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) Doctrine that is of
God, then, is one thing; doctrine that is of man, another; and so when
the Jews, regarding Him as man, called in question His teaching, <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) and said, “How knoweth this man
letters, having never learnt?” Jesus answered and said, “My doctrine is
not Mine,” for, in teaching without elegance of letters, He seems to
teach not as man, but rather as God, having not learned, but devised His
doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p23"></span>80. For He hath found and devised all
the way of discipline, as we read above, inasmuch as of the Son of God
it hath been said: “This is our God, and none other shall be accounted
of in comparison with Him, Who hath found all the way of discipline.
After these things He was seen on earth, and conversed with men.” <span
id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) How, then, could He, as divine, not
have His own doctrine—He Who hath found all the way of discipline before
He was seen on earth? Or how is He inferior, of Whom it is said, “None
shall be accounted of in comparison with Him”? Surely He is entitled
incomparable, in comparison of Whom none other can be accounted of—yet
so that He cannot be accounted of before the Father. Now if men suppose
that the Father is spoken of, they shall not escape running into the
blasphemy of Sabellius, of ascribing the assumption of human nature to
the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p25"></span>81. Let us proceed with what follows.
“He who speaketh of himself, seeketh his own glory.” <span
id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) See the unity wherein Father and
Son are plainly revealed. <span id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) He
who speaks cannot but be; yet that which He speaks cannot be solely from
Him, for in Him all that is, is naturally derived from the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p28"></span>82. What now is the meaning of the
words “seeketh his own glory”? That is, not a glory in which the Father
has no part—for indeed the Word of God is His glory. Again, our Lord
saith: “that they may see My glory.” <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) But that glory of the Word is also
the glory of the Father, even as it is written: “The Lord Jesus Christ
is in the glory of God the Father.” <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) In regard of His Godhead,
therefore, the Son of God so hath His own glory, that the glory of
Father and Son is one: He is not, therefore, inferior in splendour, for
the glory is one, nor lower in Godhead, for the fulness of the Godhead
is in Christ. <span id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p32"></span>83. How, then, you ask, is it written,
“Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy Son?” <span
id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) He Who saith these words needs to
be glorified, say you. Thus far you have eyes to see; the remainder of
the Scripture you have not read, for it proceeds: “that Thy Son may
glorify Thee.” Hath ever the Father need of any, in that He is to be
glorified by the Son?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[233:2005](2100214.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p3"></span> That is to say, it does not follow,
from the fact that the Son was sent, that He is inferior in nature.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[233:2006](2100214.htm#fr_2005) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p4"></span> S. [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[233:2007](2100214.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p6"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p6.1"></span>.
“Since the Holy Scriptures frequently, in plain words, teach the
equality of the Son with the Father, and the Son’s actual deeds likewise
testify thereto, it is not permissible to call that truth in question on
the strength of a single phrase, which we are compelled to make use of,
in speaking of God, by reason of the limitations of human language. For
in speaking of God, and the things of God, we make use of terms which we
employ in treating of created natures, and which on that account convey
the notion of imperfection which is found only in such natures.”—Hurter
*in loc.*

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[233:2008](2100214.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p7"></span> [Isa. xlviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[233:2009](2100214.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p8"></span> [Isa. xlvii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>.
“Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and My right hand
hath spanned the heavens.”—A.V.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[233:2010](2100214.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p9"></span> [Isa.
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[233:2011](2100214.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p11"></span> S. [John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[233:2012](2100214.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p12"></span> S. [John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[234:2013](2100214.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p15"></span> S. [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[234:2014](2100214.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p16"></span> S. [John vii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[234:2015](2100214.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p17"></span> S. [John xvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[234:2016](2100214.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p19"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[234:2017](2100214.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p20"></span> S. [Luke
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018), [Isa.
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[234:2018](2100214.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p21"></span> S. [John vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[234:2019](2100214.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p22"></span> “regarding Him as man.” In the
original “*secundum hominem,*” lit. “after the way, or manner, of man.”
If the Jews had accepted Jesus Christ’s teachings as divine, they would
not have questioned it. But they acted as though they were confronted
with one who was no more than man, and whose authority therefore was
properly liable to be called in question.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[234:2020](2100214.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p24"></span> [Baruch iii.
36](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#036)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p24.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[234:2021](2100214.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p26"></span> S. [John. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[234:2022](2100214.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p27"></span> “In these words attention is called to
the Unity of Nature (or Substance) in distinct Persons, for in the very
act of speaking and teaching, the Son shows that He is a Person, but He
Who speaks not of Himself, but as the Father hath taught Him, shows that
He is distinct from the Father, and yet He has, with the Father, one and
the same doctrine, and therefore one and the same nature; for, in God,
being and knowing are one and the same.”—Hurter.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[234:2023](2100214.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p29"></span> S. [John xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[234:2024](2100214.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p30"></span> [Phil. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p30.1"></span>
(another instance of adaptation).

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[234:2025](2100214.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p31"></span> [Col.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019), [Col.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[234:2026](2100214.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p33"></span> S. [John xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv.x-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The objection taken on the ground of the Son's
obedience is disproved, and the unity of power, Godhead, and operation
in the Trinity set forth, Christ's obedience to His mother, to whom He
certainly cannot be called inferior, is noticed.](2100215)
