[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100124)  [Next](2100126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p1"></span>The Holy Spirit, since He sanctifies
creatures, is neither a creature nor subject to change. He is always
good, since He is given by the Father and the Son; neither is He to be
numbered amongst such things as are said to fail. He must be
acknowledged as the source of goodness. The Spirit of God’s mouth, the
amender of evils, and Himself good. Lastly, as He is said in Scripture
to be good, and is joined to the Father and the Son in baptism, He
cannot possibly be denied to be good. He is not, however, said to
progress, but to be made perfect in goodness, which distinguishes Him
from all creatures.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p2"></span>62. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>The</span> Holy Spirit is not, then, of the
substance of things corporeal, for He sheds incorporeal grace on
corporeal things; nor, again, is He of the substance of invisible
creatures, for they receive His sanctification, and through Him are
superior to the other works of the universe. Whether you speak of
Angels, or Dominions, or Powers, every creature waits for the grace of
the Holy Spirit. For as we are children through the Spirit, because “God
sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts crying, Abba, Father; so that
thou art now not a servant but a son;” <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) in like manner, also, every creature
is waiting for the revelation of the sons of God, whom in truth the
grace of the Holy Spirit made sons of God. Therefore, also, every
creature itself shall be changed by the revelation of the grace of the
Spirit, “and shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
liberty of the glory of the children of God.” <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p5"></span>63. Every creature, then, is subject to
change, not only such as has been changed by some sin or condition of
the outward elements, but also such as can be liable to corruption by a
fault of nature, though by careful discipline it be not yet so; for, as
we have shown in a former treatise, <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) the nature of Angels evidently can be
changed. It is certainly fitting to judge that such as is <span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-Page_102"></span>the
nature of one, such also is that of others. The nature of the rest,
then, is capable of change, but the discipline is better.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p7"></span>64. Every creature, therefore, is
capable of change, but the Holy Spirit is good and not capable of
change, nor can He be changed by any fault, Who does away the faults of
all and pardons their sins. How, then, is He capable of change, Who by
sanctifying works in others a change to grace, but is not changed
Himself.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p8"></span>65. How is He capable of change Who is
always good? For the Holy Spirit, through Whom the things that are good
are ministered to us, is never evil. Whence two evangelists in one and
the same place, in words in differing from each other, have made the
same statement, for you read in Matthew: “If you, being evil, know how
to give good gifts to your children; how much more shall your Father,
Who is in heaven, give good things to them that ask Him.” <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) But according to Luke you will find it
thus written: “How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him?” <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) We
observe, then, that the Holy Spirit is good in the Lord’s judgment by
the testimony of the evangelists, since the one has put good things in
the place of the Holy Spirit, the other has named the Holy Spirit in the
place of good things. If, then, the Holy Spirit is that which is good,
how is He not good?

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p11"></span>66. Nor does it escape our notice that
some copies have likewise, according to St. Luke: “How much more shall
your heavenly Father give a good gift to them that ask Him.” This good
gift is the grace of the Spirit, which the Lord Jesus shed forth from
heaven, after having been fixed to the gibbet of the cross, returning
with the triumphal spoils of death deprived of its power, as you find it
written: “Ascending up on high He led captivity captive, and gave good
gifts to men.” <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) And well does he
say “gifts,” for as the Son was given, of Whom it is written: “Unto us a
Child is born, unto us a Son is given;” <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) so, too, is the grace of the Spirit
given. But why should I hesitate to say that the Holy Spirit also is
given to us, since it is written: “The love of God is shed forth in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit, Who is given to us.” <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) And since captive breasts certainly
could not receive Him, the Lord Jesus first led captivity captive, that
our affections being set free, He might pour forth the gift of divine
grace.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p15"></span>67. And He said well “led captivity
captive.” For the victory of Christ is the victory of liberty, which won
grace for all, and inflicted wrong on none. So in the setting free of
all no one is captive. And because in the time of the Lord’s passion
wrong alone had no part, which had made captive all of whom it had
gained possession, captivity itself turning back upon itself was made
captive, not now attached to Belial but to Christ, to serve Whom is
liberty. “For he who is called in the Lord as a servant is the Lord’s
freedman.” <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p17"></span>68. But to return to the point. “All,”
says He, “have gone aside, all together are become unprofitable. There
is none that doeth good, not even one.” <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) If they except the Holy Spirit, even
they themselves confess that He is not amongst all; if they do not
except Him, then they, too, acknowledge that He has gone aside amongst
all.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p19"></span>69. But let us consider whether He has
goodness in Himself, since He is the Source and Principle of goodness.
For as the Father and the Son have, so too the Holy Spirit also has
goodness. And the Apostle also taught this when he said: “Now the fruit
of the Spirit is peace, love, joy, patience, goodness.” <span
id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) For who doubts that He is good Whose
fruit is goodness. For “a good tree brings forth good fruit.” <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p22"></span>70. And so if God be good, how shall
He Who is the Spirit of His mouth not be good, Who searcheth even the
deep things of God? Can the infection of evil enter into the deep things
of God? And from this it is seen how foolish they are who deny that the
Son of God is good, when they cannot deny that the Spirit of Christ is
good, of Whom the Son of God says: “Therefore said I that He shall
receive of Mine.” <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p24"></span>71. Or is the Spirit not good, Who of
the worst makes good men, does away sin, destroys evil, shuts out crime,
pours in good gifts, makes apostles of persecutors, and priests of
sinners? “Ye were,” it is said, “sometime darkness, but now are ye light
in the Lord.” <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p26"></span>72. But why do we put them off? And if
they ask for statements since they do not deny facts, let them hear that
the Holy Spirit is good, for David said: “Let Thy good Spirit lead me
forth in the right way.” <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) For
what is the Spirit but full of goodness? Who though because of His
nature He cannot be attained to, yet because of His goodness <span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-Page_103"></span>can
be received by us, filling all things His power, but only partaken of by
the just, simple in substance, rich in virtues, present to each,
dividing of His own to every one, and Himself whole everywhere.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p28"></span>73. And with good cause did the Son of
God say: “Go and baptize all nations in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,” <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) not disdaining association with the
Holy Spirit. Why, then, do some take it ill that He Whom the Lord
disdained not in the sacrament of baptism, should be joined in our
devotion with the Father and the Son?

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p30"></span>74. Good, then, is the Spirit, but
good, not as though acquiring but as imparting goodness. For the Holy
Spirit does not receive from creatures but is received; as also He is
not sanctified but sanctifies; for the creature is sanctified, but the
Holy Spirit sanctifies. In which matter, though the word is used in
common, there is a difference in the nature. For both the man who
receives and God Who gives sanctity are called holy, as we read: “Be ye
holy, for I am holy.” <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) Now
sanctification and corruption cannot share the same nature, and
therefore the grace of the Holy Spirit and the creature cannot be of one
substance.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p32"></span>75. Since, then, the whole invisible
creation (whose substance some rightly believe to be reasonable and
incorporeal), with the exception of the Trinity, does not impart but
acquires the grace of the Spirit, and does not share in it but receives
it, the whole commonalty of creation is to be separated from association
with the Holy Spirit. Let them then believe that the Holy Spirit is not
a creature; or, if they think Him a creature, why do they associate Him
with the Father? If they think Him a creature, why do they join Him with
the Son of God? But if they do not think that He should be separated
from the Father and the Son, they do not consider Him to be a creature,
for where the sanctification is one the nature is one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_869"></span>[101:870](2100125.htm#fr_869) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p3"></span> [Gal.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[101:871](2100125.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p4"></span> [Rom.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[101:872](2100125.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p6"></span> *De Fid.* III. 3.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[102:873](2100125.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p9"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[102:874](2100125.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p10"></span> S. [Luke xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[102:875](2100125.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p12"></span> [Psa.
68.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[102:876](2100125.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p13"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[102:877](2100125.htm#fr_876) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p14"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[102:878](2100125.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p16"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[102:879](2100125.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p18"></span> [Psa.
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[102:880](2100125.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p20"></span> [Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[102:881](2100125.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p21"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[102:882](2100125.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p23"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[102:883](2100125.htm#fr_882) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p25"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[102:884](2100125.htm#fr_883) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p27"></span> [Psa.
143.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[103:885](2100125.htm#fr_884) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p29"></span> S. [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[103:886](2100125.htm#fr_885) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p31"></span> [Lev. xix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ii.vi-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Although we are baptized with water and the Spirit,
the latter is much superior to the former, and is not therefore to be
separated from the Father and the Son.](2100126)
