[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100024)  [Next](2100026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p1"></span>The ideas of those philosophers are
refuted who deny to God the care of the whole world, or of any of its
parts.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p2"></span>47. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> let us return to our point,
lest we seem to have lost sight of the break we made in answering the
ideas of those who, seeing some wicked men, rich, joyous, full of
honours, and powerful, whilst many upright men are in want and are
weak,—suppose therefore that God either cares nothing about us (which is
what the Epicureans say), or that He is ignorant of men’s actions as the
wicked say—or that, if He knows all things, He is an unjust judge in
allowing the good to be in want and the wicked to have abundance. But it
did not seem out of place to make a digression to meet an idea of this
kind and to contrast it with the feelings of those very persons whom
they consider happy—for they think themselves wretched. I suppose they
would believe themselves more readily than us.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p3"></span>48. After this digression I consider
it an easy matter to refute the rest—above all the declaration of those
who think that God has no care whatever for the world. For instance,
Aristotle declares that His providence extends only to the moon. But
what workman is there who gives no care to his work? Who would forsake
and abandon what he believes himself to have produced? If it is
derogatory to rule, is it not more so to have created? Though there is
no wrong involved in not creating anything, it is surely the height of
cruelty not to care for what one has created.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p4"></span>49. But if some deny God to be the
Creator, and so count themselves amongst the beasts and irrational
creatures, what shall we say of those who condemn themselves to such
indignity? They themselves declare that God pervades all things, that
all depend upon His power, that His might and majesty penetrate all the
elements,—lands, heaven, and seas; yet they think it derogatory to Him
to enter into man’s spirit, which is the noblest thing He has given us,
and to be there with the full knowledge of the divine Majesty.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p5"></span>50. But philosophers who are held to
be reasonable laugh at the teacher <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)
of these ideas as besotted and licentious. But what shall I say of
Aristotle’s idea? He thinks that God is satisfied with His own narrow
bounds, and lives within the prescribed limits of His kingdom. This,
however, is also what the poets’ tales tell us. For they relate that the
world is divided between three gods, so that it has fallen to the lot of
one to restrain and rule heaven, to another the sea, and to a third the
lower regions. They have also to take care not to stir up war one with
the other by allowing thoughts and cares about the belongings of others
to take hold of them. In the same way, Aristotle also declares that God
has no care for the earth, as He has none for the sea or the lower
regions. How is it that these philosophers shut out of their ranks the
poets whose footsteps they follow? <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[9:86](2100025.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p6"></span> It is only fair to state that the
character of Epicurus is mainly known in modern times from opponents or
persons who did not understand him. See the account in Dict. of Gr. and
Rom. Biography.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[9:87](2100025.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xiii-p7"></span> Arist. Metaph. i. 2. An allusion to
Aristotle’s saying that “the poets lie much.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Nothing escapes God's knowledge. This is proved by
the witness of the Scriptures and the analogy of the sun, which,
although created, yet by its light or heat enters into all
things.](2100026)
