[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100251)  [Next](2100253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p1"></span>The comparison, found in the Gospel of
St. John, of the Son to a Vine and the Father to a husbandman, must be
understood with reference to the Incarnation. To understand it with
reference to the Divine Generation is to doubly insult the Son, making
Him inferior to St. Paul, and bringing Him down to the level of the rest
of mankind, as well as in like manner the Father also, by making Him not
merely to be on one footing with the same Apostle, but even of no
account at all. The Son, indeed, in so far as being God, is also the
husbandman, and, as regards His Manhood, a grape-cluster. True statement
of the Father’s pre-eminence.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p2"></span>158. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is yet another Scripture,
which our opponents commonly object against us, in order to prove their
division of the Godhead of the Father from the Godhead of the <span
id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-Page_283"></span>Son,
namely, our Lord’s words in the Gospel: “I am the true Vine and My
Father is the Husbandman.” The vine and the husbandman, say they, are of
different natures, and the vine is in the power of the husbandman.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p3"></span>159. Thus, then, ye would have us
believe that the Son, as touching His Godhead, is like to a vine, so
that without a vine-dresser He is nothing, and may be neglected or even
rooted up. Thus ye juggle up a lie from the letter of the Scripture
which sayeth that our Lord called Himself the Vine, intending thereby
the mystery of His Incarnation. <span
id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490) Howbeit, if ye are bent on it that
we dispute upon the letter, I too confess, yea, I proclaim, that the Son
called Himself the Vine. For woe be to me, if I deny the pledge <span
id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491) of the salvation of His people!

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p6"></span>160. How then do you purpose to
understand the truth that the Son of God called Himself the Vine? If you
interpret the saying with respect to the Substance of His Godhead, and
if you suppose such a diversity of Godhead between the Father and the
Son as there is of nature between a husbandman and a vine, you do double
insult both to Father and to Son—to the Son, because if, as you affirm,
He is, as touching His Godhead, beneath a husbandman, then must He on
the same showing be esteemed lower than the Apostle Paul, forasmuch as
Paul indeed called himself a husbandman, as we find it written: “I have
planted, Apollos hath watered: but God hath given the increase.” <span
id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) Will you have Paul, then, to be
better than the Son of God?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p8"></span>161. Thus far the one insult. As for
the other, it lies herein, that if the Son is the Vine in respect of His
eternally-begotten Person, then, He having said: “I am the Vine, ye are
the branches,” <span id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493) that
divinely-begotten One appears to be of one substance with us. But “who
is like unto Thee among the gods, O Lord?” <span
id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) as it is written; and again, in the
Psalms: “For who is there among the clouds that shall be equal to the
Lord? Or who among the sons of God shall be like unto God.” <span
id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p12"></span>162. Moreover, ye disparage not only
the Son, but the Father also. For if the term “husbandman” is to
comprehend in its designation all the prerogative of the Father’s
Sovereignty, then, seeing that Paul too is a husbandman, you set the
Apostle, to whom you deny that the Son is equal, on an even footing with
the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p13"></span>163. Again, it being written, “But
neither he which planteth is anything, nor he that watereth; but God,
Who giveth the increase,” <span id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) you
will rest the fulness of the Father’s Majesty in a name which, as you
see, stands for weakness. For if he that planteth is nothing, and he
that watereth is nothing, but it is God, Who giveth the increase \[Who
is all\], observe what your blasphemy intends—even to expose the Father
to contempt under the title of a husbandman, and to demand another God
to provide the increase of the Father’s labour. Wickedly, therefore, do
they think to extol the Dignity of God the Father by this use of the
term “husbandman,” in which God the Father is brought down to the level
of man, as being designated by a common title.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p15"></span>164. Yet what wonder if, as ye
heretics would have it, the Father is to be exalted above a Son Whose
Godhead differs not a whit from the common condition of mankind? If ye
suppose the Son to have been entitled the Vine with respect to His
Godhead, then do ye esteem Him not only as liable to corruption and
subject to changes of wind and weather, but even as partaking of manhood
only, forasmuch as the Vine and its branches are of one nature, so that
the Son of God appears, not to have taken upon Him our flesh, through
the mystery of Incarnation, but to have altogether sprung into being
from the flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p16"></span>165. But I will indeed openly confess
that His flesh, though born in a new and mysterious birth, was yet of
the same nature with ours, and that this is the pledge of our salvation,
not the source of the Divine Generation. He indeed is the Vine, for He
bears my sufferings, whensoever manhood, hitherto frail, leans on Him
and so matures with plenteous fruit of renewed devotion.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p17"></span>166. Yet if the husbandman’s power
allure thee, tell me, prithee, who it was that spake in the prophet,
saying: “O Lord, make it known to me, that I may know; then saw I their
thoughts. I was led as a harmless lamb to the slaughter and knew it not:
they took counsel together against me, saying, Come, let us throw wood
into his bread.” <span id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) For if the
Son here speaks of the mystery of His coming Incarnation—for it were
blasphemy to suppose that the words are spoken concerning the
Father—then surely it is the Son Who speaks in an earlier passage: “I
have planted thee as a fruitful vine—how art Thou become bitter, and a
wild vine?” <span id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p20"></span><span id="page_284">p. 284</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-Page_284"></span>167. And thus thou seest that
the Son also is the husbandman,—the Son, of one Name with the Father,
one work, one dignity and Substance. If, then, the Son is both Vine and
Husbandman, plainly we infer the meaning of the Vine with regard to the
mystery of the Incarnation.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p21"></span>168. But not only has our Lord called
Himself a Vine—He has also given Himself, by the voice of the prophet,
the title of a Grape-cluster—even when Moses, at the command of the
Lord, sent spies to the Valley of the Cluster. <span
id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499) What is that valley but the
humility of the Incarnation and the fruitfulness of the Passion? I
indeed think that He is called the Cluster, because that from the Vine
brought out of Egypt, that is, the people of the Jews, there grew a
fruit for the world’s good. No man, truly, can understand the Cluster as
a token of the Divine Generation—or if there be any who so understand
it, they leave no conclusion open but that we should believe that
Cluster to have sprung from the Vine. And thus in their folly they
attribute to the Father that which they refuse to believe of the Son.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p23"></span>169. But if there be now left no room
for doubt that the Son of God is called the Vine with respect and
intention to His Incarnation, <span id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500)
you see what hidden truth it was to which our Lord had regard in saying,
“The Father is greater than I.” <span
id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) For after this premised, He
proceeded immediately: “I am the true Vine, and My Father is the
Husbandman,” that you might know that the Father is greater in so far as
He dresses and tends our Lord’s flesh, as the husbandman dresses and
tends his vines. Further, our Lord’s flesh is that which could increase
in stature with age, <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) and be
wounded through suffering, to the end that the whole human race might
rest guarded from the pestilent heat of the pleasures of this world,
under the shadow of the Cross whereon Its limbs are spread.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[283:2491](2100252.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p4"></span> Or “intending an emblem” or “token
(orig. *sacramentum*) of His Incarnation.”

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[283:2492](2100252.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p5"></span> Orig. *sacramentum.*

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[283:2493](2100252.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[283:2494](2100252.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p9"></span> S. [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[283:2495](2100252.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p10"></span> [Exod. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[283:2496](2100252.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p11"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[283:2497](2100252.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p14"></span> *sc.*is all. See Alford *in loc.* [1
Cor. iii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[283:2498](2100252.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p18"></span> [Jer. xi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[283:2499](2100252.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p19"></span> [Jer. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[284:2500](2100252.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p22"></span> [Num. xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[284:2501](2100252.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p24"></span> *i.e.*the *Incarnate* Son of God,
not the Pre-existent Logos, is the Vine.

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[284:2502](2100252.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p25"></span> S. [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[284:2503](2100252.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p26"></span> S. [Luke
ii](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xii-p26.1"></span>. *ad fin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V.](2100253)
