[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100149)  [Next](2100151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p1"></span>After proof that the Spirit is the
Giver of revelation equally with the Father and the Son, it is explained
how the same Spirit does not speak of Himself; and it is shown that no
bodily organs are to be thought of in Him, and that no inferiority is to
be supposed from the fact of our reading that He hears, since the same
would have to be attributed to the Son, and indeed even to the Father,
since He hears the Son. The Spirit then hears and glorifies the Son in
the sense that He revealed Him to the prophets and apostles, by which
the Unity of operation of the Three Persons is inferred; and, since the
Spirit does the same works as the Father, the substance of each is also
declared to be the same.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>130. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>It</span> has then been proved that like
as God has revealed to us the things which are His, so too the Son, and
so too the Spirit, has revealed the things of God. For our knowledge
proceeds from one Spirit, through one Son to one Father; and from one
Father through one Son to one Holy Spirit is delivered goodness and
sanctification and the sovereign right of eternal power. Where, then,
there is a manifestation of the Spirit, there is the power of God, nor
can there be any distinction where the work is one. And therefore that
which the Son says the Father also says, and that which the Father says
the Son also says, and that which the Father and the Son say the Holy
Spirit also says.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p3"></span>131. Whence also the Son of God said
concerning the Holy Spirit: “He shall not speak from Himself,” <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) that is, not without the
participation of the Father and Myself. For the Spirit is not divided
and separated, but speaks what He hears. He hears, that is to say, by
unity of substance and by the property of knowledge. For He receives not
hearing by any orifices of the body, nor does the divine voice resound
with any carnal measures, nor does He hear what He knows not; since
commonly in human matters hearing produces knowledge, and yet not even
in men themselves is there always bodily speech or fleshly hearing. For
“he that speaketh in tongues,” it is said, “speaketh not to men but to
God, for no one heareth, but in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries.” <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p6"></span>132. Therefore if in men hearing is
not always of the body, do you require in God the voices of man’s
weakness, and certain organs of fleshly hearing, when He is said to hear
in order that we may believe that He knows? For we know that which we
have heard, and we hear beforehand that we may be able to know; but in
God Who knows all things knowledge goes before hearing. So in order to
state that the Son is not ignorant of what the Father wills, we say that
He has heard; but in God there is no sound nor syllable, such as usually
signify the indication of the will; but oneness of will is comprehended
in hidden ways in God, but in us is shown by signs.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p7"></span>133. What means, then, “He shall not
speak from Himself”? This is, He shall not speak without Me; for He
speaks the <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-Page_132"></span>truth, He breathes wisdom. He speaks
not without the Father, for He is the Spirit of God; He hears not from
Himself, for all things are of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p8"></span>134. The Son received all things
from the Father, for He Himself said: “All things have been delivered
unto Me from My Father.” <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192) All
that is the Father’s the Son also has, for He says again: “All things
which the Father hath are Mine.” <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193) And those things which He Himself
received by Unity of nature, the Spirit by the same Unity of nature
received also from Him, as the Lord Jesus Himself declares, when
speaking of His Spirit: “Therefore said I, He shall receive of Mine and
shall declare it unto you.” <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194)
Therefore what the Spirit says is the Son’s, what the Son hath given is
the Father’s. So neither the Son nor the Spirit speaks anything of
Himself. For the Trinity speaks nothing external to Itself.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p12"></span>135. But if you contend that this
is an argument for the weakness of the Holy Spirit, and for a kind of
likeness to the lowliness of the body, you will also make it an argument
to the injury of the Son, because the Son said of Himself: “As I hear I
judge,” <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195) and “The Son can do
nothing else than what He seeth the Father doing.” <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196) For if that be true, as it is,
which the Son said: “All things which the Father hath are Mine,” <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) and the Son according to the
Godhead is One with the Father, One by natural substance, not according
to the Sabellian <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) falsehood;
that which is one by the property of substance certainly cannot be
separated, and so the Son cannot do anything except what He has heard of
the Father, for the Word of God endures forever, <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199) nor is the Father ever separated
from the operation of the Son; and that which the Son works He knows
that the Father wills, and what the Father wills the Son knows how to
work.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p18"></span>136. Lastly, that one may not think
that there is any difference of work either in time or in order between
the Father and the Son, but may believe the oneness of the same
operation, He says: “The works which I do He doeth.” <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) And again, that one may not think
that there is any difference in the distinction of the works, but may
judge that the will, the working, and the power of the Father and the
Son are the same, Wisdom says concerning the Father: “For whatsoever
things He doeth, the Son likewise doeth the same.” <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) So that the action of neither
Person is before or after that of the Other, but the same result of one
operation. And for this reason the Son says that He can do nothing of
Himself, because His operation cannot be separated from that of the
Father. In like manner the operation of the Holy Spirit is not
separated. Whence also the things which He speaks, He is said to hear
from the Father.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p21"></span>137. What if I demonstrate that the
Father also hears the Son, as the Son too hears the Father? For you have
it written in the Gospel that the Son says: “Father, I thank Thee that
Thou heardest Me.” <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) How did
the Father hear the Son, since in the previous passage concerning
Lazarus the Son spoke nothing to the Father? And that we might not think
that the Son was heard once by the Father, He added: “And I knew that
Thou hearest Me always.” <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203)
Therefore the hearing is not that of subject obedience, but of eternal
Unity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p24"></span>138. In like manner, then, the
Spirit is said to hear from the Father, and to glorify the Son. To
glorify, because the Holy Spirit taught us that the Son is the Image of
the invisible God, <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) and the
brightness of His glory, and the impress of His substance. <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) The Spirit also spoke in the
patriarchs and the prophets, and, lastly, the apostles began then to be
more perfect after that they had received the Holy Spirit. There is
therefore no separation of the divine power and grace, for although
“there are diversities of gifts, yet it is the same Spirit; and
diversities of ministrations, yet the same Lord; and diversities of
operations, yet the same God Who worketh all in all.” <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) There are diversities of offices,
not severances of the Trinity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p28"></span>139. Lastly, it is the same God Who
worketh all in all, that you may know that there is no diversity of
operation between God the Father and the Holy Spirit; since those things
which the Spirit works, God the Father also works, “Who worketh all in
all.” For while God the Father worketh all in all, yet “to one is given
through the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge,
according to the same Spirit; to another faith, in the same Spirit; to
another the gift of healings, in the one Spirit; to another the working
of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to
another divers kinds of <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-Page_133"></span>tongues; to another the
interpretation of sayings; but all these worketh one and the same
Spirit, dividing to each one as He will.” <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p30"></span>140. There is then no doubt but
that those things which the Father worketh, the Spirit worketh also. Nor
does He work in accordance with a command, as he who hears in bodily
fashion, but voluntarily, as being free in His own will, not the servant
of the power of another. For He does not obey as being bidden, but as
the giver He is the controller of His own gifts.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p31"></span>141. Consider meanwhile whether you
can say that the Spirit effects all things which the Father effects; for
you cannot deny that the Father effects those things which the Holy
Spirit effects; otherwise the Father does not effect all things, if He
effects not those things which the Spirit also effects. But if the
Father also effects those things which the Spirit effects, since the
Spirit divides His operations, according to His own will, you must of
necessity say, either that what the Spirit divides He divides according
to His own will, against the will of God the Father; or if you say that
the Father wills the same that the Holy Spirit wills, you must of
necessity confess the oneness of the divine will and operation, even if
you do it unwillingly, and, if not with the heart, at least with the
mouth.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p32"></span>142. But if the Holy Spirit is of
one will and operation with God the Father, He is also of one substance,
since the Creator is known by His works. So, then, it is the same
Spirit, he says, the same Lord, the same God. <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208) And if you say Spirit, He is the
same; and if you say Lord, He is the same; and if you say God, He is the
same. Not the same, so that Himself is Father, Himself Son, Himself
Spirit \[one and the selfsame Person\]; but because both the Father and
the Son are the same Power. He is, then, the same in substance and in
power, for there is not in the Godhead either the confusion of Sabellius
nor the division of Arius, nor any earthly and bodily change.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[131:1191](2100150.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p4"></span> S. [John xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[131:1192](2100150.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[132:1193](2100150.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p9"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[132:1194](2100150.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p10"></span> S. [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[132:1195](2100150.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p11"></span> S. [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[132:1196](2100150.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p13"></span> S. [John v.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[132:1197](2100150.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p14"></span> S. [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[132:1198](2100150.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p15"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[132:1199](2100150.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p16"></span> Sabellianism denied the doctrine
of the Trinity, maintaining that God is One Person only, manifesting
Himself in three characters. See *Dict. Chr. Biog.* art. “Sabellius,”
and Blunt, *Dict of Sects, etc.*

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[132:1200](2100150.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p17"></span> [Psa.
119.89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[132:1201](2100150.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p19"></span> Either S. [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p19.1"></span> modified, or a reminiscence of [John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p19.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[132:1202](2100150.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p20"></span> S. [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[132:1203](2100150.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p22"></span> S. [John xi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[132:1204](2100150.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p23"></span> S. [John xi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[132:1205](2100150.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p25"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[132:1206](2100150.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p26"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[132:1207](2100150.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p27"></span> [1 Cor.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[133:1208](2100150.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p29"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p29.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[133:1209](2100150.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p33"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiii-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Prophecy was not only from the Father and the Son
but also from the Spirit; the authority and operation of the latter on
the apostles is signified to be the same as Theirs; and so we are to
understand that there is unity in the three points of authority, rule,
and bounty; yet need no disadvantage be feared from that participation,
since such does not arise in human friendship. Lastly, it is established
that this is the inheritance of the apostolic faith from the fact that
the apostles are described as having obeyed the Holy Spirit.](2100151)
