[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100135)  [Next](2100137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p1"></span>The Holy Spirit is that large river
by which the mystical Jerusalem is watered. It is equal to its Fount,
that is, the Father and the Son, as is signified in holy Scripture. St.
Ambrose himself thirsts for that water, and warns us that in order to
preserve it within us, we must avoid the devil, lust, and heresy, since
our vessels are frail, and that broken cisterns must be forsaken, that
after the example of the Samaritan woman and of the patriarchs we may
find the water of the Lord.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>176. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>But</span> lest perchance any one should
speak against as it were the littleness of the Spirit, and from this
should endeavour to establish a difference in greatness, arguing that
water seems to be but a small part of a Fount, although examples taken
from creatures seem by no means suitable for application to the Godhead;
yet lest they should judge anything injuriously from this comparison
taken from creatures, let them learn that not only is the Holy Spirit
called Water, but also a River, as we read: “From his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. But this He said of the Spirit, Whom they were
beginning to receive, who were about to believe in Him.” <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p4"></span>177. So, then, the Holy Spirit is the
River, and the abundant River, which according to the Hebrews flowed
from Jesus in the lands, as we have received it prophesied by the mouth
of Isaiah. <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) This is the great
River which flows always and never fails. And not only a river, but also
one of copious stream and overflowing greatness, as also David said:
“The stream of the river makes glad the city of God.” <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p7"></span>178. For neither is that city, the
heavenly Jerusalem, watered by the channel of any earthly river, but
that Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Fount of Life, by a short draught
of Whom we are satiated, seems to flow more abundantly among those
celestial Thrones, Dominions and Powers, Angels and Archangels, rushing
in the full course of the seven virtues of the Spirit. For if a river
rising above its banks overflows, how much more <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-Page_114"></span>does the Spirit,
rising above every creature, when He touches the as it were low-lying
fields of our minds, make glad that heavenly nature of the creatures
with the larger fertility of His sanctification.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p8"></span>179. And let it not trouble you that
either here it is said “rivers,” <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991)
or elsewhere “seven Spirits,” <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992)
for by the sanctification of these seven gifts of the Spirit, as Isaiah
said, <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) is signified the fulness
of all virtue; the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and strength, the Spirit of knowledge and godliness, and the
Spirit of the fear of God. One, then, is the River, but many the
channels of the gifts of the Spirit. This River, then, goes forth from
the Fount of Life.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p12"></span>180. And here, again, you must not
turn aside your thoughts to lower things, because there seems to be some
difference between a Fount and a River, and yet the divine Scripture has
provided that the weakness of human understanding should not be injured
by the lowliness of the language. Set before yourself any river, it
springs from its fount, but is of one nature, of one brightness and
beauty. And do you assert rightly that the Holy Spirit is of one
substance, brightness, and glory with the Son of God and with God the
Father. I will sum up all in the oneness of the qualities, and shall not
be afraid of any question as to difference of greatness. For in this
point also Scripture has provided for us; for the Son of God says: “He
that shall drink of the water which I will give him, it shall become in
him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) This well is clearly the grace of the
Spirit, a stream proceeding from the living Fount. The Holy Spirit,
then, is also the Fount of eternal life.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p14"></span>181. You observe, then, from His
words that the unity of the divine greatness is pointed out, and that
Christ cannot be denied to be a Fount even by heretics, since the
Spirit, too, is called a Fount. And as the Spirit is called a river, so,
too, the Father said: “Behold, I come down upon you like a river of
peace, and like a stream overflowing the glory of the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) And who can doubt that the Son of God
is the River of life, from Whom the streams of eternal life flowed
forth?

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p16"></span>182. Good, then, is this water, even
the grace of the Spirit. Who will give this Fount to my breast? Let it
spring up in me, let that which gives eternal life flow upon me. Let
that Fount overflow upon us, and not flow away. For Wisdom says: “Drink
water out of thine own vessels, and from the founts of thine own wells,
and let thy waters flow abroad in thy streets.” <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) How shall I keep this water that it
flow not forth, that it glide not away? How shall I preserve my vessel,
lest any crack of sin penetrating it, should let the water of eternal
life exude? Teach us, Lord Jesus, teach us as Thou didst teach Thine
apostles, saying: “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth,
where rust and moth destroy, and where thieves break through and
steal.” <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p19"></span>182. For He intimates that the thief
is the unclean spirit, who cannot find entrance into those who walk in
the light of good works, but if he has caught any one in the darkness of
earthly desires, and in the midst of the enjoyment of earthly pleasures,
he spoils them of all the flower of eternal virtue. And therefore the
Lord says: “Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither
rust nor moth destroy, and where thieves do not break through and steal.
For where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also.”

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p20"></span>183. Our rust is wantonness, our
rust is lust, our rust is luxury, which dim the keen vision of the mind
with the filth of vices. Again, our moth is Arius, our moth is Photinus,
who rend the holy vesture of the Church with their impiety, and desiring
to separate the indivisible unity of the divine power, gnaw the precious
veil of faith with sacrilegious tooth. The water is spilt if Arius has
imprinted his tooth, it flows away if Photinus has planted his sting in
any one’s vessel. We are but of common clay, we quickly feel vices. But
no one says to the potter, “Why hast Thou made me thus?” <span
id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) For though our vessel be but common,
yet one is in honour, another in dishonour. <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) Do not then lay open thy pool, dig
not with vices and crimes, lest any one say: “He hath opened a pool and
digged it, and is fallen into the pit which he made.” <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p24"></span>184. If you seek Jesus, forsake the
broken cisterns, for Christ was wont to sit not by a pool but by a well.
There that Samaritan woman <span id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001)
found Him, she who believed, she who wished to draw water. Although you
ought to have come in early morning, nevertheless if you come later,
even at the sixth hour, you will find Jesus wearied with His journey. He
is weary, but it is through thee, because He has long sought thee, thy
<span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-Page_115"></span>unbelief has long wearied Him. Yet He
is not offended if thou only comest, He asks to drink Who is about to
give. But He drinks not the water of a stream flowing by, but thy
salvation; He drinks thy good dispositions, He drinks the cup, that is,
the Passion which atoned for thy sins, that thou drinking of His sacred
blood mightest quench the thirst of this world.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p26"></span>185. So Abraham gained God after he
had dug the well. <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) So Isaac,
while walking by the well, received that wife <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) who was coming to him as a type of
the Church. Faithful he was at the well, unfaithful at the pool. Lastly,
too, Rebecca, as we read, found him who sought her at the well, and the
harlots washed themselves in the blood in the pool of Jezebel. <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_988"></span>[113:989](2100136.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> [John
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[113:990](2100136.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p5"></span> [Is. lxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[113:991](2100136.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p6"></span> [Psa.
46.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[114:992](2100136.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p9"></span> S. [John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[114:993](2100136.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p10"></span> [Rev. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[114:994](2100136.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p11"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[114:995](2100136.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p13"></span> S. [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[114:996](2100136.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p15"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[114:997](2100136.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p17"></span> [Prov.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[114:998](2100136.htm#fr_997) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p18"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[114:999](2100136.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p21"></span> [Rom. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[114:1000](2100136.htm#fr_999) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p22"></span> [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[114:1001](2100136.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p23"></span> [Ps. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[114:1002](2100136.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p25"></span> S. [John iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[115:1003](2100136.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p27"></span> [Gen. xxi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[115:1004](2100136.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p28"></span> [Gen. xxiv.
62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[115:1005](2100136.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p29"></span> [1 Kings
22.36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.xvii-p29.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](2100137)
