[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100191)  [Next](2100193) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p1"></span>St. Ambrose questions the heretics and
exhibits their answer, which is, that the Son existed, indeed, before
all time, yet was not co-eternal with the Father, whereat the Saint
shows that they represent the Godhead as changeable, and further, that
each Person must be believed to be eternal.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p2"></span>58. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p2.1"></span>Tell</span> me, thou heretic,—for the
surpassing clemency of the Emperor grants me this indulgence of
addressing thee for a short space, not that I desire to confer with
thee, or am greedy to hear thy arguments, but because I am willing to
exhibit them,—tell me, I say, whether there was ever a time when God
Almighty was not the Father, and yet was God. “I say nothing about
time,” is thy answer. Well and subtly objected! For if thou bringest
time into the dispute, thou wilt condemn thyself, seeing that thou must
acknowledge that there was a time when the Son was not, whereas the Son
is the ruler and creator of time. <span
id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) He cannot have begun to exist after
His own work. Thou, therefore, must needs allow Him to be the ruler and
maker of His work.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p4"></span>59. “I do not say,” answerest thou,
<span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-Page_211"></span>“that the Son existed not before time;
but when I call Him “Son,” I declare that His Father existed before Him,
for, as you say, father exists before son.” <span
id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) But what means this? Thou deniest
that time was before the Son, and yet thou wilt have it that something
preceded the existence of the Son—some creature of time,—and thou
showest certain stages of generation intervening, whereby thou dost give
us to understand that the generation from the Father was a process in
time. For if He began to be a Father, then, in the first instance, He
was God, and afterwards He became a Father. How, then, is God
unchangeable? <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) For if He was
first God, and then the Father, surely He has undergone change by reason
of the added and later act of generation.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p9"></span>60. But may God preserve us from this
madness; for it was but to confute the impiety of the heretics that we
brought in this question. The devout spirit affirms a generation that is
not in time, and so declares Father and Son to be co-eternal, and does
not maintain that God has ever suffered change.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p10"></span>61. Let Father and Son, therefore, be
associated in worship, even as They are associated in Godhead; let not
blasphemy put asunder those whom the close bond of generation hath
joined together. Let us honour the Son, that we may honour the Father
also, as it is written in the Gospel. <span
id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) The Son’s eternity is the adornment
of the Father’s majesty. If the Son hath not been from everlasting, then
the Father hath suffered change; but the Son is from all eternity,
therefore hath the Father never changed, for He is always unchangeable.
And thus we see that they who would deny the Son’s eternity would teach
that the Father is mutable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[210:1784](2100192.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p3"></span> *Time.* We should take this term in
its fullest meaning, as signifying all that exists in time—the created
universe, and all that therein has been, and is, and is to come.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[211:1785](2100192.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p5"></span> The Arians fell into the popular error
of supposing that a father, *as a father,* existed before his son. They
also required men to apply to Divine Persons, what only holds good of
human beings—to impose on the Being of God those limits to which human
existences (as objective facts) are subjected. The existence of the
Divine Father and the Divine Son is without, beyond, above time—with the
Godhead there is neither past nor future, but an everlasting present.
But with man, time-categories are necessary forms of thought—everything
is seen as past, present, or to come—and to the human consciousness all
objects are presented in time, though the spiritual principle in man
which perceives objects as related in succession, is itself
supra-temporal, beholding succession, but not itself in succession.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p6"></span>Now it can hardly be denied with any
show of reason that a man is *not* a father until his son begins to
exist, is born, though the father, as a person distinct from his son, is
in existence before the latter. Again, father and son must be of the
same nature—they must both possess the elementary, essential attributes
of humanity. Otherwise there is no fatherhood, no sonship, properly
speaking.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p7"></span>God has revealed Himself as a
Father—even in the pagan mythologies we see the idea of Fatherhood
implicit in Godhead. If the gods of the heathen did not beget after
their kind, they begat heroes and demigods. But created existences
cannot claim to be the first and proper object of the Divine Father’s
love. They are for a time only, and with them Eternal Love could not be
satisfied. If God be a true Father, then, He must beget His Like—His Son
must be equal to Him in nature, that is, what is true of the Father,
what is essential in the Father, as God, must be true or essential in
the Son also. Therefore the son must be divine, eternal. But the
generation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p7.1"></span>γέννησις</span>) of the Son is not an event
in time. It is a fact, a truth, out of, beyond time, belonging to the
divine and eternal and spiritual, not to the temporal and created,
order. “To whom amongst the angels does He ever say, Thou art My Son;
*this day* have I begotten Thee? and again, I will be a Father to Him,
and He shall be a Son to Me? when, again, He *brings* His first-begotten
into the world” (*i.e.,* reveals Him to the created universe as its
King), He says: “And let all God’s angels worship Him” ([Heb. i.
5-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p7.2"></span>). Since the Divine Son, then, is eternal,
even as the Divine Father, the one cannot be before or after the other;
the two Persons are co-existent, co-eternal, co-equal. And the
mysterious genesis, also, is not an event that happened once, taking
place in a series of events, it is ever happening, it *is* always and
for ever.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[211:1786](2100192.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p8"></span> *i.e.,* how do you deal with such
Scriptures as “Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.”—“I am
the Lord: I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.”—“The Father of lights, with Whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.”

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[211:1787](2100192.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.x-p11"></span> S. [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.x-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Christ's eternity being proved from the Apostle's
teaching, St. Ambrose admonishes us that the Divine Generation is not to
be thought of after the fashion of human procreation, nor to be too
curiously pried into. With the difficulties thence arising he refuses to
deal, saying that whatsoever terms, taken from our knowledge of body,
are used in speaking of this Divine Generation, must be understood with
a spiritual meaning.](2100193)
