[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100357)  [Next](2100359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.x"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p1"></span>To an objection that the state of
widowhood might indeed be endurable if circumstances were pleasant, St.
Ambrose replies that pleasant surroundings are more dangerous than even
trouble; and goes to show by examples taken from holy Scripture, that
widows may find much happiness in their children and their sons-in-law.
They should have recourse to the Apostles, who are able to help us, and
should entreat for the intercessions of angels and martyrs. He touches
then on certain complaints respecting loneliness, and care of property,
and ends by pointing out the unseemliness of a widow marrying who has
daughters either married already or of marriageable age.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p2"></span>52. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.x-p2.1"></span>You</span> have learnt, then, you who are
widows, that you are not destitute of the help of nature, and that you
can maintain sound counsel. Nor, again, are you devoid of protection at
home, who are able to claim even the highest point of public power.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p3"></span>53. But perhaps some one may say that
widowhood is more endurable for her who enjoys prosperity, but that
widows are soon broken down by adversity, and easily succumb. On which
point not only are we taught by experience that enjoyment is more
perilous for widows than difficulties, but by the examples in the
Scriptures that even in weakness widows are not usually without
aid, <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357) and that divine and
human support is furnished more readily to them than to others, if they
have brought up children and chosen sons-in-law well. And, finally, when
Simon’s mother-in-law was lying sick with violent fever, Peter and
Andrew besought the Lord for her: “And He stood over her and commanded
the fever and it left her, and immediately she arose and ministered unto
them.” <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358)

<span id="iv.viii.x-p6"></span>54. “She was taken,” it is said, “with a
great fever, and they besought him for her.” <span
id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359) You too have those near you to
entreat for you. You have the Apostles near, you have the Martyrs near;
if associated with the Martyrs in devotion, you draw near them also by
works of mercy. Do you show mercy and you will be close to Peter. It is
not relationship by blood but affinity of virtue which makes near, for
we walk not in the flesh but in the Spirit. Cherish, then, the nearness
of Peter and the affinity of Andrew, that they may pray for you and your
lusts give way. Touched by the word of God you, who lay on the earth,
will then forthwith rise up to minister to Christ. “For our conversation
is in heaven, whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360) For no one lying
down can minister to Christ. Minister to the poor and you have
ministered to Christ. “For what ye have done unto one of these,” He
says, “ye have done unto Me.” <span id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361)
You, widows, have then assistance, if you choose such sons-in-law for
yourselves, such patrons and friends for your posterity.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p10"></span>55. So Peter and Andrew prayed for the
widow. Would that there were some one who could so quickly pray for us,
or better still, they who prayed for the mother-in-law, Peter and Andrew
his brother. Then they could pray for one related to them, now they are
able to pray for us and for all. For you see that one bound by great sin
is less fit to pray for herself, certainly less likely to obtain for
herself. Let her then make use of others to pray for her to the
physician. For the sick, unless the physician be called to them by the
prayers of others, cannot pray for themselves. The flesh is weak, the
soul is sick and hindered by the chains of sins, and cannot direct its
feeble steps to the throne of that physician. The angels must be
entreated for us, who have been to us as guards; the martyrs must be
entreated, whose patronage we seem to claim for ourselves by the pledge
as it were of their bodily remains. They can entreat for our sins, who,
if they had any sins, washed them in their own blood; for they are the
martyrs of God, our leaders, the beholders of our life and of our
actions. Let us not be ashamed to take them as intercessors for our
weakness, for they themselves knew the weaknesses of the body, even when
they overcame.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p11"></span>56. So, then, Peter’s mother-in-law
found some to pray for her. And you, O widow, find those who will pray
for you, if as a true widow and desolate you hope in God, continue
instant in supplications, persist in prayers, <span
id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362) treat your body as dying daily,
that by dying you may live again; avoid pleasures, that you, too, being
sick, may be healed. “For she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she
liveth.” <span id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363)

<span id="iv.viii.x-p14"></span>57. You have no longer any reason for
marrying, you have some to intercede for you. Say not, “I am desolate.”
This is the complaint of one who wishes to marry. <span id="page_401">p.
401</span> <span id="iv.viii.x-Page_401"></span>Say not, “I am alone.”
Chastity seeks solitude: the modest seek privacy, the immodest company.
But you have necessary business; you have also one to plead for you. You
are afraid of your adversary; the Lord Himself will intervene with the
judge and say: “Judge for the fatherless, and justify the widow.” <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364)

<span id="iv.viii.x-p16"></span>58. But you wish to take care of your
inheritance. The inheritance of modesty is greater, and this a widow can
guard better than one married. A slave has done wrong. Forgive him, for
it is better that you should bear with another’s fault than expose it.
But you wish to marry. Be it so. The simple desire is no crime. I do not
ask the reason, why is one invented? If you think it good, say so; if
unsuitable, be silent. Do not blame God, do not blame your relatives,
saying that protection fails you. Would that the wish did not fail! And
say not that you are consulting the interests of your children, whom you
are depriving of their mother.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p17"></span>59. There are some things permissible in
the abstract, but not permissible on account of age. Why is the bridal
of the mother being prepared at the same time with that of the
daughters, and often even afterwards? Why does the grown-up daughter
learn to blush in the presence of her mother’s betrothed rather than her
own? I confess that I advised you to change your dress, but not to put
on a bridal veil; to go away from the tomb, not to prepare a bridal
couch. What is the meaning of a newly-married woman who already has
sons-in-law? How unseemly it is to have children younger than one’s
grand-children!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[400:3358](2100358.htm#fr_3357) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p4"></span> [1 Tim. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)<span id="iv.viii.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[400:3359](2100358.htm#fr_3358) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p5"></span> S. [Luke iv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#039)<span id="iv.viii.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[400:3360](2100358.htm#fr_3359) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p7"></span> S. [Luke iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038)<span id="iv.viii.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[400:3361](2100358.htm#fr_3360) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p8"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="iv.viii.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[400:3362](2100358.htm#fr_3361) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p9"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="iv.viii.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[400:3363](2100358.htm#fr_3362) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p12"></span> [1 Tim. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span id="iv.viii.x-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[400:3364](2100358.htm#fr_3363) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p13"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.viii.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[401:3365](2100358.htm#fr_3364) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p15"></span> [Isa. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span id="iv.viii.x-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. St. Ambrose returns again to the subject of Christ,
speaking of His goodness in all misery. The various ways in which the
good Physician treats our diseases, and the quickness of the healing if
only we do not neglect to call upon Him. He touches upon the moral
meaning of the will, which he shows was manifested in Peter's
mother-in-law, and lastly points out what a minister of Christ and
specially a bishop ought to be, and says that they specially must rise
through grace.](2100359)
