[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100119)  [Next](2100121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p1"></span>The choice of Gideon was a figure of our
Lord’s Incarnation, the sacrifice of a kid, of the satisfaction for sins
in the body of Christ; that of the bullock, of the abolition of profane
rites; and in the three hundred soldiers was a type of the future
redemption through the cross. The seeking of various signs by Gideon was
also a mystery, for by the dryness and moistening of the fleece was
signified the falling away of the Jews and the calling of the Gentiles,
by the water received in a basin the washing of the apostles’ feet. St.
Ambrose prays that his own pollution may be washed away, and praises the
loving-kindness of Christ. The same water sent forth by the Son of God
effects marvellous conversions; it cannot, however, be sent by any
other, since it is the pouring forth of the Holy Spirit, Who is subject
to no external power.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>When</span> Jerubbaal, as we read, was
beating out wheat <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) under an oak,
he received a message from God in order that he might bring the people
of God from the power of strangers into liberty. Nor is it a matter of
wonder if he was chosen for grace, seeing that even then, being
appointed under the shadow of the holy cross and of the adorable Wisdom
in the predestined mystery of the future Incarnation, he was bringing
forth the visible grains of the fruitful corn from their hiding places,
and was \[mystically\] separating the elect of the saints from the
refuse of the empty chaff. For these elect, as though trained with the
rod of truth, laying aside the superfluities of the old man together
with his deeds, are gathered in the Church as in a winepress. For the
Church is the winepress of the eternal fountain, since from her wells
forth the juice of the heavenly Vine.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p4"></span>2. And Gideon, moved by that message,
when he heard that, though thousands of the people failed, God would
deliver His own from their enemies by means of one man, <span
id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) offered a kid, and according to the
word of the Angel, laid its flesh and the unleavened cakes upon the
rock, and poured the broth upon them. And as soon as the Angel touched
them with the end of the staff which he bore, fire burst forth out of
the rock, and so the sacrifice which he was offering was consumed. <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) By which it seems clear that that rock
was a figure of the Body of Christ, for it is written: “They drank of
that rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.” <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) Which certainly refers not to His
Godhead, but to His Flesh, which watered the hearts of the thirsting
people with the perpetual stream of His Blood.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p8"></span>3. Even at that time was it declared in
a mystery that the Lord Jesus in His Flesh would, when crucified, do
away the sins of the whole world, and not only the deeds of the body,
but the desires of the soul. For the flesh of the kid refers to sins of
deed, the broth to the enticements of desire as it is written: “For the
people lusted an evil lust, and said, Who shall give us flesh to
eat?” <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) That the Angel then
stretched forth his staff, and touched the rock, from which fire went
out, <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) shows that the Flesh of the
Lord, being filled with the Divine Spirit, would burn away all the sins
of human frailty. Wherefore, also, the Lord says: “I am come to send
fire upon the earth.” <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p12"></span>4. Then the man, instructed and
foreknowing what was to be, observes the heavenly mysteries, and
therefore, according to the warning, slew the bullock de<span
id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.i-Page_94"></span>stined by
his father to idols, and himself offered to God another bullock seven
years old. <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) By doing which he
most plainly showed that after the coming of the Lord all Gentile
sacrifices should be done away, and that only the sacrifice of the
Lord’s passion should be offered for the redemption of the people. For
that bullock was, in a type, Christ, in Whom, as Esaias said, dwelt the
fulness of the seven gifts of the Spirit. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) This bullock Abraham also offered when
he saw the day of the Lord and was glad. <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) He it is Who was offered at one time
in the type of a kid, at another in that of a sheep, at another in that
of a bullock. Of a kid, because He is a sacrifice for sin; of a sheep,
because He is an unresisting victim; of a bullock, because He is a
victim without blemish.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p16"></span>5. Holy Gideon then saw the mystery
beforehand. Next he chose out three hundred for the battle, so as to
show that the world should be freed from the incursion of worse enemies,
not by the multitude of their number, but by the mystery of the cross.
And yet, though he was brave and faithful, he asked of the Lord yet
fuller proofs of future victory, saying: “If Thou wilt save Israel by
mine hand, O Lord, as Thou hast said, behold I will put a fleece of wool
on the threshing-floor, and if there shall be dew on the fleece and
dryness on all the ground, I shall know that Thou wilt deliver the
people by my hand according to Thy promise. And it was so.” <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) Afterwards he asked in addition that
dew should descend on all the earth and dryness be on the fleece.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p18"></span>6. Some one perhaps will enquire
whether he does not seem to have been wanting in faith, seeing that
after being instructed by many signs he asked still more. But how can he
seem to have asked as if doubting or wanting in faith, who was speaking
in mysteries? He was not then doubtful, but careful that we should not
doubt. For how could he be doubtful whose prayer was effectual? And how
could he have begun the battle without fear, unless he had understood
the message of God? for the dew on the fleece signified the faith among
the Jews, because the words of God come down like the dew.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p19"></span>7. So when the whole world was parched
with the drought of Gentile superstition, then came that dew of the
heavenly visits on the fleece. But after that the lost sheep of the
house of Israel <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) (whom I think
that the figure of the Jewish fleece shadowed forth), after that those
sheep, I say, <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) “had refused the
fountain of living water,” the dew of moistening faith dried up in the
breasts of the Jews, and that divine Fountain turned away its course to
the hearts of the Gentiles. Whence it has come to pass that now the
whole world is moistened with the dew of faith, but the Jews have lost
their prophets and counsellors.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p22"></span>8. Nor is it strange that they should
suffer the drought of unbelief, whom the Lord deprived of the
fertilising of the shower of prophecy, saying: “I will command My clouds
that they rain not upon that vineyard.” <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) For there is a health-giving shower of
salutary grace, as David also said: “He came down like rain upon a
fleece, and like drops that drop upon the earth.” <span
id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) The divine Scriptures promised us this
rain upon the whole earth, to water the world with the dew of the Divine
Spirit at the coming of the Saviour. The Lord, then, has now come, and
the rain has come; the Lord has come bringing the heavenly drops with
Him, and so now we drink, who before were thirsty, and with an interior
draught drink in that Divine Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p25"></span>9. Holy Gideon, then, foresaw this,
that the nations of the Gentiles also would drink by the reception of
faith, and therefore he enquired more diligently, for the caution of the
saints is necessary. Insomuch that also Joshua the son of Nun, when he
saw the captain of the heavenly host, enquired: “Art thou for us, or for
our adversaries?” <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) lest,
perchance, he might be deceived by some stratagem of the adversary.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p27"></span>10. Nor was it without a reason that he
put the fleece neither in a field nor in a meadow, but in a
threshing-floor, where is the harvest of the wheat: “For the harvest is
plenteous, but the labourers are few;” <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) because that, through faith in the
Lord, there was about to be a harvest fruitful in virtues.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p29"></span>11. Nor, again, was it without a reason
that he dried the fleece of the Jews, and put the dew from it into a
basin, so that it was filled with water, yet he did not himself wash his
feet in that dew. The prerogative of so great a mystery was to be given
to another. He was being waited for Who alone could wash away the filth
of all. Gideon was not great enough to claim this mystery for himself,
but “the Son of Man <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-Page_95"></span>came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister.” <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) Let us, then,
recognize in Whom these mysteries are seen to be accomplished. Not in
holy Gideon, for they were still at their commencement. Therefore the
Gentiles were surpassed, for dryness was still upon the Gentiles, and
therefore did Israel surpass them, for then did the dew remain on the
fleece.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p31"></span>12. Let us come now to the Gospel of
God. I find the Lord stripping Himself of His garments, and girding
Himself with a towel, pouring water into a basin, and washing the
disciples’ feet. <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) That heavenly
dew was this water, this was foretold, namely, that the Lord Jesus
Christ would wash the feet of His disciples in that heavenly dew. And
now let the feet of our minds be stretched out. The Lord Jesus wills
also to wash our feet, for He says, not to Peter alone, but to each of
the faithful: “If I wash not thy feet thou wilt have no part with
Me.” <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p34"></span>13. Come, then, Lord Jesus, put off Thy
garments, which Thou didst put on for my sake; be Thou stripped that
Thou mayest clothe us with Thy mercy. Gird Thyself for our sakes with a
towel, that Thou mayest gird us with Thy gift of immortality. Pour water
into the basin, wash not only our feet but also the head, and not only
of the body, but also the footsteps of the soul. I wish to put off all
the filth of our frailty, so that I also may say: “By night I have put
off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I
defile them?” <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p36"></span>14. How great is that excellence! As a
servant, Thou dost wash the feet of Thy disciples; as God, Thou sendest
dew from heaven. Nor dost Thou wash the feet only, but also invitest us
to sit down with Thee, and by the example of Thy dignity dost exhort us,
saying: “Ye call Me Master and Lord, and ye do well, for so I am. If,
then, I the Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash
one another’s feet.” <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p38"></span>15. I, then, wish also myself to wash
the feet of my brethren, I wish to fulfil the commandment of my Lord, I
will not be ashamed in myself, nor disdain what He Himself did first.
Good is the mystery of humility, because while washing the pollutions of
others I wash away my own. But all were not able to exhaust this
mystery. Abraham was, indeed, willing to wash feet, <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) but because of a feeling of
hospitality. Gideon, too, was willing to wash the feet of the Angel of
the Lord who appeared to him, <span id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805)
but his willingness was confined to one; he was willing as one who would
do a service, not as one who would confer fellowship with himself. This
is a great mystery which no one knew. Lastly, the Lord said to Peter:
“What I do thou knowest not now, but shalt know hereafter.” <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) This, I say, is a divine mystery which
even they who wash will enquire into. It is not, then, the simple water
of the heavenly mystery whereby we attain to be found worthy of having
part with Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p42"></span>16. There is also a certain water which
we put into the basin of our soul, water from the fleece and from the
Book of Judges; water, too, from the Book of Psalms. <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) It is the water of the message from
heaven. Let, then, this water, O Lord Jesus, come into my soul, into my
flesh, that through the moisture of this rain <span
id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) the valleys of our minds and the
fields of our hearts may grow green. May the drops from Thee come upon
me, shedding forth grace and immortality. Wash the steps of my mind that
I may not sin again. Wash the heel <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) of my soul, that I may be able to
efface the curse, that I feel not the serpent’s bite <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) on the foot of my soul, but, as Thou
Thyself hast bidden those who follow Thee, may tread on serpents and
scorpions <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) with uninjured foot.
Thou hast redeemed the world, redeem the soul of a single sinner.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p48"></span>17. This is the special excellence of
Thy loving-kindness, wherewith Thou hast redeemed the whole world one by
one. Elijah was sent to one widow; <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) Elisha cleansed one; <span
id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) Thou, O Lord Jesus, hast at this day
cleansed a thousand. How many in the city of Rome, how many at
Alexandria, how many at Antioch, how many also at Constantinople! For
even Constantinople has received the word of God, and has received
evident proofs of Thy judgment. For so long as she cherished the Arians’
poison in her bosom, disquieted by neighbouring wars, she echoed with
hostile arms around. But so soon as she rejected those who were <span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.i-Page_96"></span>alien
from the faith she received as a suppliant the enemy himself, the judge
of kings, whom she had always been wont to fear, she buried him when
dead, and retains him entombed. <span id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814)
How many, then, hast Thou cleansed at Constantinople, how many, lastly,
at this day in the whole world!

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p52"></span>18. Damasus cleansed not, Peter
cleansed not, Ambrose cleansed not, Gregory cleansed not; <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) for ours is the ministry, but the
sacraments are Thine. For it is not in man’s power to confer what is
divine, but it is, O Lord, Thy gift and that of the Father, as Thou hast
spoken by the prophets, saying: “I will pour out of My Spirit upon all
flesh, and their sons and their daughters shall prophesy.” <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) This is that typical dew from heaven,
this is that gracious rain, as we read: “A gracious rain, dividing for
His inheritance.” <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) For the Holy
Spirit is not subject to any foreign power or law, but is the Arbiter of
His own freedom, dividing all things according to the decision of His
own will, to each, as we read, severally as He wills. <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_782"></span>[93:783](2100120.htm#fr_782) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p3"></span> [Judg. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[93:784](2100120.htm#fr_783) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p5"></span> [Judg. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[93:785](2100120.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p6"></span> [Judg. vi.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[93:786](2100120.htm#fr_785) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p7"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[93:787](2100120.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p9"></span> [Num. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[93:788](2100120.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p10"></span> [Judg. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[93:789](2100120.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p11"></span> S. [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[94:790](2100120.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p13"></span> [Judg. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[94:791](2100120.htm#fr_790) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p14"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[94:792](2100120.htm#fr_791) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p15"></span> S. [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[94:793](2100120.htm#fr_792) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p17"></span> [Judg. vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#036)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[94:794](2100120.htm#fr_793) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p20"></span> S. [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[94:795](2100120.htm#fr_794) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p21"></span> [Jer. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[94:796](2100120.htm#fr_795) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p23"></span> [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[94:797](2100120.htm#fr_796) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p24"></span> [Psa.
72.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[94:798](2100120.htm#fr_797) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p26"></span> [Josh. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[94:799](2100120.htm#fr_798) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p28"></span> S. [Luke x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[95:800](2100120.htm#fr_799) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p30"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[95:801](2100120.htm#fr_800) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p32"></span> S. [John xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[95:802](2100120.htm#fr_801) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p33"></span> S. [John xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[95:803](2100120.htm#fr_802) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p35"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[95:804](2100120.htm#fr_803) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p37"></span> S. [John
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[95:805](2100120.htm#fr_804) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p39"></span> [Gen. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[95:806](2100120.htm#fr_805) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p40"></span> Whence this statement is derived
cannot be ascertained. Possibly it is merely an assumption of St.
Ambrose founded on his estimate of Gideon’s character.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[95:807](2100120.htm#fr_806) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p41"></span> S. [John xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[95:808](2100120.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p43"></span> [Psa.
23.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[95:809](2100120.htm#fr_808) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p44"></span> [Psa.
75.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[95:810](2100120.htm#fr_809) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p45"></span> “*Alia est iniquitas nostra, alia
calcanei nostri, in quo Adam dente serpentis est vulneratus et obnoxiam
hereditatem successionis humanæ suo vulnere dereliquit, ut omnes illo
vulnere claudicemus.*” St. Aug. *Exp. Psal.* xlviii. 6, and St. Ambrose,
*Enar. in Ps.* xlviii. 9: “*Unde reor uniquitatem calcanei magis
lubricum deliquendi quam reatum aliquem nostri esse delicti.*” This
*lubricum delinquendi,* the wound of Adam’s heel, seems to have been
understood of concupiscence, which has the nature of sin, and is called
sin by St. Paul.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[95:811](2100120.htm#fr_810) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p46"></span> [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[95:812](2100120.htm#fr_811) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p47"></span> S. [Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[95:813](2100120.htm#fr_812) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p49"></span> [1 Kings
17.9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[95:814](2100120.htm#fr_813) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p50"></span> [2 Kings
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[96:815](2100120.htm#fr_814) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p51"></span> Athanaricus, king or *judex* of the
West Goths in Dacia, defeated in 369 by the Emperor Valens.
Subsequently, in 380, being defeated by the Huns and some Gothic chiefs,
he was forced to take refuge in Constantinople, when he was received
with all the honour due to his rank. He died the next year.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[96:816](2100120.htm#fr_815) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p53"></span> Damasus of Rome, Peter of Alexandria,
Gregory of Constantinople, and St. Ambrose himself. Peter had died by
this time, but the fact was probably not yet known at Milan.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[96:817](2100120.htm#fr_816) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p54"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[96:818](2100120.htm#fr_817) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p55"></span> [Psa.
68.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[96:819](2100120.htm#fr_818) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.i-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p56"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.ii.i-p56.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. St. Ambrose commences his argument by complimenting
the Emperor, both for his faith and for the restitution of the Basilica
to the Church; then having urged that his opponents, if they affirm that
the Holy Spirit is not a servant, cannot deny Him to be above all, adds
that the same Spirit, when He said, “All things serve Thee,” showed
plainly that He was distinct from creatures; which point he also
establishes by other evidence.](2100121)
