[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100164)  [Next](2100166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iv.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xiii-p1"></span>To those who object that Catholics,
when they ascribe Godhead to the Holy Spirit, introduce three Gods, it
is answered, that by the same argument they themselves bring in two
Gods, unless they deny Godhead to the Son; after which the orthodox
doctrine is set forth.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>92. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> what do you fear? Is it that
which you have been accustomed to carp at? lest you should make three
Gods. God forbid; for where the Godhead is understood as one, one God is
spoken of. For neither when we call the Son God do we say there are two
Gods. For if, when you confess the Godhead of the Spirit, you think that
three Gods are spoken of, then, too, when you speak of the Godhead of
the Son because you are not able to deny it, you bring in two Gods. For
it is necessary according to your opinion, if you think that God is the
name of one person, not of one nature, that you either say that there
are two Gods, or deny that the Son is God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xiii-p3"></span>93. But let us free you from the
charge of ignorance, though we do not excuse you from fault. For
according to our opinion, because there is one God, one Godhead and
oneness of power is understood. For as we say that there is one God,
confessing the Father, and not denying the Son under the true Name of
the Godhead; so, too, we exclude not the Holy Spirit from the Unity of
the Godhead, and do not assert but deny that there are three Gods,
because it is not unity but a division of power which makes plurality.
For how can the Unity of the Godhead admit of plurality, seeing that
plurality is of numbers, but the Divine Nature does not admit numbers?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Besides the evidence adduced above, other passages
can be brought to prove the sovereignty of the Three Persons. Two are
quoted from the Epistles to the Thessalonians, and by collating other
testimonies of the Scriptures it is shown that in them dominion is
claimed for the Spirit as for the other Persons. Then, by quotation of
another still more express passage in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, it is inferred both that the Spirit is Lord, and that where
the Lord is, there is the Spirit.](2100166)
