[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100100)  [Next](2100102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii"></span> <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-Page_75"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p1"></span>Strangers must never be expelled the
city in a time of famine. In this matter the noble advice of a Christian
sage is adduced, in contrast to which the shameful deed committed at
Rome is given. By comparing the two it is shown that the former is
combined with what is virtuous and useful, but the latter with neither.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p2"></span>45. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>But</span> they, too, who would forbid the
city to strangers <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) cannot have
our approval. They would expel them at the very time when they ought to
help, and separate them from the trade of their common parent. They
would refuse them a share in the produce meant for all, and avert the
intercourse that has already begun; and they are unwilling, in a time of
necessity, to give those with whom they have enjoyed their rights in
common, a share in what they themselves have. Beasts do not drive out
beasts, yet man shuts out man. Wild beasts and animals consider food
which the earth supplies to be common to all. They all give assistance
to those like themselves; and man, who ought to think nothing human
foreign to himself, fights against his own.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p4"></span>46. How much better did he act who,
having already reached an advanced age, when the city was suffering from
famine, and, as is common in such cases, the people demanded that
strangers should be forbidden the city, having the office of the
prefectship <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) of the city, which
is higher than the rest, called together the officials and richer men,
and demanded that they should take counsel for the public welfare. He
said that it was as cruel a thing for the strangers to be expelled as
for one man to be cast off by another, and to be refused food when
dying. We do not allow our dogs to come to our table and leave them
unfed, yet we shut out a man. How unprofitable, again, it is for the
world that so many people perish, whom some deadly plague carries off.
How unprofitable for their city that so large a number should perish,
who were wont to be helpful either in paying contributions or in
carrying on business. Another’s hunger is profitable to no man, nor to
put off the day of help as long as possible and to do nothing to check
the want. Nay more, when so many of the cultivators of the soil are
gone, when so many labourers are dying, the corn supplies will fail for
the future. Shall we then expel those who are wont to supply us with
food, are we unwilling to feed in a time of need those who have fed us
all along? How great is the assistance which they supply even at this
time. “Not by bread alone does man live.” <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) They are even our own family; many of
them even are our own kindred. Let us make some return for what we have
received.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p7"></span>47. But perhaps we fear that want may
increase. First of all, I answer, mercy never fails, but always finds
means of help. Next, let us make up for the corn supplies which are to
be granted to them, by a subscription. Let us put that right with our
gold. And, again, must we not buy other cultivators of the soil if we
lose these? How much cheaper is it to feed than to buy a working-man.
Where, too, can one obtain, where find a man to take the place of the
former? And suppose one finds him, do not forget that, with an ignorant
man used to different ways, one may fill up the place in point of
numbers, but not as regards the work to be done.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p8"></span>48. Why need I say more? When the money
was supplied corn was brought in. So the city’s abundance was not
diminished, and yet assistance was given to the strangers. What praise
this act won that holy man from God! What glory among men! He, indeed,
had won an honoured name, who, pointing to the people of a whole
province, could truly say to the emperor: All these I have preserved for
thee; these live owing to the kindness of the senate; these thy
council <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) has snatched from death!

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p10"></span>49. How much more expedient was this
than that which was done lately at Rome. There from that widely extended
city were those expelled who had already passed most of their life in
it. In tears they went forth with their children, for whom as being
citizens they bewailed the exile, which, as they said, ought to be
averted; no less did they grieve over the broken bonds of union, the
severed ties of relationship. And yet a fruitful year had smiled upon
us. The city alone needed corn to be brought into it. It could have got
help, if it had sought corn from the Italians whose children they were
driving out. Nothing is more shameful than to expel a man as a
foreigner, and yet to claim his services as though he belonged <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="iv.i.iv.vii-Page_76"></span>to us.
How canst thou expel a man who lives on his own produce? How canst thou
expel him who supplies thee with food? Thou retainest thy servant, and
thrustest out thy kindred! Thou takest the corn, but showest no good
feeling! Thou takest food by force, but dost not show gratitude!

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p11"></span>50. How wretched this is, how useless!
For how can that be expedient which is not seemly. Of what great
supplies from her corporations has Rome at times been deprived, yet she
could not dismiss them and yet escape a famine, while waiting for a
favourable breeze, and the provisions in the hoped-for ships.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p12"></span>51. How far more virtuous and
expedient was that first-mentioned management! For what is so seemly or
virtuous as when the needy are assisted by the gifts of the rich, when
food is supplied to the hungry, when daily bread fails none? What so
advantageous as when the cultivators are kept for the land, and the
country people do not perish?

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p13"></span>52. What is virtuous, then, is also
expedient, and what is expedient is virtuous. On the other hand, what is
not expedient is unseemly, and what is unseemly is also not expedient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_644"></span>[75:645](2100101.htm#fr_644) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* III. 11, § 67.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[75:646](2100101.htm#fr_645) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p5"></span> It is not certain to what date the
famine mentioned by St. Ambrose is to be referred, nor is the name of
the prefect of the city certainly known. The Præfectus Urbis was at this
time the highest officer of the city, directly representing the emperor,
and except to the latter there was no appeal from his decisions. Amongst
other duties he exercised a supervision over the importation,
exportation, and prices of provisions. As St. Ambrose, § 48, calls him
“*sanctissimus senex,*” he was probably a Christian.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[75:647](2100101.htm#fr_646) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p6"></span> [Deut. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[75:648](2100101.htm#fr_647) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vii-p9"></span> *tua curia.* Ed. Med. has “*tua
cura.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. That those who put what is virtuous before what is
useful are acceptable to God is shown by the example of Joshua, Caleb,
and the other spies.](2100102)
