[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100061)  [Next](2100063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.l"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.l-p0.1"></span>Chapter L.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p1"></span>The Levites ought to be utterly free from
all earthly desires. What their virtues should be on the Apostle’s own
showing, and how great their purity must be. Also what their dignity and
duty is, for the carrying out of which the chief virtues are necessary.
He states that these were not unknown to the philosophers, but that they
erred in their order. Some are by their nature in accordance with duty,
which yet on account of what accompanies them become contrary to duty.
From whence he gathers what gifts the office of the Levites demands. To
conclude, he adds an exposition of Moses’ words when blessing the tribe
of Levi.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p2"></span>255. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p2.1"></span>If</span>, then, in the Gospel of the Lord
the people themselves were taught and led to despise riches, <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) how much more ought ye Levites no
longer to be bound down by earthly desires. For your portion is God. For
when their earthly possessions were portioned out by Moses to the people
of our fathers, the Lord suffered not the Levites to have a share in
that earthly possession, <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) for He
Himself would be the strength of their inheritance. Wherefore David
says: “The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup.” <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) Whence we get the name “Levite,” which
means: “Himself is mine,” or “Himself for me.” Great, then, is his
honour, that God should say of him: Himself is Mine. Or, as was said to
Peter about the piece of money found in the fish’s mouth: “Give to them
for Me and for thee.” <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) Wherefore
the Apostle, when he said: “A bishop should be sober, modest, of good
behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not covetous, nor a
brawler, one that rules well his own house,” also added: “Likewise must
the deacons be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre, holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience. And let them also first be proved, and so let them serve,
being found blameless.” <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350)

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p8"></span>256. We note how much is required of us.
The minister of the Lord should abstain from wine, so that he may be
upheld by the good witness not only of the faithful but also by those
who are without. For it is right that the witness to our acts and works
should be the opinion of the public at large, that the office be not
disgraced. Thus he who sees the minister of the altar adorned with
suitable virtues may praise their Author, and reverence the Lord Who has
such servants. The praise of the Lord sounds forth where there is a pure
possession and an innocent rule at home.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p9"></span>257. But what shall I say about chastity,
when only one and no second union is allowed? As regards marriage, the
law is, not to marry again, nor to seek union with another wife. It
seems strange to many why impediment should be caused by a second
marriage entered on before baptism, so as to prevent election to the
clerical office, and to the reception of the gift of ordination; seeing
that even crimes are not wont to stand in the way, if they have been put
away in the sacrament of baptism. <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) But we must learn, that in baptism sin
can be forgiven, but law cannot be abolished. In the case of marriage
there is no sin, but there is a law. Whatever sin there is can be put
away, whatever law there is cannot be laid aside in marriage. How could
he exhort to widowhood who himself had married more than once?

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p11"></span>258. But ye know that the ministerial
office must be kept pure and unspotted, and must not be defiled by
conjugal intercourse; ye know this, I say, who have received the gifts
of the sacred ministry, with pure bodies, and unspoilt modesty, and
without ever having enjoyed conjugal intercourse. I am mentioning this,
because in some out-of-the-way places, when they enter on the ministry,
or even when they become priests, they have begotten children. They
defend this on the ground of old custom, when, as it happened, the
sacrifice was offered up at long intervals. However, even the people had
to be purified two or three days beforehand, so as to come clean to the
sacrifice, as we read in the Old Testament. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) They even used to wash their clothes.
If such regard was paid in what was only the figure, how much ought it
to be shown in the reality! Learn then, Priest and Levite, what it means
to wash thy clothes. Thou must have a pure body wherewith to offer up
the sacraments. If the people were forbidden to approach their victim
unless they washed their clothes, dost thou, while foul in heart and
body, dare to make supplication for others? Dost thou dare to make an
offering for them?

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p13"></span><span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-Page_42"></span>259. The duty of the Levites is no light
one, for the Lord says of them: “Behold I have taken the Levites from
among the children of Israel, instead of every first-born that openeth
the matrix among the children of Israel. These shall be their
redemption, and the Levites shall be Mine. For I hallowed unto Me all
the first-born in the land of Egypt.” <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) We know that the Levites are not
reckoned among the rest, but are preferred before all, for they are
chosen out of all, and are sanctified like the firstfruits and the
firstlings which belong to the Lord, since the payment of vows and
redemption for sin are offered by them. “Thou shalt not receive them,”
He says, “among the children of Israel, but thou shalt appoint the
Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels
thereof, and over all things that belong to it. They shall bear the
tabernacle and all the vessels thereof, and they shall minister in it,
and shall encamp round about the tabernacle. And when the tabernacle
setteth forward the Levites shall take it down, and when the camp is
pitched they shall set up the tabernacle again. And the stranger that
cometh nigh shall surely be put to death.” <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354)

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p16"></span>260. Thou, then, art chosen out of the
whole number of the children of Israel, regarded as the firstfruits of
the sacred offerings, set over the tabernacle so as to keep guard in the
camp of holiness and faith, to which if a stranger approach, he shall
surely die. Thou art placed there to watch over the ark of the covenant.
All do not see the depths of the mysteries, for they are hid from the
Levites, lest they should see who ought not to see, and they who cannot
serve should take it up. Moses, indeed, saw the circumcision of the
Spirit, but veiled it, so as to give circumcision only in an outward
sign. He saw the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth; he saw the
sufferings of the Lord, but he veiled the unleavened bread of truth in
the material unleavened bread, he veiled the sufferings of the Lord in
the sacrifice of a lamb or a calf. Good Levites have ever preserved the
mystery entrusted to them under the protection of their own faith, and
yet dost thou think little of what is entrusted to thee? First, thou
shalt see the deep things of God, which needs wisdom. Next, thou must
keep watch for the people; this requires justice. Thou must defend the
camp and guard the tabernacle, which needs fortitude. Thou must show
thyself continent and sober, and this needs temperance.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p17"></span>261. These chief virtues, they who are
without have recognized, <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) but
they considered that the order resting on society was higher than that
resting on wisdom; though wisdom is the foundation, and justice the
building which cannot stand unless it have a foundation. The foundation
is Christ. <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p20"></span>262. First stands faith, which is a sign
of wisdom, as Solomon says, in following his father: “The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) And the law says: “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God, thou shalt love thy neighbour.” <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) It is a noble thing to do one’s
kindnesses and duties towards the whole of the human race. But it is
ever most seemly that thou shouldst give to God the most precious thing
thou hast, that is, thy mind, <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359)
for thou hast nothing better than that. When thou hast paid thy debt to
thy Creator, then thou mayest labour for men, to show them kindness, and
to give help; then thou mayest assist the needy with money, or by some
duty, or some service that lies in the way of thy ministry; by money to
support him; by paying a debt, so as to free him that is bound; by
undertaking a duty, so as to take charge of a trust, which he fears to
lose, who has put it by in trust.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p24"></span>263. It is a duty, then, to take care of
and to restore what has been entrusted to us. But meanwhile a change
comes, either in time or circumstances, <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) so that it is no longer a duty to
restore what one has received. As, for instance, when a man demands back
his money as an open enemy, to use it against his country, and to offer
his wealth to barbarians. Or, if thou shouldst have to restore it,
whilst another stood by to extort it from him by force. If thou restore
money to a raving lunatic when he cannot keep it; if thou give up to a
madman a sword once put by with thee, whereby he may kill himself, is it
not an act contrary to duty to pay the debt? Is it not contrary to duty
to take knowingly what has been got by a thief, so that he who has lost
it is cheated out of it?

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p26"></span>264. It is also sometimes contrary to
duty to fulfil a promise, <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) or to
keep an oath. As was the case with Herod, who swore that whatever was
asked he would give to the daughter of Herodias, and so <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.l-Page_43"></span>allowed
the death of John, that he might not break his word. <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) And what shall I say of
Jephthah, <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) who offered up his
daughter in sacrifice, she having been the first to meet him as he
returned home victorious; whereby he fulfilled the vow which he had made
that he would offer to God whatever should meet him first. It would have
been better to make no promise at all, than to fulfil it in the death of
his daughter.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p30"></span>265. Ye are not ignorant how important
it is to look to this. And so a Levite is chosen to guard the sanctuary,
one who shall never fail in counsel, nor forsake the faith, nor fear
death, nor do anything extravagant, so that in his whole appearance he
may give proof of his earnestness. For he ought to have not only his
soul but even his eyes in restraint, so that no chance mishap may bring
a blush to his forehead. For “whosoever looketh on a woman to desire her
hath already committed adultery with her in his heart.” <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) Thus adultery is committed not only by
actual committal of the foul deed, but even by the desire of the ardent
gaze.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p32"></span>266. This seems high and somewhat
severe, but in a high office it is not out of place. For the grace of
the Levites is such that Moses spoke of them as follows in his blessing:
“Give to Levi his men, give Levi his trusted ones, give Levi the lot of
his inheritance, and his truth to the holy men whom they tempted in
temptation, and reviled at the waters of contradiction. Who said to his
father and mother, I know thee not, and knew not his brethren, and
renounced his children. He guarded Thy word and kept Thy
testimony.” <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365)

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p34"></span>267. They, then, are His men, His trusty
ones, who have no deceit in their hearts, hide no treachery within them,
but guard His words and ponder them in their heart, as Mary pondered
them; <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) who know not their parents
so as to put them before their duty; who hate the violators of chastity,
and avenge the injury done to purity; and know the times for the
fulfilling of their duty, as also which duty is the greater, which the
lesser, and to what occasion each is suited. In all this they follow
that alone which is virtuous. And who, where there are two virtuous
duties, think that which is the more virtuous must come first. These are
in truth rightly blessed.

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p36"></span>268. If any one makes known the just
works of the Lord, and offers Him incense, then: “Bless, O Lord, his
strength; accept the work of his hands,” <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) that he may find the grace of the
prophetic blessing with Him Who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_346"></span>[41:347](2100062.htm#fr_346) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p3"></span> S. [Mark x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[41:348](2100062.htm#fr_347) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p4"></span> [Num. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#023)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[41:349](2100062.htm#fr_348) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p5"></span> [Ps. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[41:350](2100062.htm#fr_349) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p6"></span> S. [Matt. xvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[41:351](2100062.htm#fr_350) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p7"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[41:352](2100062.htm#fr_351) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p10"></span> The question kept coming up from time
to time: Did Baptism annul all previous *impedimenta ordinationis?* Even
in the fifth century, as Pope Innocent I. (Ep. XXIX.) shows, some
maintained that as Baptism puts away all sins committed previous to its
reception, so also it removes all impediments to ordination. This same
idea St. Ambrose combats here.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[41:353](2100062.htm#fr_352) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p12"></span> [Ex. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[42:354](2100062.htm#fr_353) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p14"></span> [Num.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[42:355](2100062.htm#fr_354) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p15"></span> [Num. i.
49-51](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#049)<span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[42:356](2100062.htm#fr_355) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p18"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 43.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[42:357](2100062.htm#fr_356) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p19"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[42:358](2100062.htm#fr_357) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p21"></span> [Prov.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010), [Ps.
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[42:359](2100062.htm#fr_358) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p22"></span> [Deut. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[42:360](2100062.htm#fr_359) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p23"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 45.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[42:361](2100062.htm#fr_360) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p25"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 10.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[42:362](2100062.htm#fr_361) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p27"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 10, § 32.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[43:363](2100062.htm#fr_362) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p28"></span> S. [Matt. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p28.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[43:364](2100062.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p29"></span> [Jud. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p29.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[43:365](2100062.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p31"></span> S. [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[43:366](2100062.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p33"></span> [Deut.
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[43:367](2100062.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p35"></span> S. [Luke ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#019)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[43:368](2100062.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iv.i.ii.l-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p37"></span> [Deut. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.ii.l-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](2100063)
