[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100037)  [Next](2100039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p1"></span>In investigating the truth the
philosophers have broken through their own rules. Moses, however, showed
himself more wise than they. The greater the dignity of wisdom, the more
earnestly must we strive to gain it. Nature herself urges us all to do
this.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>122. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>It</span> is said, therefore, that in
investigating the truth, we must observe what is seemly. We ought to
look for what is true with the greatest care. We must not put forward
falsehood for truth, nor hide the truth in darkness, nor fill the mind
with idle, involved, or doubtful matters. What so unseemly as to worship
a wooden thing, which men themselves have made? What shows such darkness
as to discuss subjects connected with geometry and astronomy (which they
approve of), to measure the depths of space, to shut up heaven and earth
within the limits of fixed numbers, to leave aside the grounds of
salvation and to seek for error?

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p3"></span>123. Moses, learned as he was in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians, <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) did
not approve of those things, but thought that kind of wisdom both
harmful and foolish. Turning away therefrom, he sought God with all the
desire of his heart, and thus saw, questioned, heard Him when He
spoke. <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) Who is more wise than he
whom God taught, and who brought to nought all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and all the powers of their craft by the might of his works?
He did not treat things unknown as well known, and so rashly accept
them. Yet these philosophers, though they do not consider it contrary to
nature, nor shameful for themselves to worship, and to ask help from an
idol which knows nothing, teach us that these two things mentioned in
the words just spoken, which are in accordance both with nature and with
virtue, ought to be avoided.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p6"></span>124. The loftier the virtue of wisdom
is, the more I say we ought to strive for it, so that we may be able to
attain to it. And that we may have no ideas which are contrary to
nature, or are disgraceful, or unfitting, we ought to give two things,
that is, time and care, to considering matters for the sake of
investigating them. For there is nothing in which man excels all other
living creatures more than in the fact that he has reason, seeks out the
origin of things, thinks that the Author of his being should be searched
out. For in His hand is our life and death; He rules this world by His
nod. And to Him we know that we must give a reason for our actions. For
there is nothing which is more of a help to a good life than to believe
that He will be our judge, Whom hidden things do not escape, and
unseemly things offend, and good deeds delight.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p7"></span>125. In all men, then, there lies, in
accordance with human nature, a desire to search out the truth, which
leads us on to have a longing for knowledge and learning, and <span
id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-Page_22"></span>infuses
into us a wish to seek after it. To excel in this seems a noble thing to
mankind; but there are only few who attain to it. And they, by deep
thought, by careful deliberation, spend no little labour so as to be
able to attain to that blessed and virtuous life, and to approach its
likeness in their actions. “For not he that saith to Me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth those things
that I say.” <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) To have a desire
for knowledge without actions to correspond—well! I do not know whether
that carries anything more with it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[21:182](2100038.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> [Acts vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[21:183](2100038.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p5"></span> [Ex. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[22:184](2100038.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p8"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. The first source of duty is prudence, from whence
spring three other virtues; and they cannot be separated or torn
asunder, since they are mutually connected one with the other.](2100039)
