[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100247)  [Next](2100249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p1"></span>*The heretical objection, that the
Son cannot be equal to the Father, because* He *cannot beget a Son, is
turned back upon the authors of it. From the case of human nature it is
shown that whether a person begets offspring or not, has nothing to do
with his power. Most of all must this be true since, otherwise, the
Father Himself would have to be pronounced wanting in power. Whence it
follows that we have no right to judge of divine things by human, and
must take our stand upon the authority of Holy Writ, otherwise we must
deny all power either to the Father or to the Son.*

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p2"></span>78. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is a fool’s demurrer, your
Majesty, which certain persons are given to raising, in order to show
the Father and the Son to be not equal together, saying that the Father
is Almighty, because He hath begotten the Son, but that the Son is not
Almighty, because He hath not been able to beget.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p3"></span>79. But see how wild is their
blasphemy, how their philosophers’ logic confutes itself. For the
raising of this question must lead either to their confessing with their
own mouths that the Son is co-eternal with the Father, or, if they
impose a beginning upon the Son’s existence, to their assigning of
necessity a beginning to the Father’s power. When, therefore, they deny
that the Son is Almighty, they are on the road to assert—which is
impious—that the Father began to be Almighty by help of the Son.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p4"></span>80. For if the Father is Almighty by
reason of begetting the Son, then, certainly, either the Son is
co-eternal with the Father, because if the Father is eternally Almighty,
then the Son also is eternal, or, if there was a time when there was not
an eternal Son, there was by consequence a time when there was not an
Almighty Father. For when they would make out that there was a time when
the Son began to be, they are sliding back into \[the error of\] saying
that the Father’s Power also has not been from everlasting, but began to
be in consequence of the generation of the Son. So, in their desire to
do dishonour to the Son of God, they do so increase His honour as to
seem to make Him, contrary to all right belief, the source of His
Father’s Power, though the Son saith, “All things that the Father hath
are Mine” <span id="fr_2399"></span>[2400](#fn_2399) —that is to say,
not the things which He has bestowed upon the Father, but which He has
received from the Father, by right as the Son Whom the Father has
begotten.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p6"></span>81. And therefore we do declare the
Son to be Eternal Power; <span id="fr_2400"></span>[2401](#fn_2400) if,
then, His Power and Godhead be eternal, surely His Sovereignty is
eternal also. He, then, who dishonours the Son dishonours the Father,
and is an enemy and offender against duty and love. Let us honour the
Son, in Whom the Father is well pleased, for it is the Father’s pleasure
that praise be given to the Son, in Whom He Himself is well pleased.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p8"></span>82. Let us, however, make answer to
the conclusion they strive to establish; but we seem to have sought, in
pursuit of a personal appeal, to escape from the difficulty of treating
the question before us. The Father, they say, has begotten a Son; the
Son has not. What proof is this that they are not equal? To beget is the
Father’s natural function, as a Father, and no necessary outcome of His
Sovereign Power. <span id="fr_2401"></span>[2402](#fn_2401) Furthermore,
dutiful regard places persons on an equality with each other, and does
not sunder them. Again, our own experience of what holds good amongst us
frail mortals teaches us that it may frequently happen that weak men
have sons, whilst stronger men have not; that slaves have children,
whilst their masters are childless; and that the poor beget offspring,
whilst rich men are unblessed with any.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p10"></span>83. But if our adversaries say that
this too may be the result of infirmity, inasmuch as men may desire to
beget children, but be unable to do so; then, though things divine are
not to be judged of and determined by things human, yet let them
understand that with men also, as with God, whether one has children or
no, is not dependent upon or derived of his authoritative power, but
upon the personal attributes of a father, and that begetting lies not in
the power of our will, but is contingent upon our qualities of body; for
if it were a matter of sovereign authority, then the mightier king would
have the greater number of sons. To have sons, then, or to be childless,
therefore, is not in necessary connection or relation to sovereign
authority. Is it, then, so with nature?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p11"></span>84. If you \[my Arian adversaries\]
regard what you object as natural weakness, and rely upon examples taken
from the nature of mankind, remember that the Father’s nature is the
same as the Son’s, and therefore you <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-Page_273"></span>do either confess the Son to be
a true Son, and dishonour the Father in the Person of the Son, by reason
of Their unity in one and the same Nature (for as the Father is by
Nature God, so also is the Son; whereas the Apostle says that the “gods
many” are not so by nature, but are only so called); or, if you deny Him
to be a true Son, that is to say, possessing the same Nature, then He is
not begotten, and if the Son is not begotten, the Father did not beget
Him.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p12"></span>85. The conclusion we come at,
therefore, on the line of your persuasion, is that God the Father is not
Almighty, because He could not beget, if He did not beget the Son, but
created Him. But forasmuch as the Father is Almighty, He being, as you
hold, the Almighty in so far as He is the only Author of Being, then
surely He has begotten His Son, and not created Him. Howbeit, we ought
to believe His word before yours. He says: “I have begotten,” <span
id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402) and that more than once, witnessing
to Himself as begetting.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p14"></span>86. It is no sign, then, of
infirmity, whether of nature or authority, in Christ, that He has not
begotten, for to beget, as we have already said ofttimes, bears no
relation to supremacy of authority, but to a personal property in a
nature. <span id="fr_2403"></span>[2404](#fn_2403) For if the
Omnipotence of the Father is thereby constituted, that He hath a Son,
then He might have been more Almighty had He begotten more Sons.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p16"></span>87. Then is His power exhausted in
the begetting of One? Nay, but I will show that Christ also hath sons,
whom He begets every day, but with that generation, or rather
regeneration, which is related to personal authority rather than nature,
for adoption is the exercise and bestowal of authority, and generation
the manifestation of a property, as Scripture itself hath taught us: for
John saith that “He was in this world, and the world was made by Him,
and the world knew Him not. He came to His own, and His own received Him
not. But as many as received Him, to them gave He power <span
id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404) to become sons of God, to them
which believe in His Name.” <span id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p19"></span>88. We say, therefore, that it is
the function and exercise of His Authority that He has made us sons of
God, whereas the oracles of God discover that His generation is in
relation to personal attribute, for the Wisdom of God saith: “I came
forth out of the mouth of the Most High,” <span
id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406) that is to say not of compulsion,
but free, not under bond of authority, but born in a hidden birth,
according to personal powers of Supreme Sovereignty and rightfulness of
authority. Again, concerning the same Wisdom, Which is the Lord Jesus,
the Father saith in another place: “Out of the womb I begat Thee, before
the morning star.” <span id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p22"></span>89. Now this He said, not to make us
think of a bodily womb, <span id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408) but
to show that true generation is His proper activity, <span
id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409) for if we understand the words as
speaking of generation from a body, then \[we imply\] the Father
Almighty conceived and brought forth in travail. But far be it from us
that we should make this weak bodily frame the measure of God’s
greatness. The word “womb” represents the hidden mystery, the inner
sanctuary of the Father’s being, into which neither angels nor
archangels nor powers nor dominations, nor any created nature, hath been
able to enter. For the Son is always with the Father, and in the
Father—with the Father, by virtue of the distinction, without division,
proper to the Eternal Trinity; <span
id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410) in the Father, by reason of the
essential unity of the Divine Nature.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p26"></span>90. What room here, then, for one to
sit in judgment upon the Godhead, to call in question the Father and the
Son,—the One for begetting, the Other for not begetting. No man condemns
his servant or handmaid for begetting (or bearing) offspring; but those
Arians condemn Christ for not begetting—they do condemn Him, for they
privately pass sentence of condemnation upon Him, when they take from
His glory and dignity. The question, why they have not begotten
offspring, does not lead those who are joined in marriage into loss of
their love, or denial of each other’s merits, but the Arians, because
Christ hath not begotten a Son, make light of His sovereignty.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p27"></span>91. Why, ask they, is the Son not a
Father? Because, on the other side, the Father is not a Son. Why has not
Christ begotten? Even because the Father is not begotten. Yet the Son
stands none the lower, because He is not a Father; nor the Father,
because He is not a Son, for the Son said: “All things that the Father
hath are Mine” <span id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411) —so truly is
generation involved in the Father’s per<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>
<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-Page_274"></span>sonal attributes, and comes not
by mere right of sovereignty.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p29"></span>92. The Substance of the Trinity is,
so to say, a common Essence in that which is distinct, <span
id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) an incomprehensible, ineffable
Substance. We hold the distinction, not the confusion of Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit; a distinction without separation; a distinction without
plurality; <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413) and thus we
believe in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as each existing from and to
eternity in this divine and wonderful Mystery: not in two Fathers, nor
in two Sons, nor in two Spirits. For “there is one God, the Father, of
Whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by Whom
are all things, and we by Him.” <span
id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414) There is One born of the Father,
the Lord Jesus, and therefore He is the Only-begotten. “There is also
One Holy Spirit,” <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415) as the same
Apostle hath said. So we believe, so we read, so we hold. We know the
fact of distinction, we know nothing of the hidden mysteries; we pry not
into the causes, but keep the outward signs vouchsafed unto us.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p34"></span>93. O monstrous wickedness, that
they who have no power over their own procreation should claim and usurp
power to enquire into the Divine Generation! Let them deny, them, that
the Son is equal to the Father, forasmuch as He hath not begotten; let
them deny that the Son is equal to the Father, because He hath a Father!
But if they talked after this fashion about men, who sometimes desire to
beget sons, yet cannot, we should call it an insult, just as we should
so call it, if of two men, one having sons and the other childless, the
latter were said to be inferior to the former on that ground. So
monstrous also, I say, does it seem, in regard simply to men, that one
should therefore be esteemed the more lightly because he hath a father.
Peradventure, indeed, the Arians suppose that Christ is in the position
of one in a family, and frets because He is not set free and independent
of His Father’s authority, and is not empowered to administer the
estate. But Christ is not under tutelage; nay, rather has He abolished
all tutelage. <span id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p36"></span>94. How then, let them tell us,
would they have these things to be?—a true generation, the true Son
begotten of God the Father, that is, of the Substance of the Father, or
of another substance? If they say “begotten of the Father, that is, of
the Substance of God,” well and good, for then they acknowledge the Son
as begotten of the Substance of the Father. If, then, they are of one
Substance, surely they are also of one sovereign Power. Whereas, if the
Son is begotten of another substance, how can the Father be Almighty,
and the Son not Almighty? For what advantage hath God, if He have made
His Son of another substance, when confessedly the Son, on His part,
hath of another substance made us sons of God? The Son, therefore, is
either of one Substance with the Father, or of one sovereign Power.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p37"></span>95. Our adversaries’ question, then,
falls flat, because they cannot judge Christ—or rather, because He is
clear, when He is judged. <span id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417)
They are worthy, however, to be condemned upon their own sentence, who
raise this question against us, for if the Son be therefore not equal to
the Father, because He hath not begotten a Son, then by all means let
them who sow discussions of this kind <span
id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418) confess, if they have not children,
that their very servants are to be preferred before themselves, inasmuch
as they cannot be the equals of those who have children—whereas, if they
have children, let them regard the merit thereof as due not to
themselves, but of right to their sons.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p40"></span>96. The objection, then, holds not
together, that the Son cannot be equal to the Father, by reason of the
Father having begotten the Son, whilst the Son has begotten no Son of
Himself, for the spring begets the stream, though the stream begets no
spring out of itself, and light begets radiance, and not radiance light,
yet the nature of radiance and light is one. <span
id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2399"></span>[272:2400](2100248.htm#fr_2399) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p5"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2400"></span>[272:2401](2100248.htm#fr_2400) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p7"></span> Cf. [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2401"></span>[272:2402](2100248.htm#fr_2401) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p9"></span> *i.e.,*the Father begets *quâ
Father,* not *quâ* Almighty (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p9.2"></span>Παντοκράτωρ</span>).

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[273:2403](2100248.htm#fr_2402) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p13"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2403"></span>[273:2404](2100248.htm#fr_2403) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p15"></span> See § 82.

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[273:2405](2100248.htm#fr_2404) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p17"></span> Or “authority.”

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[273:2406](2100248.htm#fr_2405) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p18"></span> S. [John i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p18.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[273:2407](2100248.htm#fr_2406) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p20"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
24.5](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[273:2408](2100248.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p21"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[273:2409](2100248.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p23"></span> The word “womb” is used
metaphorically in the original, from which St. Ambrose (though
inaccurately) quotes. See [Ps.
cx.](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p23.1"></span> in the R.V.

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[273:2410](2100248.htm#fr_2409) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p24"></span> Or “to show the distinctive
character of true” *or* “perfect generation”—as an *absolute* act,
unconditioned of time or space.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[273:2411](2100248.htm#fr_2410) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p25"></span> Ath. Creed 4.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[273:2412](2100248.htm#fr_2411) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p28"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[274:2413](2100248.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p30"></span> *sc.* internally.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[274:2414](2100248.htm#fr_2413) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p31"></span> *i.e.*without plurality of
substance or essential nature. There is *one* Godhead of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Ghost—not three Godheads.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[274:2415](2100248.htm#fr_2414) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p32"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[274:2416](2100248.htm#fr_2415) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p33"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[274:2417](2100248.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p35"></span> Cf. [Gal. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p35.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[274:2418](2100248.htm#fr_2417) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p38"></span> [Ps. li.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[274:2419](2100248.htm#fr_2418) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p39"></span> Or “engage in discussions of this
kind.” Lat.—*serunt hujusmodi quæstiones.*

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[274:2420](2100248.htm#fr_2419) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p41"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p41.1"></span>, where Christ is called the Radiance of
the Father’s Glory (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p41.2"></span>ἀπαύγασμταῆς δόξης</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Various quibbling arguments, advanced by the Arians
to show that the Son had a beginning of existence, are considered and
refuted, on the ground that whilst the Arians plainly prove nothing, or
if they prove anything, prove it against themselves, (inasmuch as He Who
is the beginning of all cannot Himself have a beginning), their
reasonings do not even hold true with regard to facts of human
existence. Time could not be before He was, Who is the Author of
time--if indeed at some time He was not in existence, then the Father
was without His Power and Wisdom. Again, our own human experience shows
that a person is said to exist before he is born.](2100249)
