[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100352)  [Next](2100354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p1"></span>By the example of Anna St. Ambrose shows
what ought to be the life of widows, and shows that she was an example
of chastity at every age. From this he argues that there are three
degrees of the same virtue, all of which are included in the Church, and
sets forth several examples in Mary, in Anna, and in Susanna. But, he
adds, the state of virginity is superior to either of the others, but
that a widow ought to take greater care for the preservation of her good
name.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p2"></span>21. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.v-p2.1"></span>Scripture</span> then teaches as how much
grace is conferred by unity, and how great is the gift of divine
blessing in widows. And since such honour is given them by God, we must
observe what mode of life corresponds thereto; for Anna shows what
widows ought to be, who, left destitute by the early death of her
husband, yet obtained the reward of full praise, being intent not less
on the duties of religion than on the pursuit of chastity. A widow, it
is said, of <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v-Page_395"></span>fourscore and four years, a widow who
departed not from the temple, a widow who served God night and day with
fastings and with prayers. <span id="fr_3332"></span>[3333](#fn_3332)

<span id="iv.viii.v-p4"></span>22. You see what sort of person a widow
is said to be, the wife of one man, tested also by the progress of age,
vigorous in religion, and worn out in body, whose resting-place is the
temple, whose conversation is prayer, whose life is fasting, who in the
times of day and night by a service of unwearied devotion, though the
body acknowledge old age, yet knows no age in her piety. Thus is a widow
trained from her youth, thus is she spoken of in her age, who has kept
her widowhood not through the chance of time, nor through weakness of
body, but by large-heartedness in virtue. For when it is said that she
was for seven years from her virginity with her husband, it is a setting
forth that the things which are the support of her old age began in the
aims of her youth.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p5"></span>23. And so we are taught that the virtue
of chastity is threefold, one kind that of married life, a second that
of widowhood, and the third that of virginity, for we do not so set
forth one as to exclude others. These result each in that which belongs
to each. The training of the Church is rich in this, that it has those
whom it may set before others, but has none whom it rejects, and would
that it never could have any! We have so spoken of virginity as not to
reject widowhood, we so reverence widows as to reserve its own honour
for wedlock. It is not our precepts but the divine sayings which teach
this.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p6"></span>24. Let us remember then how Mary, how
Anna, and how Susanna are spoken of. But since not only must we
celebrate their praises but also follow their manner of life, let us
remember where Susanna, <span id="fr_3333"></span>[3334](#fn_3333) and
Anna, <span id="fr_3334"></span>[3335](#fn_3334) and Mary <span
id="fr_3335"></span>[3336](#fn_3335) are found, and observe how each is
spoken of with her special commendation, and where each is mentioned,
she that is married in the garden, the widow in the temple, the virgin
in her secret chamber.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p10"></span>25. But in the former the fruit is
later, in virginity it is earlier; old age proves them, virginity is the
praise of youth, and does not need the help of years, being the fruit of
every age. It becomes early years, it adorns youth, it adds to the
dignity of age, and at all ages it has the gray hairs of its
righteousness, the ripeness of its gravity, the veil of modesty, which
does hinder devotion and increases religion. For we see by what follows
that holy Mary went every year with Joseph to Jerusalem on the solemn
day of the passover. <span id="fr_3336"></span>[3337](#fn_3336)
Everywhere in company with the Virgin is eager devotion and a zealous
sharer of her chastity. Nor is the Mother of the Lord puffed up, as
though secure of her own merits, but the more she recognized her merit,
the more fully did she pay her vows, the more abundantly did she perform
her service, the more fully did she discharge her office, the more
religiously did she perform her duty and fill up the mystic time.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p12"></span>26. How much more then does it beseem
you to be intent on the pursuit of chastity, lest you leave any place
for unfavourable opinion who have the evidence of your modesty and your
behaviour alone. For a virgin, though in her also character rather than
the body has the first claim, puts away calumny by the integrity of her
body, a widow who has lost the assistance of being able to prove her
virginity undergoes the inquiry as to her chastity not according to the
word of a midwife, but according to her own manner of life. Scripture,
then, has shown how attentive and religious should be the disposition of
a widow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3332"></span>[395:3333](2100353.htm#fr_3332) <span
id="iv.viii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p3"></span> S. [Luke
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037)<span id="iv.viii.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3333"></span>[395:3334](2100353.htm#fr_3333) <span
id="iv.viii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p7"></span> [Sus.
63](../../../bib/apo/sus001.htm#063)<span id="iv.viii.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3334"></span>[395:3335](2100353.htm#fr_3334) <span
id="iv.viii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p8"></span> S. [Luke ii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037)<span id="iv.viii.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3335"></span>[395:3336](2100353.htm#fr_3335) <span
id="iv.viii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p9"></span> S. [Luke i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)<span id="iv.viii.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3336"></span>[395:3337](2100353.htm#fr_3336) <span
id="iv.viii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p11"></span> S. [Luke ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041)<span id="iv.viii.v-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Liberality to the poor is recommended by the example
of the widow the Gospel, whose two mites were preferred to the large
gifts of the rich. The two mites are treated as mystically representing
the two Testaments. What that treasure is for which we are taught to
offer, after the example of the wise men, three gifts, or after that of
the widow, two. St. Ambrose concludes the chapter by an exhortation to
widows to be zealous in good works.](2100354)
