[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100077)  [Next](2100079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p1"></span>Of liberality. To whom it must chiefly
be shown, and how men of slender means may show it by giving their
service and counsel.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p2"></span>68. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>But</span> if it is praiseworthy to have
one’s soul free from this failing, how much more glorious is it to gain
the love of the people by liberality which is neither too freely shown
to those who are unsuitable, nor too sparingly bestowed upon the needy.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p3"></span>69. There are many kinds of
liberality. <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) Not only can we
distribute and give away food to those who need it from our own daily
supply, so that they may sustain life; but we can also give advice and
help to those who are ashamed to show their want openly, so long as the
common supplies of the needy are not exhausted. I am now speaking of one
set over some office. If he is a priest or almoner, let him inform the
bishop of them, and not withhold the name of any he knows to be in any
need, or to have lost their wealth and to be now reduced to want;
especially if they have not fallen into this trouble owing to
wastefulness in youth, but because of another’s theft, or through loss
of their inheritance from no fault of their own, so that they cannot now
earn their daily bread.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p5"></span>70. The highest kind of liberality is,
to redeem captives, to save them from the hands of their enemies, to
snatch men from death, and, most of all, women from shame, to restore
children to their parents, parents to their children, and, to give back
a citizen to his country. This was recognized when Thrace and Illyria
were so terribly devastated. <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) How
many captives were then for sale all over the world! Could one but call
them together, their number would have surpassed that of a whole
province. Yet there were some who would have sent back into slavery
those whom the Church had redeemed. They themselves were harder than
slavery itself to look askance at another’s mercy. If they themselves
(they said) had come to slavery, they would be slaves freely. If they
had been sold, they would not refuse the service of slavery. They wished
to undo the freedom of others, though they could not undo their own
slavery, unless perchance it should please the buyer to receive his
price again, whereby, however, slavery would not be simply undone but
redeemed.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p7"></span>71. It is then a special quality of
liberality to redeem captives, <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480)
especially from barbarian enemies who are moved by no spark of human
feeling to show mercy, except so far as avarice has preserved it with a
view to redemption. It is also a great thing to take upon oneself
another’s debt, if the debtor cannot pay and is hard pressed to do so,
and where the money is due by right and is only left unpaid through
want. So, too, it is a sign of great liberality to bring up children,
and to take care of orphans.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p9"></span>72. There are others who place in
marriage maidens that have lost their parents, so as to preserve their
chastity, and who help them not only with good wishes but also by a sum
of money. There is also another kind of liberality which the Apostle
teaches: “If any that believeth hath widows let him relieve them, that
the Church be not burdened by supplying them, that it may have enough
for those that are widows indeed.” <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481)

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p11"></span>73. Useful, then, is liberality of
this sort; but it is not common to all. For there are many good men who
have but slender means, and are content with little for their own use,
and are not able to give help to lighten the poverty of others. However,
another sort of kindness is ready to their hand, whereby they can help
those poorer still. For there is a twofold liberality: <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) one that gives actual assistance, that
is, in money; the other, which is busy in offering active help, is often
much grander and nobler.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p13"></span>74. How much grander it was for
Abraham to have recovered his captured son-in-law by his victorious
arms, <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) than if he had ransomed
him! How much more usefully did holy Joseph help King Pharaoh by his
counsel to provide for the future, than if he had offered him money! For
money would not have bought back the fruitfulness of any <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span id="iv.i.iii.xv-Page_55"></span>one
state; whilst he by his foresight kept the famine for five years <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) from the whole of Egypt.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p16"></span>75. Money is easily spent; counsels
can never be exhausted. They only grow the stronger by constant use.
Money grows less and quickly comes to an end, and has failed even
kindness itself; so that the more there are to whom one wants to give,
the fewer one can help; and often one has not got what one thinks ought
to be given to others. But as regards the offer of advice and active
help, the more there are to spend it on, the more there seems to be, and
the more it returns to its own source. The rich stream of prudence ever
flows back upon itself, and the more it has reached out to, so much the
more active becomes all that remains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_478"></span>[54:479](2100078.htm#fr_478) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p4"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 9, § 32.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[54:480](2100078.htm#fr_479) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p6"></span> This was in the year 378. These
provinces were invaded by the Goths, who after the defeat and death of
Valens at Hadrianople ravaged the whole country, and carried away with
them a vast number of captives and afterwards sold them into slavery.
St. Ambrose busied himself in redeeming all he could. He tells us
himself how his efforts were met by the Arian party.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[54:481](2100078.htm#fr_480) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p8"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 16.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[54:482](2100078.htm#fr_481) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p10"></span> [1 Tim. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[54:483](2100078.htm#fr_482) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p12"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 15, § 52.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[54:484](2100078.htm#fr_483) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p14"></span> [Gen. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[55:485](2100078.htm#fr_484) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xv-p15"></span> [Gen. xli.
53-57](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#053)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xv-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Due measure must be observed in liberality, that it
may not be expended on worthless persons, when it is needed by worthier
ones. However, alms are not to be given in too sparing and hesitating a
way. One ought rather to follow the example of the blessed Joseph, whose
prudence is commended at great length.](2100079)
