[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100316)  [Next](2100318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Note on the Penitential Discipline of the
Early Church.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p2"></span>It was always believed in the Church
that the power of binding and loosing had been entrusted by our Lord to
His apostles, and by them handed on to their successors in the ministry.
The earlier practice would seem to have been short and simple: exclusion
from Communion, some outward discipline, not always continued for a long
period, and reconciliation on true repentance, these matters being
decided by the bishop at his discretion. Gradually the practice became
more systematized, various periods of discipline were prescribed for
various sins, and the time for this discipline was lengthened.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p3"></span>There were three parts in the
discipline of Penitence as a whole:

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p4"></span>1. Confession, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>ἐξομολόγησις</span>,
a term used frequently of the whole course.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p5"></span>2. Penance, properly so called, i.e.
the mortifications, fasting, etc., prescribed.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p6"></span>3. Reconciliation, performed solemnly
by the bishop, often at Easter.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p7"></span>The confession was probably in
private to the bishop, who determined whether any public confession
should be made or not. But as only great sins—at first, idolatry,
adultery, and murder (*peccata mortalia*)—were punished by outward
penance, it was clear that the sin must have been very grievous.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p8"></span>The Montanists taught that the Church
had not power to forgive great sins, and this led to clearing the
doctrine, and from the middle of the third century, even those who had
lapsed into idolatry were admitted to penance.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p9"></span>Hermas already says: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p9.1"></span>τοῖς δούλοις τοῦθεοῦ
μέτανοιά ἐστι μία,</span> *Mand*. iv. 1. And this rule seems to have
been maintained as regards the formal penance and reconciliation, not as
implying doubt of possible forgiveness, but as a matter of discipline,
and this rule deprived those who fell a second time from communion at
least till their deathbed.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p10"></span>For this public penance the Greek
words are <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p10.1"></span>μετάνοια</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p10.2"></span>ἐξομολόγησις</span>;
the Latin, *penitentia* and frequently *exomologesis.* As the word
*penitentia* includes not merely sorrow for sin and change of heart, but
also penance, or the penalty inflicted by authority, and is used in such
phrases as *penitentiam agere* or *facere*, it has been necessary in the
translation of the *De Penitentia* to vary the English terms, and to use
sometimes repentance, sometimes penance.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p11"></span>For further information on this
subject, the reader is referred specially to the Articles,
Buss-Disciplin, in the *Freiburg Kirchen-Lexikon*, by Wetzer and Welte;
and to those on Exomologesis, Penitence, and Reconciliation, in the
*Dict. of Christian Antiquities*, where other authorities and references
will be found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Virgins.](2100318)
