[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100349)  [Next](2100351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii"></span> <span id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii-Page_391"></span>

## <span id="iv.viii.ii-p0.1"></span>The Treatise Concerning Widows.

### <span id="iv.viii.ii-p0.2"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p1"></span>After having written about virgins, it
seemed needful to say something concerning widows, since the Apostle
joins the two classes together, and the latter are as it were teachers
of the former, and far superior to those who are married. Elijah was
sent to a widow, a great mark of honour; yet widows are not honourable
like her of Sarepta, unless they copy her virtues, notably hospitality.
The avarice of men is rebuked, who forfeit the promises of God by their
grasping.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p2.1"></span>Since</span> I have treated of the honour of
virgins in three books, it is fitting now, my brethren, that a treatise
concerning widows should come in order; for I ought not to leave them
without honour, nor to separate them from the commendation belonging to
virgins, since the voice of the Apostle has joined them to virgins,
according to what is written: “The unmarried woman and the virgin careth
for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in
spirit.” <span id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) For in a certain
manner the inculcation of virginity is strengthened by the example of
widows. They who have preserved their marriage bed undefiled are a
testimony to virgins that chastity is to be preserved for God. And it is
almost a mark of no less virtue to abstain from marriage, which was once
a delight, than to remain ignorant of the pleasures of wedlock. They are
strong in each point, in that they regret not wedlock, the faith of
which they keep, and entangle not themselves with wedded pleasures, lest
they appear weak and not able to take care of themselves.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p4"></span>2. But in this particular virtue is
contained also the prizes of liberty. For: “The wife is bound as long as
her husband liveth; but if her husband fall asleep she is freed: let her
marry whom she will, only in the Lord. But she will be happier if she so
abide, after my judgment, for I think I also have the Spirit of
God.” <span id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) Evidently, then, the
Apostle has expressed the difference, having said that the one is bound,
and stated that the other is happier, and that he asserts not so much as
the result of his own judgment, as of the infusion of the Spirit of God;
that the decision should be seen to be heavenly, not human.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6"></span>3. And what is the teaching of the fact
that at that time when the whole human race was afflicted by famine and
Elias was sent to the widow? <span id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303)
And see how for each is reserved her own special grace. An angel is sent
to the Virgin, <span id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304) a prophet to
the widow. Notice, farther, that in one case it is Gabriel, in the other
Elisha. The most excellent chiefs of the number of angels and prophets
are seen to be chosen. But there is no praise simply in widowhood,
unless there be added the virtues of widowhood. For, indeed, there were
many widows, but one is preferred to all, in which fact it is not so
much that others are called back from their pursuit as that they are
stimulated by the example of virtue.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p9"></span>4. What is said at first makes the ears
attentive, although the simplicity itself of the understanding has
weight to attract widows to the pattern of virtue; since each seems to
excel, not according to her profession, but her merit, and the grace of
hospitality is not lost sight of by God, Who, as He Himself related in
the Gospel, rewards a cup of cold water with the exceeding recompense of
eternity, and compensates the small measure of meal and oil by an
unfailing abundance of plenty ever coming in. For if one of the
heathen <span id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305) has said that all the
possessions of friends should be common, how much more ought those of
relatives to be common! For we are relatives who are bound into one
body.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p11"></span>5. But we are not bound by any
prescribed limit of hospitality. For why do you think <span
id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span id="iv.viii.ii-Page_392"></span>that
what is of this world is private property when this world is common? Or
why do you consider the fruits of the earth are private, when the earth
itself is common property? “Behold,” He said, “the fowls of the air,
they sow not, neither do they reap.” <span
id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306) For to those to whom nothing is
private property nothing is wanting, and God, the master of His own
word, knows how to keep His promise. Again, the birds do not gather
together, and yet they eat, for our heavenly Father feeds them. But we
turning aside the warnings of a general utterance to our private
advantage, God says: “Every tree which has in it the fruit of a tree
yielding seed shall be to you for meat, and to every beast, and to every
bird, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth.” <span
id="fr_3307"></span>[3308](#fn_3307) By gathering together we come to
want, and by gathering together we are made empty. For we cannot hope
for the promise, who keep not the saying. It is also good for us to
attend to the precept of hospitality, to be ready to give to strangers,
for we, too, are strangers in the world.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p14"></span>6. But how holy was that widow, who,
when pinched by extreme hunger, observed the reverence due to God, and
was not using the food for herself alone, but was dividing it with her
son, that she might not outlive her dear offspring. Great is the duty of
affection, but that of religion brings more return. For as no one ought
to be set before her son, so the prophet of God ought to be set before
her son and her preservation. For she is to be believed to have given to
him not a little food, but the whole support of her life, who left
nothing for herself. So hospitable was she that she gave the whole, so
full of faith that she believed at once.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[391:3302](2100350.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[391:3303](2100350.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#040)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[391:3304](2100350.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p7"></span> [1 Kings
17.9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[391:3305](2100350.htm#fr_3304) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8"></span> S. [Luke
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[391:3306](2100350.htm#fr_3305) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10"></span> Pythagoras.

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[392:3307](2100350.htm#fr_3306) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p12"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3307"></span>[392:3308](2100350.htm#fr_3307) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p13"></span> [Gen.
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The precepts of the Apostle concerning a widow indeed
are laid down, such as, that she bring up children, attend to her
parents, desire to please God, show herself irreproachable, set forth a
ripeness of merits, have been the wife of one man. St. Ambrose notes,
however, that a second marriage was not condemned by St. Paul, and adds
that widows must have a good report for virtue with all. The reasons why
younger widows are to be avoided, and what is meant by its being better
to marry than to burn. St. Ambrose then goes on to speak of the dignity
of widows, shown by the fact that any injury done to them is visited by
the anger of God.](2100351)
