[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100346)  [Next](2100348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p1"></span>In reply to Marcellina, who had asked
what should be thought of those who to escape violence killed
themselves, St. Ambrose replies by narrating the history of Pelagia, a
virgin, with her mother and sister, and goes on to speak of the
martyrdom of the blessed Sotheris, one of their own ancestors.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p2"></span>32. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>As</span> I am drawing near the close of
my address, you make a good suggestion, holy sister, that I should touch
upon what we ought to think of the merits of those who have cast
themselves down from a height, or have drowned themselves in a river,
lest they should fall into the hands of persecutors, seeing that holy
Scripture forbids a Christian to lay hands on himself. And indeed as
regards virgins placed in the necessity of preserving their purity, we
have a plain answer, seeing that there exists an instance of martyrdom.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p3"></span>33. Saint Pelagia <span
id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) lived formerly at Antioch, being
about fifteen years old, a sister of virgins, and a virgin herself. She
shut herself up at home at the first sound of persecution, seeing
herself surrounded by those who would rob her of her faith and purity,
in the absence of her mother and sisters, without any defence, but all
the more filled with God. “What are we to do, unless,” says she to
herself, “thou, a captive of virginity, takest thought? I both wish and
fear to die, for I meet not death but seek it. Let us die if we are
allowed, or if they will not allow it, still let us die. God is not
offended by a remedy against evil, and faith permits the act. In truth,
if we think of the real meaning of the word, how can what is voluntary
be violence? It is rather violence to wish to die and not to be able.
And we do not fear any difficulty. For who is there who wishes to die
and is not able to do so, when there are so many easy ways to death? For
I can now rush upon the sacrilegious altars and overthrow them, and
quench with my blood the kindled fires. I am not afraid that my right
hand may fail to deliver the blow, or that my breast may <span
id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vii-Page_387"></span>shrink from the pain. I shall leave
no sin to my flesh. I fear not that a sword will be wanting. I can die
by my own weapons, I can die without the help of an executioner, in my
mother’s bosom.”

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p5"></span>34. She is said to have adorned her
head, and to have put on a bridal dress, so that one would say that she
was going to a bridegroom, not to death. But when the hateful
persecutors saw that they had lost the prey of her chastity, they began
to seek her mother and sisters. But they, by a spiritual flight, already
held the field of chastity, when, as on the one side, persecutors
suddenly threatened them, and on the other, escape was shut off by an
impetuous river, they said, what do we fear? See the water, what hinders
us from being baptized? And this is the baptism whereby sins are
forgiven, and kingdoms are sought. This is a baptism after which no one
sins. Let the water receive us, which is wont to regenerate. Let the
water receive us, which makes virgins. Let the water receive us, which
opens heaven, protects the weak, hides death, makes martyrs. We pray
Thee, God, Creator of all things, let not the water scatter our bodies,
deprived of the breath of life; let not death separate our obsequies,
whose lives affection has always conjoined; but let our constancy be
one, our death one, and our burial also be one.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p6"></span>35. Having said these words, and
having slightly girded up the bosom of their dress, to veil their
modesty without impeding their steps, joining hands as though to lead a
dance, they went forward to the middle of the river bed, directing their
steps to where the stream was more violent, and the depth more abrupt.
No one drew back, no one ceased to go on, no one tried where to place
her steps, they were anxious only when they felt the ground, grieved
when the water was shallow, and glad when it was deep. One could see the
pious mother tightening her grasp, rejoicing in her pledges, afraid of a
fall lest even the stream should carry off her daughters from her.
“These victims, O Christ,” said she, “do I offer as leaders of chastity,
guides on my journey, and companions of my sufferings.”

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p7"></span>37. But who would have cause to
wonder that they had such constancy whilst alive, seeing that even when
dead they preserved the position of their bodies unmoved? The water did
not lay bare their corpses, nor did the rapid course of the river roll
them along. Moreover, the holy mother, though without sensation, still
maintained her loving grasp, and held the sacred knot which she had
tied, and loosed not her hold in death, that she who had paid her debt
to religion might die leaving her piety as her heir. For those whom she
had joined together with herself for martyrdom, she claimed even to the
tomb.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p8"></span>38. But why use instances of people
of another race to you, my sister, whom the inspiration of hereditary
chastity has taught by descent from a martyred ancestor? For whence have
you learnt who had no one from whom to learn, living in the country,
with no virgin companion, instructed by no teacher? You have played the
part then not of a disciple, for this cannot be done without teaching,
but of an heir of virtue.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p9"></span>39. For how could it come to pass
that holy Sotheris should not have been the originator of your purpose,
who is an ancestor of your race? Who, in an age of persecution, borne to
the heights of suffering by the insults of slaves, gave to the
executioner even her face, which is usually free from injury when the
whole body is tortured, and rather beholds than suffers torments; so
brave and patient that when she offered her tender cheeks to punishment,
the executioner failed in striking before the martyr yielded under the
injuries. She moved not her face, she turned not away her countenance,
she uttered not a groan or a tear. Lastly, when she had overcome other
kinds of punishment, she found the sword which she desired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[386:3300](2100347.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vii-p4"></span> Cf. *Ep.* XXXVII. 38. St. Ambrose,
being asked by his sister for his opinion concerning such virgins as had
committed suicide rather than suffer themselves to be violated, would
seem to say that in some cases this was allowable. St. Augustine \[*de
Civ. Dei,* I. 19\] speaks with some hesitation on the same subject.
There is some doubt as to who this St. Pelagia mentioned below may be.
St. Chrysostom says she committed suicide by throwing herself from the
roof; see Pelagia (1) in *Dict. Chr. Biog.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Widows.](2100348)
