[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100331)  [Next](2100333) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p1"></span>It is very desirable that parents
should encourage the desire for the virgin life, but more praiseworthy
when the love of God draws a maiden even against their will. The
violence of parents and the loss of property are not to be feared, and
an instance of this is related by St. Ambrose.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p2"></span>62. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is a good thing, then, that the
zeal <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii.xii-Page_373"></span>of parents, like favouring gales,
should aid a virgin; but it is more glorious if the fire of tender age
even without the incitement of those older of its own self burst forth
into the flame of chastity. Parents will refuse a dowry, but you have a
wealthy Spouse, satisfied with Whose treasures you will not miss the
revenues of a father’s inheritance. How much is poverty to chastity
superior to bridal gifts!

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p3"></span>63. And yet of whom have you heard as
ever, because of her desire for chastity, having been deprived of her
lawful inheritance? Parents speak against her, but are willing to be
overcome. They resist at first because they are afraid to believe; they
often are angry that one may learn to overcome; they threaten to
disinherit to try whether one is able not to fear temporal loss; they
caress with exquisite allurements to see if one cannot be softened by
the inducement of various pleasures. You are being exercised, O virgin,
whilst you are being urged. And the anxious entreaties of your parents
are your first battles. Conquer your affection first, O maiden. If you
conquer your home, you conquer the world.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p4"></span>64. But suppose that the loss of your
patrimony awaits you; are not the future realms of heaven a compensation
for perishable and frail possessions? For if we believe the heavenly
message, “there is no one who has forsaken house, or parents, or
brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God’s sake, who shall
not receive sevenfold more in this present time, and in the world to
come shall have everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223) Entrust your faith to God, who
entrust your money to man; lend to Christ. The faithful keeper of the
deposit of your hope pays the talent of your faith with manifold
interest. The Truth does not deceive, Justice does not circumvent,
Virtue does not deceive. But if you believe not God’s word, at least
believe instances.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p6"></span>65. Within my memory a girl once
noble in the world, now more noble in the sight of God, being urged to a
marriage by her parents and kinsfolk, took refuge at the holy altar.
Whither could a virgin better flee, than thither where the Virgin
Sacrifice is offered? Nor was even that the limit of her boldness. She,
the oblation of modesty, the victim of chastity, was standing at the
altar of God, now placing upon her head the right hand of the priest,
asking his prayers, and now impatient at the righteous delay, placing
the top of her head under the altar. “Can any better veil,” she said,
“cover me better than the altar which consecrates the veils themselves?
Such a bridal veil is most suitable on which Christ, the Head of all, is
daily consecrated. What are you doing, my kinsfolk? Why do you still
trouble my mind with seeking marriage? I have long since provided for
that. Do you offer me a bridegroom? I have found a better. Make the most
you can of my wealth, boast of his nobility, extol his power, I have Him
with Whom no one can compare himself, rich in the world, powerful in
empire, noble in heaven. If you have such an one, I do not reject the
choice; if you do not find such, you do me not a kindness, my relatives,
but an injury.”

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p7"></span>66. When the others were silent, one
burst forth somewhat roughly: “If,” he said, “your father were alive,
would he suffer you to remain unmarried?” Then she replied with more
religion and more restrained piety: “And perchance he is gone that no
one may be able to hinder me.” Which answer concerning her father, but
warning as to himself, he made good by his own speedy death. So the
others, each of them, fearing the same for himself, began to assist and
not to hinder her as before, and her virginity involved not the loss of
the property due to her, but also received the reward of her integrity.
You see, maidens, the reward of devotion, and do you, parents, be warned
by the example of transgression.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[373:3224](2100332.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p5"></span> S. [Luke
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030)<span
id="iv.vii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](2100333)
