[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100098)  [Next](2100100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p1"></span>The upright does nothing that is contrary
to duty, even though there is a hope of keeping it secret. To point this
out the tale about the ring of Gyges was invented by the philosophers.
Exposing this, he brings forward known and true examples from the life
of David and John the Baptist.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p2"></span>29. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p2.1"></span>To</span> lay down here already the result of
our discussion, as though we had already ended it, we declare it a fixed
rule, that we must never aim at anything but what is virtuous. <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) The wise man does nothing but what can
be done openly and without falseness, <span
id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) nor does he do anything whereby he may
involve himself in any wrong-doing, even where he may escape notice. For
he is guilty in his own eyes, before being so in the eyes of others; and
the publicity of his crime does not bring him more shame than his own
consciousness of it. This we can show, not by the made-up stories which
philosophers use, but from the true examples of good men.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p5"></span>30. I need not, therefore, imagine a
great chasm in the earth, which had been loosened by heavy rains, and
had afterwards burst asunder, as Plato does. <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) For he makes Gyges descend into that
chasm, and to meet there that iron horse of the fable that had doors in
its sides. When these doors were opened, he found a gold ring on the
finger of a dead man, whose corpse lay there lifeless. He desiring the
gold took away the ring. But when he returned to the king’s shepherds,
to whose number he belonged, by chance having turned the stone inwards
towards the palms of his hands, he saw all, yet was seen by none. Then
when he turned the ring to its proper position, he was again seen by
all. On becoming conscious of this strange power, by the use of the ring
he committed adultery with the queen, killed the king, and took
possession of the kingdom after slaying all the rest, who he thought
should be put to death, so that they might be no hindrance to him.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p7"></span>31. Give, says Plato, this ring to a wise
man, that when he commits a fault he may by its help remain unnoticed;
yet he will be none the more free from the stain of sin than if he could
not be hid. The hiding-place of the wise lies not in the hope of
impunity but in his own innocency. Lastly, the law is not laid down for
the just but for the unjust. <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) For
the just has within himself the law of his mind, and a rule of equity
and justice. Thus he is not recalled from sin by fear of punishment, but
by the rule of a virtuous life.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p9"></span>32. Therefore, to return to our subject,
I will now bring forward, not false examples for true, but true examples
in place of false. For why need I imagine a chasm in the earth, and an
iron horse and a gold ring found on the fingers of a dead man; and say
that such was the power of this ring, that he who wore it could appear
at his own will, but if he did not wish to be seen, he could remove
himself out of the sight of those who stood by, so as to seem to be
away. This story, of course, is meant to answer the question whether a
wise man, on getting the opportunity of using that ring so as to be able
to hide his crimes, and to obtain a kingdom,—whether, I say, a wise man
would be unwilling to sin and would consider the stain of sin far worse
than the pains of punishment, or whether he would use it for doing
wickedness in the hope of not being found out? Why, I say, should I need
the pretence of a ring, when I can show from what has been done that a
wise man, on seeing he would not only be undetected in his sin, but
would also gain a kingdom if he gave way to it, and who, on the other
hand, noted danger to his own safety if he did not commit the crime, yet
chose to risk his own safety so as to be free from crime, rather than to
commit the crime and so gain the kingdom.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p10"></span>33. When David fled from the face of
King Saul, <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) because the king was
seeking him in the desert with three thousand chosen men <span
id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span id="iv.i.iv.v-Page_73"></span>to put him
to death, he entered the king’s camp and found him sleeping. There he
not only did him no injury, but actually guarded him from being slain by
any who had entered with him. For when Abishai said to him: “The Lord
hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day, now therefore I
will slay him,” he answered: “Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth
his hand against the Lord’s anointed, and be guiltless?” And he added:
“As the Lord liveth, unless the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die, or he shall die in battle, and it be laid to me, the Lord
forbid that I should stretch out my hand against the Lord’s
anointed.” <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635)

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p13"></span>34. Therefore he did not suffer him to
be slain, but removed only his spear, which stood by his head, and his
cruse of water. Then, whilst all were sleeping, he left the camp and
went across to the top of the hill, and began to reproach the royal
attendants, and especially their general Abner, for not keeping faithful
watch over their lord and king. Next, he showed them where the king’s
spear and cruse were which had stood at his head. And when the king
called to him, he restored the spear, and said: “The Lord render to
every man his righteousness and faithfulness, for the Lord delivered
thee into my hand, but I would not avenge myself on the Lord’s
anointed.” <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) Even whilst he said
this, he feared his plots and fled, changing his place in exile.
However, he never put safety before innocency, seeing that when a second
opportunity was given him of killing the king, he would not use the
chance that came to him, and which put in his reach certain safety
instead of fear, and a kingdom instead of exile.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p15"></span>35. Where was the use of the ring in
John’s case, <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) who would not have
been put to death by Herod if he had kept silence? He could have kept
silence before him so as to be both seen and yet not killed. But because
he not only could not endure to sin himself to protect his own safety,
but could not bear and endure even another’s sin, he brought about the
cause of his own death. Certainly none can deny that he might have kept
silence, who in the case of Gyges deny that he could have remained
invisible by the help of the ring.

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p17"></span>36. But although that fable has not the
force of truth, yet it has this much to go upon, that if an upright man
could hide himself, yet he would avoid sin just as though he could not
conceal himself; and that he would not hide his person by putting on a
ring, but his life by putting on Christ. As the Apostle says: “Our life
is hid with Christ in God.” <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) Let,
then, no one here strive to shine, let none show pride, let none boast.
Christ willed not to be known here, He would not that His Name should be
preached in the Gospel whilst He lived on earth. He came to lie hid from
this world. Let us therefore likewise hide our life after the example of
Christ, let us shun boastfulness, let us not desire to be made known. It
is better to live here in humility, and there in glory. “When Christ,”
it says, “shall appear, then shall we also appear with Him in
glory.” <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_630"></span>[72:631](2100099.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* III. 7, § 33.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[72:632](2100099.htm#fr_631) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p4"></span> Cic. de Off. III. 7, § 37.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[72:633](2100099.htm#fr_632) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p6"></span> Cic. *de Off.* III. 9.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[72:634](2100099.htm#fr_633) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p8"></span> [1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[72:635](2100099.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p11"></span> [1 Sam.
26.2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[73:636](2100099.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p12"></span> [1 Sam.
26.8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[73:637](2100099.htm#fr_636) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p14"></span> [1 Sam.
26.23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[73:638](2100099.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p16"></span> S. [Matt. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[73:639](2100099.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p18"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[73:640](2100099.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iv.i.iv.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p19"></span> [Col. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.iv.v-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. We ought not to allow the idea of profit to get hold
of us. What excuses they make who get their gains by selling corn, and
what answer ought to be made to them. In connection with this certain
parables from the Gospels and some of the sayings of Solomon are set
before our eyes.](2100100)
