[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100091)  [Next](2100093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p1"></span>The property of widows or of all the
faithful, that has been entrusted to the Church, ought to be defended
though it brings danger to oneself. This is illustrated by the example
of Onias the priest, and of Ambrose, bishop of Ticinum.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p2"></span>144. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>Great</span> care must be taken that the
property entrusted by widows remains inviolate. It should be guarded
without causing complaint, not only if it belongs to widows, but to any
one at all. For good faith must be shown to all, though the cause of the
widow and orphans comes first.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p3"></span>145. So everything entrusted to the
temple was preserved in the name of the widows alone, as we read in the
book of the Maccabees. <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) For when
information was given of the money, which Simon treacherously had told
King Antiochus could be found in large quantities in the temple at
Jerusalem, Heliodorus was sent to look into the matter. He came to the
temple, and made known to the high priest his hateful information and
the reason of his coming.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p5"></span>146. Then the priest said that only
means for the maintenance of the widows and orphans was laid up there.
And when Helio<span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxix-Page_66"></span>dorus would have gone to seize it, and
to claim it on the king’s behalf, the, priests cast themselves before
the altar, after putting on their priestly robes, and with tears called
on the living God Who had given them the law concerning trust-money to
show Himself as guardian of His own commands. The changed look and
colour of the high priest showed what grief of soul and anxiety and
tension of mind were his. All wept, for the spot would fall into
contempt, if not even in the temple of God safe and faithful
guardianship could be preserved. Women with breasts girded, and virgins
who usually were shut in, knocked at the doors. Some ran to the walls,
others looked out of the windows, all raised their hands to heaven in
prayer that God would stand by His laws.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p6"></span>147. But Heliodorus, undeterred by
this, was eager to carry out his intention, and had already surrounded
the treasury with his followers, when suddenly there appeared to him a
dreadful horseman all glorious in golden armour, his horse also being
adorned with costly ornaments. Two other youths also appeared in
glorious might and wondrous beauty, in splendour and glory and beauteous
array. They stood round him, and on either side beat the sacrilegious
wretch, and gave him stroke after stroke without intermission. What more
need I say? Shut in by darkness he fell to the ground, and lay there
nearly dead with fear at this plain proof of divine power, nor had he
any hope of safety left within him. Joy returned to those who were in
fear, fear fell on those who were so proud before. And some of the
friends of Heliodorus in their trouble besought Onias, asking life for
him, since he was almost at his last breath.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p7"></span>148. When, therefore, the high priest
asked for this, the same youths again appeared to Heliodorus, clad in
the same garments, and said to him: Give thanks to Onias the high
priest, for whose sake thy life is granted thee. But do thou, having
experienced the scourge of God, go and tell thy friends how much thou
hast learnt of the sanctity of the temple and the power of God. With
these words they passed out of sight. Heliodorus then, his life having
come back to him, offered a sacrifice to the Lord, gave thanks to the
priest Onias, and returned with his army to the king, saying: “If thou
hast an enemy or one who is plotting against thy power, send him thither
and thou wilt receive him back well scourged.”

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p8"></span>149. Therefore, my sons, good faith
must be preserved in the case of trust-money, and care, too, must be
shown. Your service will glow the brighter if the oppression of a
powerful man, which some widow or orphan cannot withstand, is checked by
the assistance of the Church, and if ye show that the command of the
Lord has more weight with you than the favour of the rich.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p9"></span>150. Ye also remember how often we
entered on a contest against the royal attacks, on behalf of the
trust-money belonging to widows, yea, and to others as well. You and I
shared this in common. I will also mention the late case of the Church
at Ticinum, which was in danger of losing the widow’s trust-money that
it had received. <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) For when he who
wanted to claim it on some imperial rescript demanded it, the clergy did
not maintain their rights. For they themselves, having once been called
to office and sent to intervene, now supposed that they could not oppose
the emperor’s orders. The plain words of the rescript were read, the
orders of the chief officer of the court were there, he who was to act
in the matter was at hand. What more was to be said? It was handed over.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p11"></span>151. However, after taking counsel
with me, the holy bishop took possession of the rooms to which he knew
that the widow’s property had been carried. As it could not be carried
away, it was all set down in writing. Later on it was again demanded on
proof of the document. The emperor repeated the order, and would meet us
himself in his own person. We refused. And when the force of the divine
law, and a long list of passages and the danger of Heliodorus was
explained, at length the emperor became reasonable. Afterwards, again,
an attempt was made to seize it, but the good bishop anticipated the
attempt and restored to the widow all he had received. So faith was
preserved, but the oppression was no longer a cause for fear; for now it
is the matter itself, not good faith, that is in danger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_569"></span>[65:570](2100092.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p4"></span> [2 Macc.
iii](../../../bib/apo/ma2003.htm#000)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[66:571](2100092.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxix-p10"></span> This was attempted by the Emperor
Valentinian II., who was induced to act in this way by his mother
Justina. She being an Arian was only too ready to harass in every
possible way a Catholic bishop such as Ambrose of Ticinum was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. The ending of the book brings an exhortation to
avoid ill-will, and to seek prudence, faith, and the other
virtues.](2100093)
