[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100336)  [Next](2100338) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p1"></span>A virgin at Antioch, having refused
to sacrifice to idols, was condemned to a house of ill-fame, whence she
escaped unharmed, having changed clothes with a Christian soldier. Then
when he was condemned for this, she returned and the two contended for
the prize of martyrdom, which was at last given to each.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p2"></span>22. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>There</span> was lately at Antioch a
virgin who avoided being seen in public, but the more she shrank from
men’s eyes, the more they longed for her. For beauty which is heard of
but not seen is more desired, there being two incentives to passion,
love and knowledge—so long as nothing is met with <span id="page_377">p.
377</span> <span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-Page_377"></span>which pleases less;
and that which pleases is thought to be of more worth, because the eye
is not in this case the judge by investigation, but the mind inflamed
with love is full of longing. And so the holy virgin, lest their
passions should be longer fed by the desire of gaining her, professed
her intention of preserving her chastity, and so quenched the fires of
those wicked men, that she was no longer loved, but informed against.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p3"></span>23. So a persecution arose. The
maiden, not knowing how to escape, and afraid lest she might fall into
the hands of those who were plotting against her chastity, prepared her
soul for heroic virtue, being so religious as not to fear death, so
chaste as to expect it. The day of her crown arrived. The expectation of
all was at its height. The maiden is brought forward, and makes her
twofold profession, of religion and of chastity. But when they saw the
constancy of her profession, her fear for her modesty, her readiness for
tortures, and her blushes at being looked on, they began to consider how
they might overcome her religion by setting chastity before her, so
that, having deprived her of that which was the greatest, they might
also deprive her of that which they had left. So the sentence was that
she should either sacrifice, or be sent to a house of ill-fame. After
what manner do they worship their gods who thus avenge them, or how do
they live themselves who give sentence after this fashion?

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p4"></span>24. And the virgin, not hesitating
about her religion, but fearful as to her chastity, began to reflect,
What am I to do? Each crown, that of martyrdom and that of virginity, is
grudged me to-day. But the name of virgin is not acknowledged where the
Author of virginity is denied. How can one be a virgin who cherishes a
harlot? How can one be a virgin who loves adulterers? How a virgin if
she seeks for a lover? It is preferable to have a virgin mind than a
virgin body. Each is good if each be possible; if it be not possible,
let me be chaste, not to man but to God. Rahab, too, was a harlot, but
after she believed in God, she found salvation. <span
id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233) And Judith adorned herself that she
might please an adulterer, but because she did this for religion and not
for love, no one considered her an adulteress. <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) This instance turned out well. For
if she who entrusted herself to religion both preserved her chastity and
her country, perhaps I, by preserving my religion, shall also preserve
my chastity. But if Judith had preferred her chastity to her religion,
when her country had been lost, she would also have lost her chastity.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p7"></span>25. And so, instructed by such
examples, and at the same time bearing in mind the words of the Lord,
where He says: “Whosoever shall lose his life for My sake, shall find
it,” <span id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235) she wept, and was
silent, that the adulterer might not even hear her speaking, and she did
not choose the wrong done to her modesty, but rejected wrong done to
Christ. Consider whether it was possible for her to suffer her body to
be unchaste, who guarded even her speech.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p9"></span>26. For some time my words have been
becoming bashful, and fear to laud on or describe the wicked series of
what was done. Close your ears, ye virgins! The Virgin of God is taken
to a house of shame. But now unclose your ears, ye virgins. The Virgin
of Christ can be exposed to shame, but cannot be contaminated.
Everywhere she is the Virgin of God, and the Temple of God, and houses
of ill-fame cannot injure chastity, but chastity does away with the
ill-fame of the place.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p10"></span>27. A great rush of wanton men is
made to the place. Listen, ye holy virgins, to the miracles of the
martyr, forget the name of the place. The door is shut within, the hawks
cry without; some are contending who shall first attack the prey. But
she, with her hands raised to heaven, as though she had come to a house
of prayer, not to a resort of lust, says: “O Christ, Who didst tame the
fierce lions for the virgin Daniel, <span
id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) Thou canst also tame the fierce
minds of men. Fire became as dew to the Hebrew children, <span
id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) the water stood up for the Jews, of
Thy mercy, not of its own nature. <span
id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) Susanna knelt down for punishment
and triumphed over her adulterous accusers, <span
id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) the right hand withered which
violated the gifts of Thy temple; <span
id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) and now thy temple itself is
violated; suffer not sacrilegious incest, Thou Who didst not suffer
theft. Let Thy Name be now again glorified in that I who came here for
shame, may go away a virgin!”

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p16"></span>28. Scarcely had she finished her
prayer, when, lo! a man with the aspect of a terrible warrior burst in.
How the virgin trembled before him to whom the trembling people gave
way. But she did not forget what she had read. “Daniel,” said she, “had
gone to see the punishment of Susanna, and alone pronounced her
guiltless, <span id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) whom the people
<span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-Page_378"></span>had condemned. A sheep may be hidden
in the shape of this wolf. Christ has His soldiers also, Who is Master
of legions. <span id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) Or, perchance, an
executioner has come in. Fear not, my soul, such an one makes martyrs. O
Virgin! thy faith has saved thee.”

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p19"></span>29. And the soldier said to her:
“Fear not, sister, I pray you. I, a brother, am come hither to save
life, not to destroy it. Save me, that you yourself may be saved. I came
in like an adulterer, to go forth, if you will, as a martyr. Let us
change our attire, mine will fit you, and yours will fit me, and each
for Christ. Your robe will make me a true soldier, mine will make you a
virgin. You will be clothed well, I shall be unclothed even better that
the persecutor may recognize me. Take the garment which will conceal the
woman, give me that which shall consecrate me a martyr. Put on the cloak
which will hide the limbs of a virgin, but preserve her modesty. Take
the cap which will cover your hair and conceal your countenance. They
who have entered houses of ill-fame are wont to blush. When you have
gone forth, take care not to look back, remembering Lot’s wife, <span
id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) who lost her very nature because
she looked back at what was unchaste, though with chaste eyes. And be
not afraid lest any part of the sacrifice fail. I will offer the victim
to God for you, do you offer the soldier to Christ for me. You have
served the good service of chastity, the wages of which are everlasting
life; you have the breastplate of righteousness, which protects the body
with spiritual armour, the shield of faith with which to ward off
wounds, and the helmet of salvation, <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244) for there is the defence of our
salvation where Christ is, since the man is the head of the woman. and
Christ of the virgin.”

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p22"></span>30. Whilst saying this he put off
his cloak. This garment has been up to this time suspected of being that
of a persecutor and adulterer. The virgin offered her neck, the soldier
his cloak. What a spectacle that was, what a manifestation of grace when
they were contending for martyrdom in a house of ill-fame! Let the
characters be also considered, a soldier and a virgin, that is, persons
unlike in natural disposition, but alike by the mercy of God, that the
saying might be fulfilled: “Then the wolves and the lambs shall feed
together.” <span id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) Behold the lamb
and the wolf not only feed together but are also offered together. Why
should I say more? Having changed her garment, the maiden flies from the
snare, not now with wings of her own, seeing she was borne on spiritual
wings, and (a sight which the ages had never seen) she leaves the house
of ill-fame a virgin, but a virgin of Christ.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p24"></span>31. But they who were looking with
their eyes, yet saw not, raged like robbers for prey, or wolves for a
lamb. One who was more shameless went in. But when he took in the state
of the matter with his eyes, he said, What is this? A maiden entered,
now a man is to be seen here. This is not the old fable of a hind
instead of a maiden, but in truth a virgin become a soldier. I had heard
but believed not that Christ changed water into wine; now He has begun
also to change the sexes. Let us depart hence whilst we still are what
we were. Am I too changed who see things differently from what I believe
them to be? I came to a house of ill-fame, and see a surety. <span
id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) And yet I go forth changed, for I
shall go out chaste who came in unchaste.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p26"></span>32. When the affair was known,
because a crown was due to such a conqueror, he was condemned for the
virgin who was seized for the virgin, and so not only a virgin but a
martyr came forth from the house of ill-fame. It is reported that the
maiden ran to the place of punishment, and that they both contended for
death. He said: “I am condemned to death, the sentence let you go free
when it retained me.” And she replied: “I did not choose you as my
surety on pain of death, but as a guarantee for my chastity. If chastity
be attacked, my sex remains; if blood is sought, I desire none to give
bail for me, I have the means to pay. The sentence was pronounced on me,
which was pronounced for me. Undoubtedly, if I had offered you as
security for my debt, and in my absence the judge had assigned your
property to the creditor, you would share the sentence with me, and I
should pay your obligations with my patrimony. Were I to refuse, who
would not judge me worthy of a shameful death? How much more am I bound
where there is a question of death? Let me die innocent, that I may not
die guilty. In this matter there is no middle course; today I shall
either be guilty of your blood or a martyr in my own. If I came back
quickly, who dares to shut me out? If I delayed, who dares acquit me? I
owe a greater <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-Page_379"></span>debt to the laws who am guilty not
only of my own flight, but also of the death of another. My limbs are
equal to death, which were not equal to dishonour. A virgin can accept a
wound who could not accept contumely. I avoided disgrace, not martyrdom.
I gave up my robe to you; I did not alter my profession. And if you
deprive me of death, you will not have rescued but circumvented me.
Beware, pray, of resisting, beware of venturing to contend with me. Take
not away the kindness you have conferred on me. In denying me the
execution of this sentence, you are setting up again the former one. For
the sentence is changed for a former one. If the latter binds me not,
the former one does. We can each satisfy the sentence if you suffer me
to be slain first. From you they can exact no other penalty, but her
chastity is in danger with a virgin. And so you will be more glorious if
you are seen to have made a martyr of an adulteress. than to have made
again an adulteress of a martyr.”

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p27"></span>33. What do you think was the end?
The two contended, and both gained the victory, and the crown was not
divided, but became two. So the holy martyrs, conferring benefits one on
the other, gave the one the impulse and the other the result to their
martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[377:3234](2100337.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5"></span> [Jos. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[377:3235](2100337.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p6"></span> [Judith
x](../../../bib/apo/jdt010.htm#000)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[377:3236](2100337.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p8"></span> S. [Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[377:3237](2100337.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p11"></span> [Dan. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[377:3238](2100337.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p12"></span> [Dan. iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#027)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p12.1"></span> \[50\].

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[377:3239](2100337.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p13"></span> [Ex. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[377:3240](2100337.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>Hist. Sus. 45.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[377:3241](2100337.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p15"></span> [1 Kings
13.4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[377:3242](2100337.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>Hist. Sus. 46.

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[378:3243](2100337.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p18"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[378:3244](2100337.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p20"></span> [Gen. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[378:3245](2100337.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p21"></span> [Eph. vi.
14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[378:3246](2100337.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p23"></span> [Isa. lxv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[378:3247](2100337.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p25"></span> The soldier who remained in the
place of the virgin is spoken of as being her “surety.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The story of the two Pythagorean friends, Damon and
Pythias, is related by St. Ambrose, who points out that the case
mentioned in the last chapter is more praiseworthy. A comparison is
instituted between the treatment of their gods by heathen without any
punishment, and Jeroboam's irreverence with its punishment.](2100338)
