[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos39)  [Next](kos41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

## CHAPTER IV

### CONCERNING THE FASTING, CARE, AND THINGS TO BE OBSERVED

WHEN the Master of the Art shall wish to perform his operations, having
previously arranged all things which it is necessary to observe and
practise; from the first day of the Experiment, it is absolutely
necessary to ordain and to prescribe care and observation, to abstain
from all things unlawful, and from every kind of impiety, impurity,
wickedness, or immodesty, as well of body as of soul; as, for example,
eating and drinking superabundantly, and all sorts of vain words,
buffooneries, slanders, calumnies, and other useless discourse; but
instead to do good deeds, speak honestly, keep a strict decency in all
things, never lose sight of modesty in walking, in conversation, in
eating and drinking, and in all things; the which should be principally
done and observed for nine days, before the commencement of the
Operation. The Disciples should do the same, and should equally put in
practice all things necessary to be observed, if they wish to make use
of all these operations and experiments.

But before the commencement of the work, it is absolutely necessary that
the Master with his Disciples repeat the following Conjuration once in
the morning, and twice in the evening:--

### THE CONJURATION.

O Lord God Almighty, be propitious unto me a miserable sinner, for I am
not worthy to raise mine eyes unto heaven, because of the iniquity of my
sins and the multitude of my faults. O pitying and merciful Father, who
wouldest not the death of a sinner but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and live, O God have mercy upon me and pardon all my
sins; for I unworthy entreat Thee, O Father of all Creatures, Thou Who
art full of mercy and of compassion, by Thy great goodness, that Thou
deign to grant unto me power to see and know these Spirits which I
desire to behold and to invoke to appear before me and to

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

accomplish my will. Through Thee Who art Conqueror, and Who art Blessed
unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen.

O Lord God the Father Eternal, Who art seated upon the Kerubim and the
Seraphim, Who lookest upon Earth and upon Sea; unto Thee do I raise my
hands and implore Thine aid alone, Thou Who alone art the accomplishment
of good works, Thou Who givest rest unto those who labour, Who humblest
the proud, Who art the Author of Life and the Destroyer of Death; Thou
art our rest, Thou art the Protector of those who invoke Thee; protect,
guard, and defend me in this matter, and in this enterprise which I
propose to carry out, O Thou Who livest, reignest, and abidest unto the
Eternal Ages. Amen.

During the three last days before the commencement of this action, thou
shalt content thyself with only eating fasting diet, and that only once
in the day; and it will be better still if thou only partakest of bread
and water. Thou shalt also abstain from every impure thing; reciting the
prayer above written. And on the last day, when thou shalt wish to
commence the Operation, thou shalt remain all day without eating, and
later on thou shalt go into a secret place, where thou shalt confess all
thy sins unto God with a contrite heart. The Disciples also, together
with the Master, shall recite the same confession with a low but
distinct voice, as hath been already said in the First Book.

This having been done thrice with a devout, pure, and contrite heart, in
a place withdrawn from men, cleansed, and pure, where thou canst not be
seen, taking the water and the hyssop, thou shalt say:--

Purify me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be pure; wash me, and I
shall be whiter than snow.

After this, bathe thyself with the exorcised water, and clothe thyself
again with the consecrated garment which thou hast taken off; cerise
thyself, and surround thyself with odours, as will be told farther on,
when we speak of perfumes and suffumigations.

The which being done, thou shalt go unto the ordained place with thy
Companions, and all things being prepared, thou shalt make the Circle,
as hath been already said, with all other necessary ceremonies; then
shalt thou commence to invoke the Spirits by the Exorcisms; thou shalt
also repeat anew the foregoing Confession as hath been already said in
the First Book. After which, in sign of amendment and of repentance,
each shall mutually kiss the other.

Mark well, that up to this point, the Disciples should do the same
things as the Master.

Let the Master now give his commands unto his Disciples, and pursue the
course of the Experiment, and work with all diligence to bring it unto
perfection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Concerning the Baths, And How They Are To Be
Arranged](kos41)
