[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos57)  [Next](kos59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

## CHAPTER XXII

### CONCERNING SACRIFICES TO THE SPIRITS, AND HOW THEY SHOULD BE MADE

IN many operations it is necessary to make some sort of sacrifice unto
the Demons, and in various ways. Sometimes white animals are sacrificed
to the good Spirits and black to the evil. Such sacrifices consist of
the blood and sometimes of the flesh.

They who sacrifice animals, of whatsoever kind they be, should select
those which are virgin, as being more agreeable unto the Spirits, and
rendering them more obedient.

When blood is to be sacrificed it should be drawn also from virgin
quadrupeds or birds, but before offering the oblation, say:--

May this Sacrifice which we find it proper to offer unto ye, noble and
lofty Beings, be agreeable and pleasing unto your desires; be ye ready
to obey us, and ye shall receive greater ones.

Then perfume and sprinkle it according to the rules of Art.

When it is necessary, with all the proper Ceremonies, to make Sacrifices
of fire, they should be made of wood which hath some quality referring
especially unto the Spirits invoked; as juniper, or pine, unto the
Spirits of Saturn; box, or oak, unto those of Jupiter; cornel, or cedar,
unto those of Mars; laurel unto those of the Sun; myrtle unto those of
Venus; hazel unto those of Mercury; and willow unto those of the Moon.

But when we make sacrifices of food and drink, everything necessary
should be prepared without the Circle, and the meats should be covered
with some fine clean cloth, and have also a clean white cloth spread
beneath them; with new bread and good and sparkling wine, but in all
things those which refer to the nature of the Planet. Animals, such as
fowls or pigeons, should be roasted. Especially shouldest thou have a
vessel of clear and pure fountain water, and before thou enterest into
the Circle, thou shalt summon the Spirits by their proper Names, or at
least those chief among them, saying:--

In whatsoever place ye may be, ye Spirits, who are invited to this

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

feast, come ye and be ready to receive our offerings, presents, and
sacrifices, and ye shall have hereafter yet more agreeable oblations.

Perfume the viands with sweet incense, and sprinkle them with exorcised
water; then commence to conjure the Spirits until they shall come.

This is the manner of making sacrifices in all arts and operations
wherein it is necessary, and acting thus, the Spirits will be prompt to
serve thee.

Here endeth our Key, the which if thou thoroughly instillest into thy
memory, thou shalt be able, if it pleaseth thee, even to fly with the
wings of the wind. But if thou takest little heed hereof, and despiseth
this Book, never shalt thou attain unto the desired end in any Magical
experiment or operation whatsoever.

For in this Book is comprised all science of Magical Art, and it should
be strictly kept by thee. And hereunto is the end of our Key, in the
Name of God the righteous, the merciful, and the eternal, Who liveth and
reigneth throughout the Ages. Amen.

THE END OF THE KEY OF SOLOMON THE KING

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient Fragment of the Key of Solomon](kos59)
