[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tiu03)  [Next](tiu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Improvement of Understanding*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE ORDINARY OBJECTS OF MEN'S DESIRES

\[3\] (1) I therefore debated whether it would not be possible to arrive
at the new principle, or at any rate at a certainty concerning its
existence, without changing the conduct and usual plan of my life; with
this end in view I made many efforts, in vain. (2) For the ordinary
surroundings of life which are esteemed by men (as their actions
testify) to be the highest good, may be classed under the three
heads—Riches, Fame, and the Pleasures of Sense: with these three the
mind is so absorbed that it has little power to reflect on any different
good.

\[4\] (1) By sensual pleasure the mind is enthralled to the extent of
quiescence, as if the supreme good were actually attained, so that it is
quite incapable of thinking of any other object; when such pleasure has
been gratified it is followed by extreme melancholy, whereby the mind,
though not enthralled, is disturbed and dulled. (2) The pursuit of
honors and riches is likewise very absorbing, especially if such objects
be sought simply for their own sake, \[a\] inasmuch as they are then
supposed to constitute the highest good.

\[5\] (1) In the case of fame the mind is still more absorbed, for fame
is conceived as always good for its own sake, and as the ultimate end to
which all actions are directed. (2) Further, the attainment of riches
and fame is not followed as in the case of sensual pleasures by
repentance, but, the more we acquire, the greater is our delight, and,
consequently, the more are we incited to increase both the one and the
other; on the other hand, if our hopes happen to be frustrated we are
plunged into the deepest sadness. (3) Fame has the further drawback that
it compels its votaries to order their lives according to the opinions
of their fellow-men, shunning what they usually shun, and seeking what
they usually seek.

\[6\] (1) When I saw that all these ordinary objects of desire would be
obstacles in the way of a search for something different and new—nay,
that they were so opposed thereto, that either they or it would have to
be abandoned, I was forced to inquire which would prove the most useful
to me: for, as I say, I seemed to be willingly losing hold on a sure
good for the sake of something uncertain. (6:2) However, after I had
reflected on the matter, I came in the first place to the conclusion
that by abandoning the ordinary objects of pursuit, and betaking myself
to a new quest, I should be leaving a good, uncertain by reason of its
own nature, as may be gathered from what has been said, for the sake of
a good not uncertain in its nature (for I sought for a fixed good), but
only in the possibility of its attainment.

\[7\] (1) Further reflection convinced me that if I could really get to
the root of the matter I should be leaving certain evils for a certain
good. (2) I thus perceived that I was in a state of great peril, and I
compelled myself to seek with all my strength for a remedy, however
uncertain it might be; as a sick man struggling with a deadly disease,
when he sees that death will surely be upon him unless a remedy be
found, is compelled to seek a remedy with all his strength, inasmuch as
his whole hope lies therein. (7:3) All the objects pursued by the
multitude not only bring no remedy that tends to preserve our being, but
even act as hindrances, causing the death not seldom of those who
possess them, \[b\] and always of those who are possessed by them.

\[8\] (1) There are many examples of men who have suffered persecution
even to death for the sake of their riches, and of men who in pursuit of
wealth have exposed themselves to so many dangers, that they have paid
away their life as a penalty for their folly. (2) Examples are no less
numerous of men, who have endured the utmost wretchedness for the sake
of gaining or preserving their reputation. (3) Lastly, are innumerable
cases of men, who have hastened their death through over-indulgence in
sensual pleasure.

\[9\] (1) All these evils seem to have arisen from the fact, that
happiness or unhappiness is made wholly dependent on the quality of the
object which we love. (2) When a thing is not loved, no quarrels will
arise concerning it—no sadness be felt if it hatred, in short no
disturbances of the mind. (3) All these arise from the love of what is
perishable, such as the objects already mentioned.

\[10\] (1) But love towards a thing eternal and infinite feeds the mind
wholly with joy, and is itself unmingled with any sadness, wherefore it
is greatly to be desired and sought for with all our strength. (2) Yet
it was not at random that I used the words, "If I could go to the root
of the matter," for, though what I have urged was perfectly clear to my
mind, I could not forthwith lay aside all love of riches, sensual
enjoyment, and fame.

\[11\] (1) One thing was evident, namely, that while my mind was
employed with these thoughts it turned away from its former objects of
desire, and seriously considered the search for a new principle; this
state of things was a great comfort to me, for I perceived that the
evils were not such as to resist all remedies. (11:2) Although these
intervals were at first rare, and of very short duration, yet
afterwards, as the true good became more and more discernible to me,
they became more frequent and more lasting; especially after I had
recognized that the acquisition of wealth, sensual pleasure, or fame, is
only a hindrance, so long as they are sought as ends not as means; if
they be sought as means, they will be under restraint, and, far from
being hindrances, will further not a little the end for which they are
sought, as I will show in due time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the True and Final Good](tiu05)
