[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tiu17)  [Next](tiu19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Improvement of Understanding*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOW TO DEFINE UNDERSTANDING

\[107\] (1) But, so far as we have not got any rules for finding
definitions, and, as we cannot set forth such rules without a previous
knowledge of nature, that is without a definition of the understanding
and its power, it follows either that the definition of the
understanding must be clear in itself, or that we can understand
nothing. (2) Nevertheless this definition is not absolutely clear in
itself; however, since its properties, like all things that we possess
through the understanding, cannot be known clearly and distinctly,
unless its nature be known previously, understanding makes itself
manifest, if we pay attention to its properties, which we know clearly
and distinctly. (3) Let us, then, enumerate here the properties of the
understanding, let us examine them, and begin by discussing the
instruments for research which we find innate in us. See \[31\]

\[108\] (1) The properties of the understanding which I have chiefly
remarked, and which I clearly understand, are the following:—I. (2) It
involves certainty—in other words, it knows that a thing exists in
reality as it is reflected subjectively.

II\. (108:3) That it perceives certain things, or forms some ideas
absolutely, some ideas from others. (4) Thus it forms the idea of
quantity absolutely, without reference to any other thoughts; but ideas
of motion it only forms after taking into consideration the idea of
quantity.

III\. (108:5) Those ideas which the understanding forms absolutely
express infinity; determinate ideas are derived from other ideas. (6)
Thus in the idea of quantity, perceived by means of a cause, the
quantity is determined, as when a body is perceived to be formed by the
motion of a plane, a plane by the motion of a line, or, again, a line by
the motion of a point. (7) All these are perceptions which do not serve
towards understanding quantity, but only towards determining it. (108:8)
This is proved by the fact that we conceive them as formed as it were by
motion, yet this motion is not perceived unless the quantity be
perceived also; we can even prolong the motion to form an infinite line,
which we certainly could not do unless we had an idea of infinite
quantity.

IV\. (9) The understanding forms positive ideas before forming negative
ideas.

V. (108:10) It perceives things not so much under the condition of
duration as under a certain form of eternity, and in an infinite number;
or rather in perceiving things it does not consider either their number
or duration, whereas, in imagining them, it perceives them in a
determinate number, duration, and quantity.

VI\. (108:11) The ideas which we form as clear and distinct, seem to
follow from the sole necessity of our nature, that they appear to depend
absolutely on our sole power; with confused ideas the contrary is the
case. (12) They are often formed against our will.

VII\. (108:13) The mind can determine in many ways the ideas of things,
which the understanding forms from other ideas: thus, for instance, in
order to define the plane of an ellipse, it supposes a point adhering to
a cord to be moved around two centers, or, again, it conceives an
infinity of points, always in the same fixed relation to a given
straight line, angle of the vertex of the cone, or in an infinity of
other ways. VIII. (108:14) The more ideas express perfection of any
object, the more perfect are they themselves; for we do not admire the
architect who has planned a chapel so much as the architect who has
planned a splendid temple.

\[109\] (1) I do not stop to consider the rest of what is referred to
thought, such as love, joy, &c. (2) They are nothing to our present
purpose, and cannot even be conceived unless the understanding be
perceived previously. (3) When perception is removed, all these go with
it.

\[110\] (1) False and fictitious ideas have nothing positive about them
(as we have abundantly shown), which causes them to be called false or
fictitious; they are only considered as such through the defectiveness
of knowledge. (2) Therefore, false and fictitious ideas as such can
teach us nothing concerning the essence of thought; this must be sought
from the positive properties just enumerated; in other words, we must
lay down some common basis from which these properties necessarily
follow, so that when this is given, the properties are necessarily given
also, and when it is removed, they too vanish with it.

The rest of the treatise is wanting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Endnotes](tiu19)
