[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf03)  [Next](lmf05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Unity teachings are based on the Jesus Christ teachings, and we advise
all people to hold firmly and steadfastly to the principles taught and
demonstrated by this first Christian metaphysician. We have found in
Christianity rightly interpreted more Truth than in any of the other
religions we have delved into; consequently we advocate it.

We have found Jesus to be the great Teacher, accessible to all who have
faith in and understand the spiritual principles that He sets forth.
Jesus as a superman is here in our midst and we can receive instruction
direct from Him if we ask, and agree to carry out in our lives what He
teaches. If we want all that is contained in Christianity,
Mohammedanism, and every other religion or religious cult that came out
of Christianity, we should ask Jesus and He will show us the Truth just
as fast as we develop our spiritual nature to the point where He can
import it to us. Jesus cannot reach minds that are immersed in
materialism. By those immersed in materialism we mean not only those who
deal with the most material elements in the world but also those who
have materialized Christianity.

To insure success and to inspire faith and confidence in ourselves and
our undertaking, we should always have Christ as the source of our
inspiration and prosperity.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Our success and satisfaction in business, in home, in our social lives
is always greater when we take Christ Jesus as our partner. It is,
"Christ in you, the hope of glory" (Col. 1:27). Why not follow in the
footsteps of One who has demonstrated and proved every step of the way?

God's love for us, for all His children, is so great that He sent Jesus
Christ to be the Way-Shower to lead us to a greater realization of our
heavenly Father's love and will for us. Jesus Christ is not merely a
divine man who lived many centuries ago and whose life and works are to
be considered past history. He is alive today. He is with us now. His
words, "Lo, I am with you always" (Mt. 28:20), are His living promise to
each of us. The Christ presence within our own souls is the Great
Physician who has wisdom and power to heal and to adjust in divine order
every function of our body temples. Turning within to Him, we receive
that guidance, that assurance, that healing for which our souls long,
the prospering and success for which we not only long but need to
express as sons and daughters of the Most High, heir to all that the
Father has. Instead of thinking of the Lord as the personal Jesus Christ
who is away at some distant place called heaven, we must think of the
Lord as our own God-given Christ Mind, and of Jesus Christ as ever with
us in the spiritual consciousness that He has established and that He
has merged with the race mind in order that we

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

may be in touch with Him and lay hold of Him and build our lives
according to His pattern.

There's a distinction between Jesus Christ, the man, and the perfect-man
idea that God has created and implanted in each of us, His children. The
Christ Mind is the crystal-clear mind that is not blurred by the
"becoming" things of which the senses tell us, nor by the reports of the
intellect which are records of people's experiments day by day. The
Christ Mind gives us an idea in its entirety and then we work it out in
our own consciousness and body and affairs.

For example, the Christ idea of love is given us, God love. Love unifies
us with God, our Source, and we know that we are good and true and
fearless from within, because we let these God qualities well up from
the center of our being. Love alone would not enable us to keep our
balance; it would draw us here and there without regard to what we
accomplished. Here is where we begin to see the difference between the
man Jesus Christ as we know Him, and the people who have fallen short of
what we term goodness and real power. Jesus exercised all the God
qualities we have yet been able to discern in a masterly way. God love
was expressed by Him; but it was supplemented and balanced by God
wisdom, power, judgment, will, zeal, life, renunciation, strength,
order, imagination, and faith. Love drew Him to people; but good
judgment held Him to a course of action that resulted in success more
far-reaching than any of us have yet realized.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

Jesus is the individual who made the complete union of mind, soul, and
body in Spirit. He brought forth into expression the Christ, the
God-Mind within, and consciously identified Himself with the Father. God
is not a person; "God is Spirit."

Jesus Christ has merged His wonderful consciousness with the race
consciousness, that we may turn to Him and receive into our minds the
understanding of life and the activities of mind that result in freedom
from the limitations of race beliefs and intellectual reasonings. We can
quicken our own Christ Mind by dwelling upon the Truth that we are one
with Jesus Christ and one with God, through the understanding that Jesus
the Christ helps us to unfold.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer](lmf05)
