[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf17)  [Next](lmf19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Instead of thinking of the people whom you have believed to be evil and
an undesirable influence, think of the goodness of God in the life of
all His children. Think of God as everywhere-present light, love, peace,
power, and life. Think of all men, all women, all children as abiding in
God's presence and expressing God's qualities. As you do this, you will
touch the reality of individuals, and you will invite only the best from
them. Spirit will respond as you expect it to, for the Spirit of God is
in every person. Some persons have not yet wakened to this realization;
but as you declare the Truth for them and expect it to express through
them toward you, you will receive only loving and considerate treatment
from them. As you read these explanations of the way in which a soul may
lay hold of its inheritance from God and exercise its God-given freedom
in the endeavor to develop and use its powers, pray for more light to
enable you to see how precious these individuals are and how important
it is that we all have freedom to correct our mistakes.

The best way to help your brother is to pray for him to be spiritually
illumined. Then if he has come to a place in his soul development where
he is ready to accept Truth, he will have the understanding and desire
to seek the indwelling Christ.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

It is never wise to try to force Truth upon anyone. Place your brother
"lovingly in the hands of the Father," and know that his own indwelling
Lord will take care of him until he is open and receptive to ideas of
Truth.

You are good, yes. But it is a negative goodness. You haven't realized
your powers and made positive and purposeful use of them. You have been
made to feel that nonresistance, and righteousness, and Christianity,
and loving service are all passive. You have allowed your personal ideas
of love and goodwill to make you too sympathetic and inclined to give,
without seeking and asking for wisdom and good judgment to direct you.

Now while it is a virtue to be always ready to help others, we must be
sure that we are truly helping them, and not hindering them by allowing
them to continue in the unwise habits that have brought them to lack.

The greatest help is to be able to show others how they may help
themselves and become self-supporting and resourceful. Study and prayer,
along the lines of the Unity literature, will give you the knowledge and
power to help others understand and bring forth their prosperity.

You have a store. Have you taken God into partnership with you? Do you
start every day with quiet, purposeful communion with God? Do you ask
God to show you what to do in every transaction?

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Do you bless your store, the room, the stock, the accounts, the
customers, the salespeople? Do you fill the atmosphere with thoughts and
words of love and wisdom and prosperity?

Do you demand of others that which you demand of yourself, that they use
good judgment, and self-denial when necessary? Do you make them
understand that God prospers those who do their part and that you expect
them to do their part to pay their bills, so that you can pay yours and
go on with the store, the service you feel led to offer?

Or do you think of the sickness, and the poverty, and the inharmony
about you? Do you let folks have merchandise because you think them in
need, or because they are God's children, and you are in this way
helping God to prosper them and make them happy; and because your
business is going to prosper all and result in greater blessings? Do you
pray for their prosperity? Do you expect God in these people and God in
you to prompt them in doing that which is right by you?

By studying this matter you will come into a better understanding of the
law of prosperity and you will be led into a much happier and more
successful handling of your everyday problems.

Don't feel that you must open your hands and pass out everything that
you have. Conservation is one of the rules of success. You must expect
others to do their part. And everyone, no matter how many failures he
has had, can do his part.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

You aren't giving Spirit much credit for ability to work in your
brother's consciousness and affairs, are you? You say in the same breath
that he has been upheld by the Spirit these months and that you feel he
cannot stand the strain much longer! Don't you see what a mixed state of
consciousness that is, and how foolish it is to pray and to expect
Spirit to express its harmony and order and light in yourself or
another, and then to feel that you or the other may at any time collapse
because of the lack of spiritual power or light or life or substance?

Suppose "his mind," this tense, mortal state of mind that has been
causing him the worry and anxiety and weariness, gives way! What then?
Why, that's the very thing that must come! This old fixed state of mind
must give way, or be given up, that the Christ ideas may flow freely
through his consciousness and give him the new life and light and poise
and power and substance that he needs! Encourage him to let go, to place
himself in God's care and keeping. It is personal assumption of
responsibility that makes him feel he must cling so tenaciously to some
of his opinions and ways of working. This is the only thing that keeps
him out of the kingdom of heaven and its blessings! The treatment he has
had, if he were cooperating, would have raised him into the Christ
consciousness of peace and order and success long ago.

We are asking you to place him confidently in the care and keeping of
his indwelling Lord and to take

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

your mental hands off! Don't treat him! So long as you are trying to
force something into him, you keep his attention divided, and he doesn't
get within and quiet enough to let his soul commune with God. Leave him
in the secret place, with the Father. Jesus has promised, you know, that
those who go to the Father in secret shall be rewarded openly!

The spiritual light coming to him from within will show him the utter
foolishness of struggling and worrying and striving. It will reveal to
him the right relation of things spiritual and things manifest. He will
see clearly how the right mental attitude and physical poise and health
will result in instant and constant progress and prosperity and
satisfaction. You can't give him this. Nor can we. It is the free gift
of the Father within him.

What are you believing about this Father, who Jesus Christ proved was
willing always to hear and to answer every call in the name of His Son
Jesus Christ?

You are looking for a call. Do you know when you are called? You are to
go straight to God to talk over these things. Go into your closet of
prayer, into your "secret place of the Most High" (Ps. 91:1 A.V.) and
shut the door; then pray.

We are not promised the Father's attention when we merely cry out, "Oh,
I long so to do something for this ailing one." Did Jesus Christ perform
any healing by wishing that He had the power? No. God

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

gave Him the power; all He was required to do to lay hold of it was to
recognize that "I and the Father are one" (Jn. 10:30).

So, dear friend, if you believe in the works of the Father, believe also
in His Spirit in the midst of you, waiting to be recognized and put to
practical use. Through "Christ in you" you are the "beloved Son" in whom
the Father is well pleased.

All power is given unto you in all the affairs of mind and body.
Exercise your God-given power, authority, and dominion and rise out of
bondage to conditions of lack and discord.

There is a saying that "God helps those who help themselves." You are
God's executive, and your indwelling Lord depends on you to make His
glory manifest. Then be up and doing. Do the will of Him who sent you.
In so doing you are not only helping yourself, you are helping others.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Age](lmf19)
