[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf15)  [Next](lmf17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Unity emphasizes control of the physical by the spiritual. Many of the
things that we do and expect to control are not spiritual in the sense
that they are in accord with God's laws and plans! Real control is in
living according to the perfect pattern and law. It is not spiritual
thought that prompts one to abuse the body in any way. It is not
spiritual thought or desire that allows one to eat when there is no need
of food, or to partake of foods that the body does not require. It is
not spiritual thought that causes one to worry, or to become tense, or
to drive the body in the effort to gain intellectually.

A thing is not less spiritual because it has taken form and weight and
color. The thing that might be termed "material" is the misconception or
unwise combination of thoughts and elements that produces an undesirable
result. Spirit becomes manifest in our expression of what God gives.

Our religious life, heretofore, has led us to feel that our thoughts and
emotions were all that was necessary to our spiritual experience; that
the body was to be disregarded as of little consequence and as not
responsive to the finer things of Spirit--at least not as anything of
importance except as "controlled" by them.

Evidently, the individual soul has felt the need of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

such an earth home as the body temple. We are to realize that the body,
free from the inharmonies and weaknesses imposed upon it through error,
is a part of God's plan of life. We understand people to be three-fold
beings. We are convinced that the regular appropriation of certain
manifest life elements is required to maintain the body at a given rate
of vibration--which we know as health and endurance and ability to
transmute thought into action. We do not know how long such a plan will
be in effect; we are not greatly concerned. But it is reasonable to
suppose that we shall not learn a great deal about laws and
manifestations in advance of those which are now receiving our attention
until we have learned to live by them. When we can sustain the body in
health and activity and radiance indefinitely, we shall have gained a
better understanding of the true purpose of life and will be ready to
enter upon a mode of living that may free us from the observance of laws
that we may term "physical." The science of building and operating an
airplane would not permit the builder and the mechanics to take just any
materials at hand out of which to fashion the parts of the plane or to
furnish it with fuel. Yet we know that the power to build and drive the
machine is in the builder's mind and in the universal atmosphere.
Nevertheless, knowing this and acting upon it, we do not seek to set
aside the laws revealed by intelligence as expressed in the working of
machinery and the settled mode of travel.

A person learns to build an airplane in which to

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

fly before he is entrusted with the higher law of taking his body
through the air without a manifest vehicle.

Building the planes and using them and observing the laws governing
their flight is not denying God's spiritual laws. It is taking the steps
that are leading the person forward to the discovery of greater things.

So it is with maintaining ourselves in health, and in studying and
applying spiritual rules of action. We must learn to make the right use
of what we have--and then we shall find ourselves in possession of more.

Sometimes the soul gets so anxious about what it wishes to do that it
tends to neglect the body. This is not fair to the body nor to those who
must take care of the body when it is neglected. Our first duty, then,
is to bless our body and to get our thoughts right down into it, to
praise its wonderful work, to learn what its needs are, and to supply
them. Sometimes things happen in the realm of the senses or in
connection with the physical body that cause one to depreciate it, or
even to almost wish one did not have it. In this event the soul may
reach out so much that the body is neglected, until it suffers.

Then we sometimes become too ambitious, somewhere in the recesses of the
soul, and literally pull ourselves up by the roots, and starve the
precious body temple. Then come hard experiences--blessings in disguise.

But God is there in that body, you know, and God

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

won't let the soul continue to neglect the body. Suffering is one of the
means of drawing the attention of the soul back to its beautiful temple.
And the Christ Mind can and will direct the soul in taking up its
wonderful work in the body that it may continue to have this very
necessary vehicle of expression.

We need more often to think of our body as being the temple of divine
love, the very substance of health and harmony in order that this truth
may be implanted in the subconscious mind, which controls the body
functioning. We need more often to pray for a true concept of substance,
for with it we shall receive a glorious revelation that will go a long
way toward transforming the mind, soul, and body. This concept of
substance will be but the beginning of a transformation that will
continue until we shall be able to demonstrate as Christ Jesus did. All
who follow Him will eventually overcome as He did, spiritualizing the
soul to the extent that its outer garment, the body, will be lifted into
a like expression of Spirit; for God is no respecter of persons.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Way to Health](lmf17)
