[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf21)  [Next](lmf23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

We know that the Truth will open your spiritual eyes and your
understanding, and you will know that what seemed to you a loss at the
time is no longer considered such. You will learn that those who go
through the change called death are passing through a transition, the
soul giving up the body temple, which for some reason or other it can no
longer express through or bring into health. Your dear one has not gone
away. He is abiding in the heart of the Father, and you have learned
that the Father is omnipresent. So all His children are just where their
consciousness draws and holds them, whether they are functioning in the
physical or have temporarily laid aside the flesh body.

It will help you to know that souls keep on being re-embodied as
children until they come into the Christ consciousness and have perfect
dominion over mind and body and affairs. Your dear one may already be
building a new body temple in which to learn more lessons to unfold the
God qualities.

In understanding the law of life and coming into the light of Truth, we
give up many of our old conceptions of God and of ourselves and of life
here and "hereafter." We find that spiritual unity and love and
expression are eternal. We cease to grieve when a dear one has gone from
our sense sight and human surroundings.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

We enter into the inner place of light and peace, and know that the
Father is helping that one to do what his soul requires--just as He is
ever helping us.

Your hearing your dear one's voice in the night may have been the result
of your subconscious yearning and desire to hear him and to know he was
near. Or it may have been his soul's desire and effort to reach your
consciousness and comfort you. The soul is consciousness, and those who
are spiritually awake can direct their thinking and reach those who are
near to them. His thoughts of love could reach you during the stillness
of your intellect and your faculties could register the thoughts and
report them to the intellect; and you felt that you actually heard the
voice. This will make you to know that hearing is mental and that the
ears are but instruments to catch and radiate the things heard to the
various parts of the body consciousness.

It was not necessary for you to answer. Your dear one felt your
response. It is not wise to cling to those who have gone from the body.
It tends to bind them to past experiences, and possibly delays their
turning to the Father for divine guidance and further progress.

Living with memories isn't fulfilling God's plan for your life. God is
life, within you, eagerly seeking unity with other life, yearning to
picture forth the health and joy and strength and usefulness that there
is in all God life. God is love that must be converted

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

into loving--loving things of the present, those about you, the thoughts
and words and works that are adding to the wealth and peace and beauty
of the world now.

Dear, would it shock you if I told you I do not believe that those souls
whom you have known as friends in the past--and who failed to understand
and conform to the divine law of life so that they could stay with the
body and work out the divine harmony of His kingdom at the time you knew
them in the flesh--are in the least interested in keeping up the old
connections and friendships! Why, they are no doubt awake to the fact
that they lacked much in the way of light and power and life, and they
are surely much more interested in getting at the vital Truth and its
application, so that they shall not again fall short and be obliged to
change their environment and rebuild a body temple for further
expression! These souls who pass through the transition that is termed
death are not nearly so likely to crystallize in the past as are some of
us who stay on, looking toward the past for our interest and happiness.
They must have found it necessary to wake up and get hold of new ideas
and make new friendships, to give them inspiration and help.

So bless the past and the old friendships, and turn from them, knowing
that they are not the vital issue now. All that another has meant to you
has left its imprint upon your soul so that you profit by it daily. And
this is all that is of value to you.

There is no reason to suppose that a soul out of the physical body is
not aware of what is going on about

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

it. At least, since the soul is consciousness, it is reasonable to
assume that it is aware of all that interests it and which it desires to
identify itself with.

One who had been spiritually awake and active in soul and body would not
be likely to fall asleep even though the body were for some reason given
up. Such a one would be on the alert to satisfy his soul hunger and to
appreciate all that he could experience without the flesh and the
centers of physical structure which his consciousness had built.

It is a sorrow to have a loved one go through the experience of death.
But we show a greater love for our dear one by refusing to hang on to
the sorrow and by turning our undivided attention to learning how better
to live by the divine law, and how to help others to avoid the
experience of death. Your son would not have you cling to him in
thought; nor would he wish you to come to him through death. He is a
splendid soul, and would have you learn the Truth and live it here and
now.

Instead of thinking about going to him, out of the body, begin to be
glad that he is coming into the body again, in the splendid way all
souls have of getting into the physical--as a babe. The only way by
which we shall ever be eternally united with our loved ones is to come
into the Jesus Christ consciousness of life. Learn to keep the divine
law of life, which means the renewal and transformation of the physical
body, so that spirit, soul, and body may remain unified, and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the righteous self-expression in all three departments of being may
continue.

We are with you constantly, dear, to help you realize that all is well.
Your dear one did not know how to let go of the limitations into which
her mind had got, nor how to renew and build up her body. So to her it
is a rest, and an opportunity to lay aside the body for a time and to
break the conscious connection with things going on around her, until
the divine urge within her again prompts her to build the body temple
and take up lessons here in the physical.

If your mother had gone away on a vacation and you knew she was in
loving hands, you would not be grieved or worried, would you? Well, now,
that is just what has taken place. She is resting from the suffering and
the problems that she did not know how to manage. She is in the presence
of God, just as you are; and the best way to show your love for her is
to let go all human longing and all sense of loss, so that this soul who
welcomed you as a babe, and who has cared for you, may rest assured all
is well with you. Your mother has just gone into a different schoolroom
of life, where the divine Father-Mother is the teacher.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maternity](lmf23)
