[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk20)  [Next](brk22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

§ 18. <span class="smallcaps">Organism of Soul</span>.—I.
*Upanishads.*—Every organic being is a soul, according to the
Upanishads; and the degree of its organic development is directly
proportioned to the merits of its former works. The highest therefore
are the souls of gods and men. The soul in its human embodiment
exercises three classes of functions: (1) the sense-organs *(indriya)*,
which in slumber or swoon become paralysed and merge themselves into (2)
the organ of thought *(manas)*, which converts the data of the
sense-organs into conscious modes of thought and volition; and (3) the
"breaths" *(prāṇa)*, a term originally denoting all the functions of
physical life, then those higher functions upon which generally depends
all life, whether conscious or unconscious, and into which during sleep
or swoon are merged the *manas* and the sense-organs already absorbed in
the latter.

The name *indriya* for the sense-organs appears first in Kaṭh. and Kau.
Other texts usually call them *prāṇa* (a collective term, from the
supremacy of the *prāṇa,* or breath), and comprise under the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

name ordinarily breath, speech, sight, hearing, and *manas* (e.g. B.A.
I. iv. 7). The same ten *indriyas* as in the later system occur first in
B.A. II. iv. 11, IV. v. 12, which adds *manas* and heart (cf. Pra. IV.
2). On *manas* as central function of cognition and action see B.A. I.
v. 3, IV. i. 6, Ch. VII. iii f., Kaṭh. VI. 7. The sense-organs are
compared to horses drawing the car of the body, *manas* to their bridle,
Kaṭh. III. 3; in Maitr. II. 6 the organs of action are the horses, the
organs of intelligence (see below) the reins, *manas* the driver. On the
immersion of organs with *manas* in *prāṇa* see especially B.A. IV. iii.
12, Ch. VI. viii. 2, Pra. IV. 2 f. The "breaths" are usually given as
five, viz.: (1) *prāṇa* in the strict sense, which in B.A. and Ch.
denotes exspiration, and later exspiration and inspiration together; (2)
*apāna,* in B.A. and Ch. the inspiration, later the wind causing
digestion in the bowels or evacuation; (3) *vyāna,* respiratory action
connecting *prāṇa* and *apāna,* variously conceived; (4) *samāna*,
sometimes the wind digesting food, sometimes connection between
exspiration and inspiration; (5) *udāna,* which carries food and drink
up and down (Maitr. II. 6) and guides the soul to Brahma in death and
sleep (Pra. III. 7, IV. 4).

II\. *Later Vedānta.*—In the system of Śankara the gross body, subtle
body (§ 19), *karmāśraya* (§ 20), and *prāṇas* are classed together as
the "determinations" or *upādhis* by which the Self

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

conceives itself as an individual soul (above, § 12). Whereas the gross
body is abandoned on death, the other organisms travel in a potential
form with the soul throughout all its births. By the term *prāṇa*
Śankara, following the old Upanishadic usage, designates not only the
unconscious "breaths," but also the conscious *indriyas.* The *indriyas*
(the functional forces whence arise the material sense-organs) according
to him comprise the five functions of action (viz. speech, grasp,
locomotion, generation, and excretion) and the five of *buddhi* or
intelligence (viz. sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell), with which
is associated the *manas* as their centre. The *prāṇas,* or "breaths" in
the strict sense are the five known in the Upanishads. Śankara explains
*prāṇa* as exspiration, *apāna* as inspiration, *vyāna* as the force
maintaining life when both exspiration and inspiration are checked,
*samāna* as the digestive force, and *udāna* as the current leading the
soul from the body on death (on II. iv. 8 f.). When death takes place,
the *indriya*s sink into *manas,* this into the *prāṇas,* these into the
individual soul (lodged in the heart), this into the "subtle body" (§
19), which then starts on its wanderings. Thus Śankara (on IV. ii. 1 f.)
explains the statement of Ch. VI. viii. 6 that on death Speech is merged
in *manas,* this into *prāṇa,* this into Heat, this into the Higher
Godhead. These words, he holds, mean that the potential functions of
conscious sensation are

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

merged into those of unconscious vitality, the latter into the
individual soul, this again into the "Heat," i.e. the "subtle body,"
which conveys the soul through its wanderings. See also §§ 12, 15.

The later Vedānta (e.g. the Vedānta-sāra and the Ātma-viveka and
Vākya-sudhā ascribed to Śankara) schematises the functions of empiric
thought by dividing the *antaḥ-karaṇa,* its collective organisation,
into *chitta,* *manas* (often loosely called *antaḥ-karaṇa*), *buddhi,*
and *ahaṃ-kāra.* To *chitta* it ascribes the function of passing notice,
to *manas* that of deliberation, and to *buddhi* that of determination.
Sometimes also it uses *buddhi* as a general term denoting both
*ahaṃ-kāra,* the conception of egoity, which is the agent in empiric
mental action, and *manas,* the instrument of egoity; in the false
identification of these functions with the Self or Spirit lies the root
of phenomenal illusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Subtle Body](brk22)
