[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk28)  [Next](brk30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

**PART II**

### SOME TEXTS OF THE VEDĀNTA

#### I. <span class="smallcaps">Creation</span> <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

1\. <span class="smallcaps">In</span> the beginning this universe was
Self alone; there was naught else open-eyed. He bethought Himself: "Now
I will create worlds!"

He created these worlds—the Ocean, the Light, the Dead, the Waters. That
is the Ocean which is beyond the heaven; the heaven is its foundation.
The Light is the sky. The Dead is the Earth; the Waters are those
beneath.

He bethought Himself: "There are the worlds; now I will create
world-wardens!" He drew from the waters Man, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) and made him solid. He brooded over him.
When he had been brooded over, his mouth burst asunder like an egg; from
his mouth arose Speech, from speech Fire. His nostrils burst asunder;
from his nostrils arose the incoming Breath, from the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Breath Wind. His
eyes burst asunder; from his eyes arose Sight, from Sight the Sun. His
ears burst asunder; from his ears arose Hearing, from Hearing Space. His
skin burst asunder; from his skin arose hair, from the hair plants and
trees. His heart burst asunder; from his heart arose Mind, from Mind the
Moon. His navel burst asunder: from his navel arose the outgoing Breath,
from the Breath Death. His secret parts burst asunder; from his secret
parts arose seed, from seed the Waters.

2\. These gods, having been created, fell into this great ocean; this He
gave over to Hunger and Thirst. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) They
said to Him: "Find out for us a dwelling-place in which we may rest and
eat food." He brought them a cow. They said: "This is not enough for
us." He brought them a horse. They said: "This is not enough for us." He
brought them a man. They said: "Well done, forsooth!" For man is in
sooth well done. He said to them: "Enter, each according to your
dwelling-places." So Fire, becoming Speech, entered his mouth; Wind,
becoming the incoming Breath, entered his

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

nostrils; the Sun, becoming Sight, entered his eyes; Space, becoming
Hearing, entered his ears; the Plants and Trees, becoming hair, entered
his skin; the Moon, becoming Mind, entered his heart; Death, becoming
the outgoing Breath, entered his navel; the Waters, becoming seed,
entered his secret parts.

Hunger and Thirst said to Him: "Find out for us a dwelling-place." He
said to them: "I give you a share with these gods, I make you partners
with them." Therefore it is that whosoever be the godhead for whom an
offering is taken, Hunger and Thirst are partners therein.

3\. He bethought Himself: "There are the worlds and the world-wardens;
now I will create for them Food."

He brooded over the waters; when they had been brooded over, there arose
from the waters a shape. The shape that arose was Food.

When this was created, it sought to escape Him. He sought to seize it
with Speech, but could not; if He had seized it with Speech, one might
have been filled with food through speaking only. He sought to seize it
with the incoming Breath, but could not; if He had seized it with the
Breath, one might have been filled with food through breathing only. He
sought to seize it with the Eye, but could not; if He had seized it with
the Eye, one might have been filled with food through sight only. He
sought to seize it with the Ears

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

but could not; if He had seized it with the Ear, one might have been
filled with food through hearing only. He sought to seize it with the
Skin, but could not; if He had seized it with the Skin, one might have
been filled with food through touch only. He sought to seize it with the
Mind, but could not; if He had seized it with the Mind, one might have
been filled with food through thinking only. He sought to seize it with
the secret parts, but could not; if He had seized it with the secret
parts, one might have been filled with food through excretion only. He
sought to seize it with the outgoing Breath, and He swallowed it. It is
the Wind that grasps Food, the Wind that wins Food. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

He bethought Himself: "How can this be without me?" He bethought
Himself: "By what way shall I come in?" He bethought Himself: "If
speaking is by speech, in-breathing by the in-breath, sight by the eye,
hearing by the ear, touch by the skin, thinking by the mind,
out-breathing by the out-breath, excretion by the secret parts, then who
am I?" <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8)

He cleft asunder the crown of the head, and by that door came in. This
door is called the "cleft"; it makes for bliss. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Three dwellings has He, and three dream-states —this is His dwelling,
this His dwelling, this His dwelling. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](brk30.htm#fn_10)

Having been born, He surveyed living things. "What is here," said He,
"that one would call other \[than Me\]?" He saw man to be most utterly
Brahma, and He said, *"idam* *adarśam"* ("I have seen it"). Therefore He
has the name *Idan-dra.* His name is indeed *Idan-dra;* but him who is
*Idan-dra* men call *Indra,* <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](brk30.htm#fn_11) in a dark manner; for the gods
love what is dark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[56:1](brk29.htm#fr_4) Aitareya Upanishad, i.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[56:2](brk29.htm#fr_5) *Purusha;* see above, §§
4, 5, 7.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[57:1](brk29.htm#fr_6) The cosmic powers, Fire,
Wind, Sun, Space, Vegetation, Moon, Death, and Water (each of which is
created from a corresponding function of the ideal Man) are in
themselves powerless. They sink back into the primitive waters, and
suffer hunger and thirst; they must have a home in the real Man in order
to be satisfied and active. The forces of Nature exist only through and
in the human subject

<span id="fn_7"></span>[59:1](brk29.htm#fr_7) The outgoing breath,
*apāna,* probably is here identified with the function of digestion (p.
43). The rest of the sentence is based upon a word-play.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[59:2](brk29.htm#fr_8) For the answer to this
question, see the next extract.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[59:3](brk29.htm#fr_9) See above, § 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II: Who am I?](brk30)
