[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk24)  [Next](brk26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

§ 22. <span class="smallcaps">God</span>.—These two ideas, empiric
servitude to Works and transcendental freedom, leave little room for a
Supreme God or moral guide of the experiences of souls. The older texts
practically ignore such a power; their polytheistic myths are merely
echoes from the Veda, allegorically turned, and when they refer to a
supreme deity they mean the higher Self within man. Later authors,
however, began occasionally to set up in theistic fashion a distinction
between the Self within and the Self without. This finally led to the
conception of the later Vedānta, in which the Supreme Self, styled "the
Lord" *(Īśvara)*, is given the function of directing as efficient cause
the course of "works," so that each comes to its

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

requital in due season and form, while the direct responsibility for all
man's experiences is thrown upon the inward Self. In other circles the
same theistic current led to the identification of this Ātmā-God with
one of the great popular deities, usually Vishṇu or Śiva; and thus arose
the great theologies, of which the most significant is the
Bhagavad-gītā, a compromise between Upanishadic idealism, Sānkhya
physics, and practical faith. The first definite theism is in Kaṭh. II.
20 (?), 23, III. i., v. 13, Muṇḍ. III. ii. 3, Īśa 8, Śvet. III 20,
IV.–VI., etc. Worship of Brahma-Ātmā is however frequently mentioned in
the Upanishads. It is an adoration of the Self either in its unqualified
absoluteness (cf. Ch. III. xiv. 1, "Brahma in sooth is this All; it hath
therein its beginning, end, and breath; so one should worship it in
stillness"), or as allegorically typified by some physical force (see §
5), or as represented by the sacred syllable *Om* or *Aum,* upon which
see especially Māṇḍ. and Pra. v., which sets forth the three degrees of
reward for meditation upon one, two, or three elements of this word; cf.
Śankara on Brahma-sūtra, I. iii. 13. See also §§ 8, 24.

Śankara (on Brahma-sūtra, II. iii. 29) claims that wherever the Vedas
and Upanishads represent the absolute Brahma under the form of
"determinations" (§ 12), this is for the purpose of worship of Brahma as
qualified Supreme, *saguṇa,* e.g. in Ch. III. xiv. The conception of the
soul's

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

relation to God as that of a servant to his master is justified by him
(on II. iii. 43 f.), inasmuch as Brahma by his supreme "determinations"
regulates the activity of the empiric soul in the exercise of its
inferior "determinations." He permits the worship of this "qualified
Brahma," i.e. the Absolute conceived under the forms of empiric thought,
but regards it as inferior in saving power to the true knowledge (see §§
24, 25). The works of religion—ritual and devotion—are of value only as
aids to enlightenment; they are not necessary, and after enlightenment
is gained they lose all significance (on III. iv. 25 f., IV. i. 1 f.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[47:1](brk24.htm#fr_2) *Predestination* for
empiric life, B.A. III. viii. 9, IV. iv. 5, Ch. III. xiv. 1, VIII, i. 5;
*Unconscious freedom of transcendental Self,* Ch. VIII. iii. 2;
*Absolute freedom* *in enlightenment,* Ch. VII. xxv. 2, VII. i. 6, v. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Brahma the Destroyer](brk26)
