[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk37)  [Next](brk39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### X. <span class="smallcaps">The Spirit Within</span> <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)

Then Uddālaka Āruṇi <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) questioned him.

"Yājnavalkya," said he, "we dwelt among

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the Madras, in the house of Patanchala Kāpya, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36). studying sacrifice. He had a wife who was
possessed by a spirit <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37); we asked him
who he was, and he answered that he was Kabandha Ātharvaṇa, and said to
Patanchala Kāpya and to the students of sacrifice, "Knowest thou, Kāpya,
that Thread whereby this world and the world beyond and all creatures
are bound together?" "Nay, my lord," said Patanchala Kāpya, "I know it
not." Then he said to Patanchala Kāpya and the students of sacrifice,
"Knowest thou, Kāpya, that Inward Ruler who rules inwardly this world
and the world beyond and all creatures?" "Nay, my lord," said Patanchala
Kāpya, "I know him not." Then he said to Patanchala Kāpya and the
students of sacrifice, "Verily, Kāpya, he who should know that Thread
and that Inward Ruler knows Brahma, knows the worlds, knows the Vedas,
knows the creatures, knows the Self, knows the All." This he said to
them: this I know. If thou, Yājnavalkya, shalt drive home the Brahman's
cows without knowing that Thread and that Inward Ruler, thy head shall
split." <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38)

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

"Verily, Gautama, I know that Thread and that Inward Ruler."

"Any man may say, "I know, I know"; but do thou say how thou knowest."

"Truly, Gautama," said he, "the wind is that Thread; for by the wind as
thread, Gautama, this world and the world beyond and all creatures are
bound together. Therefore, Gautama, they say of a man who has died that
his limbs are relaxed; for by the wind as thread, Gautama, were they
bound together."

"It is so, Yājnavalkya. Tell of the Inward Ruler."

"He who, dwelling in the earth, is other than the earth, whom the earth
knows not, whose body the earth is, who inwardly rules the earth, is thy
Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the waters,
is other than the waters, whom the waters know not, whose body the
waters are, who inwardly rules the waters, is thy Self, the Inward
Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the fire, is other than the
fire, whom the fire knows not, whose body the fire is, who inwardly
rules the fire, is thy Self, the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Inward Ruler, the
deathless. He who, dwelling in the sky, is other than the sky, whom the
sky knows not, whose body the sky is, who inwardly rules the sky, is thy
Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the wind, is
other than the wind, whom the wind knows not, whose body the wind is,
who inwardly rules the wind, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the
deathless. He who, dwelling in the heavens, is other than the heavens,
whom the heavens know not, whose body the heavens are, who inwardly
rules the heavens, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who,
dwelling in the sun, is other than the sun, whom the sun knows not,
whose body the sun is, who inwardly rules the sun, is thy Self, the
Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in space, is other than
space, whom space knows not, whose body space is, who inwardly rules
space, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in
moon and stars, is other than moon and stars, whom moon and stars know
not, whose body moon and stars are, who inwardly rules moon and stars,
is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the
ether, is other than the ether, whom the ether knows not, whose body the
ether is, who inwardly rules the ether, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler,
the deathless. He who, dwelling in the dark, is other than the dark,
whom the dark knows not, whose body the dark is, who

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

inwardly rules the dark, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless.
He who, dwelling in the light, is other than the light, whom the light
knows not, whose body the light is, who inwardly rules the light, is thy
Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. Thus as to godhead; now as to
nature. He who, dwelling in all beings, is other than all beings, whom
all beings know not, whose body all beings are, who inwardly rules all
beings, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. Thus as to nature;
now as to personality. He who, dwelling in the breath, is other than the
breath, whom the breath knows not, whose body the breath is, who
inwardly rules the breath, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless.
He who, dwelling in speech, is other than speech, whom speech knows not,
whose body speech is, who inwardly rules speech, is thy Self, the Inward
Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the eye, is other than the
eye, whom the eye knows not, whose body the eye is, who inwardly rules
the eye, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling
in the ear, is other than the ear, whom the ear knows not, whose body
the ear is, who inwardly rules the ear, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler,
the deathless. He who, dwelling in the mind, is other than the mind,
whom the mind knows not, whose body the mind is, who inwardly rules the
mind, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

in the skin, is other than the skin, whom the skin knows not, whose body
the skin is, who inwardly rules the skin, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler,
the deathless. He who, dwelling in the understanding, is other than the
understanding, whom the understanding knows not, whose body the
understanding is, who inwardly rules the understanding, is thy Self, the
Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the seed, is other than
the seed, whom the seed knows not, whose body the seed is, who inwardly
rules the seed, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He unseen
sees, unheard hears, unthought thinks, uncomprehended comprehends. There
is no other than he who sees, no other who hears, no other who thinks,
no other who comprehends. He is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the
deathless. All else is fraught with sorrow."

Then Uddālaka Āruṇi held his peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[75:1](brk38.htm#fr_34) Bṛihad-āraṇyaka
Upanishad, III. vii.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[75:2](brk38.htm#fr_35) A patronymic, meaning
"son of Aruṇa."

<span id="fn_36"></span>[76:1](brk38.htm#fr_36) A patronymic signifying
a descendant of Kapi. Similarly *Ātharvaṇa,* below, means a descendant
of the mythical sage Atharvan.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[76:2](brk38.htm#fr_37) In Sanskrit *Gandharva;*
originally, perhaps, the Gandharvas were spirits of fertility, but in
classical literature they are a kind of fairies, with musical
proclivities. See especially Pischel and Geldner, *Vedische Studien,*
vol. i., p. 183 foll.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[76:3](brk38.htm#fr_38) This dialogue between
Uddālaka and Yājnavalkya forms<span id="page_77">p. 77</span> part of a
disputation between Brahman theologians, as the prize of which a
thousand cows were offered by King Janaka of Videha (Bṛihad-ār. Up. III.
i. 1). The mention of a splitting head occurs several times in a similar
connection in the Upanishads; practically it means that he who accepts
the challenge and fails in these tourneys of wit is doomed to death by
"visitation of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI: The Wisdom of Raikva](brk39)
