[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas026n)  [Next](jas028n)   
 \[[27. Anansi and Brother Dead.](jas027)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*NOTE:* 

### 27. Anansi and Brother Dead.

The story of "Brother Dead" is one of the best known of Jamaica stories.
Trowbridge, 282, says Death is looked upon as Anansi's brother. "Anansi
fool 'em all; nobody can fool Anansi, only Bredder Dead," old Forbes
said at the end of a trick story. Every Jamaica collection includes a
version. See Jekyll, 31-34; Milne-Home, 40-41; Trowbridge, JAFL 9,
286-287; Pamela Smith, 69-70; Wona, 73-77. For other references, compare
Parsons, Andros Island, 117-119 and note 2, page 117.

The story turns upon Anansi's stealing from Death's provision field, as
in 17b. All the versions except Wona's version end with the episode of
"refugees in the roof," as in number 5 c; an episode related to the
fruit-dropping or dust-blinding incident as a means of getting rid of a
strong enemy who is lying in wait for a weaker; as in numbers 13 c, 23.

In Wona's version, which has retained a European underworld coloring,
Anansi passes fields of fat cattle and comes finally to the city of
Death. He greases the hinges of the gate with the fat of the sheep he
has killed out of Death's flocks, and when he flees, the gate opens for
him. Nevertheless, the shadow of death jumps upon his back. He asks
various friends to take it off, and finally succeeds in throwing it to
earth; later he picks and eats callalu (Jamaica greens) from the spot
where it fell. This latter part of the story is the "Dry-head" episode
of numbers 22 and 30.

In the ordinary Jamaica version, the comedy of getting the food,
bringing the wife, attempting Death's destruction, take the place of the
underworld detail. Another Maroon version begins:

Anansi get a daughter he call Mat, an' he go to a place where he was
hunting an' see a man sitting down all day sharpening pegs. Anansi go
an' say "Morning, Brar Dead!" Not a 'peak, only keep on work all a time.
He go up on his fol' have lots of dry meat, an' he tek as much an' carry
it down an' bile his food. Anansi don' walk where rope is set against de
water, walk a different pass.

After Anansi has left his daughter with Dead, the story runs:

Him daughter want water, say, "Brar Dead, want water." Not a answer. Him
follow de pass an' go down to whe' de water deh; an' him drop in Brar
Dead's rope an' he catch him. An' Dead run down an' tek him off de stick
an' lick him.--"Brar Dead, I'm yo' wife! yo' wife, Brar Dead! Don' kill
me! Don' kill me!" Don' hear a word, not a word. Kill him an' cut him up
an' carry him put him up in lof', mek fire under him, dry him.

In Trowbridge, Death is a loquacious planter and the story runs like any
thieving plot. In the Maroon version the figure of

{p. 250}

"Brother Dead" corresponds with that of the "Piercer of Souls" or the
"fisherman" in American Indian stories of the trickster's visit to the
underworld, e. g. Relation de la Nouvelle France, 1636, p. 106; Petitot,
Traditions Indiennes des Déné Dinjé, p. 33. The American Indian
fisherman is spearing or angling for fish; the Jamaica figure of Death
is trapping game, Both tricksters make their way in by avoiding Death's
trap.

The incident of tying Death's hair in order to burn him up corresponds
to the hair-plaiting in Callaway, 29, and Theal, 110, where the
trickster sets fire to the hut and burns up his host.

Version (b) shows a simpler handling of similar incidents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 28. Brother Dead and the Brindle Puppy.](jas028n)
