[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas031)  [Next](jas033.md)   
 [\[Note\]](jas032n.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. The Law against Back-biting.

##### a. Duck's Dream.

George Parkes, Mandeville.

One time Anansi were living in a country an' the country were very hard;
so they pass a law that anyone talk one another, that man will drop down
dead. So Anansi say he

*mus'* eat something out of it, because he's going to fix himself into a
place where people

*mus'* talk him. So he get a hoe an' a pick-axe an' a machete an' go to
a broad flat rock near the side of the road where everyone pass, begun
to knock, pong pong pong. Hog was passing. Hog say, "Mawning, Brar
Anansi." Anansi say, "Mawning, Brar Hog." Hog say, "Wha you do deh?"
Anansi say, "Governor pass law an' say famine coming upon lan' an'
ev'rybody mus' work groun', so me deh try see wha' me kyan' do." So Hog
went on. As he went a little way he say, "Odder people work groun' a
good place; Anansi deh work groun' 'pon rock!" As Hog say so, drop down
dead. Anansi turn roun', pick him up put him in his bag, said, "Dat de
way

*oonoo*\[2\] talk a man!" So now he carry Hog go home go eat him.

\[2. Oonoo is Jamaican for "you."\]

{p. 41}

The nex' day he went back. Cow was passing. He began to knock,
pong pong pong. Cow say, "Mawning, Brar Anansi." Anansi say, "Mawning,
Brar Cow." Cow say, "A wha' you deh do deh?" Anansi say, "governor pass
a law that a great famine come 'pon land an' everybody mus' work
groun'." So cow went on. When he go a little distance he said, "Odder
man work groun' have good place; Anansi work 'pon rock stone!" Cow drop
down dead. Anansi tak him up put him in his bag, said, "Dat's how

*oonoo* talk a man!' He carry home Cow an' eat him.

Horse and Goat come and they share the same fate. Now a day or two
after, while Anansi was there knocking, Duck came up. He said, "Mawning,
Brar Anansi." Anansi said, "Mawning, Brar Duck." Duck said, "A wha' you
do deh?" Anansi say, "Governor pass law say great famine coming 'pon
lan' an' ev'rybody mus' work groun', so me deh try see wha' me can do."
Anansi said to Duck, "What is all de strange news a fe you side?"\[1\]
Duck say not'ing strange but only thing he dream a dream las' night that
he's on the worl' so long an' no married yet; so him a go down a bottom
yonder go see if him kyan' get married. So he went on. Anansi then said,
"Good people, they get married. Duck an' all say

*him* want fe married too!" So Anansi drop down dead. Duck turn roun'
an' pick him up, swallow him, an' said, "Dat's de way

*oonoo* talk a man!"

\[1. "in your district."\]

##### b. Guinea-chick.

Alexander Archibald, Mandeville.

Anansi make law if anyone talk de odder one, he dead. He get up on one
cave roadside, go working ground. Cow a pass, go see him. Anansi say,
"Des a try a work one groun' heah." So when Cow go long, pass him, Cow
say, "Chuh! man fool! man kyan't work groun' 'pon rock-stone!" As Cow
say so, Cow tumble down dead. Den Anansi go pick him up, go eat.

Hog came. Hog ax him say, "A wha' yo' a doin' heah?"--"A try a work a
groun'." Hog pass him."--"Chuh! man kyan't look upon rock-stone an' say
me work groun'!" As Hog say so, him drop dead. Anansi pick him up, go
eat.

Guinea-chick say, "I will go deh!" Guinea-chick put on him clo'es same
as a go market. So when he come an' see Anansi upon de stone a dig, tie
him head wid a check handkerchief--dat are Guinea-chick--an' pass
Anansi, no 'peak to him. Dat time him go long Anansi say, "Dat dar
fool!" Den Anansi drop dead.

Jack man dory!

{p. 42}

##### c. Dry-head at the Barber's.

Charles Thompson, Harmony Hall.

Once Anansi and But\[1\] made agreement that they wasn't to talk one
another. Anansi went to a road and But went to one. Part of the day,
Dry-head was passing where Anansi was working and complain to Anansi
that he going out to a ball to-night and he going to a barber-shop to
get his hair barber. And after he gone Anansi say, "Pardon me, me Lord!
whe' Brar Dry-head get hair on his head to go to de barber-shop to
barber?" An' Anansi fell down an' died, an' But went back an' pick him
up an' eat him.

\[1. Butterfly.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. Fling-a-mile.](jas033.md)
