[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas061)  [Next](jas_04)   
 [\[Note\]](jas062n)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 62. Man is Stronger.

Simeon Falconer, Santa Cruz Mountains.

The Lion and the Tiger were very good friends. Tiger says, "No one beat
us in strength!" Lion said, "No, my friend, somebody that's stronger
than we. Tiger said no, no, he cannot believe that. Lion said there was
a little something called "Man" that was stronger. So Tiger says he will
have to find that something called 'Man."

And he go hunting the Man and he buck up Mr. Ram-goat and he ask him if
him name "Man". Goat says yes. And he asked him if the two things he had
up here (horns) called "gun". And he asked him if that long scat he have
on belly, called "ram-rod." And he asked him if that bag he had, called
"shot-bag." And Goat said yes. And Tiger walk up and lick him flat on
the ground. Goat holla "Wi-i! wi-i-i!" And Tiger went back to Lion and
say he find something called "Man" and single lick he lick him, fa'
dead. Lion say, "No, me friend! dat no 'Man', for Man have two feet an'
dat you tell me have four legs." Tiger say

*will* have to go back again find Man, for he bound to have that
something called "Man".

{p. 68}

And he went out again seeking after "Man", and a Hunter was out. And he
saw the Hunter and he said, "Now this yeah

*mus'* Man!" And so him gwine up to de man, de Hunter aiming for him
with the gun, and ask if him name "Man". And the Hunter drive at him
with the gun. And he run back to Lion and could only say, "I find 'Man'
an' him single answer him answer me, blood fly all t'ru me body!" and
him dead. Lion says, "I tell you; you no believe me; but you believe me
now!"'

{p. 69}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OLD STORIES, CHIEFLY OF SORCERY.](jas_04)
