[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas058)  [Next](jas060.md)   
 [\[Note\]](jas059n.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 59. Rabbit Stories.

##### a. The Tar Baby.

Rennie Macfarlane, Mandeville,

When Brer Fox tried to catch Brer Rabbit, he could not catch him. He
stick up a tar-pole in his common, an' when Brer Rabbit come an' see
it', say, "Come out of Brer Fox place or I kick you!" An' the tar-pole
wouldn't come out, An' kick him an' his foot fasten. "Let go foot, else
I kick you with the other one!" An' he won't let it go, an' kick it with
the other one an' the other foot fasten. An' he box him an' his han'
fasten. An' say, "Let go me, else I box you!" an' he box him with the
other han' an' his han' fasten. An' he said, "Let it go, else I buck
you!" An' he buck him an' head fasten. An' said, "Let me go, else I bite
you!" an' when he bite him, mouth fasten an' he couldn't move or talk.

An' Brer Fox said, "Think I couldn't catch you!" An' Brer Fox said, "Out
of burn you an' drown you an' hang you an' dash you over de bramble,
which one you rather?" He said, "Do anything you like but don' dash me
over dat bramble!" An' Brer Fox take him an' dash him over the bramble,
an' he said, "Oh, what a fool!"

##### b. Saying Grace.

Rennie Macfarlane, Mandeville.

Brer Fox catch Brer Rabbit again. So he gwine kill him, an' Brer Rabbit
said, "Do, Brer Fox, as you gwine kill me, have prayers. An' he said,
"Clasp you hands an' say what I say: 'O God, bless an' blind us!'" but
Brer Fox thought he say "Bless an' help us," an' he say it. An' Rabbit
run away an' they never see him.

{p. 65}

##### c. Pretending Dead.

Rennie Macfarlane, Mandeville.

When Brer Fox want to get Brer Rabbit again, he an' Bear make up to
catch him. Brer Bear go to Brer Rabbit yard an' tell him that Brer Fox
dead an' he mus' help him bury him, for he an' Brer Fox friends. When he
go to Brer Fox yard, be see Brer Fox lying down. Brer Rabbit put on his
bonpon\[1\] hat an' coatie an' spectacle an' sit up in a rocking-chair
an' say, "I never see it so! What a style! what a funniness! I think
that when folks fall down die, they always cock up their foot in the air
an' make 'pooh!'" An' Brer Fox cock up his foot in the air an' say,
"Pooh!" an' Brer Rabbit go away an' say, "A man like you never dead
yet!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. The Animal Race.](jas060.md)
