[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas006n)  [Next](jas008n.md)   
 \[[7. Eggs and Scorpions.](jas007.md)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*NOTE:* 

### 7. Eggs and Scorpions.

Jekyll tells the same story in Annancy and Candle-fly, 86-89, Wona, in
Anancy and Fire-fly, 24-29; Pamela Smith, in Anancy and Ginger-fly.
Milne-Home, 35-39, contains the scorpion episode, Compare Tremearne FL
21:360.

The plot is in two parts. (1) Anansi goes on an egg-hunt at night with
Fire-fly as guide, but is deserted because of his greed. (2) He stumbles
upon Tiger's house at night, and tries to steal back the eggs which
Tiger has set Scorpions to guard. The parallel of this story with number
39 is obvious. Jekyll's version takes on elements of the sheep-stealing
story, number 5. A Mandeville version reads much like Milne-Home's:

Bra Anansi an' Bra Tiger went out to go an' steal some eggs. Bra Anansi
took a rubber bag an' Bra Tiger took a canvas bag. When Bra Tiger bag
full, Bra Anansi jus' half. Bra Tiger would not wait any longer. He
leave him an' he go away.

Anansi was filling the bag, there he see a light coming, think it was
Bra Tiger an' cry out, "Lor', Bra'r, Bra'r, yo' jus' coming to meet me?"
But it wasn't Tiger; it was the man watchin' the eggs.

An' when he went up to hol' him he said, "Do, sah! do, sah I don' carry
me to massah to-night. Tie me to yo' bed-side to-night till a mawnin'!"
An' when the man was sleeping, he call to Bra Rat, "Bra'r Rat, run come
here let me tell you somethin'!" When Bra Rat come he said, "Jes' loose
me, I hev some egg here to give you!" An' he loose him, he simply went
right away,--never give Bra Rat anything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 8. Tiger's Bone-hole.](jas008n.md)
