[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas015)  [Next](jas017.md)   
 [\[Note\]](jas016n.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 16. Shut up in the Pot.

Simeon Falconer, Santa Cruz Mountains.

There was a very hard time, no food whatsoever could they get, so Anansi
him family well fear. So when Bredder Tiger and Bredder Tacoomah go see
him, he tell them for last three or four days his wife and children
didn't eat bread. Say they will go back home and send him some of 'em
food, and the two go back from Nansi yard and just dodge him now and
hear his wife call, "Heah! dinner ready!" And Bredder Tiger and Bredder
Tacoomah go back to the house knock on the door. The wife open the door
and Anansi go right out of the house--'shamed! The wife give them some
of the food to eat and it was only fresh beef.

They come back to Bredder Anansi now and Nansi tell them say, "I will
get the beef, but whatever I tell you to do, you mus' be sure to do it."
An' he put on a big pot of water on fire, an' him, Nansi, get into the
pot of water and gwine tell them shut him up in him pot, An' tell them
as soon as him knock the pot, open the pot. An' him come out now, tell
Bredder Tiger

*he* mus' get in the pot,--Tacoomah long side in the pot too. And shut
them up, an' he get a heavy weight an' put it on the pot top. An' he
went right outside and tell him wife mus' shove up the fire, mak the
fire bigger an' bigger. An' when him come back, them was properly
cooked, They gwine eat now, he was tuning up his fiddle--

"I got them now! I got them now!  
Them think they got me, but I got them now!"

{p. 20}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. House in the Air.](jas017.md)
