[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas043)  [Next](jas045)   
 [\[Note\]](jas044n)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 44. Spider Marries Monkey's Daughter.

May Ford, Newmarket

Bredder Monkey had a daughter whom Bredder Spider wanted to marry.
Monkey didn't want Bredder Spider to marry his daughter as he thought
Bredder Spider was too fast and beneath him; he only kept Bredder Spider
company as he thought him useful to him, So he jump to Bredder
Green-lizard and said, "Bredder Green-lizard, what you think of such
cheek? Fancy! Bredder Spider want to marry me daughter! I don't want to
hurt his feelings as he is useful to us, so help me to get out of it."
So Bredder Green-Lizard say, "I tell you a way, man. Call her 'Miss
Nennan-kennan-wid-a-turn-down-gown' and whoever guess her name marry
her, for Bredder Spider never can guess that!" So Bredder Lizard went
direc' an' tell Bredder Spider, "When dey call you all up to ax Bredder
Monkey daughter name, you fe say, 'Miss
Nennen-kennen-wid-a-turn-down-gown'." {p. 55} So Bredder Monkey send out
word to all the gentlemen who want to marry his daughter to come and
guess her name. Not one could tell her name till when he catch to
Bredder Spider, Bredder Spider say, "Miss
Nennen-kennen-wid-a-turn-down-gown." So Bredder Spider got Bredder
Monkey daughter an' marry her.

So when Bredder Spider wife had a baby, she left Bredder Spider put the
pickney to bed while she go to pond. When Bredder Spider think wife
gone, him start to sing,

"Hush, me pickney, hush me baby,  
A me cunnie mak me get yo' mama!"

Spider wife turn back an' say, "A what a dat you sing?" Spider say, 'Me
only sing,

'Hush, me pickney! hush, me baby!  
It's a good t'ing marry yo' mama?"'

Bredder Monkey been a come see him an' hear what Bredder Spider singing.
Bredder Monkey say, "Wa' so you get me daughter!" an' grab away the baby
an' kill Spider. And as him kill Spider the pickney drop out his hand
dead.

So never kill a Spider, as whatever you have in hand will be sure to
break.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45. The Chain of Victims.](jas045)
