[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas107)  [Next](jas109.md)   
 [\[Note\]](jas108n.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 108. Big Begum and Little Begum.

Emily Alexander, Mandeville.

There was two sons named Big Begum and Little Begum.

Big Begum was very rich and Little Begum was very poor. One

{p. 144}

day, Little Begum found a bag of money and sent to Big Begum to borrow
his quart pan to measure the money. Big Begum was very envious, didn't
like to see Little Begum prosper. So he wondered what Little Begum was
doing with the quart pan. He got some grease and greased the bottom of
the pan to find out. Little Begum measured the money and, not looking in
the pan to see that a coin had fastened in the bottom, sent it back to
Big Begum, Big Begum saw the money in the pan and was surprised to know
where Little Begum got this money from, so he threatened Little Begum if
he did not tell him he would kill him.

So Little Begum told him that he had killed three of his horses, carried
the meat to the market and hung it up in the market crying out, "Fresh
meat for sale, bit a pound!" Big Begum now went home, killed three of
his horses and carried the meat to the market and gave the same alarm;
but no one came to buy it. So he was so sorry!

He went back home, called Little Begum, put him in a bag and tied him on
a tree to stay till he came back. While Little Begum was there, he saw a
man passing with a herd of sheep and he cried out. The man went up and
asked what was the matter. He said that Big Begum wanted him to go to
him and he did not want to go. So the man with the herd of sheep said he
wanted to go, and Little Begum told him to take him out the bag if he
wished to get there. The man took him out and went into the bag; Little
Begum tied it as tight as he could, and the man told him to take charge
of the herd of sheep. So he went away with the herd of sheep, leaving
the man there.

Big Begum came up now with his cutlass and chopped the bag so fine that
he could hardly believe it was a man, and buried it. So when he buried
it, he went round the corner whistling and singing beautiful songs,
feeling quite happy that he had killed Little Begum. But as he turned
the corner, he saw Little Begum with the herd of sheep. He was so
surprised! He said, "Is that you, Little Begum? I thought I had chopped
you up a while ago and buried you!" Little Begum said, "If you had
chopped me up a little finer and buried me a little deeper, I would get
a herd of cows instead of a herd of sheep!" So Big Begum told Little
Begum to chop him up as fine and bury him as deep, so he might get the
cows. So Little Begum chopped him up very fine and buried him. That was
the End of Big Begum!

{p. 145}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 109. The Fool and the Wise Brother.](jas109.md)
