[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas151)  [Next](jas153.md)   
 [\[Note\]](jas150n.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Animal Jests.

##### IX.

Louse an' Dog-flea have a quarrel. Dog-flea, he said, "Brar Louse, when
him ketchin' yo' a head, how you manage?" Louse said, "Brar, me gwine a
knot knot." Louse said to Dog-flea, say, "Brar, when him ketchin' you,
how

*you* manage?" Dog-flea said, "Me gwine a seam in." Dog-flea said, "Den,
Louse, when dem a comb you, whe' you go?" Louse said, "I lie down flat
'pon de meat." Louse said to Dog-flea, "Den, Brar, when dem dip a hot
water how you manage?" Dog-flea say, "Come, come, sah, dat don't fe yo'
business!" So de quarrel end.

##### X.

Ground-lizard and Ground-rat were two friends. Rat said to
Ground-lizard, "How black nigger sta'?" Lizard say, "Oh, dey
ugly-lookin' chaps'." Rat said, "Yes? I see dem but nebber can stan' to
look pon dem. Soon as dem see me dem say, 'Look Groun'-rat! look
Groun'-rat!' an' take a stone to kill me, so I get out a dem sight."
Ground-lizard say, "When dey buck up on me suddenly, I jump, but when I
go a little way, turn round on dem an' look; dat how I know dey
ugly-lookin' chap.'

##### XI.

Puss and Dog went out journeying one day and they found a thruppence. So
they divided and now the trouble was they didn' know which thing to buy
with a penny ha'penny. Dog said, "Brar Puss, I goin' to take fe my
quattie to buy a quattie worth of look'." Puss say, "I won' buy 'look',
I wi' buy cattle!" So the Puss buy a pair of lizard and let them go on
the run, and they run to breed. That is why you see a cat always after
lizard, and a dog is always looking, looking, looking and doing nothing,

##### XII.

Han' a go market. Hear beg Han' a buy meat. When Han' come a pass, he
cut piece of de meat. Den Mosquito see him, an' Mosquito come fe go tell
Hear say Han' cut de meat. Den eb'ry time Mosquito go to tell Hear, Han'
knock him. He come back again--"Hearie!" Han' knock him (striking his
ear with his hand). Couldn't tell him yet.

##### XIII.

Monkey said to Goat, "I want to make a ball and I have a jacket I don't
want to wear; so I sent for you to see if you will

{p. 182}

buy the jacket." And said, "Try on the jacket, see if it will fit you."
So Goat try on the jacket, and Monkey said, "It kyan't fit you better!"
Goat said, "Fit? fit? fit? (strutting about looking at himself) fit fe
tre-ew!" So Goat buy the jacket.

##### XIV.

Anansi an' Tiger was traveling going thru' a stream of water. Anansi
want to find if Tiger can tell a story. Anansi foot went right down on a
sort of stone in de water. Anansi say, "I mash a fish!" Tiger holla out
say, "I smell de fat!"

##### XV.

Tacoomah say, "Anansi, yo' ma dead!"--"A' right! bit's wort' a meat fe
sarve t'day."--"Anansi, yo' ma wake!"--"A' right! one somebody kyan't
live a worl'."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lies.](jas153.md)
