[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas_01)  [Next](jas_03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE.

The stories in this collection were taken down from the lips of over
sixty negro story-tellers in the remote country districts of Jamaica
during two visits to the island, one of six weeks in the summer of 1919,
the other of five weeks in the winter of 1921. The music was all
recorded during the second visit by Miss Helen Roberts, either directly
from the story-teller or from a phonographic record which I had made. In
this way the original style of the story-telling, which in some
instances mingles story, song and dance, is as nearly as possible
preserved, although much is necessarily lost in the slow process of
dictation. The lively and dramatic action, the change in voice, even the
rapid and elliptical vernacular, can not appear on the printed page. But
the stories are set down without polish or adornment, as nearly as
possible as they were told to me, and hence represent, so far as they
go, a true folk art.

Although some story-tellers claimed to know "more than a hundred"
stories, no one narrator gave me mote than thirty, and usually not more
than four or five at one interview.

To all such story-telling, as to riddling and song, the name of "Anansi
story" is applied,--an appellation at least as old as 1816, when Monk
Lewis in his journal describes the classes of "Nancy stories" popular in
his day among the negroes as the tragical witch story and the farcical
"neger-trick." The "neger-trick" harks back to slave times and is rarely
heard to-day; tales of sorcery, too, are heard best from the lips of
older narrators. Modern European fairy tales and animal stories
(evidently unknown to Lewis) have taken their place. Two influences have
dominated story-telling in Jamaica, the first an absorbing interest in
the magical effect of song which, at least in the old witch tales, far
surpasses that in the action of the story; the second, the conception of
the spider Anansi as the trickster hero among a group of animal figures.
Anansi is the culture hero of the Gold Coast,--a kind of god--, just as
Turtle is of the Slave coast and Hare (our own Brer Rabbit) of the Bantu
people "Anansi stories" regularly form the entertainment during
wake-nights, and it is difficult not to believe that the

{p. xii}

vividness with which these animal actors take part in the story springs
from the idea that they really represent the dead in the underworld
whose spirits have the power, according to the native belief, of taking
animal form. The head-man on a Westmoreland cattle-pen even assured me
that Anansi, once a man, was now leader of the dead in this land of
shades. However this may be, the development of Jamaican obeah or
witchcraft has been along the same two lines of interest. Magic songs
are used in communicating with the dead, and the obeah-man who sets a
ghost upon an enemy often sends it in the form of some animal; hence
there are animals which must be carefully handled lest they be something
other than they appear.

Riddling is a favorite pastime of the Jamaica negro. Much is preserved
from old African originals in the personification of common objects of
yard and road-side, much is borrowed also from old English folk
riddling. That this spread has been along the line of a common language
is proved by the fact that only a dozen parallels occur in Mason's
Spanish collection from Porto Rico, at least ten of which are quoted by
Espinosa from New Mexico, while of collections from English-speaking
neighbors, fourteen out of fifty-five riddles collected in South
Carolina and nine out of twenty-one from Andros Island are found also in
Jamaica. Particular patterns are set for Jamaica riddling into which the
phrasing falls with a rhythmical swing careless of rhyme,--"My father
has in his yard" and "Going up to town." The giving of a riddle is
regularly preceded by a formula drawn from old English sources--

Riddle me this, riddle me that,  
Perhaps you can guess this riddle  
And perhaps not!

generally abbreviated into

Riddle me riddle,  
Guess me this riddle,  
And perhaps not.

The art is practised as a social amusement, groups forming in which each
person in the circle must propound riddles until his supply is exhausted
or his riddle unguessed.

My own work as a collector in this engrossing field of Jamaican
folk-lore owes much to those collectors who have preceded me and who
have enjoyed a longer and more intimate acquaintance than has been
possible for me with the people and their idiom;--to Monk Lewis, a true
folk-lorist, whose "Journal" of 1816 is of the greatest interest to-day,
to Mr. Walter Jekyll and

{p. xiii}

his excellent volume of songs and stories in the Folk-lore Publications
of 1907, and to the writers of nursery tales, Mrs. Milne-Home, Pamela
Smith, and Mrs. W. E. Wilson (Wona). I take this opportunity also to
acknowledge most gratefully the many courtesies for which I am indebted
during my visits to the island. I particularly wish to thank Professor
Frank Cundall for his advice and cooperation, and for the use of the
invaluable West India library connected with the Jamaica Institute in
Kingston where I was able to consult books not easily to be found in
library collections. To the Hon. and Mrs. Coke-Kerr, to Mrs. Harry
Farquharson and to the Rev. and Mrs. Ashton I am gratefully indebted for
many courtesies in the task of finding reliable native informants. To
these informants themselves,--to Simeon Falconer, William Forbes, George
Parkes, and a score of others I owe thanks for their ready response to
my interest. In America also I wish to thank Mrs. Elsie Clews Parsons
for suggestions as to method and for the use of her valuable
bibliography and Mrs. Louise Dennis Hand for help with Spanish
collections, and to express my grateful obligations to Professor Franz
Boas for his patient editing and valuable bibliographical suggestions,

Martha Warren Beckwith

The Folk-lore Foundation  
Vassar College  
April, 1924.

{p. 1}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ANIMAL STORIES.](jas_03)
