[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm201)  [Next](hm203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. II*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE GOLDEN TRIPOD.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### SECOND TRACT.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### THE

# CHEMICAL TREATISE

###### OF

## THOMAS NORTON,

###### THE ENGLISHMAN,

###### CALLED

#### BELIEVE-ME,

###### OR

#### THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

AN EPIGRAM

WRITTEN BY M. M., ON NORTON'S CHEMICAL

TREATISE.

As the Nile with its overflowing waters floods the surrounding country,
and covers it with fertilizing slime, bearing in it the promise of a
rich and laughing harvest, so the genius of Norton overflows its banks
far and wide, while he makes known to us the glorious works of Nature.
He spreads himself abroad over an immensity of space, that he may
fertilize the fields of Alchemy, and rejoice the hearts of its husband
men. If you are fortunate you will catch beneath this wide expanse of
waters a fish which will satisfy the longing of your heart. And if you
fail of success, yet your mind will be stored with the precious
treasures of knowledge, and you will in any case be richly rewarded for
your labour. The treasures of Hermes are not laid open in one book:
perhaps one writer may render clear to you what another fails to
explain.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### THE TREATISE, CREDE-MIHI, OR ORDINAL,

#### OF THOMAS NORTON.

#### PREFACE FIRST.

(*By the Author himself*)

THIS Book shews to the initiated knowledge, but intensifies the
ignorance of the vulgar. It is the book of honouring, increasing riches,
and the book of the needy, putting to flight poverty. It is the book of
confidence and truth, full of counsel for kings and of teaching for
prelates, a book useful for sainted men, who wish to live unspotted of
sin; a secret book, the Book of the Gift of God, to chosen men a pathway
of true hope, a strength to those constant in firm faith, and who
unwaveringly believe in my words. Alchemy is sought by the false and the
true—by false seekers without number, but they are rejected. Many are
aflame with the desire of gain, but amongst a thousand thousand scarce
three are chosen. There are many called to knowledge, noble and poor,
learned and ignorant, but they will not submit to toil, or await the
time; they do not attain to the goal because they are ungrateful. The
Book of our Art is clear as light to the sons of knowledge, to whom God
has freely given to understand this matter. Only let them believe this
prophetical saying; to the thankful all flows forth from the fount of
Divine love.

This noble science is bestowed only on those who love justice with a
devout mind, but to the deceitful, the treacherous, and the violent it
is denied, because their sin's hinder the coming of God's gifts.

This knowledge would often have been the glory of England's Kings, if
their hope had been firmly placed upon God.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One who shall have
obtained his honours by means of this Art, will mend old manners, and
change them for the better. When he comes, he will reform the kingdom,
and by his goodness and virtue he will set an everlasting example to
rulers. In his time the common people will rejoice, and render praise to
God in mutual neighbourly love. O King, who art to accomplish all this,
pray to God the King, and implore His aid in the matter! So the glory of
thy mind will be crowned with the glory of a golden age, which shall not
then be hoped for as future.

#### PREFACE SECOND.

To the honour of the One God, who is Three Persons in One, this book has
been written, in order that, after my death, learned and unlearned men
might see how every one who will follow my good counsel, and ponder it
well before he begins the work, may obtain great treasure through the
Art of Alchemy. But the book is also a storehouse of mighty secrets for
the learned. Let me warn the unlearned that they must study this Art
with fear and trembling, lest they be led astray by the false delusions
of those who counsel many costly experiments, and use high sounding
words. For my part, I desire none of that fame which the world can give,
but only your prayers to God for me, though you need not utter my name.
Let no one trouble himself about the author, but rather let him
diligently consider the contents of the Book. If you enquire into the
motives of men, you will find many who are induced to give their minds
to the study of Alchemy, only by the desire of gain and riches; and such
men are found even among Cardinals of highest rank, Archbishops, and
Bishops of lofty order, Abbots and religious Priors, also among hermits,
monks, and common priests, and among Kings, princes, and lords of high
degree.

For men of all classes desire to partake of our good things: merchants,
and those who exercise their craft in the forge, are led captive by a
longing to know this Art; nor are common mechanics content to be
excluded from a share in it: they love the Art as dearly as great lords.
The goldsmiths are consumed

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

with the desire of knowing—though them we may excuse since they have
daily before their eyes that which they long to possess. But we may
wonder that weavers, freemasons, tailors, cobblers, and needy priests
join in the general search after the Philosopher's Stone, and that even
painters and glaziers cannot restrain themselves from it. Nay, tinkers
presumptuously aspire to exalt themselves by its means, though they
should be content with the colour with which glass is stained. Many of
these workmen, however, have been deceived by giving credulous heed to
impostors, who helped them to convert their gold into smoke, and though
they are grieved and disappointed at the loss, they yet buoy themselves
up with sanguine thoughts, and hope that they will after all reach the
goal; alas, too many have I known, who, after amusing themselves with
delusive hopes through a long life, have at last died in squalid
poverty! For them it would have been better if they had stayed their
hands at once, seeing that they met with nothing but disappointment and
vexation of spirit. For, surely, he who is not very learned will do well
to think twice before he meddles with this Art. Believe me, it is by no
means a light matter to know all the secrets connected with the science.
Nay, it is a profound philosophy, a subtle science, a sacred alchemy.
Concerning which I here intend to write in a style manly, but not
curious. For he who desires to instruct the common people should speak
to them in a language they understand. But though I must express myself
in a plain and unassuming style, no candid reader should therefore
contemn me. For all that before me have written on this matter have
rendered their books obscure and unintelligible by an exaggerated use of
poetical imagery, parables, and metaphors which grievously obstruct the
path of those who first enter on this field of knowledge. This is the
reason that a beginner, who strives to put their precepts into practice,
only loses his trouble and his money, as is daily seen. Hermes, Rhasis,
Geber, Avicenna, Merlin, Hortulanus, Democritus, Morienus, Bacon,
Raymond, Aristotle, and many others, have concealed their meaning under
a veil of obscurity. Hence their books, which they have handed down to
us, have been a source of endless error and delusion to the vulgar and
the learned, and, in spite of the beautiful conceits which abound in
their writings, no one has been able to find a path

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

through the wilderness of their words; yea, many have been reduced to
despair. Anaxagoras indeed acquitted himself better than the rest, in
his book "Concerning Natural Changes." Of all the ancient Sages whose
writings I have read, he lays open most plainly the foundation of our
knowledge. For this very reason Aristotle is wroth against him, and
attacks him most virulently in many passages, as I can shew, his purpose
being to keep men from following him. For he (Anaxagoras) was full of
wisdom and love: may God above reward him for his goodness, and pardon
the evil deeds of those who sow the seeds of enmity and hatred. To the
latter class belonged that monk who set forth a pretentious book of A
Thousand Receipts, from malice and the love of mischief—which was copied
in many places, and deceived and deluded numerous enquirers, and reduced
them to beggary; moreover, he represented true and approved men as
forgers and impostors. For this reason I am impelled by pity to set
forth the truth in a few simple words, in order to warn you against
false and deceitful teaching, if, indeed, you will pay attention to me
and to my words. Throw away your volumes of "Recipes," for they are full
of falsehood and fraud. Do not believe them, but give diligent heed to
the maxim, that nothing is wrought without its own proper cause. This is
the mistake into which those self-styled "Practical Sages" fall. They do
not place knowledge on a firm foundation by enquiring into the cause of
things. You should therefore constantly bear this momentous rule in
mind: never to set about an experiment until you fully comprehend the
why and the how. He who would make good progress in this Art should also
diligently eschew all falsehood. For God is Truth, and it is He who
shews this Art to men: therefore keep yourself above all things
unspotted from the slightest taint of falsehood. Let it be fixed in your
mind as an abiding principle, under no circumstances to procure for
yourselves "adulterated" metals, like those who seek to accomplish
albifications and citrinations, which cannot abide a searching test, and
by which they produce false silver and false coin for the purpose of
duping the credulous. But God has provided that no one should succeed in
attaining to this Blessed Art, who loves that which is false rather than
that which is true. If any man would obtain grace of God to discover the
secrets of

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

this Art, he should be a lover of justice and truth; nor let him be too
eager in his own mind to follow this Art on account of its outward
advantages. He who would enjoy the fruit of his labour, should be
satisfied with such wealth as is sufficient. Let him not waste time and
trouble on divers methods of procedure, but let him follow the
directions of this Book, which is called the "Ordinal of Alchemy," the
*Crede-mihi*, an everlasting standard. For as the Ordinal instructs the
presbyters concerning the ministry of the days which they must observe,
so all the true and useful teaching of ill-digested books on Alchemy is
here set forth in proper order. Wherefore, this Book is of inestimable
value for the acquisition of the precious science, nor can its truth
ever be denied, though it be composed in an unassuming style. As I have
received this Art by Divine Grace, so I set it forth to you in seven
chapters as fully as my fealty will permit. For I remember what is said
about the judgment of God at the last day.

The first chapter will shew what persons from among the common people
can attain to this knowledge, and why the science of Alchemy was by the
Ancients called blessed and sacred.

In the second chapter will be set forth the wise joy and the long
labours of those who follow this Art.

The third chapter will, for the sake of my fellow-men, contain a
faithful description of the substance of that Stone which the Arabians
call the Elixir. There you will learn whence it is obtained.

The fourth chapter will treat of the gross part of the work, which is
foul and little suited to delicate persons.

The fifth chapter is concerned with the subtle part of the process which
God has ordained for the learned only, but which few of the learned ever
comprehend; so that the secret is really possessed by very few.

The sixth chapter deals with the question of proportion, and with the
agreement of this world below with the sphere of heaven above, of which
a right understanding greatly helps many learners, and proves of great
assistance to them in our wonderful Art.

The seventh chapter will truly set forth to you the principles in
accordance with which your fire should be regulated.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Now, O Lord, do Thou guide and assist me, for I desire to gird myself to
my task! Everyone that shall happen to read this Book, I implore to
offer up prayers for my soul, and not to alter that which I have
written, for the better or for the worse, on the pain of my most
grevious anathema. For where the sense is obscure this is for the
purpose of secrecy; but if a single syllable be altered in a critical
passage, it may destroy the value of the whole book. Therefore, see that
which I have written be preserved intact, for though the language be
humble, yet it conveys truths of most momentous importance, and it
should be read not once or twice, but twenty times. Your best plan will
be to read many books on Alchemy, and this one last of all.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span id="img_00900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/00900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00900.jpg)</span>

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### THOMAS NORTON'S

### CHEMICAL TREATISE.

#### CHAPTER I.

A MOST wonderful Magistery and Archimagistery is the Tincture of sacred
Alchemy, the marvellous science of the secret Philosophy, the singular
gift bestowed upon men through the grace of Almighty God—which men have
never discovered by the labour of their hands, but only by revelation,
and the teaching of others. It was never bought or sold for a price to
any of those who sought after it; but it' has always been granted
through the grace of God alone to worthy men, and perfected by long
labour and the lapse of time. It was given to relieve the estate of man;
it puts an end to vainglory, hope, and fear, and removes ambition,
violence, and excess. It mitigates adversity, and saves men from being
overwhelmed by it. Whoever has perfect knowledge of it, eschews
extremes, and is content with the middle way. Some disdain to call this
Art sacred, because they say that Paynims sometimes acquire a knowledge
of it, though God cannot be desirous of conferring any good thing upon
them, seeing that their wilful and stubborn unbelief renders them
incapable of possessing that which is the cause of all good. Moreover,
it is affirmed that our Art produces nothing but gold and silver, which
are coined into money, or fashioned into cups and rings, but are
approved and accounted by wise men the least valuable and precious of
all things which are upon the earth; and hence men of this school
conclude that this science, if judged by its effects, cannot claim to be
regarded as sacred.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

To this objection, we answer what we know to be true, that the science
of this Art has never been fully revealed to anyone who has not approved
himself worthy by a good and noble life, and who has not shewn himself
to be deserving of this gracious gift by his love of truth, virtue, and
knowledge. From those who are otherwise minded this knowledge must ever
remain concealed.

Nor can anyone attain to this Art, unless there be some person sent by
God to instruct him in it. For the matter is so glorious and wonderful
that it cannot be fully delivered to any one but by word of mouth.
Moreover, if any man would receive it, he must take a great and sacred
oath, that as we his teachers refuse high rank and fame, so he will not
be too eager for these frivolous distinctions, and that he will not be
so presumptuous as to make the secret known to his own son; for
propinquity of blood, or affinity, should be held of no account in this
our Magistery. Nearness of blood, as such, does not entitle anyone to be
let into the secret, but only virtue, whether in those near to us or in
strangers. Therefore you should carefully test and examine the life,
character, and mental aptitude of any person who would be initiated in
this Art, and then you should bind him, by a sacred oath, not to let our
Magistery be commonly or vulgarly known. Only when he begins to grow old
and feeble, he may reveal it to one person, but not to more—and that one
man must be virtuous, and generally approved by his fellows. For this
Magistery must always remain a secret science, and the reason that
compels us to be so careful is obvious. If any wicked man should learn
to practise this Art, the event would be fraught with great danger to
Christendom. For such a man would overstep all bounds of moderation, and
would remove from their hereditary thrones those legitimate princes who
rule over the peoples of Christendom. And the punishment of this
wickedness would fall upon him who had instructed that unworthy person
in our Art. In order, then, to avoid such an outbreak of overweening
pride, he who possesses the knowledge of this Art, should be
scrupulously careful how he delivers it to another, and should regard it
as the peculiar privilege of those who excel in virtue.

But even if this Art could, on account of its effects, be

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

justly denied a claim to sanctity, it would still be sacred on account
of its nature and essence. For as, on the one hand, no one can discover
it except by the grace of God, so it is also holy, because it is a
divine labour and work to change vile copper into the finest silver and
gold. For no one could discover a method of producing such effects by
his own thought, seeing that the substances are divers, and man cannot
separate that which God has joined together. Nor could the course of
Nature be quickened, unless God Himself had granted the aid of this
mighty science to those whom He loves. Therefore, the ancient Sages have
well called Alchemy a sacred science; and no one should be so
presumptuous as to cast away the blessed gift of God. For let us only
consider that God has hidden this knowledge from great and learned
doctors, and out of His mercy has revealed it to men of low degree, who
are faithful lovers of truth, and lowly of heart; and as there are only
seven planets among the vast multitude of the stars of heaven, so
amongst millions of millions of men hardly seven attain to this
knowledge. As we watch men's lives, we see and learn that many scholars
of profound erudition, with countless other enquirers, have striven to
acquire our science, and yet that all their labour has produced as a net
result—nothing. Though they have spent all their substance in the
search, it has nevertheless turned out a failure. They have again and
again missed the mark at which they aimed; and at last they have given
up the quest in despair, and have arrived at the bitter conclusion that
the Art is nothing but rank fiction and imposture. As the outcome of
their fruitless enquiries they have begun to denounce our Magistery for
a vain and empty thing. Let me tell such men that they take too much
upon themselves in thinking that that must be nought which their wisdom
is not sufficient to compass. But we are not greatly troubled by their
calumnies and injurious words; for those who are wise in their own
conceits, while in reality they understand nothing, are not the guests
for whom our feast is prepared. Though these men cannot understand our
Magistery, yet, for all that, it must remain true; and though its truth
be denied by some who are lifted up by the vain pride of empty wisdom,
all wise men will admit that those who have confessedly never looked
upon a thing cannot be allowed

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

to give an authoritative opinion about it. It would be foolish indeed to
attach any value to a blind man's opinion about a painting; and though
these men are so proud of their profundity and wisdom, I very much doubt
whether they could build the tower of St. Paul's (London), or remove it
from its foundations. But it is more difficult still to believe that
they are keen enough to penetrate the most profound secret which this
world contains. Well, now, we will say no more about them, but deliver
them over to the wretchedness of their own ignorance.

Now, you who seek this wisdom, learn to distinguish the false from the
true. All true enquirers into the Art of Alchemy should be well versed
in the primary philosophy. Otherwise all their labour will be vain. The
true seeker undertakes the search on his own account; for while he
eagerly hopes to find our Delectable Stone, he does not wish to see
others involved in any loss he may incur. He therefore conducts all the
experiments at his own cost, nor does he grudge the expense which their
labour requires. He consumes his substance and empties his coffers, and
advances step by step with great patience, basing his hope on God's
assistance alone. Impostors, on the other hand, wander in ragged gown
from city to city, and set traps for the unwary whom they may dupe with
their pretended knowledge, and outwit by vain talk and perjury. They,
say that they can augment silver, and affirm with a false oath that they
can multiply both gold and silver, and thus they ingratiate themselves
with the covetous, producing the excellent conjunction of Fraud and
Avarice. But in no long time the multiplier of gold is found to have
deceived his credulous victim with his magnificent promises and his
perjured assertions—and -the covetous man is reduced to beggary. This
must be the result if one is not from the very first on his guard
against the deceitful language of the multiplier. Of these persons I
might speak at great length, but am afraid of encouraging men who are of
themselves disposed to evil. I fear that by saying any more I might
possibly do as much harm as good, and therefore I will only add one word
to the wise: If these persons really possessed the knowledge to which
they pretend, they would take good care not to make it known to others,
nor would they have any need to go about boasting of their knowledge,
and cheating the credulous out of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

their money. If these impostors were punished according to their deserts
in all places where they drive their fraudulent trade, there would not
be so many of them. Now these fellows put forward lying assertions about
Nature when they speak of the multiplication of metals. For of this one
thing you may rest assured: Metals are never multiplied. Such a thing
would be contrary to Nature's methods. Nature never multiplies anything,
except in either one or the other of these two ways: either by decay,
which we call putrefaction, or in the case of animate creatures, by
propagation. In the case of metals, there can be no propagation, though
our Stone exhibits something like it. Putrefaction destroys and
corrupts, but in order to be fruitful, it must go forward in some
convenient place. Metals are generated in the earth; for above ground
they are subject to rust: hence above ground is the place of the
corruption of metals and of their gradual destruction. The cause which
we assign for this fact is that above ground they are not in their
proper element, and an unnatural position is destructive to natural
objects, as we see, for instance, that fishes die when they are taken
out of the water; and as it is natural for men, beasts, and birds to
live in the air, so stones and metals are naturally generated under the
earth. Physicians and apothecaries do not look for aquatic flowers on
arid hills. God in His wisdom has ordained that everything should grow
in its own proper place. I know that some deny this principle, and
assert that metals are multiplied. For, they say, the veins of silver,
lead, tin, and iron which we find in the earth, are sometimes rich and
sometimes poor; and such diversity would be totally inexplicable if the
metals did not multiply or grow. This fact then is thought to prove that
metals grow underground—and if they grow underground, why, it is asked,
should they not grow above ground, in a vessel which protects them from
the influences of fire, water, and air? Our answer to this argument is
that it proves nothing, because the conditions are not the same in the
two cases. For the only efficient cause of metals is the mineral virtue,
which is not found in every kind of earth, but only in certain places
and chosen mines, into which the celestial sphere pours its rays in a
straight direction year by year, and according to the arrangement of the
metallic substance in these

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

places, this or that metal is gradually formed. Only few parts of the
earth are suitable for such generation—how, then, can they be multiplied
above the earth? Every person of average intelligence knows that in the
case of congealed water, or ice, the water, before it becomes hardened,
is more plentiful in some places than in others. Before its congelation,
it exists in small quantities in brooks and ditches, while more
considerable veins of it are found in lakes and rivers. Afterwards,
large quantities of ice are seen where there was much water; but it
would manifestly be absurd to say that the ice must have grown or
multiplied in the lakes and rivers, because they contain greater masses
of it than ditches or brooks. In the same way, the metals do not
necessarily grow in the mountains, because in some places they exist in
larger quantities than in others. A certain portion of any metal can
never be increased in quantity by the action of an inherent principle;
and herein minerals differ from vegetables and animals. A vegetable
seed, such as an acorn, virtually contains within itself the trunk and
the leaves of a tree, though they cannot at a given moment be discerned
with the eye. But metals always remain exactly the same in their
composition, though they be dissolved with strong waters. An ounce of
silver can never become more or less than an, ounce of silver. For
nothing can be multiplied by inward action unless it belong to the
vegetable kingdom, or the family of sensitive creatures. But the metals
are elementary objects, and possess neither seed nor sensation. Hence we
conclude that all multipliers of metals should be forbidden to exercise
their fraudulent trade. For when a metal has once been generated, it is
never added to by growth. Nevertheless, we have known one metal to be
transmuted into another of a different kind by means of the cognate
nature of their substances; so, for instance, iron has been changed into
bronze. But nothing can produce real silver or gold except the Medicine
of the Philosophers. Hence the falsehoods affected by the multipliers
are eschewed and shunned by all true Sages. But all honour and reverence
is due to the genuine Art of sacred Alchemy, which is concerned with the
precious Medicine that has virtue to produce pure gold and silver. Of
this an example exists in a certain city of Catalonia, which Raymond
Lullius is supposed to have drawn up. It consists of a series of seven
images, and is designed to

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

shadow out the way of truth. Three of these pictures represent matronly
figures of solid silver, and four of them represent men .of gold in
flowing garb. On the hems of their garments appear certain letters, the
meaning of which I will proceed to expound.

"I was once an old iron horse-shoe"—such is the inscription on the
garment of one woman—"but now I am the purest silver." "I," says another
woman, "was iron smelted from the ore, but now I am become pure and
solid gold." "I," says a third, "was once a battered piece of copper:
now I am all silver." The fourth figure says: "I was once copper,
generated in a vile place, but at the bidding of God I have now become
perfect gold." "I," says the fifth figure, "who was once fine and pure
silver, am now more excellent gold." The sixth figure proclaims that it
was during 200 years a leaden pipe, but is now known by all for honest
silver. The seventh says: "A wondrous thing has happened to me—I have
become lead out of gold. But certainly my sisters are nearer than I."

This science derives its name from a certain King Alchymus of
illustrious memory, who, being a generous and noble-hearted prince,
first set himself to study this Art. He ceased not to question Nature by
day and by night, and at last extorted from her a blessed answer. King
Hermes also did a like thing, being deeply versed in every kind of
learning. His "Quadripartite" deals with the four great branches of
natural science: astrology, medicine, alchemy, and natural magic; and
therein he expresses himself as follows: "Blessed is the man who knows
things truly as they are, and blessed is the man who duly proves that
which appertains to knowledge." It was his opinion that many are
deceived in thinking that they understand that of which they do not know
the cause. It is an old proverb that in a bushel of imagination there is
often not even a grain of true knowledge. It is also true that by the
habit of proving everything, and by wise discernment, learned men are
even now adding to their stock of information. By knowledge men
understand themselves and all things; without knowledge men are beasts,
and worse than beasts. Lack of knowledge renders men fierce and wild,
but instruction makes them mild and gentle. It is now the custom for
nobles to despise those who desire to understand the secrets of Nature;
but in olden times even Kings ordained that no one

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

should be instructed in the seven liberal sciences except those who were
nobly born, and brilliantly endowed, and that he who had once devoted
himself to knowledge should be bound to spend his life in its pursuit.
Hence the Ancients called these sciences the seven liberal sciences,
because those who wished to become perfect adepts in them should delight
in them in a spirit of liberty. Freedom from all mundane cares is
necessary for him who would apply himself thoroughly to the study of
human law, and he who wishes to become a ripe scholar in many sciences,
has much more solid reasons for turning his back on the world's toils
and pleasures. This fact sufficiently shews the ground on which learned
men are despised. Yet the glorious memory of the man who increases day
by day in the knowledge of truth, can never perish. The man who loves
wisdom, justice, and grace, may be rejected in many places, but time
will circle his brow with a crown of gold. In the meantime, we must
expect that those who love knowledge for its own sake shall be scorned
by the ignorant multitude. Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that
though many devote themselves to this study for the sake of mere gain,
yet avarice and science are incompatible yoke-fellows; he whose
affections are set on mere lucre, will never discover the secrets of
this Art. But he who delights in knowledge for its own sake approaches
the study of our Art in the right spirit, and such a man is bound to
succeed. There is no need to lengthen out this chapter any further,
since we have already set forth who they are that may, with reasonable
hope of success, apply themselves to the study of sacred Alchemy. Let me
repeat that any such person should be a faithful Christian, and a man
who is not easily moved from his purpose. He should be free from
ambition, free from the necessity of borrowing from others, full of
patience and endurance, and of unwavering confidence in God. He should
be prepared to follow knowledge through good and evil report. His life
should be free from guilt, falsehood, and sin. Such men alone possess
mental aptitude for becoming proficients in this science. The next
chapter deals with joy and sorrow.

#### CHAPTER II.

In Normandy there once lived a monk, who deceived many persons of
different ranks in life. When his mind had become

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

filled with the vain conceit that he had a perfect knowledge of this
Art, he gave himself up to such violent joy that he almost went out of
his senses. Whose preposterous zeal I will attempt to excuse by adding
the following brief narrative for the sake of illustration:—

This monk had led a vagrant life in France, in forgetfulness of his vow,
and in the indulgence of his low desires. At last he came to this
kingdom, and attempted to persuade all men that he had a perfect
understanding of the Art of Alchemy, which he said he had obtained from
a certain "Book of Recipes." He was desirous of achieving a mighty deed,
which should hand down the glory of his name to posterity, and for ever
establish his reputation in this island. He was always thinking how he
should spend the vast wealth which (he thought) he would soon be able to
procure. At last he said to himself: "Behold, I know where I shall find
a faithful man, who can aid me in this matter, and help me to the
fulfilment of my wish: which is, to erect in a glorious manner on
Salisbury Plain, fifteen magnificent Abbeys in a short space of time,
and each within a mile of the other." In pursuance of this design, the
monk came to me, and laid open his whole plan, at the same time
requesting me to assist him with my counsel. I have promised before the
shrine of Saint James not to divulge his name; but yet I may without
prejudice to my vow speak about his foolish undertaking. After telling
me of his proficiency in this glorious Art, he said that he wanted
nothing but an opportunity of labouring for the King's good, and
permission from the Council to buy land for the aforesaid Abbeys. As to
the expense, he said it would he easy for him to make it good. But he
was in great doubt, where, from whom, and how he was to purchase the
land. After listening to the exposition of hip lofty design, I desired
to test his learning and his knowledge of scholastic science; and I
found that in these branches of attainment he was sadly to seek. Yet I
contained myself, and kept my own counsel, in order that I might learn
more about his designs. So I told him that the matter was not of
sufficient importance to be laid before the King, for everyone would
look upon the same as an idle tale, if no proof of his pretensions was
forthcoming. The monk answered that he had in the fire a substance which
would supply

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

him with all that he needed, and that within forty days he could
triumphantly demonstrate to me the truth of his words. I replied that I
would not now press him any further, but that I would wait the allotted
time. But when the date which he had fixed arrived, the monk's science
evaporated, and all his Abbeys and lofty designs vanished into thin air;
as the impostor had come, so he departed, not without great shame and
confusion. But shortly afterwards I heard that he had deceived many
kind-hearted people, and had then again returned to France. It seemed a
great pity that fifteen abbeys, seats of religion, sanctity, and
learning, should so unceremoniously have vanished with him! It was also
wonderful that such a man could have deluded himself into the belief
that he could erect fifteen abbeys, while he himself could not live true
to his vow of obedience, and must needs wander about as an apostate
vagabond, for the purpose of obtaining a knowledge of this sacred Art.
But I have already repeatedly said that just because it is sacred, no
false or deceitful person can attain to it. In order to illustrate my
meaning, I will now add another example. There was a man who thought
that he was as deeply versed in this Art as Raymond Lullius or Friar
Bacon, for which reason he was so presumptuous as to call himself
peerless. He was the priest of a small town, not far from the city of
London, and was thought by others to have little skill in preaching.
This man felt sure that he had discovered the secret of our Art, and so,
in order to advance his fame, he formed the design of throwing a bridge
over the Thames for the benefit of travellers, and for the convenience
of the whole neighbourhood. But nothing would serve him but he must set
up a grand and lofty structure which should compel the admiration of all
beholders. It was to have towers covered with flaming gold, and its
pillars were to be such as had never been seen before. He frequently
spoke of the new thing which he was going to accomplish, for his bridge
was to be seen far and wide by night, and was to endure for ever; its
glory was never to grow dim. Then he revolved different plans in his
mind concerning the best manner of carrying out his design. At first he
thought that flaming torches would answer his purpose, and elaborated a
plan of setting them up in sufficient numbers. But soon he was seized
with a fear that after his

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

death the trustees of his benefaction might neglect the torches, and
apply the money allotted to that purpose in some other way, Thus he at
length arrived at the conclusion that it would be best to light up his
bridge by night with great flaming gems and carbuncles, such as should
be visible far and wide, and radiate their splendour in all directions.
But here again he was troubled with new misgivings, where such
carbuncles could be found, and where he should meet with wise and
reliable men, who would travel through all the countries of the world,
and procure for him a sufficient number of these jewels. These thoughts
caused him so much anxiety, that he wasted away to a mere shadow. All
this time, of course, he was firmly persuaded that he had found the true
secret of our Art. But when the year came to an end, his Art and all his
substance vanished with it; for he had opened his glass vessel and found
that it contained neither gold nor silver. Then he flew into a great
passion, and cursed himself in the bitterness of his heart. For he had
spent all his wealth, and passed the rest of his life in poverty. What
more shall I say about him? His case speaks for itself.

When learned scholars and those who frequent the schools hear of the
melancholy fate of these foolish persons, they ought to take warning,
and remember that the same things may happen to themselves, if they are
not constantly on their guard. For many of them are but too ready
lightly to receive all conclusions, however false, if they only find
them boldly asserted in books. This easy and unquestioning confidence
may bring in its train poverty and vexation of spirit. The hope afforded
by such teaching is an empty delight and a veritable fools’ paradise,
But the true sons of our Art stay their hope on God alone, since they
know that without Him everything is a delusion and a failure, for they
know that a man who has not the Beginning of all Knowledge cannot
conduct his enquiry to a successful end. No man, O God, can comprehend
without Thee, and though the exposition of the Art be uttered in his
ears, without Thee it is but idle breath to him! Of Thee, O God, comes
all blessed and successful effort! Thou art of all good things both the
beginning and the end. Now I have told you something of the joy which is
caused by the vain hopes of foolish enquirers; hear now also about the
sorrow, of which this Art has been

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

a source to many whose hopes have been grievously disappointed.

The first cause of sorrow is to see and realize that among the many who
seek this Art only few ever find it, and that no one can attain this
knowledge unless he be taught before he begins; and he is truly learned,
and finely endowed, who can apprehend it by the teaching of another. The
subtle shades of natural differences must be well known to the man who
desires to be initiated in the most profound secret of the universe; and
no form of words can be so accurate as to safeguard the learner against
error. For many who have now departed this life have gone widely astray
before they finally succeeded in their search after our Stone. Either at
the very outset, or at a later stage of the work, all are liable to
error, until they are enlightened by the teaching of experience, and hit
upon the proper regulation of heat and cold. Nobody is more liable to
error in respect to this matter than your bold and overconfident
enquirer. Nobody sooner mars our work, than he who is in too great a
hurry to complete it. The man who would bring this matter to perfection,
should set about it cautiously and heedfully. The most grievous
circumstance connected with our Art, is that it you make a mistake in
any part of it, you have to do it all over again from the very
beginning. Anyone who gives himself up to this search must therefore
expect to meet with much vexation of spirit. He will frequently have to
change his course in consequence of new discoveries which he makes. His
experiments will often turn out failures, his mind will often be in a
state of doubt and perplexity; and thus he will continue to be vexed by
conflicting results, until at length he reaches the goal of his desire.
Again, let me tell you a little more about the sorrows and troubles of
the Alchemist, which may considerably moderate your desire to acquire
the practice of this Art. At first it is most difficult, as the Sages
say, to find out among so many impostors, the man who has a perfect
understanding of our science. And when you have found a truly learned
master, you have not yet by any means left all your trouble far behind
you. If your mind is devoted to virtue, the Devil will do his utmost to
frustrate your search by one or the other of three stumbling blocks,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

namely, haste, despair, or deception. For he is afraid of the good works
which you may do if you succeed in mastering this secret. The first
danger lies in undue haste, which destroys and mars the work of many.
All authors who have written about this Art, agree in saying, like the
author of the little book of "The Philosopher's Feast," that undue haste
is of the Devil. Hence he will the soonest make an end who tarries a
little at the beginning; and those who act otherwise will discover to
their cost the truth of the proverb which says that: "The greater haste
we make, the less will be our speed." For he who is in a hurry will
complete his work neither in a month, nor yet in a year; and in this Art
it will always be true that the man who is in a hurry will never be
without matter of complaint. Rest assured also that haste will
precipitate you from the pinnacle of truth. It is the Devil's subtlest
device to ensnare us; for this haste is an *ignis-fatuus* by which he
causes us to wander from the right path. The man who has found grace
stoutly sets his face against hurry; he does so as a matter of habit,
for in a moment of time haste may mar your whole work. Therefore be on
your guard against hurry, accounting it as a device of the Devil. Time
will not allow me to caution you with sufficient vehemence of feeling
against habits of hurried work. Many pierce themselves through with
sharp sorrows, because they are always in a hurry, and full of
impatience to reach the goal, which comes about through the temptation
of Satan. I will say no more about hurry, but blessed is he who
possesses patience. If the enemy does not prevail against you by hurry,
he will assault you with despondency, and will be constantly putting
into your minds discouraging thoughts, how those who seek this Art are
many, while they are few that find it, and how those who fail are often
wiser men than yourself. He will then ask you what hope there can be of
your attaining the grand arcanum; moreover, he will vex you with doubts,
whether your master is himself possessed of the secret which he
professes to impart to you; or whether he is not concealing from you the
best part of that which he knows. The Evil One will endeavour to fill
your mind with these doubts, in order to turn you from your purpose by
diffidence and despondency. Nor will anything avail against his
assaults, except the calm confidence inspired

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

by virtue, and the sound conclusions of reason. Your fears will be
scattered to the winds if you quietly consider the high character of
your master and teacher; nor need you despair if you can call to mind
that he was induced to instruct you by love, and by no selfish motive.
It is difficult indeed to trust a man who offers you his services; for
such a person stands more in need of you than you of him. But if your
master be such a man as I have directed you to seek, and if he has
waited for you to come to him, you ought to be strongly armed against
the shafts of distrust. If your master be at all such a man as mine was,
you can have no excuse for doubting him, for mine was noble and true, a
lover of justice, and an enemy to deceit. Moreover, he was a good keeper
of his secret, and when others ostentatiously displayed their knowledge,
he held his peace as if he knew nothing. When others talked in his
presence about the colours of the rose, he would listen in grave and
impenetrable silence. Him I attended during many years; but he would not
impart to me anything of moment, until he had made me submit to many
tests for the purpose of proving my disposition; and when he had found
me faithful and true, and had seen the great hope which I had conceived
in my mind, I obtained favour in his eyes through the will of God, and
his heart inclined to me. When at length he thought that I should not be
put off any longer—since my scholarly attainments and the generous
aspiration of my soul had moved his heart, and made it go out to me—he
took up his pen, and wrote to the as follows: "My faithful friend and
beloved brother, I am constrained to accede to your request, as no other
person like you will ever come to me. The time has arrived for you to
receive this favour of me on account of your manly character and firm
faith, your approved virtue and wisdom, your truthfulness, love, and
perseverance, your constancy, and the generous aspiration of your soul.
This your excellent mental condition I will now reward, to your lasting
solace and comfort, by divulging to you the mighty secret. For this
purpose it is necessary to converse with you by word of mouth; if I laid
open to you the secret in writing, I should be violating my oath. Hence
it is necessary that we should meet; and when you come, I will make you
the heir of my Art, and depart from

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

this land. You shall be my brother and my heir in respect of this grand
secret, which is the despair of the learned. For this reason give thanks
to God for this message: it is better than to become heir-apparent to a
crown. For only those whom God has chosen next to His own heavenly
saints, ever receive this Art by which He is so highly honoured. I will
write no more to you at the present time: mount on horseback, and come
to me without delay." When I had perused these lines, I set out at the
very same hour, and at once hastened to my master, though the distance
exceeded a hundred miles. I continued with him forty days, and learned
all the secrets of Alchemy (although before I had understood philosophy
as well as any other person in the kingdom). Yet it would be foolish to
suppose that the work itself can be completed within forty days: I say
that I was fully instructed within that time, but the work itself
requires a longer period. Then all that had been dark became as clear as
the light, when I beheld the secret gates of Nature unbarred; I saw so
plainly the causes and the rationale of everything, that it was no
longer possible for me to doubt or despair. If you are as fortunate in
your master as I, you will never be assailed by despondency.

The third enemy against whom you must guard is deceit, and this one is
perhaps more dangerous than the other two. The servants whom you must
employ to feed your furnaces are frequently most untrustworthy. Some are
careless, and go to sleep when they should be attending to the fire;
others are depraved, and do you all the harm they can; others, again,
are either stupid or conceited and over-confident, and disobey
instructions; some have fingers retentive of other people's property, or
they are drunken, negligent, and absent-minded. Be on your guard against
all these, if you wish to be spared some great loss. If servants are
faithful, they are generally stupid; those who are quick-witted, are
generally also false; and it is difficult to say whether the deceitful
or the stupid are the greater evil of the two. For when I had all my
experiments in proper train, some thievish servants ran away with my
materials and utensils, and left me nothing but the empty laboratory;
and when I calculated the cost, time, and labour of beginning the work
all over again, I had almost in the bitterness of my heart resolved to
bid an

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

everlasting farewell to this Art of Alchemy. For it will hardly be
believed how completely I had been stripped of all that I possessed,
although ten trustworthy persons still survive to attest the fact.
Indeed the blow was so great that it could hardly have been inflicted on
me by human agency alone, without the instigation and co-operation of
the Devil. I also made an Elixir of Life, of which a merchant's wife
bereft me, and I procured a quintessence, with many other precious
preparations, but of all these things I was robbed by wicked men, and
thus found, to my smart, that in the sweetest cup of this world's joy,
there is a liberal infusion of bitterness. Let me tell you a little more
of what has fallen under my observation, concerning the perplexities of
this work. The calamity of which I am thinking happened to a good and
godly man; and I am the only person that can give a true account of it.

Thomas Dalton, a devout and religious servant of God, possessed a larger
quantity of the Red Medicine than has ever been obtained by any other
Englishman. Now a certain knight of King Edward's household, named
Thomas Herbert, dragged this Dalton forth by violence from an abbey in
Gloucestershire, and brought him before the King, where he was
confronted with Delvis. For Dalton had been scribe (secretary) to this
William Delvis, and Delvis had told the King about Dalton's skill in
this Art. Delvis was a faithful servant, who always stood in the
presence of King Edward, and he deposed that within an hour Dalton had
made for himself one thousand pounds sterling of gold, fully equal to
that of the royal coin: and he confirmed his testimony by a most sacred
oath upon the Bible. Then Dalton looked full upon Delvis, and said: "O
Delvis, thou hast perjured thyself! Thou hast foully broken the pledge
thou gayest me, and hast betrayed me even as Judas betrayed his Master."
"I did, indeed," rejoined Delvis, "once swear to thee that I would not
betray thy secret; yet I do not consider myself as guilty of perjury,
since the service of my King and country release me from my oath." Then
Dalton soberly answered him thus: "This subterfuge does not excuse thy
perjury; for if it did, how could the King himself trust thee, who hast
confessed thy perjury in his presence? And," he continued, turning to
His Majesty, "I do admit that I possessed this Medicine for a long

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

time; but at length it was only a source of grief and anxiety to me—and
therefore after retiring to that abbey from which I was brought hither,
I threw it into a tidal river which is daily renewed by the ebb and flow
of the sea. Thus as much wealth has been lost as would have sufficed for
the outfit and support of twenty thousand knights, who might have been
willing to go forth and recover the Holy Sepulchre. For the love of God,
I kept this Medicine many years, in order that through its means I might
succour a King who should undertake this expedition. But as this sacred
duty was forgotten, the Medicine is now irrecoverably lost." The King
replied that it was a foolish act to destroy so wonderful a treasure,
and demanded that Dalton should prepare some more of the Medicine. "No,"
said Dalton, "that can never be." "Why not?" enquired the King. "How did
you obtain it?" Dalton replied that he had received it from a learned
Canon of Lichfield, whose works he had diligently attended to during
many years, until at length the Canon had bequeathed to him as much of
the Medicine as he had ever possessed. Then the King gave Dalton four
marks, with liberty to depart withersoever he desired; and, at parting,
he expressed his grief and concern that he had not known Dalton before.
But as it oftens happens that the worst tyrants are found in the
retinues of kings, so Herbert now caused Dalton to be seized, robbed of
the money which the King had given him, and carried off to Stepney,
where he detained him a long time. Thence Dalton was conveyed by Herbert
to a castle in Gloucestershire, cast into the dungeon thereof, and kept
close prisoner for four years, during which period he was tormented by
Herbert in every conceivable manner. At length he was led forth to
execution, and when he saw the ministers of death, he said: "O blessed
Lord Jesus, I have been separated from Thee too long: Thou didst give me
this knowledge, and I have used it without overweening pride. I have not
been able to find a fit person to whom .I might have bequeathed my
wisdom. Therefore, dearest Lord, I now resign Thy gift into Thy own
hands." Then he poured forth a devout prayer, and thereupon turned to
the executioner and said, with a smile, "Now thou mayest work thy will."

When Herbert heard these words, his eyes filled with tears,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

because neither deceit, imprisonment, nor death could induce his victim
to yield up the precious secret; and he bade his servants let the old
man go, as his obstinacy was not to be overcome. Then Dalton arose,
looked about him with sadness and disappointment depicted in his
countenance, and departed with a heavy heart; for he had no desire to
live even another year. This injury happened to him through the greed
and cruelty of godless men. Herbert died not long after, and Delvis lost
his life at Tewkesbury. Such are the sufferings which they who aspire to
a knowledge of this Art, must lay their account with having to bear. Yet
we also see how the greed of wicked men over-reaches itself. For if
Herbert had treated Dalton with kindness and gentleness, instead of with
cruelty, insolence, and violence, much advantage might have been reaped
not, only by the King, but also by the entire commonwealth. Yet we need
not wonder that gracious means were not used, for sin reigns everywhere
in this kingdom. Otherwise, the people might have obtained great relief
from rates and taxes, and much money might have been bestowed in charity
among knights, priests, and the common people. Hence we may learn that
profligate violence is incapable of acquiring wisdom; for virtue and
vice are contrary the one to the other, and men abandoned to the one
cannot receive the reward of the other. If vicious persons could gain a
full knowledge of this Art, their overbearing insolence would grow
unendurable, and their ambition would overleap all bounds; they would by
its means become worse men than they were before. Now this chapter
respecting the delights and sufferings of our Art is finished. The next
will declare the Matter of our Stone.

#### CHAPTER III.

Tonsilus had been engaged in the momentous search during more than sixty
years. Bryan, too, and Halton, in the western parts, had been employed
day and night in practical experiments; yet they did not find this noble
science, because they did not know the Matter and root of the Art, but
sought it by a mistaken method, until they had wasted their lives and
goods. They were put to great expense, loss, and suffering, by the
recipes according to which they worked. Then Tonsil

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

complained to me with tears that he was in great bitterness of soul,
because he had spent the better part of his life on false receipts, vile
substances, herbs, gums, roots, and grasses, of which he enumerated many
species, as, for instance, crowfoot, celandine, mezerion, lunaria, and
mortagon—also upon hair, eggs vervein, excrements, and urine—upon
antimony, arsenic, honey, wax, and wine—on quicklime, vitriol,
marchasita, and all kinds of minerals—on amalgams, albifications, and
citrinations. All had been reduced to nothing by his operations; for he
had not well considered his purpose, and the due proportions of natural
truth. After he had failed with all these substances he thought nothing
could be better than to operate on human blood, until I told him that by
a fierce fire blood was destroyed, and converted into smoke. Then he
besought me by the love of Christ to declare to him the true substance
of the Stone. "Tonsil," I replied, "what good would it do an old man
like you? Renounce this pursuit and give yourself up to prayer; for that
is what your time of life requires. If you did know the substance of our
Stone, you would fall a victim to old age before you could prepare it."
But he bade me not to trouble myself about what might be the result to
himself. "It would be a comfort to me at least to know the substance of
the Stone which I have sought so long." "Tonsil," I said, "your request
is more easily made than granted. For all the authors who deal with this
subject write about it in obscure language, and not one of them declares
it plainly; nay, they beseech God to remove them suddenly out of this
world, if they ever write books about the grand secret. For many of them
have been fearful of committing to paper more than was right about this
science; and not one of them has given more than one or two plain hints
respecting it. They did not write with the object of divulging their
secret to the world, but in an obscurely allusive style, in order that
they might be able to recognize those who understood their meaning as
brothers and fellow adepts. Hence you must not be content with reading
only one book, but you should study a variety of authors; because,
according to the learned Arnold, one book opens up the understanding of
another. The same thought is expressed by the learned Anaxagoras, who
testifies that if a man will not take the trouble of reading many books,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

he can never attain to a practical knowledge of our Art. But though I
may not reveal to you for the sake of charity what has never yet been
plainly set forth by the brethren of our Art, I may at least give you
some comfort by answering as straightforwardly as I can, any questions
which you may like to put to me." "Good Master," he replied, "tell me
truly whether the substance be Sun (gold) and Mercury, or Sun and Moon
(silver), or whether these three must be taken together; or whether it
be Gold by itself, or Mercury by itself, or whether Sulphur with these
two be the substance of the Stone? Or, is salt of ammonia nearer the
truth, or is some other mineral the right thing to use in our Art?" The
questions you have put, Tonsil, are wisely and astutely conceived;
neverthelesss, you have not named the substance, except generically. For
you must take a part of these, and of other things at various times,
according to the requirements of the Art. Divers things are used in the
preparation of our Stone, but there are two materials, and only one
Stone. Between the two there is the same difference as that between a
mother and her offspring; or, looking at the matter from another point
of view, the difference resembles that which exists between male and
female. These two substances will furnish you with all that you need. As
for the white Tincture, if you are wise, one of these you shall find to
be a Stone, which is rightly named, because, like a stone, it is
indestructible by fire. Yet it is not like a stone to the touch or the
sight, but is a fine earthy powder, of a dull red. In its separate form
we call it our ground litharge; at first it is brown and ruddy, and then
of a whitish colour. It is called our chosen Marcasite, and one ounce of
it is worth more than fifty pounds. Yet is it not sold in the cities of
Christendom, but he who desires it, must either get it made by someone
else, or prepare it himself. There is this advantage concerning it, that
to make it once well dispenses with all need of repeating the task.
Ancient writers call it a thing of small price, because it is lightly
esteemed by the merchants, and no one that finds it cares to pick it up,
any more than if it were an ounce of dirt. Few will believe that it is a
pearl of great price, for it is known to none but the wise. Thus have I
laid bare to you a great secret, more plainly than any of the dead
masters. Then,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tonsilus, you must
also have another Stone, or else you want your principal material. This
Stone is most glorious, fair, and bright. It is sold as a stone, and
looks like a stone of singular transparency and brilliance. One ounce of
it may, in most places, be obtained for about twenty shillings. Its name
is Magnesia, but its real nature is known to few. It is found on the
tops of the highest mountains, and in the lowest depths of the earth
Plato knew its properties and called it by its name. Chaucer says, in
the Canon's Tale, that it is called Dytanos, thus defining an obscure
term in language still more hopelessly obscure; but it is impossible to
understand a thing if for one unintelligible term another still less
intelligible is substituted. Nevertheless, my Tonsilus, I will endeavour
to explain to you the meaning of Magnesia in our own tongue. *Magos* is
Greek, and is equivalent to the Latin *mirabile*; *aes* is money,
*ycos*, science; *A* is God; that is to say, it is a matter in which
much divine knowledge is involved. Now you know what Magnesia is—it is
*res aeris*, and in it lies hidden a wonderful and divine secret. These
two stones, my Tonsilus, you must take as your materials for the
preparation of the Elixir. Although at first no further materials are
needed, yet, as I have already hinted, divers other things are of great
use in our Art. The great secret was never before so plainly expounded.
But take my explanation in all its fulness; and I will pray God, lest my
excess of frankness be reckoned to me for a crime—for I fear that I have
suffered my pen to run riot. Though few may understand what I have said,
yet there are some students of this Art so subtle, cunning, and
keen-witted, that still fewer data would suffice to them for the
discovery of all that we know. Nevertheless, God shall provide that none
shall find it except the man of a pure and virtuous life. It was with
this end in view that the ancient writers concealed with so much
solicitude the matters of our Stone, which I have here declared. You
need no other substances but these two for the preparation of the white
Stone, except salt of ammonia, and that kind of sulphur which is
extracted from metals. These two substances suffice for the fulfilment
of your desire; none but these two finally abide the test of the fire.
Sulphur is burned, and loses its colour. Rut

our Litharge is indestructible. Do not set about with any

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

metal or quicksilver. If you destroy its whole composition, some of its
component parts will be of use to you. But the principal substances are
the two which I have mentioned, namely, Magnesia and Litharge, its
brother."

#### CHAPTER IV.

I will not attempt to escape from the task which I have undertaken to
expound the great work: I will instruct you as fully as possible in this
secret, and all my endeavour shall be to make known to you the truth. As
far as I may do so without prejudice to my vow, f will be your guide,
and shew you the way to the goal of your desire. If you consider into
what a state of obscurity and confusion the different parts of this work
have been wilfully thrown by the old writers, you will understand the
difficulty of my task. None of them has declared more than one point of
our experiment; and for this reason their writings, even if you
understand them, will not enable you to practise the Art yourself.
Arnold testifies in his books that the central secret of our Art is to
know the substance on which it is based; and in his work "Multifary,"
where he shews how pure and simple essences are to be recognised, he
says that our fundamental matter is of two kinds; but he does not tell
us how they are to be found. Their names you have already learned in the
last chapter. Friar Bacon dwells more fully on this point, where he
says: "Divide all parts into their cognate elements. For the unlearned
do not proceed in this way; but they continue pertinaciously and
senselessly to add more and more to a divisible substance—and while they
fancy that they are on the point of bringing to perfection the flower of
our Art, all that they really effect is the multiplication of error." In
this passage Bacon, like his predecessors, appears fearful of saying too
much. Perhaps you also remember what Avicenna says, in his "Gate": "You
must go forward to perfection by true teaching in accordance with the
facts of Nature: you must eat to drink, and drink to eat, and in the
mean season be covered with perspiration." Rhasis expresses himself to
the same effect, but warns us against suffering the matter to consume
its food too quickly: "Let it assimilate its aliment little by little."
Of this rule the Prophet also makes mention, if you rightly comprehend
his meaning: "Thou hast

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

visited the earth," he says, "and watered it: Thou hast multiplied its
wealth: the fruitful land hast Thou turned into a dry place, and the
arid land into a river of water." When it has plenty of meat and drink,
it is needful to watch at a time when the body craves sleep. For our
labour demands constant vigils and great diligence, and it must be
nourished and fed with precious substances. "Therefore let all poor men
eschew this experiment," says Arnold, "as this Art is for the rich of
this world"—and I myself can attest to ail poor men the truth of these
words. "Moreover," he continues, "let the enquirer be patient and of an
even temper, for those who are in a hurry will never reach the goal."
The length of time required for the purification of the substance, is a
stone of stumbling to many who will not believe in it. I advise you,
therefore, ye poor, not to attempt the solution of this mystery, but to
stay your hands before it is too late. One fourth of an ounce too much
or too little may in a single hour mar and destroy the labour of weeks.
The substance you must prepare with gentle heat, and so long as there is
no violent effervescence, you may keep it over the fire: you should
gradually consume it by gentle coction, but it must not be suffered to
throw up great bubbles, as such a course would be indicative of haste.
Gentleness and patience will mark out to you the safest method, and
enable you to avoid the manifold dangers which beset the enquirer's
path. One of the most difficult experiments in the gross work, is the
classification of our intermediate minerals. The different media that
are used must all be in a highly purified state, if the work is to be
brought to a successful conclusion. For the pure and impure, the mature
and immature, are by nature violently opposed to each other; that which
is fixed naturally adheres to fixed substances, and volatile substances
are sympathetically attracted by that which is volatile. Everywhere
Nature strives to produce harmony by drawing like to like. Now you will
find our gross work to be generically impure; and it is a matter of
great difficulty and danger, requiring the utmost wisdom of the wise,
and confounding the folly of the ignorant, to purge our Substance from
all foreign matter. The learned as well as the simple are often led
astray at this point, and prove the truth of the saying of Anaxagoras,
that all men need to be taught discretion by bitter experience.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Once I heard a
wise man say that, at the present time, magnesia (in a pure state) is
sold in Catalonia, together with the other intermediate minerals, so
that the hands of a fastidious man need now no longer be defiled with
this dirty work; and if this were really true, both the commencement and
the consummation of your work would be a much easier matter than it is
under ordinary conditions. For if you are compelled to do all that I
have had to accomplish, you will be wearied out before you reach the
work proper. The work of the Sages does not begin until all substances
are pure, both without and within. Let us remember that as we are
seeking a tincture which imparts perfection to all things else, we must
remove from it all that is foul 'and vile. Of the different media, each
has its own properties, and its own function to perform, according to
its essential nature; of those media by which our experiment is
advanced, some are of their own nature helpful, and others are harmful.
Our Apothecaries do not understand the secret of their preparation, and
we refuse to instruct them, because we know that they would adulterate
them (for the purpose of deceiving their customers) rather than take
diligent and conscientious pains to let their drugs be genuine and pure.
It is their practice (as I know by bitter experience) to ask a high
price, and to furnish an untrustworthy article. If a man would have
materials on which he may rely, he must not be afraid of soiling his own
hands, nor must he shun expense, though it may swallow up all his
hoarded wealth. In the gross work that man is furthest from the goal who
is in too great a hurry to reach it. If our great work, with all that
belongs to it, could be accomplished in three years, artists might
account themselves [fortunate](errata.htm#0); for when it has once been
brought to a satisfactory conclusion, there is no need to undertake it a
second time, if indeed one is skilled in the art of augmenting his
medicine; and the attainment of this skill is one of the great objects
of our Magistery. There is no need for me to name in this place the
different minerals which are required, seeing that Albertus has most
fully discussed this point. I might say much about the properties of
minerals; but the discussion would prove barren of results in the
advancement of our Art. One of the most important conditions of success
is the mechanical skill in the manipulation

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of experiments; in regard to these it is possible to go astray in a
thousand ways, the path being beset with all but insurmountable
difficulties at every step. Therefore, believe that which the ancient
writers tell us—that nothing can be rightly done without experience.
Consider all circumstances, and take care to secure uniformity in all
that is required. Use one vessel which is simple both in material and in
shape; beware of one made of mixed material, lest some accident happen
at a critical moment. This general admonition will save me the trouble
of laying down, and you the trouble of remembering, a hundred special
cautions; and this instruction may suffice for him who is wisely intent
on the practice of our Art. If your servants are faithful and true, you
will be able to carry out your experiments without constant vexation.
Therefore, if you would be free from all fear, over the gross work,
follow my counsel, and never engage married men; for they soon give in
and pretend that they are tired out, as I can assure you from my own
experience. Hire your workmen for certain stipulated wages, and not for
longer periods than twenty-four hours at a time. Give them higher wages
than they would receive elsewhere, and be prompt and ready in your
payments. For your kindness will stir up in their hearts love and
reverence, and a spirit of zeal in the conduct of the work committed to
them; for they know withal that they are liable to be discharged at once
if they are negligent in your service. Married men will not agree to be
engaged for such short periods; therefore, give them a wide berth. If I
had known and acted on this principle before, I might have been spared
much loss and vexation. In the pursuit of our Art, you must preserve at
all times your liberty of action; and you should also take care, from
time to time, to unbend your mind from its sterner employments with some
convenient recreation; otherwise your [spirits](errata.htm#1) might be
weighed down with melancholy and despair, and you might lose heart for
the continuation of your work. There is no need to add much to this
chapter, for the ancient writers have already fully set forth all that I
have not yet touched upon. But that which they have omitted is most
plainly expounded in this Book. Hence it is called the Ordinal of
Alchemy, the supplement of all other works on the subject. The following
chapter is for the initiated, and

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

shews all the rules to be observed in the subtle part of the work.

#### CHAPTER V.

When Briseus was a money-changer, he caused loss to many persons, but to
others his dealings were a source of delight and joy; and as this fact
seemed at the time a wonder and marvel to all who heard of it, so in our
own time—not so very long ago—an almost miraculous event was observed to
take place: within the short space of ten days the same bed in a house
near Leadenhall was successively occupied by three Masters of this Art,
every one of whom possessed both the white and the red Tincture; though
hardly one person amongst a million of men ever becomes possessed of the
glorious prize. One of them, as I was told, was from the Duchy of
Lorraine, the second hailed from the Midland Counties of England, the
third was the youngest, and was born near a Cross, which stands at the
boundary of three shires. Wise men had foretold from the conjunction of
planets that prevailed at his birth, that he would be an ornament to
England. Anyone might travel through the length and breadth of Europe
without meeting with three such Masters. Two of them are about to
depart, but the third will remain and do much good in this part of the
world. Nevertheless, the sins of our rulers will delay the good which
otherwise he might confer upon our country at once. The oldest of the
three Masters prophesied concerning this young adept, that he would have
to endure much suffering at the hands of those who owed him the greatest
debt of gratitude He also uttered many other prophecies, some of which
were verified by the event, while the rest remain to be fulfilled. "One
thing is most certain," he said, "after great sorrow there will be great
joy in all parts of this country—joy which will be experienced by all
good men." The youth enquired when this thing should be, and the old
man's answer was that it should come to pass when the Cross was honoured
by night and by day in the land of God, and the land of Light: which
thing will happen in due time, but is delayed by the grevious wickedness
of men. But when the blessed hour arrives, this Art will be revealed to
a King; and more glorious things will then be brought to pass

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

than it is possible for us to enumerate in this place, when he shall
have reformed our manners and abolished all abuses. He will investigate
this science in secret, and will be instructed in it by hermits, or
monks. So King Calid, in his time of need, sought this knowledge of
many, until it was imparted to him by Morienus, who succoured the King
with his counsel, being removed thereto by his nobleness and virtue. But
now we will speak of this subject no longer, but proceed to give an
account of the subtle work. He that would understand it must be deeply
learned. He should know elementary philosophy if he wishes to study
Alchemy.

Now, let me tell you who are intent upon this Art, that when materials
have by preparation been rendered fit for generation, they must by
division be separated into four elements. If you cannot do this, go and
learn of Hortulanus, who has written a special treatise on the
subject—in which treatise he shews how to divide wine into its elements.
Moreover, you should know the effects of the four qualities—heat, cold,
moisture, and dryness—of which all things are composed; and because in
this Art you are specially desirous of obtaining a colour which abides
the fire, you ought also to know, before you set about its production,
how colours are generated. For every colour that can be named is seen in
our work, before the white colour appears. Moreover, you must be able to
melt your substance easily, like wax or gum. Otherwise, according to the
Masters, it could not enter or penetrate metals. The substance should be
both fixed and fluxible, and have abundance of colour. To conjoin these
three contraries in one substance, is the great secret of our Art.
Nevertheless, an apt learner may find it expounded in this chapter. And
first—to speak as briefly and concisely as possible concerning the
aforesaid four primary qualities: heat and cold are active qualities;
moisture and dryness, on .the other hand, are qualities of a passive
kind. For the latter are always passively subject to the former, as, for
instance, stones when they become lime, and water when it is changed to
ice. Whence you may easily see that nothing is fully wrought except by
heat and cold. Yet the passive qualities have some power, as we find
every day in mechanical operations, in the baking of bread, the brewing
of beer, and other processes

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

brought about by the operation of moisture and dryness. Aristotle, in
his physical treatise, and many others, say that from action proceeds
knowledge; thus they call practice the source and root of speculation
and of all science. For the properties of all things are perceived by
watching their operations, as, from the colour of urine we hear
physicians draw conclusions in regard to the excess or lack of animal
heat in the body. By means of those four primary qualities, we study the
colours in the due order of their succession. But we can have no real
assurance respecting the white colour, except in a very pure substance.
You will be materially assisted in your task by a knowledge of the way
in which colours are daily generated. Colour is the extremity of every
transparent body; a clear substance is here beautifully consummated. If
dryness dominates in a dry substance, its colour will most certainly be
white. Of this fact you may convince yourself by ocular proof in the
case of burned bones, or of quicklime made of stones. Where cold
prevails in a moist and clear substance, a white colour will be the
result, as is seen in the case of ice, or water indurated by frost. The
cause has already before been declared in our philosophy; but here I do
not speak of common philosophy, but only adduce these facts in
illustration of alchemistic principles. And indeed one fact explains
another, as the offspring may be known by looking at its mother. If heat
operates on a thick and moist substance, a black colour will be the
result.

If you desire an illustration of this principle, you need only put some
green wood on the fire. When cold is brought to bear on a thick and dry
substance, the colour which is produced will be black. The reason is
that the substance is compact and very thick, and under the influence of
cold which is destructive of life, the thickness causes obscurity and
absence of light; and negation of colour is blackness. Thus you may
accept it for an universal fact that a clear substance is a white
substance. The efficient cause is not always the same; it is sometimes
heat, and sometimes it is cold. But blackness and whiteness (as every
one knows) are the two extremes of colour. Hence your work must begin
with blackness, if whiteness is its final perfection. Red—as the Sages
say—is an intermediate colour between black and white. Nevertheless you
may believe what I say: Red

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

is the final colour in Alchemy. The Sages also tell us that pink and
orange are colours intermediate between white and red; and that green
and grey are intermediate colours between red and black. Flesh colour is
seen in very pure substances. Physicians have discovered nineteen
colours intermediate between white and black in urine; of these colours
one is whitish, like that of the onyx stone. Magnesia appears to partake
of this colour—though Magnesia throws out a mild, pure splendour in the
subtle stage of our Art; and here we behold all colours that ever were
seen by mortal eye—a hundred colours, and certainly a good many more
than have been observed in urine; and in all those colours our Stone
must be found in all its successive stages. In the ordering of your
practical experiments, and in conceiving the different parts of the work
in your own mind, you must have as many phases, or stages, as there are
colours. If you do not know the different stages of this Art, you will
find them in Raymond's "General Exposition of Alchemy." Gilbert Kymer
has indeed left us a fanciful book, in which he describes seventeen
proportions. But they do not suffice for this science, of which he was
never able to discover the true secret, though he was profoundly learned
in Medicine.

Such, however, is the strength of the human constitution, that it often
overcomes disease in spite of the doctor's physic: and the physician's
art is praised in many cases where his remedies had nothing to do with
the cure, or even retarded it. But the case is different with respect to
our mineral medicine; for our Art is raised far above all generations,
and exists only in the wisdom of the Artist, as any wise man may
discover by experience. Thus, the true foundation of Alchemy consists in
the proper graduation of the work, and in the correct adjustment of heat
and cold, moisture and dryness; also in the knowledge that through these
qualities others are generated, such as hardness and softness, heaviness
and lightness, roughness and smoothness—according to the addition of
these primary qualities in certain proportions of weight, number, and
measure. Under these three categories we may range everything that God
has made. For God has created and ordered all things in accordance with
certain proportions of number, weight, and measure; and if you depart
from these proportions, you destroy the harmony of Nature. It is
therefore a

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

wise caution which is given by Anaxagoras, that we should not proceed to
join together our elements, until we have discovered the exact
proportion of weight in which all the elements are found in the
substances with which we have to deal. Bacon says that the Ancients have
concealed nothing except these proportions, respecting which they give
us no information. For when they speak of proportions, they bewilder the
student with the most contradictory assertions. If you wish to know the
truth about these proportions, you may obtain it by studying the works
of Albertus, Raymond, Bacon, and Anaxagoras the Elder. You must collect
your knowledge from the pages of these four writers, as one of them by
himself will not afford it. Though you understand the secret of joining
the four qualities together into one cohesive whole, yet the more
difficult task of combining the different elements still remains to be
accomplished. A proper union has to be effected between earth and water
on the one hand, and air and fire on the other. Though the third and the
second are the most noble of all, yet the first and the fourth cannot be
excluded. Earth is the most useful element, and that of which we have
the greatest need. Here lies latent the possibility of growth and the
power of generation; it is the earthy litharge of our Stone. Without it
there can be no generation and no fixation thereof. For there is nothing
fixed save earth alone; all the other elements are volatile. Daily
experience teaches you that this is true of fire, water, and air. Fire
is the cause of expansion, and renders the substance capable of
per-mixtion; but the transparent splendour and beautiful colour are
produced through the influence of air. Moreover, when air is condensed,
it produces substances which are easily melted, such as wax, butter, and
gum; these are liquefied by a very slight degree of heat. Water purifies
by ablution, and causes mortifying things to revive. There is nothing
wonderful in the multiplication of fire, and it is greatly inferior to
the power of multiplication inherent in earth. For earth daily produces
fresh herbs, while one spark of fire is miraculously enlarged only when
it is fed with plenty of combustible matter. Fire and earth are the only
elements that are capable of multiplication, and they cause the power of
multiplication inherent in our Stone. Of this earth Albertus the Great
says, that among all mineral substances

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

lithargyrium (which he describes at some length) is the most suitable
for our white Elixir. We will now proceed to discuss the conjunction of
the elements; and, on this point, we may lay down the following rules:
(1) Combine your elements grammatically, in accordance with their own
proper rules. These rules are the principal instruments for aiding the
learned in this work: for the two greatest contraries upon earth are
fixedness and volatility. All the grammarians of England and France
cannot skill to teach you this concord. But this Ordinal can shew you
where you may learn it, namely, in the book called *De Arbore*. (2) Join
them together also after the manner of the rhetorician, with purified
and ornate essences. Inasmuch as your tincture must be pure and fair,
take pure earth, water, fire, and air. (3) In accordance with logical
methods, combine such things as admit of a true and natural union. Many
learned men, by neglecting this precept, have lost all their labour and
pains. (4) Combine them also arithmetically, in accordance with those
subtle natural proportions, of which little was known when Boëthius
wrote: "Bind together the elements by numbers." (5) Combine your
elements musically, for two reasons: first, on account of melody, which
is based on its own proper harmonies. Join them according to the rules
which obtain in music in the proportions which produce musical
consonance; for these musical proportions closely resemble the true
proportions of Alchemy, at least, as far as the more general aspects of
our Art are concerned. Its more subtle proportions you must learn from
the writings of Raymond and Bacon. Bacon discusses them allusively in
his three Epistles. Raymond expounds them more fully in his General
Treatise. Many who read his words think that they understand them, but
they are deceived. (6) Combine your elements also by means of Astrology,
that all their operations may prosper, and that the simple, rude, and
unformed substance may, in due course of time, and in the proper order
of its development, be brought to perfection through the blessed
influences of the Stars. (7) The science of perspective (optics) also
affords much help to those who labour in our noble Art; and it is
materially advanced by many other sciences, (8) as, for instance, that
science which deals with the plenum and the vacuum. But, as

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

far as this Art is concerned, we must regard as the mistress of all
sciences, (9) the science of Natural Magic. Now, when the four elements
have been wisely combined, and each thing ordered in its own proper
degree, then we shall behold in the various stages of coction, a
constantly shifting succession of colours, until perfection is attained.
For the substance is wrought upon from within by the natural warmth,
which is found to exist intellectually in our substance, though it can
be neither seen, nor felt, nor handled. Its operation is known only to
few. When this inward natural heat is stirred up by the influence of
outward artificial heat, Nature, having once been roused into activity,
will go on to operate, and produce the various changes which the
substance has to undergo; and this is one cause, as the Sages will tell
you, why so many colours are seen in our work. Many mistakes arise in
the study of this Art through ignorance of the difference between
outward and inward heat. In order that you may know how these two kinds
of heat ought to aid and stimulate each other, and which of the two
ought to predominate in our work, you should be guided by the analogy of
animate creation, and more especially by the analogy of the coction
which goes on in the human body. It was well said by Morienus, that the
generation of our Stone exhibits a wonderful analogy to the creation of
man, in whom, says Raymond, the four degrees of the four complexions are
found together. On account of the close analogy which exists between the
generation of man and that of our Stone, it has been said that there are
in this world only two microcosms—man and our Stone.

Now, we have described the conjunction or digestion of the elements, and
we proceed to give an account of the nutrition of our substance. There
is a solid humour rendered firm by dryness, well mixed in all its
degrees; and the passive qualities are generated in due mixture by
inward and outward heat. Hence our digestion is nothing but perfection
produced out of a substantial humour. You must pardon my using these
expressions, which to the unlearned must appear obscure and meaningless;
but this Art of Alchemy, like all other arts and sciences, has its own
proper terminology, from which it is not safe for me to depart.
Digestion is sometimes quickened by

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

outward cold, as you may see from the fact that in winter men take a
larger quantity of food than in summer, when their heat is more intense
For cold drives heat inward and increases its action, giving it greater
virtue and power of digestion than it had before. The digestive quality
in our Art is the virtual heat of a digestive organism. Nevertheless,
the warmth of a digestible substance is also instrumental in aiding
digestion. Fever heat digests nothing. Baths may both aid and cause
destruction. Digested (fermented) wine has more natural heat than must.
Coagulation is not a substantial form, but only a passive state of some
material substance. Moreover, you should know when the colours appear,
that the principal agent in the substance is either heat, or cold, or
moisture, or dryness. To recognise the principal agent at any given
stage requires the practised eye [of](errata.htm#2) the Master, and a
quick observation of the manner in which the colours arise. The
principal agent obtains royal power over the four qualities, and during
its temporary predominance assimilates them to its own nature. This
change is discussed by Anaxagoras in his book entitled "Natural
Conversion," and its *rationale* is also given by Raymond. The
discernment of your principal agent is not by any means such a simple
matter as you may suppose; I will attempt to teach it you by means of
four signs or symptoms, viz., colour, taste, smell, and fluxibility. The
colour of your substance may guide you in recognising its principal
agent, because that colour which a glance at your vessel exhibits as
predominant is caused by that quality which, for the time being, is the
principal agent. Of course, you will be able to moderate any excessive
action of this principal agent, if you are aware of its nature; and its
nature I will now enable you to tell, by giving you an account of the
causes whereby the different colours which appear in our Art are
produced. Whiteness is the effect of transparency in any object.
Blackness arises when the clearness of a dense body is obscured by the
thickness of its constituent parts: it is produced out of an earthy
substance by combustion, particularly when the heat causes a greater
hardness of the atoms. By the mixture of the dense and obscure with the
clear and pure, we obtain all the intermediate colours. Any clear and
transparent body arises out of the substance of air and water condensed
in purified earth which

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

does not destroy their transparency. If in such clear and transparent
bodies you do not perceive any special shades of colour, you may
confidently conclude that they are the effect of intense cold, as is the
case with the crystal, beryl, and other formations which you may thus
distinguish from each other: Crystal is aeriform water, and is clear,
transparent, and fair; but where the aqueous element predominates, it is
more obscure, as in the case of beryl, or ice. Where the substance is
essentially dry, it is dense, hard, and obscure, as may be seen in the
diamond, and other substances of a like nature. In a clear substance
light causes a brilliancy such as we behold in Magnesia; and a watery
vapour produced by heat is instrumental in the formation of such bodies.
Such are the causes of transparency, and of the extreme colours. As to
the intermediate colours, that of the ruby is caused by a thin smoke in
a clear body, which happens when much light and brilliancy prevail in
such a body; and it is more or less brilliant in proportion to the
quantity of light. The amethyst comes next in glory after the ruby, its
obscurity being greater, and its transparency less; the shining
substance of the chalcedony stands next to beryl. Green, or the colour
of the emerald, is formed of pure water, mixed with a burned earthy
substance, and the greater the transparency of the earth, the more
marked is also the brilliant green of the emerald. Yellow is generated
out of water and earth, and has the clearness of air dimmed by the
obscurity of black vapour. Grey, or lead colour, is the result of and
union of watery and earthy elements, and where these atoms are cold and
dense, the grey colour is more intense, as is seen in very old lead; or
in persons at the point of death. This colour is called livid, and is
frequent in men of an envious disposition. It concentrates the natural
colour and the blood in the heart, for the purpose of comforting it, and
leaves the face cold and dry, as it has been forsaken by its warmth and
blood. In the same way, when fevers have reached an extreme point, the
finger nails are of a livid hue. The colour of the sapphire is an orient
blue, not unlike that of the celestial firmament, and fairer to behold
than the colour of lead, because it contains more air, water, and light.
Moreover, the colour of the sapphire is esteemed more precious than
other shades of light blue, which are more obscure because they contain
more earth and

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

less air. Silver may easily be converted into the colour of the
lazulite, because the transparency of the silver, produced by air, has a
tendency to become assimilated to the colour of the sky; and the
abundance of quicksilver which it contains, causes the brilliancy of the
silver, while the splendour of the quicksilver, in its turn, is produced
by subtle earth, pure water, and clear air. The orange colour, the shade
of yellow which appears in gold, is a pleasing colour, and by many is
even considered charming; it is generated by a strong and vigorous
digestion, as its aqueous elements are exposed to a high degree of heat,
which is seen in honey, urine, gall, and lye. The yellow colour of gold
is the product of a pure and subtle water perspicuously condensed. For
the more pure water is condensed, the more brilliant it becomes. The
cause of a mirror is fixed humidity; and for this reason it is also
smooth, because air receives no impressions, and is incapable of
confining itself. It is the water which produces its clearness. If pure
white and pure red be well mixed, the result is a beautiful orange
colour. Thus all the different ways in which the elements may be
combined, produce different colours in our substance, according to the
different degrees of digestion. Observe well the proper colours of
elements, that you may be the better able to judge of colours.
Physicians say of certain herbs that they are cold without, and warm
within at the root. If you wish for an illustration of this saying,
observe the nature of fragrant violets. Common philosophy teaches us
that the rose is cold within and red without. Anaxagoras says in his
"Natural Changes," that the outward and the inward in all things are of
a nature directly opposite to each other; and the rule holds true,
except in the case of such things as are very plain and simple in their
composition, as, for instance, the scammony and laurel, that do not
nourish like vegetables. Bear in mind that in every mixture, one of the
elements will strive to obtain the mastery. This insolent and greedy
disposition is found in man, as in all things beside. But all sorts and
conditions of men are placed on a footing of equality by death, which is
God's means of laying low men of high degree, and of shewing the vanity
of all ambitious thoughts and desires. Kings and beggars find their
common level in the grave. It is thus that you must treat your principal
agent, if it overleaps the proper bounds of equality.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this sense
Aristotle says: "Let there be perfect equality in the composition of
your Stone, in order that unprofitable strife may be avoided." Let there
be all the colours which we have enumerated, in their proper order, and
then suffer Nature to bring about the process of generation in her own
way, till among this great variety of colours one is found to
predominate, which resembles the colour you are seeking to discover. In
this way you may make use of the colours for the purpose of guiding you
in this work. I might say much more about colours; but what has been
said constitutes a satisfactory fulfilment of my promise, and will teach
you how far the various colours may be made to serve your purpose in
recognising your principal agent. Many learned men indeed will justly
wonder that so great a variety of colours should appear in our Stone
before the final stage of permanent and immutable whiteness is reached,
seeing that the ingredients seem to be so few and simple. But I will
explain the mystery in a few words: Those colours are due to the
properties of magnesia, the nature of which is capable of change into
any proportion and degree, just as crystal, for instance, exhibits the
colour of any substance which is placed under it. Hence it is well and
generously said by Hermes that "for performing the miracles of one
thing, God has so ordained it that out of one thing all these marvels
should spring forth." For this reason common philosophers cannot find
this virtuous Stone, because it transcends their comprehension.

The sense of smell will also furnish you with indications whereby you
may recognise the predominant element; and, in conjunction with the
indications afforded by colour, it will teach you where to look for the
principal agent. Now as white and black are the two extremes of colour,
so stench and fragrance are the extremes of odour. But as fishes are
incapable of distinguishing intermediate colours, because their eyes are
without eye-lids and cannot be closed, so we cannot become aware of
intermediate odours by the sense of smell, because our nostrils are
incapable of being shut, like the eyes of fishes. On this account
intermediate odours are not perceived by the nostrils as distinctly as
intermediate colours are perceived by the eye. An unpleasant smell is
not, in the opinion of the Sages, an intermediate smell, but only one
less fetid. Yet they have noted it down in

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

their books as the result of their experience—though I have no
experimental knowledge of the fact—that if you mix a sweet and fragrant
odour with one of a penetratingly fetid character, the fragrant odour
alone is smelt, while the fetid one is imperceptible; and the reason
which they allege is that all fragrant things are more pure and
spiritual than those which are fetid, and therefore penetrate the air
more easily, and, being more grateful to the living organisms and more
agreeable to nature, are more readily received than fetid smells. An
odour is a vaporous steam dissolved by heat, of a substance resembling
an exudation, which penetrates the air freely, and affects it and your
sense of smell, as your palate is affected by food, your sense of
hearing by sound, and your sense of sight by colour. Four things are
required for the perfect apprehension of odours. First, it is necessary
that a subtle substance should be affected by the operation of heat, and
give out a vaporous similitude of itself, which evaporation must then be
dispersed through thin, clear air, and act on the sense of smell. But
this odorous vapour is not so readily given out by dense and hard
substances which, like our Stone, are not easily affected by heat. Heat
quickens odours, cold hinders them; manure is more fetid in summer than
in winter. Grateful odours are generated out of a pure and vaporous
substance, as in the case of ambergris, nard, and myrrh, which are
specially pleasing to women. A pure substance under the influence of
gentle heat, gives out moderate odours, such as the fragrance of
violets; but when moderate heat acts on an impure substance, the result
is a disagreeable odour, such as that of aloes and sulphur. When the
natural heat of the substance is diminished, the fact is signalized by a
most fetid smell, such as that of decomposed fish. Where a stench is
produced by the putrefaction of natural heat, it is a vapour or steam
issuing from decaying matter. If the juices only are corrupted, while
the substance itself is not destroyed, the stench will be extremely
disagreeable, yet not so fetid as in the former case. A putrid smell is
caused only by the corruption of the substance itself. When an evil
substance is decomposed, it gives out a horrible smell; and putrefying
carcases of human beings may often cause a pestilence. The smell of
extinguished coals is destructive of health, and may occasion even a
mare to miscarry.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the qualities
of a substance harmonize with your nature, the odour will be pleasant;
but if the substance be of a kind that does not sympathise with your
nature, you will be disagreeably affected by the odour. Fishes love
sweet smells, as is seen from the fact that they are more easily
attracted by a fresh than by a stale bait. All fragrant matters have a
corresponding degree of natural heat; and though camphor, roses, and
other cold substances emit a pleasant fragrance, yet ancient writers
tell us that the purity of their substance is equivalent to, and
virtually represents, natural heat. You may take for granted the truth
of the old saying, that one pleasant smell does not neutralize another.
It is different, however, with fetid odours; for the smell of garlic
overpowers that of dung. But now we have said enough for our present
purpose about smells, and you will be easily able to tell when
putrefaction begins to set in. The sense of smell will also enable you
to distinguish between a subtle and a gross substance. You will also
have knowledge of an intermediate substance which exhibits the
corruption of natural heat, and of the difference between corrupted
humour and corrupted substance. But our substance has been highly
purified, and is conserved by the mean virtue; wherefore, you must not
expect a fetid smell to arise from it, though it putrefies after its own
proper kind.

The third sign and test by which you may know your principal agent is
called taste, which always causes the diminution of the substance
tasted. The test of the palate would be more certain than that of the
eye or the nose, if it were not dangerous to taste our Stone, seeing
that it is destructive of health and life, so penetrating is its
quality; hence it is inexpedient and even dangerous to taste of it too
often. It strengthens metals, as we know, but it is hurtful to human
beings until the perfect red colour appears, which abides the test of
fire. A common labouring man, who had devoted himself to the study of
this Art, tasted a small piece of the white Stone in the hope that
thereby he would be delivered from all pain and disease, instead of
which he was suddenly struck down with the palsy. Him my master speedily
cured with mineral Bezoar. Therefore, though the palate be the best
judge of the progress which has been made in our Art, yet it is of
little practical use, because the taste of our substance is both

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

horrible and hurtful. Nevertheless, certain parts may, without any risk,
he tasted before they are joined together, for the purpose of
discovering whether the operation has been rightly performed or not. At
the same time the skilled artist will be able to discover all he wants
to know by the colour and odour. Thus many judge of the quality of good
wine, but new wine is best tested by the palate. For the sense of smell
has only one organ, and is capable of distinguishing nothing but
vaporous steam. The sense of taste, on the other hand, undoubtedly
possesses six organs for the perception of material qualities. These
organs Nature has ordained for the security and protection of living
creatures. The ape tests the wholesomeness of his food by the sense of
smell, men and parrots rely upon the verdict of the palate. For many
things, though fragrant, touch the palate adversely, and repel by their
acidity, bitterness, or sickly and nauseating sweetness; or they are
poisonous, corrosive, or too highly seasoned. In all these cases it is
unadvisable to appeal for a decision to the sense of taste. The ancient
writers have distinguished nine different varieties of taste, viz.,
acrid, oily, and vinegary (indicative of a subtle substance), biting,
salt, watery (characteristic of intermediate substances), bitter, acid,
and sweet (inherent in substances of great thickness and density). These
nine varieties of taste are of common occurrence: five of them are the
product of heat—the oily, the acrid, the salt, the bitter, and the
sweet; the remaining four are produced by cold—the sour, the acid, the
watery or insipid, and the biting. Taste is determined by two things,
viz., by diversities of substance, and diversities of quality. A thick
substance is generally found to have a sweet taste; a substance which is
moist, thick, and warm, produces an oily taste; while a substance of an
intermediate quality, which is both hot and dry, is characterised by a
salt or pungent taste. A thick substance, that is both hot and dry, is
intensely bitter. A subtle substance, on the other hand, which is also
hot and dry, is marked by a harsh and acrid flavour. In this way heat is
the source of five different varieties of taste, but not of more. That
which is cold and dry in the second degree, and at the same time
exhibits a subtle substance, is sour—as you may see by the face which a
man makes who has tasted unripe apples. The same

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

qualities in the same degree, united to an intermediate substance,
produce, as you may easily suppose, a biting effect upon the palate, as,
for instance, the rose. But the acid, less acid, and slightly acid
flavours are the results of cold and dryness in different degrees. Cold
and humidity in the first degree always produce a watery flavour, as is
seen in the whites of eggs and in oysters; for these substances are both
cold and humid, and have much superfluous moisture—for which reason they
are not greatly relished by the human palate. Isaac says that there are
only seven varieties of taste, because the acid and the slightly acid,
though different in degree, are yet in reality one and the same flavour,
and because the watery or insipid variety simply represents negation of
taste. We may also speak of compound flavours, such as bitter-sweet, and
others of a like kind. Thus, by means of the palate, men may distinguish
substances, qualities, and degrees. But if you do not care to subject
our matter to the test of the palate, you may be guided by another class
of symptoms, just as in medicine we do not rely upon the signs exhibited
by the urine alone, but take them in conjunction with the state of the
pulse, and the general condition of the body. He would be an ignorant
physician indeed who should compete his diagnosis without availing
himself of everything which may help him to a knowledge of the exact
nature of the disease. Thus, if you would pursue the study of our Art,
you should avail yourself of the indications afforded by the four
methods of observation for the purpose of forming a correct judgment. Of
three of these methods we have already spoken, the fourth is the
fluxibility of the liquid. The liquid is the strength of our substance,
and its condition affords the most striking evidence of the progress of
the work; moreover, by its means the elements are both combined and
dissolved. The liquid joins together the male and the female, and causes
the dead to be restored to life. The liquid purges by ablution, and is
the principal nutriment of our Stone. Without liquid there is no good
food; the liquid carries the aliment to all the different parts of the
human living body, and it performs the same function in Alchemy. But you
should well consider the purity and the quantity of all your liquids,
and also their consistency or thinness: otherwise you will make little
progress. Now, because

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

our Elixir needs a twofold preparation, it exhibits more natural marvels
than any other substance. Physicians say that the denser and more
consistent urine is, the more humidity does it indicate; but with us the
thickness betokens dryness, and that which is subtle humidity. Many
liquids are needed for our Stone in accordance with its requirements. In
the book entitled "The Crowd," Aristeus says: that air is invisibly
enclosed in water, which lifts up the earth by its aerial potency.
Pythagoras remarks that if the matter were so, it would be a most
fortunate circumstance. Plato expresses himself most circumspectly when
he calls it (the liquid) "the gentle dropping of dew"; and the words are
thoroughly applicable to Alchemy. But in the commonplaces of the primary
philosophy it is said that condensed air is changed back into rain, and
rarefied water into air. Some say that the month of May is the beginning
of the year, when air is condensed into water. Others say that such
water descends from the sky till the Sun enters the sign of Scorpio.
Others, again, tell us that no liquids should be used that are affected
by the cold, because, as the ancient writers state, their activity is
chained up by the cold. Some Sages affirm that the liquid which you
should employ in preparing the Elixir is milk; another expresses himself
in the following mystical words: "No liquid is sufficient for the great
work but the water of Litharge, which together with the water of Azoch
produces virgin's milk." Democritus, on the other hand, states that the
best liquid for the preparation of our Stone is permanent water, which
is naturally capable of resisting the action of fire, and of enduring
its heat. Rupescissa says that aqua vitæ is the liquid required, because
it is spiritual and revivifying in its nature, and because it is the
quintessence which restores dead things to life (concerning this
quintessence Aristotle writes in his "Book of Secrets" that all
perfection is in the fifth part). Rupescissa further calls this aqua
vitæ the best of all liquids, for that it renders thick and dense
substances spiritual. In the works of Pythagoras you will find our aqua
vitæ spoken of in different language. He himself calls it the vivifying
principle, and bids us volatilize that which is fixed, and fix that
which is volatile, as by this strong method of compulsion the fixed
materials will become easy to melt. Others say that

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the best of all liquids is that which stirs up most desire and love.
These are best found near islands, and in places that are washed by the
ocean. Certain Sages tell us of yet another liquid which is colder than
spring water, and has an icy taste; its quantity, however, is never
diminished, nor is its substance consumed, though it is in a state of
constant activity in the preparation of our Stone. This water is called
by Democritus the "shadowless light," or "the water of the rising Sun."
Hermes says that no water is of such paramount importance as the water
of crude mercury; "for," he says, "this water holds the high place of
being the proper water of Alchemy." Thus, ye who pursue the study of
this Art, may know by means of all these liquids our Stone must be
perfected. A liquid is a shifting substance, of a watery and unstable
nature; and all such things are more subject to lunar influences than
those of a firmer structure. Of this every initiated Artist may behold a
proof in the preparation of the white Tincture. Liquids wash and purify
both extreme and intermediate substances. God created liquids for the
use of man and for the cleansing of all impurities. Liquids doubtless
possess the power of bringing hidden impurities to the surface of a
body, as those will tell you who use this simple means for the purpose
of cleansing soiled clothing. Liquids comfort and refresh the parched
roots of grass and trees; for all natural liquids have the power of
restoring any vital juices which have been lost. Liquids are also useful
for the dividing and separating of qualities, and for the resolving of
substances into their smallest parts. Liquids further cause the
generation of our Stone by the conjunction of many things into one. They
assist the fluxibility and motion of many things. Again, you should
observe how liquids are to be gained from the different substances which
exist on earth. Some are derived through incision, as, for instance, the
juice of the terebinth; others, by crushing, as the juice of the grape
and of the olive; others again, by distillation, like water; some, by
combustion, like colophony; some by dissolution, according to the manner
in which women prepare lye; others are produced in other ways; while
some owe their origin to natural processes, as, for instance, urine,
blood, milk, and sweat. Coagulatory substances, again, are of great use
and profit in the making of cheese. In these and many other ways we seek
and discover liquids which may

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

be useful to us in the preparation of our glorious Elixir, the most
precious Philosopher's Stone, for which we daily bless God's name.

All the liquids that we have enumerated are of a more or less adhesive
nature, with the solitary exception of quicksilver, which, though
fluxible, will not adhere to any other matters but those in which it
finds a sister or brother mixed of the same subtle substance; but with
any other liquid it will not mingle, though they, too, are composed of
the four elements, as milk contains whey, butter, and cheese. These four
elements may be separated and put together again, to the great
advancement of your experiment; but the manner in which cheese, butter,
and whey are obtained is a simpler subject of investigation than are the
liquids which exist in our Stone. Not one of them is simple and
uncompounded except water alone. Of the several liquids of our Stone you
should understand also the qualities and degrees; for thus you will be
able to check the various superfluous activities of the principal agent,
if this agent itself be permanent and durable. If the predominant
quality be dryness, you may correct it by adding, according to your
requirements, a greater or less quantity of humid moisture; and in the
same way you may proceed with regard to the other qualities, thus
compelling the principal agent to submit to the rule of your will. By
the knowledge of the diversity, contrariety, and agreement of qualities,
you may judge which quality ought to predominate. You will need great
wisdom in so adding and diminishing your liquids that all the
ingredients are placed on an equal footing. But do not believe that
there is anything which has the qualities of heat and moisture in the
same degree; for all that maintain the existence of two qualities of
this kind, are deceived in their opinion, whoever they be. The
commonplaces of philosophy, which set forth this proposition, are not
true. Have done with this idea, and let a new one take its place in your
mind. For all the ancient writers who have asserted that these two
qualities could exist in the same degree, have been mistaken, or they
have done so simply for the purpose of preventing enquirers from
discovering the secret method of tempering the elements. Hence he who
does not know graduations cannot be perfect in our work, seeing that God
has allotted to each thing its own proper measure. Without due
measurement of time no one can sing correctly; he

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

who errs in the measurement of time, errs in the very essence of the
singer's Art—and all that err inflict a wrong on Nature. Consider also
that the purer your medium is, the greater will be the perfection which
arises out of it. The media embrace the most important part of the
virtue and potent essences of our Art. For the solid cannot become
fluxible, nor the liquid firm, in the gradual process of preparing our
substance, without the help of intermediate substances which partake of
the nature of both the extremes. It is thus that, by means of a treble
spirit, the soul is joined to the human body; of these three spirits one
is called the vital spirit, the other the natural spirit, and the third
the animal spirit. Let me also tell you where these spirits dwell. The
vital spirit has his habitation in the heart; the natural spirit,
according to the ancient writers, abides in the liver, while the animal
spirit sojourns in the brain. Now, so long as these three spirits
maintain a sound state of health in the human body, the soul dwells in
the body without any jarring disagreements, and life is sustained. But
when these spirits are unable to abide in man, the soul is also
compelled to forsake the body. For the subtle, pure, and immortal soul
can never dwell with the gross body, except the spirits act as media
between them. In our work we ought also to distinguish between body,
soul, and spirit; and our intermediate substances are the spirit which
joins the body and soul together by. partaking of the nature of both.
Nature has no other way of binding extremes together except by
intermediate substances, and these intermediate substances (media) are
of different kinds. After all these things you should also know the
seven circulations of each element, which agree with the number of the
seven planets, and they are known to none except by grace Divine.
Certain Sages of great learning tell us that these circulations are nine
in number; and perhaps it is safer for us to follow their teaching.
Nevertheless, the newest inventions made by modern philosophers, whose
assertions are exalted beyond the possibility of doubt, enable us to
dispense with two. Some learned men think that they may avoid every risk
of a mistake if they go on in due order from fire to air, from air to
water, and from water to earth, thus moving downward from that which is
most exalted to that which is lowest; and they adduce in support of
their assertion the alleged fact

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

that air is the food of fire. But, believe me, this kind of circulation
is nothing but one method of rectification, which tends more to
separation and correction than to transmutation. Moreover, the favourite
food of fire, its own proper nutriment and fuel, is not air but earth,
as both fire and earth are dry, and heat depends for its very existence
on dryness, while the nature of air, on the other hand, is more humid.
Yet it is also true that fire cannot operate without air, since the hand
of God has linked together the elements in a bond of mutual dependence,
which will not suffer them to be disunited by any human contrivance or
device. Of this fact you may find an illustration in trumpets, where,
after the ascent of air, you may often observe a deposit of water, the
occurrence of which can only be explained on the supposition of the
mutually inclusive nature of the elements. But our circulation begins
with fire, the most exalted of all elements, and ends with water, which
of all elements is the most unlike to fire. Another circulation begins
with air and ends with earth. From earth to fire, thence to pure water,
thence again to fire, and after this to a 'mean, passing to earth,
finally once more recurring to fire—by such circulations, the Red
Tincture is perfected. Other circulations are more suitable for the
production of the White Tincture. Now every circulation has its -own
proper time, according to the facility or difficulty of its execution.
For as one planet is heavier and slower than another, so some
circulations that are performed by the Sages take up a space of thirty
weeks, while other circulations require a much shorter period of time;
just as some planets are lighter and swifter than others. Thus, after
all the gross and crude operations have been performed, our work may
often still require twenty-six weeks. Ignorance of this fact has
deceived many, and caused them to give up their labour at a point where
the Sages are wont to begin. Other inexperienced students of this Art
have imagined that it can be accomplished in forty day's. They do not
know that in Art as well as in Nature everything has its own time, and
its own proper method. The elephant, for instance, being a huge and
unwieldy animal, extends its period of gestation over two years, and is
fifty years old before it can bring forth young. Anaxagoras says, in his
"Considerations," that the generation of the metals

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

requires a thousand years, and that, in comparison to that period of
time, our work occupies only a single day. You must therefore conduct
your operation in a very subtle manner when you see the earth rise above
the water; for as the earth which we tread with our feet supports the
water, so, in our Art, you should frequently cause a gentle spring of
water to well forth, in order that the same may flow softly, seeing that
a violent outpour is positively hurtful. Moreover, the student of
Alchemy should be aware of the effects of the seven waters, concerning
which you must seek instruction in the books of others; for you cannot
expect me to expound our whole system in this brief treatise.

Some think that by means of these waters they can correct all metallic
imperfections, and can find the effects of the four elements; for they
are confident that all requisite properties are discovered in these
waters, not only for the purpose of softening hard metals, but also for
hardening those which are too soft, purifying them, and rendering them
malleable. For the attainment of each one of these objects, the
knowledge of these waters is said to be indispensable. Otherwise our
Stone would not receive its proper nourishment. The ancient writers call
our Stone a microcosm; and there can be no doubt that its composition
greatly resembles that of the world in which we live, consisting as it
does of elements, hot, cold, moist, and dry, hard, soft, light, and
heavy, rough, smooth, fixed, volatile, and fluxible; and also because,
in spite of the manifold variety of its component parts, it is not many
things, but one thing. The transmutation of metals implies a change, not
only of colour, but also of substance. The elements of the substance
which undergoes a change must become the elements of the substance into
which it is to be changed, and impress upon it their own character. All
transmuted parts must be proportionately impressed in the transmuting
elements, so that the thin elemented matter may permanently possess the
substance of the one and the virtue of the other. As soon as a child is
born, it can feed and cry; and so our Stone, when first prepared, has
abundant power of imparting its colour to other substances. Again, as
after three years the child walks and talks, so after a certain lapse of
time, our Stone receives a still more intense power of colouring, so
that it can

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

pervade with its own glorious nature a substance of a thousand times its
own size. To this fact I myself can bear witness: for many a time have I
seen well-purged metals transmuted into the finest silver and gold.
Thus, our Stone may go on growing in quantity, and becoming more
excellent in quality, during an infinite period of time; and in this
respect it bears a marvellous analogy to the birth and growth of human
beings. I must, however, take this occasion to state a truth which may
be displeasing to some readers. The time when you first succeed in
preparing your Stone should be well and wisely used, or you may even
then lose all your pains, and miss your recompense for all the heavy
outlay you have undergone.

For the purpose, then, of augmenting your Stone, you should at once
divide it into two equal parts, carefully testing the correctness of
your division by means of the balance. One-half is for the Red Tincture,
and the other moiety for the White. Then, and not till then, will you
begin to reap the profits of your labours. But it will be unadvisable to
stop even here, seeing that you may go on augmenting your Tincture
indefinitely. Miriam, the sister of Aaron, rightly says that life is
short, and knowledge long; nevertheless, our Tincture, when it has once
attained to the highest perfection of its excellence, has the virtue of
greatly retarding old age. Some of our Sages have been so foolish as to
give up the further improvement of our Stone at a point when they might
have reached the final goal with little trouble and great advantage to
themselves. This supine carelessness can only be explained by assuming
that they were not aware of the full virtue of that Stone; and I see
that I must point out to all its fortunate owners the full extent of
their possession. For when I shall have departed out of this world, this
testimony will remain behind as a witness, and on this account I am not
slow to reveal the secrets of the Art, so far as I may do it without
prejudice to my vow. I have instructed you with sufficient clearness how
to prepare the White Tincture. But when my master had declared all these
things to me, he said that many students have by patient and unwearied
diligence independently discovered this our White Stone and Tincture, as
if they had derived their knowledge from the wisest of masters; but that
scarce one in fifteen kingdoms possesses our Red Stone. With these
words, he fixed upon me

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

a steady and unfaltering gaze, and he saw that his speech had clouded my
countenance with sorrow. I answered: "Alas, what shall I do? for I love
knowledge far beyond all earthly wealth; moreover, the Red Tincture is
said to be a most precious substance, which has the virtue of prolonging
life. I should account the Red Stone a more glorious acquisition than
all the gold of the whole world." He replied that I was still a young
man, and that youth was prone to insolence and excess. Could I expect to
be enrolled among the Sages at the immature age of twenty-eight? I must
be a much older man before I could expect to have this secret unfolded
to me. "Alas, good master," I said, "though my body is still young and
my years are few, I beseech you to prove me, and you will see that my
mind has already attained the ripeness of mellow age." My master said no
more at the time, but I soon found that he was trying and testing my
character by a course of probationary training, after the manner of the
Sages—of which it would be both tedious and indiscreet to publish a
lengthy account. Finally, however, by the grace of God, he accounted me
worthy of this wonderful proof of his love and esteem, and imparted to
me the true secret of preparing the Red Tincture. To inquire into the
manner of its preparation would be an aimless quest before the White
Tincture has been prepared. Both Medicines are composed from the same
substance, in the same vessel; and by the same methods, until the living
matters have been mortified. Then the material and shape of the vessel,
and the degree of chemical treatment, must be changed. But my heart
beats violently, and my hands tremble, when I speak of this glorious
thing. Hermes said a true word when he exclaimed: "Fire and Azoth are
sufficient." The expositor of Hermes and Aristotle, in the treatise
appended to their works, makes a most startling assertion, when he says
that Albertus Magnus, and Bacon, the Minorite friar, had no knowledge of
the manner in which the Red Stone is multiplied by augmentation. This
writer was well aware what he was saying, as my master proved to me by
incontrovertible arguments. I myself have never actually prepared the
Red Tincture as yet, because I was disheartened by being robbed of my
whole wealth of chemical materials and implements—as I set forth at
length in a preceding chapter. But I understand the method of its
preparation perfectly,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and am able to explain it to others. Those who have ventured to unfold
this grand arcanum to their disciples say that the redness of this
delectable Stone is contained in its whiteness, and may be brought out,
and made to appear to the Artist's ravished gaze by the gently
compelling heat of fire. Pandophilus, in "The Crowd" tells us that the
white Tincture is the type and shadow of the red; and Miriam confirms
his words by saying that the redness is concealed in the whiteness. An
admirable book entitled *Laudabile Sanctum*, ascribed to Hermes, uses
the following expression of the Red Tincture: "There lies the snowy wife
wedded to her red spouse." That is to say, in the white Tincture you
have a beautiful woman of snowy whiteness espoused to a red husband. If
your white Stone is exposed to the heat, and through the action of the
fire becomes red as blood, then the marriage is valid and perfect—as in
the act of copulation, if it be fruitful, the male seed obtains the
ascendancy, and assimilates the female seed to its own nature. That this
fact is so, those who have observed the nature of the embryo have been
taught by experience. When this has been brought about, our Stone is
perfected. The Sages say that it should be nourished with its own poison
till it has had enough. When this has been done, you may go wherever you
like, for it will defray all your expenses. Thus, then, I have expounded
to you the subtle part of the work with all its appurtenances, and more
I need not, cannot, and will not, reveal.

#### CHAPTER VI.

With respect to concords, let me say that there should be no serious
difference between those things which ought to agree For difference
produces discord, and discord would make all your labour of none effect.
Whoever wishes to practise our Art, should be guided by five rules or
concords. The first rule to be observed is, that the student's mind
should be in perfect harmony with his work. The desire of knowing this
Art should hold a dominant place in his mind; else all his labours will
come to nothing. The second concord is, that he should know the
difference between this Art and those who profess it. The third kind of
harmony is that which should exist between the work and the instruments.
The fourth concord assigns to the work

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

the place which is most suited to its execution. The fifth concord is
the sympathy which should exist between your work and the celestial
sphere. I will say something about each one of these five rules, and
begin with the first. Few students possess the gift of perseverance.
They are in a great hurry and the work seems too long. They wish you to
do violence to Nature, and the zeal of some is so much like a straw fire
that at the end of six months it has quite burned down. Many change
their minds after a week, some after twenty-four hours. Some believe in
our Art most fervently for a month; but at the end of the month they
will have nothing more to do with it. For such persons it would be
better to stay their hands at once than to waste their time with the
study of our Art Let these butterflies flutter whither they will. But
let us, before we put our hands to this work, learn with our hearts the
truth of the saying; "Let us do everything from beginning to end
strenuously, and yet softly and gently." All foolish and double-minded
people must necessarily be fickle and unstable; and it is natural that
simple folk, who have been stripped of all their savings by heartless
impostors, should conceive a deep-seated aversion to our Art. But only
men of constant and persevering minds are fitted to be students thereof.
If any such man undertakes the study of this science, whether he be a
layman or a priest, a merchant, a knight, an abbot, or a gentleman, he
is not likely to fail of success: for his mind is in harmony with his
work. The second concord to which attention must be paid in the pursuit
of this Art, is the securing of fit and suitable assistants. No
assistant should be chosen that is not sober, discreet, and diligent,
faithful, vigilant, a keeper of secrets, and a pure liver; a man of
clean hands and of a delicate touch, obedient and humbly content to
carry out your orders. Such ministers alone will give close heed to your
work, and secure you against all avoidable accidents. Do not imagine,
however, that two or three of these will be sufficient for the
completion of your experiment. If the quantity of your substance be
moderate, eight such servants will be required, but if the quantity be
small, the work may be done by four. Of this number, one half should be
on duty, while the other half sleep, or are at church; for this
experiment cannot be brought to a successful termination, unless it is
continually

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

attended to, by night as well as by day; and with the exception of the
Sabbath, your men should relieve each other in the morning and in the
evening. While they are on duty, they should carefully eschew every
wicked word and deed; otherwise your work will most certainly be marred.
For this reason your assistants ought either to be all men or all women,
and persons of both sexes ought not to be set to work together. If your
assistants are members of your own family, you should seek to inspire
them with love for the work, and interest in its success; for nothing is
more important than that the hearts of your workers should be in their
work. Our third rule was, that the instruments should be of a kind
suited to the labour to be performed. This rule is not fully apprehended
by many students of our science. It means that the different parts of
the experiment require their own proper utensils, of a substance and
shape closely adapted to the particular purpose which they are intended
to serve. The divisions and separations of our substance are best
carried out in small vessels; a broad vessel is required for
humectation, while the process of circulation demands a vessel of still
larger capacity. Those used for precipitation should be long; those
which you employ for the purpose of sublimation may be both short and
long, while narrow vessels, four inches high, are more appropriate in
the process of correction. Some vessels are made of lead, and some of
dead clay. Dead clay is that which has been carefully hardened, and
having been mixed with sand and gravel, is capable of sustaining a high
degree of fierce heat. Other kinds of clay burst when exposed to the
fire, and you should reject vessels made of them. Other vessels, again,
are made of stone, and endure the test of heat admirably; but vessels of
this kind, which are both impervious to water and proof against fire,
are now very rarely to be obtained in England; but where they can be
had, they are invaluable for our purpose. All other vessels are made of
glass, and are admirably adapted to prevent the volatile substance from
escaping. In our country they are made of ashes and siliceous material,
but elsewhere of little stones. The best kind of glass for our purpose
is that made of cinders which have been left to glow in the hearth all
night; a still harder and more durable kind is prepared out of smelted
glass

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

sherds. What has been said will guide you in selecting the most suitable
kind of vessel; as to its form or shape you must consult your own common
sense: it is. however, clear that you should, in this case, as in all
others, strive to follow as closely as possible in the footsteps of
Nature. Moreover, the size and shape of your vessel should be in
proportion to the quantity of your substance, and to all the other
conditions of the experiment. The general principles which should
determine your choice are well laid down by Albertus Magnus in his book
on "Minerals." The whole secret was disclosed in a few words by my
master, when he said: "If God had not given us a vessel, His other gifts
would have been nothing worth—and that vessel is glass." Some other
instruments are also needed, such, for instance, as suitable furnaces.
The ancients describe a special furnace for use in every stage of our
Art, devised differently according to the bent of their minds. Many of
these, however, are quite unsuitable, some being too broad, others too
high, and others out of harmony with the requirements of Nature. Some of
the furnaces described in these books may be used, but by far the
greater number ought to be rejected, seeing that they' are the
inventions of men who only appeared to be, but were not really, Sages.
Of the furnace which can be most highly recommended, you will find a
pictorial representation in this volume. One which was unknown to the
Ancients, I am proud to call my own invention. I set it up, in the first
instance, at a very considerable outlay. But its advantages more than
make good its cost. It is so constructed that sixty different chemical
operations, for which divers kinds of heat are required, may be carried
on in it at the same time, and a very small fire of only a foot square
supplies a sufficient degree of heat for all these processes. As all may
not be sure of this instrument, it has not been represented in a
picture. Another furnace will serve for sixty or more glasses, each of
them standing in the same degree of heat, as you may see by the picture.
I have also invented another furnace, which is of great use in the work
of separation, exaltation, and disjunction or division, and is most
'admirably adapted for the processes of ablution or purging,
desiccation, and preparation. These six operations may with great ease
be performed in it at the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

same time, and one fire suffices for them all. But it is a new
invention, and I cannot afford to describe it more minutely. might also
set down a description of another furnace, which is more dangerous than
all the rest. It was constructed by the Ancients for the preparation of
our Magnesia; and they said that while it could not with impunity be
touched for fear of the flame which rose from the wood, yet a linen rag
might be placed on it without being scorched. This ingeniously
constructed furnace I was fortunate enough to re-invent, and with its
aid I was enabled to perform many wonderful experiments. This furnace
and its structure must remain a secret for some years longer; but let me
warn you, in conclusion, to be very careful in the selection and
structure of your furnace. It must be so arranged as to enable you to
regulate the supply of heat, and to abate the fierceness of the flame at
any moment. If a man does not understand and know the use of his tools
and instruments, all his work will be done in a casual, haphazard
manner, and it will be impossible for him to anticipate success with any
degree of certainty. Therefore, let me once more repeat my warning: See
to your instruments, and test their quality before you set about your
work. The fourth rule is also most important. The experiment cannot
succeed unless it be performed in a suitable place. Some places must be
always dry, free from air and excess of light such as is caused by the
bright rays of the sun. Others cannot be too much illuminated. The
places more fitted for other parts of the work, are humid and cold. But
violent draughts should be carefully avoided throughout. Hence a spot
must be wisely chosen to fulfil all the requirements of the different
parts of the work. The Sages tell us, in their enigmatic style, that our
substance should be prepared within nine bars. Astrologers say that it
is a singular mark of Divine grace if a man can find the right place for
our work. For many things produce wonderful effects in some places, but
are entirely barren of results in others; and opposite consequences are
often produced by the same thing in different places. The explanation of
these facts is to be found in the knowledge that different places are
differently influenced by the celestial bodies, just as a magnet, for
instance, affects a needle differently in different latitudes. For this
reason the Sages have declared that some places are well, and others
ill,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

suited to our work. But the very worst of all possible places are those
which have been defiled by lechery.

The fifth rule is well known to the learned. There should exist a
certain harmony between the celestial spheres and our work. Nothing on
earth is so simple or so easily influenced as the elements of our Stone;
and when they are being prepared they obey their own proper
constellations, as the needle yields to the influence of the magnet. Let
this amicable concord prevail, then, in a direct and fiery ascendent,
and let your happy and favourable ascendent be in fortunate aspect with
his Lord. The work should be sheltered from all adverse and evil
influences; if these cannot beset aside, let them have a trine aspect.
When you prepare the White Tincture, let the Moon be fortunate, as also
the Lord of the Fourth House, which is the Treasure of Hidden Things,
according to the old Sages. The Sixth House must be favourable for the
servants. Preserve your work from all great impediments, and see that it
be not affected by the adverse constellation of your Nativity. The
virtue of the mover of the orb is the formal influence; the virtue of
the eighth sphere is instrumental to it; the virtue of the planet is
proper and special; and that of the elements is material, and embodies
the working of the other agents. The first resembles the genius of the
operator; the second is analogous to his hands; the third corresponds to
his instruments; and the fourth answers to the substance which is
prepared. Let the things on earth correspond to things in heaven, and
you will obtain the Elixir, and become a great Master. Do not trust to
Geomancy, which is a superstitious Art; nor to all Astrologers, because
this science is secret; like that of Alchemy. Necromancy God forbids,
and the Church condemns; therefore, if you wish for success, let your
hands be pure from all superstitious practices. Necromancy is of the
Devil, and a lying Art. God will bless you if you give yourself wholly
to the study of our own Blessed Art. In the next chapter I will speak
about the regulation of the fire.

#### CHAPTER VII.

Would you know the perfect Master? It is he who understands the
regulation of the fire, and its degrees. Nothing will

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

prove to you so formidable an impediment as ignorance of the regimen- of
heat and fire; for our whole Art may be looked upon as being
concentrated in this one thing, seeing it is all important for the
proper development of our substance that the degree of heat which is
brought to bear on it should be neither too great nor too small. In
regard to this point many learned men have gone grievously astray. (1)
The degree of heat which is employed for the scalding of pigs and geese,
is that which we require for our decoction of intermediate minerals, and
for the purpose of covering the Litharge with sweat. (2) The degree of
heat which is sufficient for drying thin linen is good for our air in
thirty operations; for the purpose of division you may employ the degree
of heat used by cooks in roasting meat. (3) A similar degree of heat
with a circular fire will be found useful for the separation of the
dividents. (4) But for the circulation of the elements you will require
white heat, which must be- maintained at an even temperature, without
either increase or diminution, until the whole operation is
accomplished. Moreover, there ought not to be in this fire any moisture
that can be perceived by the touch, or seen with the eye. (5) There also
is such a thing as a moist fire, though the expression sounds like a
contradiction in terms. This fire should be used at a certain stage of
the work, in order to remove the substances which adhere to the sides of
the vessel. The same degree of heat is also employed to dilute thick
substances. The Sages declare that, in its highest degree, it causes and
generates an even dryness, and that its effect here coincides with that
of dry heat in the first degree. (6) There is also another fire which is
employed for the purpose of drying substances steeped in moisture. (7)
Another variety of fire is that of conservation, because by its
operation all things are parched up. (8) In the preparation of Magnesia
we use the effusion of fire, which is full of danger, not only to the
work, but also to the Master, who may even lose his life by its noxious
effects. For this reason you should carefully protect your mouth, ears,
eyes, and nose, as the smoke of this fire is ten times more baneful than
poison. By neglecting this caution many students have sustained
considerable injuries. (9) A corrosive fire answers the purpose of
judiciously separating kindred

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

elements. One moment of excess, one moment of premature diminution, may
mar the labour of months. He that regulates the fire aright is worthy of
being hailed as a great Master of the Fire. It is exceedingly difficult
to tell the exact degree of heat which any given fire will produce; and
here the sense of sight is the only reliable test. No sound or
intelligible directions can be given in writing: the only schoolmistress
that can impart to you a thorough knowledge of this branch of our Art is
experience. It is in regard to this variety of heat that Anaxagoras
says: "Nobody is all at once an accomplished Sage." (10) The next kind
of heat is of a consuming fierceness. It is employed to smelt very hard
minerals. It cannot be too fierce or powerful, even though it may
occasionally be necessary to keep it up for some length of time. (11)
The next variety of heat is that of calcination, and is used for the
purging of impure metals, the essential qualities of which would be
impaired by smelting. (12) The kind of heat used for sublimation comes
next, and by its means volatile minerals may be sublimed. (13) The last
variety of heat is the most important of all. It should be employed at
the time of the projection of our Stone. But experience is a good
teacher, and I will say no more, except that he who makes a mistake at
this point, must begin the work over again.

I have now told you all things as plainly as if I had been describing to
you the way to this or that town. I have, as it were, named every
county, river, bridge, and village that has to be passed, and, with this
my guide-book in his hand, a judicious traveller may easily find his
way. A wise and intelligent man may, by means of this Book, discover the
secret of our science; for the foolish and dull-witted it was not
intended, and it will not teach them anything. Our Science is the height
of earthly knowledge, and is to be attained by neither Pope nor Emperor
through their rank, influence, or power, but only by virtue, and by
Divine grace. Our Stone cannot be discovered or perfected unless it be
sought with intense devotion. In the works of the Ancients, understood
in the light of this my Ordinal, the truth of the matter is fully set
forth; the present Book, in particular, was written for the purpose of
resolving all your doubts; here everything is in its proper place, and
nothing is wanting. Time was when I would cheerfully have paid down a
thousand pounds for

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the contents of this volume; and this last chapter I would not have
missed for three hundred pounds.

Do not wonder, Masters and Friends, that our Science is here so plainly
expounded: I set pen to paper with the requirements of the common people
in view. For just because the vulgar are not instructed in this
knowledge, infinite wealth is annually wasted in this country, as all
Sages know, and many others of all ranks are daily reduced to beggary.
Study our Art, then, ye uninstructed, and scorn to abide in fatuous
ignorance. It is better for you to take to this study late than never.

Let all that are benefitted by the reading of this Ordinal offer up
prayers for my soul, and for the living and the dead.

In the year of our Lord 1477 this Book was begun.

Glory be to God!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Testament of Cremer](hm203)
