[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm212)  [Next](hm214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. II*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

###### THE

# ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER,

###### OR

### A FOURFOLD FIGURE,

##### EXHIBITING ANALYTICALLY TO ALL THAT ENTER THIS MUSEUM THE MOSAICO-HERMETIC SCIENCE OF THINGS ABOVE AND THINGS BELOW.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE
I.](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg)  
FIGURE I.  
</span>

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE
II.](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg)  
FIGURE II.  
</span>

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span id="img_fig03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE
III.](tn/fig03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig03.jpg)  
FIGURE III.  
</span>

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

<span id="img_fig04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE
IV.](tn/fig04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig04.jpg)  
FIGURE IV.  
</span>

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

### THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER.

\_\_\_\_\_

#### A KEY TO THE FOURFOLD FIGURE,

\_\_\_\_\_

##### [FIGURE I.](#img_fig01)

BONUM INFINITUM VEL LUMEN GRATIÆ = The Infinite Good or the Light of
Grace. TRIUNITAS = Trinity in Unity. ‏יהוה‎, = Jehovah. PATER, FILIUS,
ET SPIRITUS SANCTUS = Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. MUNDUS ARCHETYPUS =
The Archetypal World. SERAPHIM, CHERUBIM, THRONI = Seraphim, Cherubim,
Thrones, *i.e.*, *Hierarchiæ, Classis Prima* = First Class of the
Hierarchy. DOMINATIONES, PRINCIPATUS, POTESTATES = Rulers,
Principalities, and Powers, *Hierarchiæ Classis Secunda* = Second Class
of the Hierarchy. VIRTUTES, ARCHANGELI, ANGELI = Virtues, Archangels,
Angels, *i.e.*, *Hierarchiæ Classis Tertia* = Third Class of the
Hierarchy. MUNDUS INTELLIGENTIARUM = The World of Rational Beings.

HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF HOSTS;  
ALL THE EARTH IS FULL OF HIS GLORY.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

MARCELLIUS PALINGENIUS (in Zod. Vit., Book ix.): Great Father of Gods,
Highest Power of the World, than whom Thought knows nothing greater; far
from the bodily world, yet forming all Bodies, those which cannot
change,

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

and those which are destroyed by the lapse of time; Beginning without a
beginning; Fountain from which all manner of good things flow forth;
Ruler and Multiplier of Nature; Who comprehendest All Things, yet art
comprehended of none; Infinite Majesty, Goodness, Wisdom, Life, Order,
Beauty, Perfection, Mind, Truth,—Light, Way, Strength; dwelling nowhere,
and yet dwelling everywhere; immovable, yet constantly moving all
things: Of whom, To whom, and Through whom are all. things; always
remaining the same, unchangeable through all time: Greatest of Causes,
who, revolving according to a fixed law the starry heavens, dost govern
the circle of human Destiny; King of Kings, waited on and worshipped by
thousands of Angelic Hosts singing joyous Hymns in the Infinite Domain
of Light, beyond the uttermost borders of the \[lower\] World, where is
the fit abode of true Archetypal Things; Thee I worship, to Thee I pray,
Thee I reverently adore. Deign to look on me with gracious eye, and hear
my voice when I cry to Thee. Send to me the rays of Thy Light, dispel
the darkness of my soul, weighed down by the grossness of a mortal body.
Grant me to find the Right Way, lest hurtful error, vain credulity, and
blind opinion drag me headlong to the ruinous domain of falsehood. For
if without Thee a mortal mind or human strength strive to rise upward,
their waxen wings are melted, and they fall headlong, like Icarus of
old. Without Thee, I cannot see the hidden depths of Divine Truth, or
the art and skill by which salvation is attained. Grant unto me,
therefore, most gracious King of Kings, that I may know Thee and please
Thee; then that I may know myself, what I am, the reason of my life on
earth, whence I came, and whither I am going, what is my duty in this
life, and what I must eschew—so that when Lachesis has finished the
thread of my life, and the last hour has cast my weary body into the
Tomb, Death may be unto mc a grateful rest, and the haven of peace.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

#### [FIGURE II.](#img_fig02)

MUNDUS ELEMENTARIS = Elementary World.

The First Circle contains the Zodiacal Symbols.

SECOND CIRCLE.

*Capricornus tenet Genua* = Capricorn holds the knees.

*Aquarius habet Tibias* = Aquarius rules the thighs.

*Pisces gubernant Pedes* = The Fishes govern the feet.

*Aries tenet in Microcosmo Caput* = Aries holds the head of the
microcosm.

*Taurus tenet Collum et Guttur* = Taurus holds the neck and the throat.

*Gemini tenent Scapulas et Manus* = Gemini hold the shoulders and the
hands.

*Cancer regit Pectus et Pulmonum* = Cancer rules the breast and the
lungs.

*Leo imperat Stomacho* = The Lion governs the stomach.

*Virgo tenet Hepar, Intestina, et circa Ventrem* = The Virgin holds the
liver, the intestines, and the parts about the stomach.

*Libra cantina Renes et Vesicam* = The Balance contains the reins and
the bladder.

*Scorpio gubernat Naturæ Secreta* = The Scorpion governs the secret
parts of Nature.

*Sagittarius regit Coxas* = Sagittarius governs the thighs.

THIRD CIRCLE.

JANUARIUS, FEBRUARIUS, *Melancholia* = January, February, Melancholy.

MARTIUS, *Ver* = March—Spring.

APRILIS, *Pituita* = April—Phlegm.

MAYUS = May. JUNIUS, *Æstas* = June—Summer.

JULIUS, *Bilis* = July—Bile.

AUGUSTUS = August. SEPTEMBER, *Autumnus*= September—Autumn.

OCTOBER, NOVEMBER, *Sanguis* = Sanguine Temperament.

DECEMBER, *Hiems* = Winter.

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

FOURTH CIRCLE.

*Mineræ* = Minerals. IGNIS = Fire. ÆRIS = Air. AQUÆ = Waters. *Metalla*
= Metals. TERRÆ = Earth.

FIFTH TO ELEVENTH CIRCLES.

<div align="center">

|                      |                     |                                 |                     |
|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------|
| *The Seven Planets*. | *The Seven Angels*. | *The 7 Members of Microcosmus*. | *The Seven Metals*. |
| SATURN.              | *Oriphiel*.         | SPLEEN.                         | *Lead*.             |
| JUPITER.             | *Zachariel*.        | LIVER.                          | *Tin*.              |
| MARS.                | *Samuel*.           | DIAPHRAGM.                      | *Iron*.             |
| SUN.                 | *Michael*.          | HEART.                          | *Gold*.             |
| VENUS.               | *Anael*.            | REINS.                          | *Copper*.           |
| MERCURY.             | *Raphael*.          | LUNGS.                          | *Quicksilver*.      |
| MOON.                | *Gabriel*.          | BRAIN.                          | *Silver*.           |

</div>

TWELFTH CIRCLE.

TRIA SUNT PRINCIPIA, TRES SUNT MUNDI, TRES SUNT AETATES, TRIA SUNT REGNA
= There are Three Principles, Three Worlds, Three Ages, and Three
Kingdoms.

\_\_\_\_

THEOLOGIA (Theology). ALCHYMIA (Alchemy). GRAMMATICA (Grammar).
DIALECTICA (Dialectics). RHETORICA (Rhetoric). MUSICA (Music). PHYSICA
(Physics). ASTRONOMIA (Astronomy). ARITHMETICA (Arithmetic). GEOMETRIA
(Geometry). MEDICINA (Medicine). JURISPRUDENTIA (Jurisprudence).

NATURA = NATURE.

INMOST CIRCLE.

*Magna dignitas fidelium animarum ut unaquæquæ habeat*, *etc*. = It is
the great honour of faithful souls, that from their very birth an angel
is appointed to preserve and keep each of them.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

The Author of the "Handbook of Physical Science Restored" writes as
follows:

§ 1. God is an Eternal Being, an Infinite Unity, the Radical Principle
of all things. His Essence is Infinite Light. His Power—Omnipotence; His
Will—Perfect Goodness; His Wish—Absolute Reality. As we strive to think
of Him, we plunge into the Abyss of Silence, of infinite Glory. § 2.
Many Sages have held that an Archetypal World existed long before the
world of sense, when the Archetypal Light began to unfold Himself, and
set forth in an Ideal World a counterpart of the Divine Mind. This
belief is borne out by the words of Hermes Trismegistus, who says that
when God changed His form, the universe was suddenly revealed and put
forth in the Light of Actuality—this world being nothing but a visible
Image of a Hidden God. This is what the Ancients meant when they said
that Pallas leapt forth in divine perfection from the forehead of
Jupiter, with the aid of Vulcan (or Divine Light). § 3. The Eternal
Father of All Things, being not less wise in the ordering, than powerful
in the creation, of the world, has made the whole Universe to cohere by
means of secret influences and mutual subjection and obedience, things
below being analagous to things above, and *vice versâ;* so that both
ends of the world are nevertheless united by a real bond of natural
cohesion. Thus Hermes tells us that things below are the same as things
above, and that things above are analagous to things below. § 4. He who
looks upon Nature as anything but the constant expression of God's Will,
is an Atheist; every smallest part of the great universe is constantly
vitalized and conserved by the Spirit of the Divine Master, and there is
no life or existence apart from His consciously exerted Will. It was He
that in the beginning moved upon the face of the waters, and brought
forth the Actual out of the Chaos of Potentiality.

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

#### [FIGURE III.](#img_fig03)

FIRST CIRCLE.

‏יהוה‎ = Jehovah, *i.e.*, Α Ω = Alpha and Omega

SECOND CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 2.—The earth was empty and void, and darkness was upon the
face of the deep.

THIRD CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 2.—And the Spirit of God moved the face of the waters.

FOURTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 3, 4.—And God said: Let there be light: and there was light.
. . . And God saw the light that it was good.

FIFTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 4, 5.—And He divided the light from the darkness. And He
called the light day, and the darkness He called night. And the evening
and the morning were the first day.

SIXTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 6-8.—And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of
the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.

And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the
firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

And God called the firmament Heaven, and the evening and the morning
were the second day.

Psalm xxxiii. 6.—By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all
the host of them by the breath of His mouth.

Psalm cxlviii. 4, 5.—Praise the Lord, ye heavens of heavens, and ye
waters that be above the heavens. Let them praise the name of the Lord:
for He commanded, and they were created.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

Daniel, iii. S9, 60.—Praise the Lord, ye heavens; bless Him and magnify
Him for ever. O ye waters that be above the firmament, praise ye the
Lord: bless Him and magnify Him for ever.

SEVENTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 9-13.—And God said: Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it
was so.

And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the
waters called He seas: and God saw that it was good.

And God said: Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in
itself upon the earth: and it was so.

And the earth brought forth grass and herb yielding seed after his kind,
and the tree yielding fruit whose seed was in itself, after his kind:
and God saw that it was good.

And the morning and the evening were the third day.

Psalm, civ. 5, 14.—Who laid the foundations of the earth that it should
not be removed for ever. He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle,
and herb for the service of man; that he may bring forth food out of the
earth: and wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his
face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.

EIGHTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 14-19.—And God said: Let there be lights in the firmament of
heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and
for seasons, and days and years.

And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give light
upon the earth: and it was so.

And God made two lights: the greater light to rule the day, and the
lesser light to rule the night; He made the stars also.

And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the
earth,

And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light
from the darkness.

And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

Sirach, xliii. 1.—He made the lofty firmament in its glory, and the
stars, a vision of beauty. The eastern Sun announces the day. It is a
wonder of the Most High. Great is God who created it, and bade it run
its course Moreover, the Moon shines throughout the world, in due
season, dividing months and years. It waxes and wanes in wonderful
guise. The host of the stars shines gloriously in the firmament of
heaven. God, the Most High, has commanded them to light up the world. By
the word of the Lord they are fixed, and do not neglect their vigils.

NINTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 20-23.—And God said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly
the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the
earth in the open firmament of heaven.

And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth,
which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every
winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

And God blessed them, saying: Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the
waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

Psalm civ., 24.—O Lord, how manifold are Thy works: In wisdom hast Thou
made them all: the earth is full of Thy riches. So is this great and
wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great
beasts. There go the ships; there is that leviathan whom thou hast made
to take his pastime therein. These all wait on Thee, that Thou mayest
give them their meat in due season.

TENTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 24-31—And God said: Let the earth bring forth the living
creature after his kind, cattle and creeping thing and beast of the
earth, after his kind: and it was so.

And God made the beast of the earth, after his kind, and cattle after
their kind, and everything that creepeth upon the, earth, after his
kind; and God saw that it was good.

And God said: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let
them have dominion over the fish of the

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him:
male and female created He them.

And God blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that
moveth upon the earth.

And God said: Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed which is
upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit
of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to
everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have
given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

And God saw everything that He had made, and behold it was very good.
And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

GEORGE RIPLEY, in the Prologue to his "Twelve Gates," says: O
incomprehensible Light, glorious in Majesty, the brightness of whose
rays obscures our lights: O Unity in the substance, and Trinity in the
Godhead. Merciful purifier of souls, who dost exalt us from this
troublesome vale of vanity to heaven. Infinite power and wisdom,
unspeakable goodness, sustain and govern me day by day so that I may
displease Thee in nothing. O Thou with whom are all treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, out of whose infinite mind this universal frame sprang
forth in a moment of time—when heaven and earth were made by Thy word,
and all that is in them by the breath of Thy mouth—grant unto me grace
to know Thy blessedness and Thy goodness. In no other way shall I come
to the knowledge of the Blessed Stone. As Thou didst make all things out
of *one* chaos, so let me be skilled to evolve our microcosm (little
world) out of *one* substance in its three aspects of Magnesia, Sulphur,
and Mercury!

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

#### [FIGURE IV.](#img_fig04)

‏יהוה‎ = Jehovah.

ANNUS SOLARIS =The Solar Year. ANNUS STELLATUS = The Year of the Stars.
ANNUS VENTORUM = The Year of the Winds.

*Mercurius Philosophorum* = Mercury of the Sages.

*Mercurius Corporeus* = Corporeal Mercury.

*Mercurius Vulgaris* = Common Mercury.

*Sulphur Combustibile* = Combustible Sulphur.

*Sulphur Fixum* = Fixed Sulphur.

*Sulphur Æthereum* = Volatile Sulphur.

*Sal Terrenum* = Earthy Salt.

*Sal Elementorum* = Elementary Salt.

*Sal Centrale* = Central Salt.

*Ignes quatuor ad opus requiruntur* = Four kinds of fire are requisite
for the work.

*Phœnix* = Phœnix     *Aquila* = Eagle.

\_\_\_\_\_

BY THE WORD OF THE LORD WERE THE HEAVENS ESTABLISHED, AND THEIR HOSTS BY
THE BREATH OF HIS MOUTH. THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD HAS FILLED THE WORLD.
ALL THINGS ARE SATISFIED WITH THY GOODNESS, O LORD. THOU TURNEST AWAY
THY FACE, THEY ARE TROUBLED. THOU TAKEST AWAY THY SPIRIT, THEY DIE AND
RETURN AGAIN TO THEIR DUST. THOU SENDEST FORTH THY SPIRIT AND THEY ARE
CREATED, AND RE NEWEST THE FACE OF THE EARTH. THY GLORY IS FOR
EVERLASTING.

\_\_\_\_\_

THE EMERALD TABLE OF HERMES.

It is most true, it is without error, it is the sum of verity: That
which is beneath is like that which is above, and that which is above is
like that which is below, for the performance

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

of the wonders of one thing. As all things were created from the Mind of
One, so all things arose by modification of this One Thing. It is so
with our Substance. Its father is the Sun, its mother the Moon. The Wind
bore it in its belly. The earth is its nurse. The father of all, the
Thelema of the whole world, is here. Its strength is undiminished if it
is changed into earth. Separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from
the gross, gently, but with great skill. It rises from earth to heaven,
and again descends to the earth, and receives the strength of things
above and of things below. Thus you have the GLORY OF THE WHOLE WORLD,
and all darkness will flee away from you. This is the strength of every
strong thing: it overcomes every subtle thing, and penetrates all
solids. IN THIS WAY WAS THE WORLD CREATED. These are the wonderful
modifications, the manner of which I have described. Hence I am called
Hermes Trismegistus, having the three parts of the wisdom of the whole
world. I have now said all I have to say concerning the operation of the
Sun.

\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addendum](hm214)
