[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. II*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ADDENDUM.

The verses which accompany the frontispiece to the first volume may be
translated thus: The things that are in the realms above are also in the
realms beneath; What heaven shews is oft found on earth. Fire and
flowing water are contrary one to another; Happy thou, if thou canst
unite them: let it suffice thee to know this!

The Cross on the title-page of "The Golden Tract" bears the following
inscription: All Glory is a Birth in the Sand. The Stone unites in
itself all blessings.

The Symbol at the end of the Preface contains, within the second circle,
the names of the four elementary natures, Air, Fire, Earth, and Water,
and in the central circle the words—Marvel of Nature.

The inscription on the Emblem which accompanies the title page of "The
Golden Age Restored" should be read thus: There are three marvels—God
and Man—Mother and Virgin—Three and One. The Centre in the Triangle of
the Centre.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

The Symbol which accompanies "The Book Alze" contains these words: Visit
the interior parts of the earth: by rectifying thou shalt find the
Hidden Stone.

The inscription on the Symbol of the Seventh Key of Basil Valentine
signifies: The Seal of Hermes. Winter. Spring. Summer. Autumn. Water.
The Salt of the Philosophers. That upon the Symbol of the Tenth Key: I
am issued from Hermogenes. Hyperion elected me. Without Jamsuph I am
compelled to perish.

In the second volume, the Diagram which accompanies "The Ordinal of
Alchemy" may be explained as follows:

*Mundus Archetypus* = Archetypal World.

*Deus Jehovah Bonum Infinitum* = God Jehovah the Infinite Good.

ii\. Angels.    iii. Ether.     iiii. Elements.

*Bonum Finitum* = finite Good.

*Cælum* = Heaven. *Angeli* = Angels. *Stellæ* = Stars.

*Homo* = Man. *Meteor* = Meteors. *Aves* = Birds.

*Bestiæ* = Beasts. *Pisces* = Fishes.

AER = Air. TERRA = Earth. AQUA = Water.

*Planetæ* = Planets. *Lapides* = Stones.

*Metalla* = Metals. *Sal* = Salt.

*Infernalis* = That which is under the earth.

*Ignis* = Fire. *Procellæ* = Winds. *Inane* = The Void.

*Tenebræ* = Darkness. *Abyssus* = Abyss.

CHAOS, MALUM, SATAN = Evil.

The inscription on the Medal in the text of "The Golden Calf" reads: The
Divine Metamorphosis exhibited at Prague, Jan. 15, 1648, in the presence
of his most sacred Majesty, Ferdinand III. *Nummi Crassities:* The
thickness of the Medal.

 

 

 

FINIS.

 

 

 

 

 
