[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu03)  [Next](mu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER 1.

### OUR EARLY HISTORY

### AND

### SIXTY SUCCESSFUL YEARS OF SECRET SERVICE

On December 25th, in the year 1875, a small group of generous and deeply
sincere men and women met for the purpose of dedicating their lives and
their fortunes to the establishment of a world-wide commercial
organization which would, by its **"works"** as well as its
**"words,"—**fittingly commemorate the birth of mankind's greatly
beloved exemplar and way-shower—**Christ Jesus**.

He,—in memory of whom the Christian era is dated,—taught men that "The
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,—and not afar off," and that they might
enter it at any time they were willing to obey the Golden Rule, and to
live in peace and brotherly love, dealing with one another as they would
be dealt with. He knew that our world's resources and its glorious
attractions existed in limitless inexhaustible abundance and that they
had been placed here for the happiness and equal use of all mankind.
**He knew that there was no need for rivalry or greedy competition**.

That mankind might be persuaded to prove Jesus' promises and to
practically apply them on a world-wide scale, and in all branches of
human relationships, and that there might be erected to His memory **a
monument capable**

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

**of exemplifying the "Spirit," as well as the "Letter," of His
teachings**, this little group of men and women pledged their lives, and
their combined fortunes of over sixty millions ($60,000,000.00) of
dollars, to the establishment of an organization which would devote its
resources and the energies of its members, to a discovery of the basic
causes of world-wide poverty,—wars and human suffering.

**The program they had determined upon, was quite unlike any ever before
attempted. They proposed to deal, not with results or effects called
Poverty and War, but with their causes, and if need be to spend their
entire fortunes and lives in a world-wide investigation and preparation
of plans for the annihilation of what they believed to be humanly
directed causes of mankind's endless fears, insecurity and suffering**.

They had become convinced that poverty, ignorance, superstition, fear,
hate and war were largely, if not entirely, the effects of such
**humanly directed causes**, perpetuated century after century by those
individuals who found it financially profitable to do so, and who had
reached such—a point of moral idiocy that they no longer considered the
sufferings of their victims.

In no way could the men and women who gathered together that Christmas
Day, be classified as visionary impractical idealists, although the
vision which had gradually dawned in the thoughts of each one of them
during a period of many years, could only have been the out-growth of
the highest form of unselfed ideals. If we were permitted to mention the
names of some of the members of

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

that little group, they would be instantly recognized by the
well-informed people of every civilized nation on our earth today.

They each had experienced extreme poverty in earlier years and their
attainment to positions of wealth and prominence had not been by
visionary dreaming, but by exercising intelligence, industry, and an
unyielding determination to break the shackles of such slavery. However,
success had not dimmed their memories, or caused them to forget their
tortures of hunger and privation, nor the fact that hundreds of millions
of men, women and little children were still hungry and poorly clad—and
tens of millions of them dying of starvation and exposure each year.

And so, on that Christmas Day, in the year 1875, a world-wide
organization was formed and given a name. A name which for over
fifty-eight years was to be known only by the members of that group, and
their immediate co-workers, but a name which throughout all of future
human history will stand as a beacon light of progress, forever
reminding the men and women of every age, that **the Universe itself is
their home**, and that there will never come a time when men will be
able to say that they know all there is to know, and that there is
nothing new to explore or to discover. For never will the Research
Department of The International Institute of Universal Research and
Administration cease making discoveries of which the human race should
be informed, nor cease from striving to be worthy of its name's
significance. It will never reach the stage where it has wholly
fulfilled its mission to the human race, of serving those whom its
founders considered

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

as their brothers and sisters, and desired to benefit. It will never
cease growing, nor enlarging its capacity to serve.

The major purpose of The International Institute of Universal Research
and Administration was to be the discovery and application of ways and
means by which the **"Golden Rule"** might be **"Practically" applied**
in all human relationships, in order that poverty and wars would no
longer occur, and men might learn to live in peace and happiness, in
this gloriously beautiful world home of ours. That men might learn to
enjoy its abundant resources,—which belong equally to us all, their eyes
need only be opened to the inexhaustible nature of the needful or
desirable things of life placed here on our earth in such endless
variety by our Creator. To open men's eyes to the needlessness of
poverty and war, and to prove to them the availability of the earth's
limitless resources, this was the task to which The Institute's founders
had set their hands.

People who have spent less time, effort or money in economic research,
may not yet be willing to heed the warnings which some of The
Institute's discoveries necessitate, nor to believe the promises which
other discoveries so filled with hope, now justify. Those who are
willing, not only to heed our Research Department's warnings and act in
accordance with its recommendations, but also to believe and accept its
promises, will be able,—(when they are sufficient in number),—to awaken
the intelligent right-thinking people of the world in time to prevent
another war; a war which is internationally planned by the world's

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> War Lords and
actual Rulers for the purpose of exterminating the educated and
religious inhabitants of the civilized nations, and of permanently
enslaving those who are not slaughtered during this world-wide holocaust
of deadly gases, poisons, death rays and searing flames.

The sparks which would release these forces of extermination—would be
scattered during the years 1935, 1936 and 1937. By October 1937, enough
war equipment would be in use, throughout the nations of the earth, to
bring about the complete extermination of over four hundred million
(400,000,000) of the world's educated and religious classes.

If the Institute's warnings are heeded and its recommendations accepted
quickly enough, there need be no civilization-destroying war, but
instead, mankind will experience an era of freedom, security and
luxurious abundance of the needful and desirable things of life such as
have never before been available to even the world's wealthiest or most
fortunate citizens. **We are prepared to prove that poverty is
perpetuated and wars are fought "solely" for the profit of those who
control the world's financial structure**.

Men are not inarticulate beasts of the field, incapable of voicing their
protests against injustice and needless poverty, nor are they
handicapped by the limited intelligence of an ostrich which hides its
head in the sand in order that by not seeing approaching danger it may
believe itself protected and safe. Intelligent creatures need not
hesitate nor be afraid to bring out from under cover the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

forces of greed, insane ambition and cruelty, which have for so long a
time enslaved the human race. The control by these soulless, unfeeling
task-masters, expressed as insane dreams of conquest, (by a few
individuals whom mankind have unwisely permitted to grow wealthy and
influential), can be broken with no more difficulty than that which
would be experienced by herds of cattle in overcoming the puny influence
of their herders, if they but recognized the strength of their own
combined numbers.

On that December Day, long years ago, the founders of The International
Institute of Universal Research and Administration **(to whom we shall
hereafter refer as "Our Sponsors")**, were fully aware of the truth of
the above statement. It was due to their recognition of the fact that
the human race was living in needless bondage to these task-masters of
greed and insane ambition, that they pledged their combined wealth of
over sixty millions of dollars to the establishment of a great
**"International Research Bureau,"** in order that the facts pertaining
to the specific nature of this bondage, and the truth regarding the
limitless quantity and variety of the world's resources, might be
brought—with adequate supporting proofs—to the attention of the
intelligent right-thinking people of our world.

Our Sponsors believed, (and their Research Department has since proven),
that the principal known resources of the earth had been systematically
withheld from mankind's use for many centuries, by a world-wide
organization composed of a small group of families in possession of
fabulous accumulations of wealth, which they were using

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to gradually pauperize and enslave the human race. They also believed
that these people, through an organization, and an executive board,
**(to which we shall hereafter refer as "War Lords" or "The World's
Hidden Rulers," and its "Money Changers"),** possessed complete control
through their followers and satellites, of the political parties,
governments and major utilities and industries of every civilized nation
on earth, and that every revolution or war of any consequence, during
the past number of centuries, had been planned and executed under their
direction, either for the purpose of financial gain or to safe-guard or
strengthen their political strangle-hold upon the world and its
citizens. Our Sponsors further believed that revolutions and wars were
planned and executed by these subversive influences for the two-fold
purpose of perpetuating poverty and of killing off the healthiest males
of the human race, each century, in order that the followers and
satellites of these Hidden Rulers might more readily exercise their
control over the world's resources and its peoples.

They knew that this organization of Hidden World Rulers had at its
disposal hundreds of billions of dollars in wealth, consisting of gold,
silver and jewelry accumulated during thousands of years, by families,
organizations and governments over which it had gradually gained
control; and that this incalculably vast accumulation of wealth was
under the complete unsupervised jurisdiction of an executive board
consisting of men who had dedicated their lives and talents to
furthering the plans of its original organizers. Age-old plans to
eventually exterminate the world's religious and educated classes, and
to destroy its educational, religious and humanitarian institutions,
(inasmuch

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

as they constitute the principal forces attempting to overthrow poverty
and war), and to place in their stead, an organization composed of these
maniacs,—or their descendants or heirs, permanently in control of the
human race and the resources of our earth. These insanely ambitious
moral idiots, (believing that they or their descendants will some day
have principalities of their own, and thousands of personal slaves at
their beck and call), willingly lend themselves to the furthering of
such a program.

Our Sponsors believed that when a member of the executive board of this
organization of Hidden World Rulers passes on, that the remaining
members, in order to maintain the necessary quota of executives, select
one of their most trusted and ambitious agents to take the place of the
deceased, and that for hundreds of years, the subversive plots of this
powerful and well hidden group have been successfully approaching the
time when the world's educated and religious classes are to be
exterminated.

**Our Sponsors also believed that there was no possible way of thwarting
these plots, other than to replace gold and silver as the world's medium
of exchange and basis of currency and money, with some form of money
which could never be accumulated in large quantities by any individual
or group of people, nor spent by anyone other than the one to whom it
was issued**. They believed that in no other way could the world-wide
strangle-hold of the "Hidden Rulers" be broken, since their thousands of
years of accumulations of gold, silver, jewels, and other easily stored
forms of wealth, had finally reached the point where their complete and
absolute control of world governments

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

would soon enable them to bring about the permanent enslavement of the
human race through the avenues of war.

As a result of former discoveries, it was believed that two great wars
would be fought. Although each of them would be conducted on a
world-wide scale, the first one would be planned and executed for the
dual purpose of pauperizing the peoples of the earth and of testing out
the potential slaughtering capacity of the war machinery which the
**"War Lords"** planned to use in their final war of extermination a few
years later. Furthermore, their news-collecting and dispensing agencies
would he fully tested and experienced in the promulgation and
dissemination of the necessary **"Fear and Hate-Generating Propaganda"**
required for the successful execution of any great war. At the
conclusion of the first war, all necessary data would be collected by
all nations in reference to any improvements required in the
construction of their final war machine, including the publicity
facilities as well as the actual munitions, armaments and necessary
machinery with which to slaughter vast numbers of human beings.
**Thereafter, a number of years would be devoted to perfecting their
plans and equipment, and further impoverishing the substantial class of
the world's citizens and its trained workers in order that the necessary
Poverty, Fear, Bitterness and Hate, (which constitute the human fuel
upon which the war propaganda machine must feed), would provide an
acceptable cause for revolutions and wars in the minds of the citizens
of the world's major nations.**

Religious, racial, and class antagonisms and hatreds,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

would in the meantime—through carefully prepared propaganda—be fully
inflamed, and the people of these various groups be crying out to be
allowed to tear at each other's throats like so many hate-incensed and
ravenous wolves. With such preparations, the world's Hidden Rulers would
experience but little difficulty in causing their final war of
extermination. With every nation fully armed and equipped, on the
pretext and seemingly laudable grounds of self-defense, it would be
childishly simple to ignite the fuse which would set off their bombs and
cannon, and bring about the slaughter of the hundreds of millions of
men, women and children whom they desire to exterminate. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)

In no other way than by murdering the educated and religious classes of
the world's population, could these "Hidden World Rulers" hope to bring
about the final destruction of their **two greatest enemies to permanent
and complete world control; namely, Mankind's Educational Systems and
their Enlightened Religious Institutions.**

On December 25th, in the year 1875, although each, of the men and
women—who had met together for the purposes previously referred to—had
conducted extensive individual investigations, they had been able to
only partly obtain the necessary substantiating data, but they had,
nevertheless, become convinced that the subversive influences we have
described not only existed but were rapidly consummating their program
to enslave the human

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

race. **The World War of 1914-18, and subsequent events, constitute at
least partial proof of the accuracy of their early conclusions.**

Centuries ago, Columbus believed that there was a land across the sea.
He not only did not know whether or not this was so, but in addition to
his own uncertainty even the most highly educated people of his day
ridiculed and persecuted him for this belief. Nevertheless, he searched
for the land which his intelligent convictions persuaded him existed,
and finally he found it. **He no longer just believed that it was there,
but he knew and could prove his claims to even the most skeptical of his
former tormentors, if they would but listen to his testimony or gaze
upon the evidence which he had gathered.**

**The founders of The International Institute of Universal Research and
Administration had even greater reason for their belief that the world's
resources existed in such vast abundance and variety that each member of
the human race could have over one hundred times as much as he had
formerly enjoyed, without exhausting these resources during a period of
millions of years.** They were also equally convinced that greed,
selfishness and cruelty bred into the hearts of men by the world's false
system of private profits, utterly unscrupulous competition, and its
civilization-destroying theory of **the "Survival of the Fittest,"** had
given birth to, and nurtured, cruel and insane ambitions in the minds of
men, until at that time there existed a group of fabulously wealthy
individuals with neither souls nor scruples, who had become moral idiots
dreaming of owning the world and enslaving its peoples.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

The Institute's founders did not know, in the year 1875, that their
beliefs were provable, but the results of previous years of research had
convinced them that they were. By the year 1919,—almost forty-four years
later, after spending millions of dollars of the money they had donated
to the service of humanity, and years of their lives, they no longer
just believed but instead, just as in the experience of Columbus in
verifying his convictions, they also had searched and found irrefutable
evidence and proof of their convictions. **They no longer just
believed—they knew!!!** Not only had they proven their theories (which
we have previously described herein) to be correct, but also much of an
indescribably startling nature. Even those to whom the evidences and
proofs were presented in the form of pictures, photostatic copies of
contracts, agreements, and plots for the enslavement of the human race,
found it difficult to believe that human beings could become such
swinish monsters. And none but those who had seen our Research
Department's pictures and authenticated hope-inspiring reports of the
world's vast inexhaustible resources, inventions and facilities for a
world-wide system of quantity production and equality of distribution of
the necessities and luxuries of life, could believe that such limitless
abundance could possibly have been kept hidden from the human race for
so many thousands of years.

Without the proofs before them, but few men or women would be willing to
believe the statement of The Institute's Research Department, that
**"Mankind United"**—within a period of **"months"**—could not only
forever uproot the causes of war and poverty, but that they could

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

usher in such an era of peace, security and luxurious abundance of the
necessary or desirable requirements of mortal life, that no one would be
obliged to work over four (4) hours a day, four (4) days a week, eight
(8) months each year, to earn a salary of not less than $3,000.00 per
year, irrespective of nationality, color, religion, education, training
or ability. Pensions of $250.00 per month could be given to all those
who had worked a total of 11,000 hours or who were sixty (60) years of
age or over, and desired to retire from active routine duties; also
similar pensions for those who were incapacitated and unable to work.

Without such proofs it would sound fantastic to claim hat free
transportation during vacation periods to any part of the world—free
education, and free development of talents—could be made available to
every man, woman or child on earth, and many of these benefits enjoyed
within less than ninety (90) days after the acceptance of the plans and
recommendations of our Research Department by not less than two hundred
million (200,000,000) of the intelligently industrious class of the
world's population.

Because of mankind's inherent distrust of each new idea presented to
them, and their age-old resistance to progress, (and because of the fact
that the proofs gathered by our Research Department would require a
library of hundreds of books to adequately describe), a plan for
imparting these findings to the world's civilized peoples, in a manner
which would overcome their distrust and win their support, was finally
adopted by the executive board of

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The International
Institute of Universal Research and Administration in the year 1919.

The problems which confronted Our Sponsors, when it became necessary to
determine upon ways and means by which to place their astounding
discoveries in the hands of the world's intelligent and right-thinking
people, seemed almost insurmountable. For it must be borne in mind that
the men and women comprising the Research Department of The Institute,
had been obliged to surround their activities with the utmost secrecy,
to prevent detection by some one of the thousands of spies retained by
the world's Hidden Rulers. Our Sponsors had successfully evaded
detection during many years by the simple expedient of individually
remaining wholly unknown in connection with any research activities of
an international nature, and of . obtaining any necessary information
through carefully selected, highly intelligent and trustworthy
individuals, who had been appointed through agents for their respective
tasks, and who were never permitted to know the name nor the identity of
their **actual** employer.

Each of the men and women who had gathered together on that Christmas
Day, in the year 1875, and each of those who had later been invited to
become members of The Institute's Research Department, had agreed that
if any one of them should ever be suspected of being engaged in
activities adverse to the plans and interests of the world's War Lords
and Hidden Rulers, that such a one would immediately sever his or her
connection with the Research Department of The Institute. Also that none
of them would ever divulge the name or the identity of any

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

other member of the group, nor acknowledge their connection therewith,
even to the members of their own families or their most intimate
acquaintances or associates. They agreed that they would never grant
such information to anyone during their lifetime, and that even though
they might be forced to submit to forms of torture which would cause
their death, they would still keep these vows. They further agreed to
never invite anyone to join the Research or Administrative Staff of The
Institute, until all of the members thereof had unanimously voted in
favor of extending such an invitation, nor until the one who had thus
been elected to membership, fully agreed to abide by the rules of
conduct and caution which the nature of The Institute's activities
required. **Needless to say, the selection of a new member for their
group was preceded by extensive investigations into the character,
dependability and courage of such a one.** Finally they had agreed that
should their Research Department develop inventions or make discoveries
of commercial value, that such inventions or discoveries would under no
consideration be used by The Institute or its organizers for their own
financial gain, inasmuch as such activities might thereby lead to The
Institute's detection by the world's subversive influences.

Each member of the Research Department of The International Institute of
Universal Research and Administration, is pledged to the service of the
human race without hope of personal profit or remuneration of any kind,
nor in fact, even recognition. These men and women seek no honors or
benefits of any nature whatsoever for their services. Only by waiving
all possibilities of financial

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

gain or public acclaim, could they have even hoped to succeed in making
the discoveries they sought, or to complete the plans for the
establishment of an economic system capable of saving the world from the
horrors of war and ultimate enslavement by those who plot the
destruction of the educational and religious institutions of our
civilization.

**Our Sponsors have obtained the necessary proofs and they no longer
"Just Believe," "They Know" that illiteracy, superstition, ignorance,
poverty and war are planned, directed and perpetuated for the purposes
of financial profit, personal power, and control over the resources and
peoples of our earth.**

**They have also learned that the earth's resources are so limitless in
variety and quantity, and civilization's mechanical developments and
inventions more than adequate for the production of such an abundance of
the necessities and luxuries of life, that the entire human family could
live on a scale of luxury exceeding even that now enjoyed by the world's
so-called wealthy families.**

Our Research Department gradually learned that many idealistic, **"but
perfectly practical plans" for the alleviation of human suffering** and
the establishment of an economic system capable of permanently
guaranteeing mankind against both war and poverty—have from time to time
been developed and presented to the human race throughout the centuries.
**But one and all, they have wholly failed to uproot the actual causes
of poverty or war, and the numerous other "Humanly-planned Sources" from
which**

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

**mankind's ceaseless woes emanate—for, One and All, they have been
built around "Human Personality" and a publicly known founder or leader.
Therefore, all that has ever been necessary for those in control of
world affairs to do, in order to keep mankind in bondage, has been for
them to get rid of the leaders, and they have thereby invariably gotten
rid of any movements which might in time have developed the strength to
oppose their rule.**

The destruction of any movement for the relief of human suffering, or
which might ultimately bring an end to war and poverty, has always been
accomplished by the world's subversive forces in one of four
ways;—**namely, either by intimidation, bribery, flattery or
assassination.**

**Our Sponsors had learned of the futility of even attempting to uncover
the malignant world-wide causes of human suffering by attempting to
openly appear as the leaders of a movement to eradicate these evils. The
only possibility of their success rested in the source of the
information released to the world, and the names or the identities of
those who obtained such information, remaining permanently unknown.**

**The paramount necessity of "Absolute Secrecy" was quite apparent** to
each of those who comprised The Institute's sponsors, for they had
learned that the secret service departments of the information agencies
**controlled by the world's "Hidden Rulers"** contained considerably
over 10,000 highly trained and well-paid spies, devoting their entire
time to the task of supplying information concerning the activities of
the peoples of all nations, and the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

relationship of such data to the activities of the departments employing
them.

**Having learned that the vast wealth of the world's "Money Changers"
(its "Hidden Rulers") enabled them to readily destroy any movement
adverse to their interests—**(if they could discover its sponsors and
its headquarters or the sources of information from which its plans had
been evolved)—our Research Department, shortly after its formation,
undertook to discover the exact reasons for the failure of many
thoroughly practical plans which had, from time to time, been presented
to the human race for the prevention of wars and the cure of poverty.
Any one of a number of these plans, if universally adopted, would
immediately have succeeded, but they had never been allowed to get
beyond the **"Discussion"** stage. Our Research Department had to know
the reason for these failures, in order that it might thereby guard
against their repetition in its own experience.

It soon learned that one of four (4) methods are always used by the
world's Hidden Rulers. Since any movement at its inception can be
destroyed by destroying its leader or obstructing his activities, the
subversive forces always resort to one of the four (4) methods to which
we have just referred. First they try **Intimidation**, either through
the avenues of ridicule or direct **Threats**. Should intimidation fail,
then they next attempt to **Bribe** the originator of any plans adverse
to their interests, if they think he can be reached in that way. One of
these two methods usually succeeds. However, if both fail, then for a
time the plans of the organizer or leader are **"Aided"**

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

until he has gained a following. After that, the glorification of his
personality and **a program of "Ceaseless Flattery"** is systematically
conducted, until he becomes thoroughly convinced that he is indeed a
super being and deserves the praise and adulation of everyone with whom
he comes in contact. It is not long thereafter until he has quite
forgotten his ideals of service, and desires only to add to his own
prestige. His appetite for adulation and flattery develops so rapidly
that he has but little time left in which to accomplish any
"constructive" results. He is quite too busy feeding his ego, and
thenceforth the "Money Changers" have nothing to fear from him.

If this third method does not succeed, the fourth and last one they use
has never, throughout hundreds of years, failed to accomplish the result
they desire. If a movement is gaining too much headway, and a leader's
ideals of service and his plans for uprooting the causes of war or
poverty seem to be succeeding in spite of interference, then the fourth
method is used—**"Assassination."** This last method has invariably
destroyed any movement which depended upon the motivating influence of a
human leader for its success.

**Countless practical plans, quite able to end both war and poverty,
have been presented to the human race by generous, brilliant and deeply
sincere men and women. Yet, not one has ever been allowed to progress
beyond the "Conversational or Discussional Stage," for all have had a
known originator or human leader, who could be thwarted or put out of
the way at will.**

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The Sponsors of The International Institute of Universal Research and
Administration fully realized that the only method by which the plots of
the world's **"Hidden Rulers"** could ever be uncovered and brought to
the attention of mankind, and the only way by which a plan capable of
ending war and poverty would ever be established, would be for those who
originated it to remain beyond detection. They knew that no plan to
assure peace and happiness to the human race could ever succeed unless
the source which provided information to the public, and those
responsible for its continuous and uninterrupted release—**"Remained
Unknown,"** and thereby beyond the murderous reach of the agents of such
subversive influences.

Those who control the world's governments, and its political and
industrial structures, and who plan the early extermination of its most
enlightened citizens, do not waste their time fighting the followers of
a movement; **"they deal not with effects but with causes." "To destroy
a movement, they destroy its leader;" but they cannot destroy a program
built upon the indestructible foundation and leadership of an "Idea"
instead of a person. Therefore, our Sponsors determined upon "a grouping
of ideas," which would constitute a form of leadership "without any
known headquarters or personal leaders to attack;" yet fully capable of
ultimately bringing to pass the establishment of an organization with
sufficient world-wide influence to uproot and destroy the age-old power
of the satellites of selfishness and greed, and those who are now the
world's "Hidden Rulers."**

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

A program capable of accomplishing this result and with its headquarters
and leaders permanently beyond the reach of the world's subversive
forces, was conceived of and adopted by the Sponsors of The
International Institute of Universal Research and Administration in the
year 1875. **The proof that they have been fully successful in guarding
and protecting their activities, is the fact that the headquarters and
the identities of The Institute's founders and research experts
are—"Sixty years Later"—still unknown**. The wisdom of this cautious
policy is evidenced by the further fact that those who have been
appointed to impart The Institute's discoveries to the world and to
carry out their program, are now rapidly reaching the culmination of
their plans for the successful establishment of a world-wide
Co-operatively-owned Universal Service Corporation. An
internationally-owned business corporation, powerful and influential
enough to permanently prevent any further wars and, for all time to
come, to end the rule of those influences of selfishness and greed,
personified by people who keep the human race in endless poverty,
and—for purposes of financial gain—subjected to utterly needless
bloodshed and ceaseless suffering.

During Our Sponsors’ many years of preparation for the fulfillment of
their plans, and for the establishment of an organization universally
influential enough to carry them forward to ultimate success—the most
important requirement was a well-equipped Research Department with a
staff of experts comprising the most talented available members of each
major branch of human endeavor. **Exact information—"Facts," not
"Theories"—constitutes the only**

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

**foundation upon which any "lasting" accomplishment can be erected.**

To destroy the influences which keep the human race in constant bondage
to age-old humanly perpetuated foes, such as war and poverty, it would
be necessary to discover the source or sources from which they emanate.
It would also be necessary to know exactly, **"How"—"What"** and by
**"Whom"** they are fed. In other words, to discover the organization or
organizations, the materials or elements, and the method or methods
responsible for the perpetuation, century after century, of these
monstrosities and destroyers of human security and happiness.

Finally, after completing such discoveries—if they were to be of any
value to the human race—it would be necessary to perfect a program
capable of destroying these enemies and preventing the appearance at
some later date of similar ones.

**To establish a world-wide economic system in which there would be no
room left for either war, poverty, or those who condone them, there was
but one plan which could possibly succeed. The production and
distribution of the necessities and luxuries of human life would have to
be conducted by a profit-sharing, equally-owned, worldwide corporation,
on such a vast and efficient scale that no man, woman or child in any
part of the world would be denied anything essential, or constructively
desirable, for his or her happiness, security or advancement.** To bring
such universally needed results to pass, would require the whole-hearted
tireless efforts of the world's most out-standing and experienced
experts and leaders, selected

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

from every branch of human activity, and from every corner of the globe.
In addition, such people would be obliged to remain wholly unknown to
the world; not only when conducting their investigations and perfecting
the plans for their great **"Universal Service Corporation,"** but also
permanently thereafter.

If they were to successfully guard against the dangerous influences of
jealousy, envy or pride, which might strike at their achievement through
the avenues of religious, racial or class antagonisms, it would be
necessary that not even the members of their own immediate families ever
be allowed to know the identities of those who would constitute The
Institute's Research or Administrative Staffs.

**At such a time as their plans were fully consummated, neither their
own families, their relatives nor descendants, must ever be given the
opportunity to expect or receive special favors, privileges or
recognition, inasmuch as an economic system based upon the "Golden Rule"
and a "Brotherhood of Economic Equality," must provide no room for the
"glorification" of human beings or "hero-worship." Although men may
respect and gratefully appreciate a worthy human accomplishment, they
should worship and glorify God,—not one another.**

In other words it was necessary that the members of the Research and
Administrative Department of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration, be composed of men and women possessing not
only exceptional qualities of intelligence, together with outstanding
executive experience and ability, but also a deeply sincere willingness
to serve the human race without hope of financial

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

gain or public recognition or glory, but to do so in exchange for no
other reward than the satisfaction which the successful performance of a
worthy accomplishment might bring to them.

Towards the close of the year 1919, after a period of forty-four (44)
years of continuous effort and an expenditure of many millions of
dollars—the Sponsors of The Institute had—(although but
gradually)—finally succeeded in completing the formation of a group of
executives and Research Experts capable of carrying their original and
unaltered program on to its ultimate fulfillment.

During these years, the little group which had gathered together on that
Christmas Day so long ago, had drawn ceaselessly and generously upon
their talents and the experiences of their successful careers, as well
as upon their personal fortunes, in order that the organization they had
founded might become so firmly established and so thoroughly and so
correctly informed upon the matters to which they had dedicated their
lives, that before the advancing years could too greatly reduce their
ranks, they would have fully removed all elements of uncertainty or
possibilities of failure.

Not only had they made many startling discoveries of incalculable value
to the human race—in behalf of our own as well as future generations—but
they had also carefully and wisely replaced those of their number who
had passed on.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

**By the end of the year 1919, the Research and Administrative
Departments of the Institute had been gradually increased to a total
executive force of two hundred (200) people.** Selected exclusively from
the ranks of men and women who had experienced extreme poverty in their
earlier years, but who had proven their qualifications and practical
abilities by their successful careers and individually acquired
fortunes, this group of two hundred (200) research experts and
executives possessed ample qualifications for the accomplishment of the
purpose for which they had voluntarily dedicated their lives when the
opportunity to do so had been extended to them. It was agreed that until
after the end of the year 1936, (at which time their program would be
approaching its culmination), a Research and Administrative group of
exactly two hundred (200) members would be maintained. Should one of
their number pass on, a selection of a man or a woman of similar
qualifications to those of the deceased would be made, subject to the
**"Unanimous Agreement"** of the remaining members. The one thus
selected would be subject to the same irrevocable pledges, and would be
voted upon in the same manner as had each of the group of two hundred
(200) chosen during the previous years.

**This Executive Board, (to whom we shall continue to refer as "Our
Sponsors"), therefore at this time consists of two hundred (200)
practical, successful and widely experienced experts and authorities,
selected from the agricultural, mining, manufacturing, merchandising,
banking, transportation, educational and religious groups of leaders, of
the world's most advanced civilized nations.**

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

During the past sixteen (16) years, while waiting for world events and
mankind's qualities of thought to reach the point where the authenticity
of The Institute's warnings would be self-evident and its
recommendations universally understandable, our Research Department has
carefully checked, tested and proven the value of each of its
discoveries, revolutionary mechanical inventions, policies and
contemplated plans of procedure developed during their many years of
preparation.

**All is now in readiness for a world-wide "Free" 30-day program, during
which time The Institute's well-guarded sixty years of discoveries and
carefully prepared recommendations will be freely offered to the human
race. In two-hour programs repeated day and night, twelve times each
twenty-four hours, five days each week, this ambitious international
proclamation of warnings and recommendations will be freely given to the
two hundred million (200,000,000) clear-thinking men and women
throughout the nations of the earth, to whom we are now extending our
invitation.**

At the conclusion of said thirty-day program, a worldwide election will
be conducted and an international vote obtained upon one hundred (100)
separate measures, which The Institute will at that time offer to the
intelligent right-thinking members of the human race for their
acceptance or rejection.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Although no effort has been made to either embellish, elaborate or treat
in full detail The Institute's discoveries, and the various aspects of a
subject which will require a thirty-day use of moving pictures, radio
broadcasts, and much in the nature of charts and supporting statistical
reports to comprehensively impart, nevertheless the following pages of
this Bulletin are intended to outline a number of the humanly-planned
causes of war and poverty, and the basic principle upon which any
program for their correction must be established. It has been rightly
stated that a carefully-prepared picture can supply as much information
as the use of ten thousand words. It can therefore be readily understood
why we request that the public postpone its opinion of our claims and
recommendations until the conclusion of our free 30-day program, which
will—(with the use of moving pictures and other modern and efficient
methods of presentation)—provide information which would otherwise
require the publication of many hundreds of volumes of highly technical
reports. However, a careful reading of this Bulletin will provide
sufficient data for those who are unbiased, to form at least a partial
opinion of the character, motives and ideals, of those who constitute
The Sponsors of this world-wide movement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[10:\*](mu04.htm#fr_1) *Without widespread public
co-operation our organization can—at this time—do no more than to
temporarily delay this catastrophe*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The World's Hidden Rulers](mu05)
