[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu04)  [Next](mu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE WORLD'S HIDDEN RULERS

Inasmuch as the power of the world's subversive influences—**its "Hidden
Rulers"**—consists primarily of their vast century-old accumulations of
gold and silver, and the fact that such metals constitute the basic
element supporting the money structures of all civilized nations, no
program could possibly succeed which failed to take this major fact into
consideration, or which failed to sponsor the universal adoption of a
wholly different and unaccumulative form of currency. **It has been the
boast of the agents of these "Hidden Rulers," that it has seldom been
necessary to assassinate any of the world's so-called financial or
political leaders, for only infrequently do they find one they cannot
either intimidate, flatter or "Buy". However, it occasionally takes a
little more money to buy some than others. Therefore, since the "Gold
and Silver" reserves under the direct control of these "Hidden World
Rulers," at this date exceed those of even the combined governments of
the earth, it should not be difficult to understand—with the financial
structure and money exchanges of every nation completely under their
influence—**

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

**why every government on earth is today directly or indirectly, wholly
and entirely controlled by them; nor to understand why this condition
exists, irrespective of the name or nature of the political parties
which the public naively vote into office.**

Believing that by the use of their vote, they are thereby having some
voice in the administration of their country's business and consequently
in matters which directly affect their own lives, the world's citizens
pay very little attention to what actually takes place in the political
affairs of their respective nations, until finally, they lose either
their lives through war, or their financial security and happiness
through a subtly-planned, and expertly-executed depression.

In recognition of the frequently destructive power of misused wealth,
all clear-thinking men and women are aware of the fact that the moneys
of the world must be established on a basis other than gold or silver,
before the human race can even hope to break its present shackles and
bondage to war and poverty, or to prevent its ultimate and complete
enslavement to those whose vast accumulations of these metals enable
them to hold mankind in endless bondage.

Inasmuch as the age-old curses of illiteracy, ignorance, superstition,
autocratic domination, war and poverty, constitute the principal sources
of profit for those who have for centuries governed the affairs of the
human race, mankind can expect neither peace nor security, until the
people whom greed and insane ambition have turned into moral idiots, are
no longer able to control the governments and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

resources of the earth, through accumulations—century after century—of
its gold and silver.

Those who are familiar with the manipulations of the international stock
exchanges and banking systems of the world, can readily understand how
the possession of vast accumulations of gold and silver would enable the
individuals in whose hands they rested, to completely dominate and
control the lives of men.

With the power to increase or decrease the value of stocks, real estate
and the prices of food, clothes and other human necessities at will,
through the mediums of carefully planned revolutions and wars together
with periods of both national and world-wide depressions, a monopoly of
the earth's principal resources and a direct but well hidden control of
the financial policies, and therefore the governments of the world's
major nations, have been maintained century after century. Mankind will
have little or no opportunity to resist this domination as long as gold
and silver are enthroned as the world's basis of currency, and as the
gods which it worships.

**The human race, without realizing it, expends literally its entire
efforts and the fruitage of its talents, inventions and progressive
developments, merely adding to the wealth and strangle-hold over human
life already possessed by those who control the moneys and mediums of
exchange required by men in their business transactions with one
another. For centuries men have worked, not for themselves and their
families, but for the world's "Money Changers,"—its "Hidden" though
"Actual" Rulers.**

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

When carefully analyzed it is found that for centuries over ninety-seven
(97) out of every one hundred (100) families in the world have expended
their entire talents and energies without having received even the
barest necessities of a well-rounded life, in payment for their efforts.
Although men have continuously been made to feel that the "Private
Profit System,"—evolved by the "Money Changers,"—provides everyone with
an equal opportunity for compensation and advancement in proportion to
his or her respective talents, nevertheless, well planned and expertly
executed wars and depressions have always stolen these rewards from
them.

The cunningly planned plots and slavery of the "Private Profit System"
become self-evident, when we realize that the world's "Money
Changers"—through the avenues of revolutions, wars and periodical
depressions—get back most of the money they pay out in salaries or
business profits to others. They readily retrieve such expenditures
through the profits of revolutions, wars—carefully planned unemployment,
depressions, continuous and ever-increasing taxation—royalties from the
control of major patents—the manipulation of industries and stocks—wheat
and food exchanges—together with the almost religiously encouraged money
savings of the world's thrifty population, deposited for so-called
"safe-keeping" in the "Money Changers’" centrally-controlled
international system of banks and "so-called" trust companies. Their
method is really quite simple, since all they require to assure their
success, is an attitude of indifference on the part of the public, and
this mankind themselves generously provide.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

**Revolutions and wars, together with world-wide poverty, and its
endless cycles of depressions and unemployment, comprise the broadest
channels through which the "Hidden Rulers’" constantly growing
accumulations of gold, silver and jewelry, flow into their treasuries.**

When people are out of work and hungry, they will sell not only their
old gold, silverware and jewelry but also "their services," for little
or nothing, in order that they might thereby obtain food. **To bring
about such conditions of dire need it is only necessary for the "Money
Changers" to cause what the world calls "A Depression".** Being in
complete control of the international money and credit structure, they
need only shut off the flow of credit to the business men, farmers and
other employers of human labor,—shut down the major industries of the
world,—(most of which they either partly, or entirely control), start
calling in the thousands of loans made through their banks and other
credit avenues,—manipulate the stock and bond exchanges in such a manner
that thousands of banks fail and are forced to close their doors, and
the "Money Changers,"—with but slight inconvenience thereafter,—quickly
"gather up" the previous few years of so-called "prosperity" savings,
accumulated by millions of thrifty people all over the world. It is not
long, by the application of such methods, before they have retrieved
whatever surplus funds the industrious workers, farmers and business men
have gradually accumulated from their "seemingly" generous salaries or
business profits.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Those whose savings are not taken through bank failures and other
occurrences of a similar nature, are forced—(by means of
unemployment)—to gradually use up their surplus funds.

When enough people have been thrown out of work and are no longer able
to buy the output of those of the world's factories which may still be
continuing to operate, nor to purchase the produce of the farms, then
these agricultural and industrial institutions are likewise forced to
cease hiring men and women. Soon their surplus stocks are disposed of at
whatever they can get for them, in (what has become through lack of
buyers),—a rapidly declining market, and they also are left entirely at
the mercy of the world's "Money Changers". As soon as it is known that
practically all surplus funds have been exhausted, then any loans or
mortgages against these people or businesses are called in for payment.
Knowing that such people have no funds with which to pay off their
loans, the farms and businesses belonging to them are then taken over by
these "Money Changers," through their satellites and agents, to be
disposed of in accordance with their program for retrieving any
accumulations of jewelry, gold or silver, gathered by the world's
population during the previous generation, and of gaining control of the
new inventions, discoveries, patents, resources or properties, which may
be of benefit to them in the exercise of their continued domination over
the affairs of men.

When the business, professional, industrial, agricultural and employee
groups have, through the process of a long drawn-out depression, been
forced to use up whatever

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

form of savings they may not have already lost through bank failures, or
some other premeditated form of robbery, they are next obliged to draw
upon their emergency reserves of stocks and bonds which they have
gradually accumulated through their industrious efforts, frugality and
self-denial. Since by that time, few but the very rich have any money
left with which to buy even the necessities of life, (to say nothing of
such "luxuries" as stocks and bonds), there is, consequently, but very
little market for these securities, which have been so carefully put
away for the "rainy day." Inasmuch as there are only a few buyers, and
therefore little demand, it is not long before the holders of these
securities offer them at a reduced price to anyone who will buy. **The
day soon arrives when those who formerly were not wise enough to sell,
are obliged to reduce their prices still further, until stocks and bonds
which they purchased at a unit price—let us say, of $10.00—from the
"Money Changers"—(through their satellites, the international system of
stock exchanges, banks and "so-called" trust companies),—they are very
happy to sell back to them at a unit price of $5.00. However, waiting
their time, it is not long before the "Money Changers" through their
world-wide agencies are able to buy back these securities at not only as
low as $5.00, $3.00 or $1.00 per unit, but almost in exchange for a loaf
of bread,—if people by that time have become hungry enough to make such
sacrifices of their resources.**

Men who have lost their homes and have no money with which to buy food,
will gladly consent to the passing of local, state or national measures,
granting their respective governments the right to issue millions or
even

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

billions of dollars in bonds, with which to provide food, clothes and
homes for those who have been deprived of such necessities;—knowing
these facts, the "Money Changers" soon find that they are quite able,—as
the result of their carefully planned depression, to further strengthen
their hold upon the governments and industries controlling the lives of
such people. In fact, since there are by that time none who are able to
underwrite such bonds, (and thereby provide the money with which to feed
the unemployed),—other than the financial institutions controlled by
these subversive influences, **they not only succeed in "Stealing" the
most desirable homes, businesses, farms, and properties of the people of
an entire nation, and are enabled to buy back stocks or bonds for a few
pennies,—which they formerly sold for many dollars per unit,—but they
also receive as a reward of their careful plans and financial
manipulations, a mortgage upon the resources of an entire nation and the
labor of its citizens and their descendants, for generations to come.**

In case you should be tempted to believe that people should be grateful
to them for buying these bonds,—and thereby providing the money with
which to feed and clothe those in need during the depression,**—let us
remind you that such bonds are purchased with the very money which
belonged to the people themselves,** but which the "Money Changers" had
stolen from them through bank failures, property foreclosures,
depreciated bonds, stocks and property values, so carefully premeditated
and arranged. **Not only have they thereby succeeded in stealing the
peoples’ money but also through the medium of endless taxes for the
repayment of such bonds and interest,**

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

**they have likewise caused them to mortgage their future earnings and
even the earnings of their descendants.**

**In the meantime, these manipulators of the world's economic
structure,—"its Actual, though Hidden Rulers,"**—succeed, not only in
acquiring the new inventions, discoveries or properties and other
resources they may desire to control, but simultaneously,—through the
curtailed production of food and other necessities of human life,—the
prices of such commodities are gradually increased until those who
control the sources of supply, are able not only to hire labor at their
own figure, but also to sell the products of such labor at any price
they may determine upon for their profit. **Considered from all angles,
a depression is certainly a most profitable form of manipulation for
those in control of the world's major reserves of gold and silver, and
the moneys based thereon. The fact that tens of millions of men, women
and little children are obliged to suffer pangs of hunger, exposure, and
the loss of the homes for which such men and women may have worked the
greater part of their lives, does not cause the slightest concern to
those whose only thought is the accumulation of more and ever more of
that which they worship as their God;—the only "trinity" to which they
ever bow down—"Money," "Power" and "Influence."**

And so we find that that which the world has glorified as its greatest
stimulant to human progress,—**"THE COMPETITIVE PRIVATE PROFIT
SYSTEM,"**—has once more betrayed its followers into the hands of those
who many long centuries ago originated it as a means by which to extract
the fruitage of mankind's achievements of brilliancy,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

genius and industry, without compensation; **always holding out the
"bait" of "personal profit or financial gain,"—yet knowing that they
would never have to pay,—it has been childishly simple for the people
who control vast sums of the world's present form of money, to get what
they want "without ever losing the bait."**

Another broad avenue through which the world's "Hidden Rulers" retain
their control over human affairs, and at the same time add to their
wealth, is that which carefully planned and executed revolutions and
wars provide. **Although human lives and grief-stricken broken hearts
are the materials they use in these manipulations, their financial gains
and increased gold and silver reserves are none-the-less gratifying to
them.** In addition they thereby also reduce the danger of ultimately
being overthrown, inasmuch as their slaughter, each century, of the
healthiest, strongest and most courageous males throughout the various
civilized nations of the earth, effectually removes a source from which
a vigorous and fearless opposition might some day be formed.

The method by which revolutions and wars are brought to pass for the
profit and continued reign of these subversive influences, will be but
briefly touched upon in this Bulletin. However, during the world-wide
free, thirty-day program, by the Research Department of The
International Institute of Universal Research and Administration, which
is more fully described in the last chapter hereof, a complete exposé of
the methods used during many centuries by the world's "Hidden Rulers,"
through which mankind have been kept in ceaseless bondage, will be
placed

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

in the hands of the clear-thinking, intelligent men and women of every
nation.

Through the avenues of propaganda the "Hidden Rulers" create either hate
or fear in the hearts of the people of various groups or nations, and
thereafter with but little difficulty, impress such people with the
necessity of spending vast sums of money, through bond issues by their
governments, for "defensive" (?) armaments and munitions of war, for
what they are pleased to call "Preparedness" against the attack of some
neighbor nation. At the same time, such neighbor nation is impregnated
with similar qualities of either hate or fear and persuaded to spend
thousands of millions of dollars, that its people may likewise build up
a defense against the attack

Iof the nation, which they themselves,—(according to their neighbor's
propaganda),—are supposed to be preparing to attack. Through this
method, the people of the entire world

are persuaded to part with their earnings and business profits, down the
avenues of taxation, in order that their respective nations may be well
prepared against the attack of other nations, who are likewise
preparing—not for wars of aggression—but,—(so they think),—for purposes
of defense. Without this ceaseless flow of hate and fear-generating
propaganda, there wouldn't be even one man or woman out of each million
citizens of any one of the world's civilized nations, who would have the
slightest desire to wage a war of aggression against the people of any
other country.

Unless they are deliberately influenced otherwise,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

human beings in all civilized parts of the world are primarily
peace-loving creatures, concerned with their own personal advancement
and the happiness of their families through normal avenues of industry
and the development of individual talents—not through murdering someone
against whom, by the wildest stretch of their imagination, they can have
no logical reason for any feelings of antagonism.

Inasmuch as the industries controlling the production and sale of
armaments and munitions of war are largely, if not entirely, dominated
by the "Money-exchange" structure to which we have referred, most of the
huge profits from these industries flow directly into the pockets of
those who manipulate the thoughts, emotions,—and thereby, the
governmental expenditures of mankind.

**By causing wars on the pretext of requiring room for expansion,—or
possibly for the much more idealistic purpose of "Ending all Wars,"—the
armaments and munitions which have thus been sold are thereby destroyed,
and must of course be "quickly" replaced because of the imminent danger
of another war, "as we are told."** We are led to believe that a war of
aggression is being planned by a nation which has been preparing for
many years to destroy our people and steal our resources, whereas the
fact of the matter is, that most of these "demoniacal human beings,"—(as
they are pictured to us),—have probably never even "heard" of our
country, or if they have, we mean only a name and a few lines on some
world map to them. They are quite too busy trying to make a living, and
trying to find just a little normal and deserved

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

happiness for themselves and their families, than to be giving any
thought to whether they like or dislike us.

**With but few exceptions, there has never been a revolution or a war
which would ever have been fought, had not some individual or small
group of ambitious and usually insanely cruel and morally depraved human
beings, devoted their efforts and resources to stirring up either
"fear," "bitterness" or "hate" in the hearts of people whom they desired
to use as cannon fodder.**

It is doubtful if there has ever been a war which has ever benefited
anyone other than those who planned and executed it, in order that they
might thereby gain wealth, power or glory for themselves. The "only
exceptions" to this statement, would be the revolutions or wars fought
to gain personal liberty, freedom of speech and religious freedom, or in
order that men might be allowed to form governments which would enable
them to enjoy privileges withheld from them by their former tyrannical
rulers.

**However, our Research Department will prove during its international
30-day program that even the worthy institutions of liberty could have
been established without having had to, at any time during the past two
hundred (200) years, resort to bloodshed or violence, had those who
desired the enjoyment of "life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,"
been willing to stand together and express as much unity of purpose in
the exercise of intelligently industrious efforts in behalf of the
production and equal distribution of the necessities and luxuries of
life, as they were willing to "emotionally expend" in venting**

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

**their bitterness and hate on the fields of battle.**

Had the mothers, sisters and wives of those who fought for liberty, been
willing to make as many sacrifices in the building of an economic system
patterned after the "Spirit" as well as the "Letter" of the **"Golden
Rule,"** established upon the foundation of **"Economic Equality;"** and
had they been willing to sell their jewels and melt up their silverware
to produce the machinery and equipment for the accomplishment of such a
result without bloodshed, in the same manner in which they were willing
to make such sacrifices that they might buy uniforms, guns, bullets and
swords to send their men folk out upon the fields of battle to be
slaughtered or maimed, then no wars during the past two hundred (200)
years would have been necessary, even for the noble ideal of "liberty."
Nor would the world's Napoleons, and others of their ilk, ever have had
the opportunity of causing the murder of millions of men, and the broken
hearts and lives of countless millions of mothers, sisters, wives and
helpless little children, century after century.

**With the establishment of a world-wide system of production and
distribution, based upon "Economic Equality" and the spirit of the
"Golden Rule," there would be no room nor opportunity for private profit
in conflict with the welfare of the majority.** Personal ambitions would
have to take the form of improved individual abilities, and the
development of constructive talents, rather than the accumulation of
money or the development of one's egotistical conviction of his own
superiority to others. Serving one another,—**one for all and all for
one,**—would take the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

place of self-glorification, and public acclaim would come, not upon the
battlefield for having proven one's self a "better killer" than another,
but instead, a "better doer" of deeds of service for the happiness of
one's fellowmen, as well as one's self. Those with kindly thoughts,
generous hearts and noble aspirations in the direction of human welfare
and service, would be the ones who would win the respect of their
fellowmen. **There would be no room for either the qualities of a bully
or those of a swine, and it would be the sons of Beelzebub instead of
the sons of men who would have no place to lay their heads.**

It is such an economic system, built around the ideal of brotherly love
and a desire for the development of constructive individual talents,
which Our Sponsors seek the privilege of establishing. Wars are fought
for the purpose of stealing mankind's wealth, but we ask no sacrifice of
jewels or other prized possessions of the men and women to whom this
invitation is being extended. **We ask only that the world's
right-thinking people permit us to form them into an organization two
hundred million (200,000,000) strong; that there may be established a
Universal Service Corporation, "equally owned," and its production and
distribution of the luxuries and the necessities of life, "equally
enjoyed," by not only the people who comprise this group, but likewise
all others in any nation of the earth, as soon as they are willing to
comply with the ideals of service and brotherly love which its charter
will embody.**

We ask only that these two hundred million (200,000,000) people combine
their influence and the vast

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

buying power of over one thousand million ($1000,000,000) dollars per
day, which they now possess, and that they use this readily available
power in such a manner that a great **"Universal Service
Corporation,"**—equally owned and equally controlled by each of their
number,—may be internationally established, and through its influence
succeed in bringing to pass the world-wide acceptance of a type of money
which can never be accumulated by any one person or group of persons in
large enough quantities to cause either wars or poverty.

**We ask only that a type of money be thereby established which
will,—for all time to come, stand as a monumental symbol of indignation
against a system which could unresistingly condone the slaughter of
eight million (8,000,000) of its healthiest and finest young men under
the sanctions of war; a system which could condone such legalized murder
merely in order that a handful of "swinish moral idiots" might thereby
derive over one hundred and twenty billions of dollars
($120,000,000,000.) of the world's wealth, to add to their already
bulging treasure chests. Over fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in
net profits for each man killed was,—during the last world war,—their
reward for possessing large enough accumulations of gold and silver to
influence the thoughts of the entire "so-called" civilized world into
consenting to war.**

We ask only that the right-thinking people of every land consent to the
adoption of a form of money based on a different standard of value than
either gold or silver, in order that the age-old power and influence
possessed by the world's subversive forces, may thereby be forever

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

taken from them; and that no person or group of persons ever again be
allowed to gain enough wealth, influence or power to buy, bribe or
mesmerically direct the thoughts of others through avenues of
propaganda, into agreeing to the legalized slaughter of human life,—to
which men have been taught to consent,—under the name of **"War."**

**Is it too much to ask that the Biblical commandment, "Thou Shalt Not
Kill," be "Practically," instead of "Theoretically," embedded—not only
into the hearts of men, "but also into the very structure of the
economic system tinder which they live"???**

**Is it too much to ask that a "Monetary System" which permits the
accumulation of such vast sums of wealth in the hands of a few men that
they have the power to change this Biblical commandment into one which
is by law engraved into the very statutes of every civilized nation, and
reads,—"Thou Shall Not Kill " unless thou first payest a financial
profit to thy masters—the "Money Changers,"—be forever destroyed, and in
its place, that there be erected a world-wide economic structure which
will take into consideration the fact that many men are as yet "but
little more than animals," in their character development; a system
which will therefore no longer provide a reward for greed and
selfishness by supplying the opportunity for such qualities to profit by
a monopolistic control of the world's money?**

**Is it too much to ask that an economic structure be erected which will
take into consideration "the fact that human beings are frequently
selfish, greedy and cruel"—and which will therefore make it impossible
for men, when**

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

**expressing such qualities,—to harm anyone other than themselves; a
system which will enable men to "Reap what they Sow," and "quickly
enough" to soon learn the desirability of sowing "Generosity" instead of
"Selfishness,"—"Sharing" in place of "Greed," and "Kindness" instead of
"Cruelty"?**

**The "One and only Reward" which the Sponsors of The International
Institute of Universal Research and Administration ask in exchange for
the voluntary gift of over sixty millions of dollars ($60,000,000.) of
their personal resources, and the many years of their lives which they
have devoted to this task, is that the "Profits of War" and the "Profits
of Planned Depressions," be forever prevented from recurring in any
nation on this earth.**

Our Research Department is well prepared to provide a proven method by
which this result can be immediately accomplished. It has completed the
plans for the early establishment of a great world-wide and equally
owned **"Universal Service Corporation,"** capable of producing and
distributing the necessities and luxuries of life for the entire human
race. A world-wide equally owned co-operative commercial organization
which will, for all time to come, be powerful enough to stand as a
fortress for the human race, successfully preventing either wars,
depressions, unemployment or poverty.

No share in the ownership of such a corporation, other than that which
each member of the entire human race will receive, is asked or could be
accepted under the terms of its charter by any of the Sponsors or
Official Associates of The Institute. After many years of ceaseless

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

**research and preparation, they ask only the privilege of being
permitted to irrefutably prove the wisdom and vital importance of its
immediate world-wide formation.**

It should not be difficult to understand why a great commercial
co-operative equally-owned Universal Service Corporation, capable of
producing the requirements of life for the entire human family is
needed, nor why the moneys of the world must by such means be
established on a basis other than gold or silver, before the human race
can even hope to break its present shackles of war and poverty, or to
prevent its ultimate complete enslavement.

Inasmuch as world-wide war and poverty constitute the principal sources
of profit for those who have for centuries governed human affairs,
mankind can expect neither peace nor security, until those whom greed
and insane ambition have turned into moral idiots, are no longer able to
control the governments and resources of our earth, through their
possession of large quantities of "money."

The Research Department of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration, has developed a type of money which can
never be accumulated by any person or group of persons, for it will have
value as currency only for a limited period of time after the date it is
issued, and will possess such value only when spent by the person for
whom it is specifically prepared. No other type of money will ever
overcome war or poverty; both of which are perpetuated solely for
financial gain, and by those who have enough money to cause depressions

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

and financial panics, by their manipulation of the political, financial
and commercial enterprises of the world, and the influence with which to
force any or all of the world's various governments into revolutions or
wars whenever, they may so desire.

**Only a type of "limited use money,"—the accumulation of which would be
of no value to anyone,—can ever permanently uproot the impulses of greed
and mad ambition; for it has been truly stated that if all of the money
in the world could be divided equally among those who comprise the human
race, over seventy-five per cent (75%) of it would,—"within less than
one (1) year,"—be, either in the pockets or completely under the control
of three per cent (3%) of the world's citizens, and the remainder of the
human race would again be as poverty-stricken as it had been before.**

**If the "Golden Rule" is to be used as the measure of men's
relationship with one another, then an economic system must be
established which will protect those who have not as yet learned how to
protect themselves, and a medium of exchange must be adopted which will
protect the world's population against "Greed," "Selfishness" and
"Dishonesty," until such qualities no longer exist in human nature.**

The International Institute of Universal Research and Administration,
during a period of over sixty (60) years, has been quietly but
ceaselessly engaged in perfecting plans for the accomplishment of this
result, believing that its success would at the same time, disclose the
means by

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

which to destroy the strangle-hold of those whom greed and mad ambition
have turned into mankind's swinish and depraved "Money Changers and
Masters."

Intelligent men and women do not place matches, knives or guns in the
hands of those who are known to be insane, neither should they permit
the continuation of an economic system which breeds greed, selfishness
and insane ambitions in the hearts of men; a competitive private profit
system which rewards their qualities of selfishness, arrogance and
indescribable cruelty, by freely granting them the power of life or
death over their fellow beings, through encouraging their control of the
world's money and consequently food, clothes, homes, and in fact the
very lives of men; **nor a system which makes men forget there is a God,
and instead, rewards those who dream of becoming gods themselves,** and
encourages them to seek the power to send millions of men "tearing at
each other's throats," incensed with meaningless hate, planted in the
hearts of the various combatants through the money-controlled mediums of
propaganda scattered throughout the various nations, yet owned and
controlled by a single group of men whom mankind have so richly rewarded
with their money. Possessing the financial power and influence with
which to cause continuous revolutions, wars or depressions for their
profit, the greed of these "Money Changers" has become so great, that
they no longer feel either pity or compassion towards the millions of
human beings whom their war machines slaughter, nor the slightest
concern over the tens of millions of grief-stricken, broken hearts and
broken lives, which their money-mad ambitions have

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

caused. **Insane lust for money soon becomes their god, and constitutes
the only feeling they know.**

**To dethrone "the god of this world" nurtured by a private profit
system which has caused literally all of the wars and most of the
poverty suffered by the human race, and to place in its stead a
world-wide system of production and distribution, with the "Golden Rule"
as its cornerstone,—with guaranteed lifelong financial independence for
all, and permanent universal security and peace as its structure,—this
is the sole purpose, for which our Research Department was formed and
the result which it is now endeavoring to accomplish.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The International Legion of Vigilantes and the
Leadership of Eternal Right Ideas](mu06)
