[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu06)  [Next](mu08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### UNIVERSAL

### SECURITY, PEACE AND HAPPINESS

### VERSUS

### POVERTY, FEAR AND WAR

We all desire happiness,—nor do we begrudge the fulfillment of this
desire in the life of any other person—therefore, why should we not help
each other to find security, peace and happiness? Why should we not
stand together,—**"One for All and All for One"?**

Since none of us would want anyone or anything to stand in our pathway
and obstruct or prevent our happiness; nor have any right-thinking men
or women the slightest desire to interfere with the happiness or joy of
others,—and since these two correlated statements are indisputably true
when applied to the lives and thoughts of any group of people in any
country on the face of this globe,—**Why then is it also true that so
few of us have ever felt securely happy?** Why is it that envy,
jealousy, hate, bloodshed and war, are observed all about us as the
indications of experiences in the lives of everyone, and that these
conditions exist today, literally as unabated as they have throughout
untold centuries of human life? Why is there so much lack and why such
ceaseless fear of losing what little we have?

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

**The Research Department of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration is prepared to prove that the causes which
bring about insecurity, and racial, religious, and class antagonisms,
are not the inevitable concomitants of evolution, nor an accidental
result, but the plans and purposefully directed plots and programs of
those motivated by the desire for power and financial gain, "and who are
not the slightest bit concerned about how they accomplish their ends."**

**Were it not for the "Planned Perpetuation of Antagonisms,"** causing
constant division among the people of various groups, we would by now be
living in a world populated by men and women doing their fair share of
the world's work, and earning the right,—and thereby worthy,—of sharing
with fair equality, its inexhaustible and diversified abundance and
loveliness. Man would no longer be a creature of lustful enslaving
habits and appetites, nor in bondage to superstitions, unprovable
beliefs or undemonstrable creeds. **Men would be obeying the "Golden
Rule"—not from compulsion but from desire—instead of merely theorizing
and preaching about it.** They would be thinking, speaking and living,
in a clean intelligent, unselfish and kindly manner. Man, loving good
more than evil, and assured of the right to develop his talents and
constructive abilities, would be worthy of trust, and a law unto
himself—free—joyous—and forever unconfined and unlimited.

We have no desire to injure or kill you, nor to cross the oceans to some
foreign nation and kill people we have never even seen; people who
individually could not,—by

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the wildest stretch of imagination,—have done anything to harm us. Only
collectively could they affect us adversely or injure us, and then only
after they had been organized and incensed to thoughts of fear, hate or
envy, by the lying tongue of propaganda,—**stimulated and made to utter
its lies by some one person, or some small group of persons filled with
the lust for power, glory or wealth.** Only then can people be
made,—(through the mesmeric and hypnotic influence upon their emotions
of subtle propaganda),—to desire or want to kill men whom they have
never even seen. Only by being influenced into believing that we might
lose the few crumbs of security or happiness,—patronizingly granted to
us by the small group of families who unlawfully control the wealth and
power of this globe,—could any of us be persuaded into going out and
killing another human being—no matter what his nationality or color
might be—English, African, Chinese;—white, black or yellow.

**It has required centuries of progress for mankind to reach the place
where it is now possible to communicate with a large enough number of
people, during any one century, to build up a force of sufficient
potency to overcome greed and the lust for power, which have, during
countless centuries, been the principal causes of poverty, envy,
jealousy, hatred, murder and war. These selfishly perpetuated
experiences and qualities of thought make security or happiness utterly
impossible of attainment in the life of any human being, whether he be
rich or poor.**

You will readily recognize as your own the ideas we are going to present
to your thought, and we therefore

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

suggest that you spend no more time or years in **"wishing,
only,"**—since the world has now reached an age of enlightenment, and
has developed facilities for intercommunication, which make it possible
to immediately put mankind's universal ideas of freedom into effect. The
fulfillment of these desires can be brought to pass with such a small
amount of co-operation, that the world's right-thinking men and women
need no longer delay, even one day, in taking the necessary steps for
their accomplishment.

It is not vast wealth, power, glory, nor the unsubstantial elements of
flattery, that mankind seek. All any normal men or women desire, is
freedom to do the things which appear to their thought as worthy of
effort, and to have the facilities with which to develop natural talents
and express "normal" ambitions. No one, until falsely trained to desire
such things, asks for great wealth or power, but only for assured
security, peace and financial independence. It is not for purposes of
luxurious living that the average human being desires financial
independence, but primarily, in order that opportunities fo'r
constructive self-expression might thereby be made more readily
available.

Man is never a glutton or a beast, unless he has become the creature of
enslaving appetites and educated desires cunningly encouraged by
influences which profit from such weaknesses.

To love Life, and "to Live" and "to let Live," is as natural an impulse
of our thought as it is to breathe, unless one's mentality has been
warped by an environment, such

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

as need no longer exist on this earth.

Now let us see whether we can, individually as well as collectively,
obtain happiness—permanent security—peace—and financial independence,
right here in this present world, without any new discoveries,—(other
than those which already exist),—being added to our civilization.

**Five hundred million (500,000,000) people are always hungry, and
thirty million (30,000,000) of them die each year from lack of food, and
yet it has been said, and proofs are readily available,—that enough food
could be raised within a "ten-year" period, to feed the population of
our entire world for over one hundred (100) years, without any further
harvesting of crops or other production of food, if mankind desired to
use the present machinery, inventions, and available executive ability,
for the accomplishment of such a result.**

**Millions of men, women and little children die annually from extreme
exposure, due to lack of warm clothes, and yet, enough clothing
materials could be produced within a ten (10) year period to clothe the
entire human race for the rest of this century.**

**Over one thousand million (1000,000,000) people on our
planet,—(one-half of its total population),—have no habitations of their
own which they can call their home, yet we claim that there is a great
world depression and not enough work for the trained workers of our
civilized nations to perform, and that therefore, hundreds of millions
of industrious and intelligent men and women must remain idle.**

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

With hundreds of millions of people starving, freezing to death and
homeless, mankind must wait while the world's **"Swinish Money
Changers,"**—motivated solely by greed, and indescribable selfishness,
stop to figure out just how they can succeed in making men continue to
work for the **private profit system** which they control; **a system of
"Greed" and "Selfishness," which has been perpetuated century after
century, for the exploitation of human beings, and which should have
been completely destroyed long ages ago.**

Is it the purpose of life to build machines, cannons and battleships,
accumulate money, and construct vast office buildings,—where. the
Midases may count their gold,—or should the object of life consist in
seeking wisdom and happiness? **Where did we come from?—Why are we
here?—Where are we going?** Are not these questions of more importance
to each of us than the creating of piles of gold to pour into the laps
of a small handful of people who cannot possibly ever take such wealth
with them when they leave us, and yet, which—after they are gone—always
starts the endless struggle all over again, to see who shall possess it?

**Is it not right that we each should have our lives to use as we may
choose, so long as we harm no one? Should we not be seeking wisdom and
happiness, instead of lifeless money and unsatisfying
self-glorification?**

**The two hundred million (200,000,000) people whom we herein invite to
learn how they may form an equally owned and "Universal" service
corporation, are at this time spending an average of over one thousand
million**

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **($1000,000,000)
dollars per day. If they have the courage, wisdom and vision to combine
their buying power, they can readily own the world's principal resources
of raw materials, from which are produced food, clothes, homes and other
necessities of life (as well as its luxuries) and thereafter they will
have the power to permanently prevent such requirements of human life
from ever again being exploited for private profit. There is no other
way on this earth, to stop wars or to eliminate poverty.**

**The Private Profit System controlled by those who use the world's
resources and its man power for the production of their luxurious
pleasures, is wholly dependent upon "the demand always exceeding the
supply," for in no other way can a profit be collected.**

When supply exceeds demand, those who control its sources are glad to
get whatever people will pay, but when demand exceeds supply and, for
instance, two people want exactly the same article of which there is
only enough for one, they will then bid against each other, and if they
want it badly enough, will keep on bidding until they pay a thousand
times or ten thousand times what it actually cost to produce; but the
reverse is also true: When those in control of a large quantity of some
article,—the supply of which exceeds the demand,—desire to sell, they
have to go out bidding for buyers. If they can't get people to buy at
one price, then they offer their merchandise at a still lower price, and
keep on lowering the price until someone agrees to buy. **Hence, anyone
who desires to make a profit on the sources of supply he may control, is
of necessity forced to curtail his production so as to never**

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

**release enough to satisfy everyone, or in other words, so that there
will always be a surplus of buyers unable to get what he is
producing;**—always someone to bid a higher price and start the others
bidding, so that even after they have paid many times the article's
value they will feel fortunate in having obtained it at any price,—due
to its "supposed (?)" scarcity.

This basic formula upon which the **"Private Profit System"** is
perpetuated century after century, is readily understood, when we
consider the prices paid for rare paintings. If a famous artist has
passed on, and the number of his paintings can never again be increased,
people begin wanting what they can no longer get, and they offer those
who own the paintings, more money than they paid for them; and then some
one else thinks he wants them and he offers still more. **Finally people
begin to think that the paintings, "Themselves," must possess some great
inherent value of their own, when actually, the demand has been created
largely because of the fact that the quantity can never be increased.
"It isn't the paintings they pay for but only the privilege of having
control of them."**

In accordance with the "Money Changers’" formula,—that the supply of any
necessary article must never be permitted to equal the demand,—we find
that during the past twenty-four (24) months, they have used the
influences which their vast accumulations of gold and silver enable them
to wield, to bring about the destruction of millions of acres of wheat
and cotton crops, tens of millions of cattle, and countless millions of
tons of other necessary or desirable requirements of human life, in
order that they

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

might thereby force the demand to a point so far beyond the available
supplies of necessities or luxuries, that they would have no difficulty
in obtaining whatever profits they might desire through their control
over the principal commercial avenues of production and distribution.

**The fact that five hundred million (500,000,000) other human beings
will go hungry each day, and that thirty million (30,000,000) of them
will starve to death during the following twelve (12) months, is of no
concern to these captains of finance. Theirs is a business of making
profits, and as long as they can make more money from human beings who
are suffering and in need, than they can from those who are secure,
peaceful and happy,—mankind may rest assured that just so long as gold
and silver can control the destinies of men, no improvement in our
economic or political systems which might provide a guarantee of
security and happiness to the inhabitants of our world, will ever be
brought to pass.**

**Only through the universal adoption of a medium of exchange based on
"Service" rather than on "Gold or Silver," will mankind ever succeed in
destroying the swinishly perpetuated spectacle of the wholesale
destruction of food and other necessities of life, which is permitted to
take place before the very eyes of tortured starving human beings.**

**To make our world into a garden spot, ever more beautiful as a home
for the human race,—to add to the sum total of human happiness, and not
just seek what we would individually like to possess, (without
consideration for others ), but instead, to apply "the Golden Rule" of**

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **"One for All and
All for One"—as a real desire within our hearts, and not merely words
emanating from our lips, is the only ambition truly worthy of
intelligent creatures.**

Man cannot point to a time since the beginning of human history when
there has not existed, somewhere on the globe, a greater abundance of
those things which are necessary or desirable for his use, than he could
possibly exhaust. However, it has been less than one hundred (100) years
since men have awakened to a sufficient degree of comprehension and
discernment, to recognize the "infinite abundance" of good which has
always been available for their welfare here on earth.

Only by the intelligent application of new ideas, have men discovered
ways and means of using a few of the materials which the earth contains
in such limitless abundance and variety. The good ideas; which they have
welcomed and acted upon, now enable them to communicate almost instantly
with one another in any part of the globe. By the use of "right
ideas,"—at the rate men have proven their ability to abridge distances
during the past twenty-five (25) years,—it is not improbable, that at a
not far distant date, men will be able to travel to any part of the
world between sunrise and sunset of a single day.

Mankind should therefore no longer be mesmerized by the belief that they
are made up of many disconnected links, nationalities, classes or
families, but they should now,. recognize the fact that they are, after
all, just one family—"The Human Family." Why then, should they not
become **"Mankind United"?** The result of world-wide co-operation,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

and of such internationally united efforts, would soon be **"Mankind
Unlimited."**

Considering the inexhaustible abundance of the earth's resources, and
mankind's present ability to rapidly transport those things which
constitute a surplus in one locality, to points where there may seem to
be a lack, it is high time that **"Mankind United"** in order that they
might share each other's surplus products, and thereby each enjoy a
wider variety of the good things which our earth so abundantly produces.

**There never has been, and there never will be, an actual economic
cause or reason for the existence of a world-wide condition of
poverty—or reasons for men to wage war among themselves, inasmuch as an
abundance of everything essential to man's welfare has always existed
upon this globe.** The proof of this statement is a fact which no one
can deny;—namely, that all of the materials which enter into our
telephones, radios, airplanes, automobiles, or any other present-day
invention,—have been here on this earth throughout countless millions of
years waiting for man to use them. Limitless resources and power are
always available whenever men are willing to stop fighting among
themselves and devote their thoughts and efforts towards the discovery
of the blessings which our Creator has placed here for our use;
**resources in such vast abundance, that men need never fight over which
one should have the most, for there is more than mankind can use during
a period of millions of years.**

**There never has been and never can be any reason, due to a difference
in the fundamental needs or desires of**

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

**human beings, nor to a lack of materials for food, clothes,
shelter,—or any other requirement for man's welfare,—which could
constitute any legitimate cause for the establishment of antagonistic
forms of government, or separately owned sources of supply, or
separately owned facilities for manufacturing or producing mankind's
necessities or luxuries of life.**

There is not now, nor could there ever have been in the history of man,
a period when the intelligent application of **"The Golden Rule"** in
all human activities and relationships, could not have solved every
spiritual, moral, or physical requirement of man. The natural results
and effects of brotherly love, and a consequent unshakable trust and
confidence in one another, would have uprooted the causes of poverty and
war centuries ago, had men applied "The Golden Rule" in their "economic
relationships," as constantly as they have referred to it in their
philosophical discussions with one another.

**Merely because our ancestors failed to discern the practical and
economic, as well as idealistic desirability of universal brotherly
love** (which would long centuries ago have resulted in the destruction
of class distinctions—national boundary lines and racial
antagonisms)—and merely because they preferred to go out and commit
murder, and then after stealing the possessions of their weaker
brothers, to evolve a rule of conduct which they called **"The Law of
the Survival of the Fittest"** does not justify us in perpetuating such
a rule.

**The world was not formed "solely" for the use of "swine," nor solely
for the use of human beings who subscribe**

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

**to "swinish" humanly promulgated rules of conduct worthy only of
hogs.**

**Our Research Department claims that wars, poverty, and most of the
disappointments, broken hearts and broken lives of mankind, can be
avoided by co-ordinating the combined "demonstrable" wisdom, ideas and
efforts, of each member of the human family with all others, and
distributing the total products thereof, "equally" among the members of
the entire human race,—granting none the privilege of attaining to a
degree of power or influence sufficiently great to injure his
fellows,—should greed or selfishness gain control of such a one's
thoughts.**

**We believe that all men, women and children, of every nation, should
have the privilege of developing their talents for their own as well as
for the world's advancement, and the equal use of whatever they might
desire of the earth's resources of a constructive nature, for their own
individual happiness.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Golden Rule—Or—The Rule of Gold—Which Shall It
Be?](mu08.md)
