[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu07)  [Next](mu09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### THE GOLDEN RULE—OR—THE RULE OF GOLD

### WHICH SHALL IT BE

### ?

Just as long as a type of money is in use which can be accumulated in
such vast quantities that those who control it are able to dictate to
the governments and the peoples of the earth, and to make or break them
at will; and as long as human nature is such that a taste of great power
or great wealth frequently develops a ceaseless craving for more,—until
the time comes when such people have grown so insanely ambitious that
they have reached the stage which can only be described as "moral
idiocy;"—it is wholly illogical, and—were it not such a tragedy—even
rather ridiculous, to place beautifully couched petitions in their
hands, which plead with these monstrosities of greed for reduced
armaments,—round-table discussions, (instead of war),—old-age pensions,
social security and other similarly worthy desires in the hearts of
sane, right-thinking men and women.

Knowing that the political structures of every nation can always be
controlled—either by methods of intimidation, bribery, flattery or
assassination—by those with sufficient money to accomplish such
results;—knowing that vast quantities of gold and silver now rest in the
hands

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

of a small group of men who desire more wars and more poverty, that they
may, thereby,—through the manipulations of cheap labor or the sale of
armaments or other merchandise for the slaughter of human life—not only
add to the contents of their already over-flowing treasure chests, but
also bring about mankind's complete enslavement;—knowing that such men
have learned more tricks of propaganda, and so-called mass psychology,
through which to control the activities of any groups of politicians,
which have ever, or will,—(under our present private profit competitive
system),—ever be elected to office;—knowing that such men have learned
more ways and means of controlling the actions of politicians and those
who hold public office, than the combined civilian population of the
combined so-called civilized governments of the entire world could ever
hope to learn during hundreds of years, (through their wholly inadequate
and usually politically, capitalistically or subversively controlled
mediums of news or sources of information);—knowing all of these facts,
is it likewise not rather ridiculous that men and women who call
themselves intelligent creatures, should waste the time to even try to
correct conditions through sending long petitions to people who are so
easily controlled by the insanely ambitious maniacs who govern them?
**(One might just as well send a request to a rattlesnake asking it not
to bite him).**

Those of us who believe ourselves to be intelligent creatures can never
expect to permanently improve conditions by merely writing little
crosses on long pieces of paper, which we call "Ballots," when—after
tossing these bundles of ballots around among themselves for their

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

amusement,—the world's "Money Changers" arrange the actions of the new
political administration in any way they may desire, and with the power
and influence of their money, completely control the new crop of
publicly or politically appointed representatives, with not the
slightest bit of difficulty, through the use of one or more of their
four methods of control; namely,—**intimidation, bribery, flattery or
assassination,** which their accumulations of money enable them to
exercise.

Knowing these things, it is high time that those men and women
throughout the world, who desire financial independence and security,
bind themselves together into the only type of organization which will
ever succeed in directing either the governments or the industries of
the world in behalf of the happiness of its citizens; **namely, a
Co-operative, Equally Owned Universal Service Corporation, capable of
producing and distributing the necessities and luxuries of life for its
members, and with its combined buying power of more than One Thousand
Million ($1000,000,000) Dollars per day,—(and the concerted action of
Two Hundred Million (200,000,000) equal owners),—capable of bringing to
pass the international adoption, through "Commercial" instead of
"Political" methods, of a type of money which neither any one person nor
any group of persons will ever be able to accumulate in sufficient
quantities to destructively dictate either the thoughts or the actions
of their fellow beings.**

Without seeking financial remuneration, public recognition or reward of
any nature,, the sponsors of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

after many years of thorough preparation, now invite the world's
right-thinking and intelligent citizens to accept their proofs of the
feasibility of such an accomplishment.

**It has indeed been rightly stated, that "That which is every one's
business" is usually "No one's business."** Our Sponsors, many years
ago, became aware of the fact that although all **"sane people"** desire
to end both war and poverty,—and it is surely the business of every
intelligent person to help do so,—nevertheless, no individual nor group
of individuals with sufficient understanding of these problems to bring
about their solution, had considered them of sufficient importance to
warrant an expenditure of either the necessary time or money which would
be required before any successful solution could be reached. **Our
Sponsors and Executive Board of two hundred men and women have, for many
years, made it "their business" to discover a practical plan for ending
war and poverty.** They not only have been successful, but of equal
importance is the fact that the solution they have evolved is one which
can be applied with inevitable success,—and, within a period of less
than ninety (90) days after its acceptance by at least two hundred
million (200,000,000) intelligent men and women;—nor will such
acceptance require any supreme sacrifices of either time or money.

**Realizing that the power and influence of the world's subversive
forces,—those who perpetuate both its wars and poverty,—consist solely
of the enormous buying power which their century-old accumulations of
gold and silver place in their hands, Our Sponsors soon recognized the
fact that it would be necessary to "fight fire with fire;"**

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

**in other words, to combat the buying power of the world's "Money
Changers" "with a buying power of even greater potency."**

They knew that one of the principal reasons for the adoption of plans by
the Hidden Rulers, to bring about the extermination of the world's
educated and religious peoples, was the fact that such classes of human
beings,—through the avenues of study and the privileges of firsthand
observation which present modes of travel have made available to
them,—have begun to realize that the untouched resources of the earth
and the unused lands which could be cultivated for the production of
food are so vast, in variety and extent, that there is not the slightest
reason for anyone being obliged to experience either privation, poverty,
or a life of drudgery. Such educated people are fully aware of the fact
that the earth's resources are so abundant that all of the world's
citizens might readily be enabled to enjoy lives of comparative luxury,
and have ample leisure time for recreation or the development of
individual talents, if each new marvelous discovery and mechanical
invention were used,—not for purposes of wasteful and destructive forms
of competition,—but instead, for the purposes of production for all
mankind, in accordance with each individual's respective needs.

Recognizing the growing discontent of the masses against needless
conditions of poverty and drudgery, and realizing that unless such of
the population, whose education had made them discontented, were soon
exterminated, they would eventually unite and demand a greater share of
the world's resources than they had been receiving,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the Hidden Rulers determined to destroy such people, and to do so before
a demand could be made for the establishment of an economic system which
might alter the world's medium of exchange, from gold and silver to one
of a more equitable nature.

**If gold or silver could no longer buy human labor or merchandise, such
a condition would, for all time to come, destroy the influence which
these "Money Changers" and their satellites have for so many centuries
enjoyed.** To prevent such a result—which would spell their doom—it
would be necessary not only to slaughter four hundred million
(400,000,000) of the educated and religious classes, who constitute the
group most persistent in their demand for social equality and justice,
but it would also be necessary to destroy the world's educational and
religious institutions, and thereafter prevent their re-establishment
except on a basis which would destroy the initiative of individuals, and
in its place create a standardized type of "mass-thought," which would
force the mentalities of the human race into a mold capable of shaping
their thinking in accordance with the plans and desires of those who
would then be their rulers.

The slavery which the world's Hidden Rulers plan to bring about will be
similar to that now experienced by the hundreds of millions of people in
India, such as has existed there continuously throughout many thousands
of years. **However, there will be even less freedom or opportunity for
mental development.** The model towards which they strive, is the one
adopted by the aristocracy of India some thousands of years ago; a
principle of Government which

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

has never failed to enable those who practice it, to not only
continuously add to their own personal fortunes, but also to readily
retain their control over the millions of human beings who thereby
permanently become their slaves.

The enslaving principle of Government to which we refer, may be briefly
described as one which keeps the masses of people always
poverty-stricken and illiterate, in order that they may thereby be
readily influenced through the avenues of superstition, and fear of the
unknown. When millions of people are unable to either read or write, and
when the nameless fears of superstition are systematically planted in
their thoughts century after century, it is not difficult to sway them
into action or obedience, through either the avenues of fear or intense
hate. **Likewise, when tens of millions of people are not only
poverty-stricken or on the verge of starvation, but are actually dying
by the thousands each day, from the tortures of starvation and exposure,
it is not difficult to buy their labor for little or nothing; inasmuch
as they will literally sell their souls for a piece of bread if they are
constantly kept hungry enough.**

The billions upon billions of dollars of wealth in the form of gold,
silver and jewels, retained and added to century after century by the
Rajahs and the wealthy families of India, have fully proven the security
which such forms of Government bring to those who are wealthy enough to
adopt and consistently perpetuate them. **It is also readily understood
why education and the Christian religion, (the teachings of the Golden
Rule and brotherly love), constitute the only enemies which such rulers
fear.**

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

**Because of the disobedience some centuries ago, of the representatives
and satellites of those who then ruled the peoples of the earth, both
the influences of "education" and "the Christian religion" were allowed
to start leavening human thought.** Ceaseless efforts have since been
made to eradicate these influences, but they have, during the past few
centuries, and particularly during the era represented by recent
generations,—spread with much rapidity. They have resulted in such an
increase in mechanical inventions, and mediums through which to abridge
distance and communicate with great numbers of people from one central
point,—through the use of radio and other modern means of
inter-communication,—that the only method left to the world's Hidden
Rulers—if they are to succeed in retaining their control over the world
and its people—is to exterminate all people who are either educated or
religious, or whose thoughts have been touched and enlightened by either
one or both of these broadening influences. They feel that there is no
other solution to their problem, inasmuch as the ever-growing insistence
of these right-thinking people is rapidly bringing to pass a world-wide
demand, by hundreds of millions of such individuals, that the earth's
resources be fully released for the equal benefit of all, and that the
mechanical inventions of our present civilization be universally used
for the production and distribution of a greater abundance of such
resources, in order that all—instead of only a few of the citizens of
our world—may enjoy beautiful homes and educational advantages, as well
as an abundance of all of those things which add to the happiness of men
during their sojourn here on our earth.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

That the world's Rulers have been at least partly successful in
preventing the influences of education, religion and universal financial
security, from developing sufficient strength to bring about their
overthrow,—or the establishment of an economic system which would no
longer enable them to retain their control over our world,—is evidenced
by the fact that even today, during our so-called enlightened
twentieth-century civilization, an average of one out of every two
people who populate our earth,—in other words, a total of one thousand
million (1000,000,000) human beings,—are not only still unable to read
or write, but in addition to their illiteracy, the majority of them are
filled with the usual numerous nameless fears which are so easily
planted in the ignorant and superstitious thoughts of such illiterates.

That the world's Rulers have likewise been quite successful in keeping
the masses of people who are located in the more densely populated parts
of the earth, hungry enough to be willing to work for little or nothing,
is evidenced by the fact that right at this time,—and continuously
throughout countless centuries,—over five hundred million (500,000,000)
human beings are hungry every day of their stunted, starved little
lives, and over thirty millions (30,000,000) of such men, women and
little children, die each year; or, in other words, over eighty thousand
(80,000) every twenty-four (24) hours,—over two and one-half millions
dying each month, after experiencing weeks, -months or years of the slow
excruciating tortures of hunger.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

Inasmuch as ignorance and poverty go hand in hand,—as they are intended
to by those who perpetuate them,—we find that the majority of deaths
from under-nourishment, starvation and exposure, occur in those nations
whose Rulers have been most successful in perpetuating illiteracy,
ignorance and false superstitious teachings. However, even in the
world's advanced civilized countries, the influence of the subversive
forces to which we refer, has been sufficient to constantly obstruct and
greatly handicap education, free speech, and the privileges of
"uncontrolled" religious worship. In fact, the buying power and
influence of their money has been so great, that even in this so-called
enlightened age, (although they are obliged to spend hundreds of
millions of dollars each year to accomplish their purpose), they succeed
through the avenues of the newspapers, magazines, publishing houses,
industrial and political mediums,—which they either own or control,—in
seriously obstructing most of the educational or religious teachings
which help human beings to become independent, clear, unbigoted
thinkers. **Through the avenues we have just described, they likewise
succeed in perpetuating poverty, and preventing mankind's use of the
many marvelous inventions which have been perfected in spite of
ceaseless obstructions to the progress of education.**

**By drawing upon their inexhaustible reserves of gold and silver, these
subversive forces have no more difficulty in buying the control of new
inventions and basic patents, than they experience in maintaining their
rule over the political structures, (be they ever so advanced),—of the
world's most civilized nations.**

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

We therefore find that through these dual forms of control,—added to the
weakening influences of the ceaseless revoluticns and wars to which they
subject the world's so-called civilized peoples,—that even in our most
advanced nations, hundreds of thousands of people die each year from
starvation and exposure.

Even though enlightened thinking has produced countless marvelous
mechanical inventions,—capable of relieving humanity almost entirely of
the need for human labor or drudgery,—yet through the ceaseless
undermining monetary power of the subversive forces, the limitless
abundance of the necessary or desirable things of life, which could
thereby be so readily made available to all mankind, is not only
withheld from their use, but food and other necessities of human life
are actually destroyed right before men's eyes, in order to assure their
continued poverty and privation. We find, in line with this policy of
action, that the political, agricultural and industrial leaders of the
world, have been readily influenced into destroying millions of acres of
wheat and cotton crops, tens of millions of cattle, and an incalculable
quantity of miscellaneous types of food and other necessities of life
during the last twenty-four months, in order that the effect of the
world's recent inventions might be offset and poverty be made to retain
its hold upon the human race.

The influence of "the Money Changers’" publicity and propaganda
disseminating medium is so great, that not only do we find them able to
gain the public's consent to a monopolistic control of the world's most
valuable mechanical

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

inventions, and to a wholesale destruction of the products of such
inventions, but also able to accomplish these results without even one
newspaper headline, or other announcement to the public, ever appearing
in any part of the civilized world, which might inform the sane and
right-thinking members of the human race that while they are voting
their consent to the wholesale destructions of food and other
necessities of human life,—eighty thousand (80,000) of the men, women,
and children of their own and other countries, are lying in the gutters
of the world with their stomachs bursting open from starvation. **Eighty
thousand (80,000) human beings dying of starvation every twenty-four
(24) hours, and our leaders not only succeed in hiding this fact from
us, but actually make us believe they are justified in destroying our
foodstuffs and the products of our factories because of a supposed
surplus.**

**Mankind's Hidden Rulers are fully aware of the fact that those who
have been allowed to "correctly" learn the meaning of Christ Jesus’
teachings,—relative to "the Golden Rule" and "brotherly love,"—would
never permit such world-wide destruction of food if they knew that an
average of one out of every four of the world's entire population, (in
other words over five hundred million people), suffered from hunger each
day, and that over thirty million of them will die this year,—(as have a
like number, year after year for centuries); yet hardly a word is
allowed to be spoken from even the church pulpits of the world nor a
headline to appear in any paper, for fear that right-thinking and
generous men and women might thereby learn of such conditions.**

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

The reason for such enforced silence on the part of the sources of
information to which the public looks for enlightenment and guidance, is
readily understood when we realize that with tens of millions of
highly-skilled workers, unemployed and living on government
doles,—(which the employed people of such nations must pay through
numerous avenues of taxation every time they spend even five cents for a
loaf of bread),—and with millions of unused acres of land and thousands
of idle factories, it is quite evident that the educated, religious and
sane men and women of the world would make such a clamor, that its echo
would be heard to the ends of the earth;—not only would they demand that
such idle workers, idle factories and idle lands be made to produce the
food, clothes, homes, and normal requirements of human life, for those
who are unemployed, but also for the hundreds of millions of starving,
homeless, unwanted, unloved and **"truly forgotten"** men, women and
helpless little children of "every land."

Knowing these things, and knowing that through the avenues of such of
the world's inventions as they have been unable to control, mankind
might in time be informed of the manner in which they have been
duped,—through their acceptance of the selfishly perpetuated false law
of "the survival of the fittest," and its tireless servant, "the
Private-Profit System,"—and might then demand a system of greater
equality and justice; the world's "Money Changers" realized that they
must quickly destroy the discontented classes, or they themselves might
soon be overthrown. They knew that it would be as impossible to remove
the effects of Christ Jesus’ teachings of brotherly

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

love, and those of the world's various enlightened forms of education,
from human thought and from the hearts of men, as it would be to extract
yeast from a pan of dough once it had been impregnated with it. The only
means by which these "moral idiots" could even hope to continue their
control over the world and its citizens, would be to deal with education
and religion, (the only two forces they have ever feared), in the same
manner in which they would have to deal with the pan of dough if they
were going to try and get rid of the yeast. **In other words they would
have to destroy the dough in order to destroy the yeast.**

The influences of education and religion have now become so deeply
embedded into the thoughts and hearts of men, that there is no possible
means by which they can be destroyed other than to slaughter those who
have felt their effect. Such people are growing increasingly desirous of
ending the age-old curses of war and poverty, and of bringing to pass
the universal establishment of an economic system which will be able to
abundantly supply the requirements of human life for the people of every
land, **and without any more bloodshed or bitter rivalries.**

Recognizing that a desire to bring about the brotherhood of man, had
become almost universally accepted among the people of the world's most
advanced nations, and that a widespread demand, not only for economic
security but for protection against the ravages of war, had entered the
hearts of men, the world's Hidden Rulers determined, many years ago,
upon a plan which would not only bring about the extermination of the
classes of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

would actually they desire to destroy, but would enlist the enthusiasm
and unquestioning help and support of millions of the citizens of these
various civilized nations; a plan which would draw this support from
both the educated and religious, as well as the illiterate classes.
**They decided to start a number of great world movements which would
appear to have as their objectives, "The Establishment of a World
Brotherhood."**

They would finance a number of revolutions and bring about the overthrow
of the world's major governments, but they would do so in the name and
under the guise of what would seem to be **"A Great World
Brotherhood."** Depending upon the characteristics of thought of the
people of these various nations, they would name their movements either
**"Communism," "Fascism" or "Socialism,"**—or give them some other
equally euphonious title. However in each instance they would cause the
people,—through well-planned propaganda and carefully selected and
trained lieutenants,—to believe that the leaders of these new types of
government, (inasmuch as they had been selected from the working
classes), were devoting their entire efforts to the establishment of a
system of "equality" and "the brotherhood of man." Finally, with the
acceptance of such beliefs, the public would willingly consent, not only
to a regimentation of men and of the activities of agriculture and
industry, but also grant their support and co-operation towards the
enforcement of such rulings.

Under the mesmeric influence of thinking that they were finally helping
to bring to pass economic equality and a great world brotherhood, they
would unresistingly permit

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

any forms of cruelty or brutality which their new Rulers might tell them
were necessary for the success of their movement. When such people had
either voluntarily or through compulsion, submerged their own thinking
and individualities in programs which they would be told were for the
good of the **"State"** and when they had been taught that the
**"State"** must come first no matter how much suffering they were
individually forced to experience, **then—"but not until then"—the
combined labor, talents and abilities of such people would be directed
into channels for the production of great armaments and munitions of
war, and for the development of huge standing armies, which the masses
would be made to believe were for the protection and advancement of the
"long prayed for brotherhood of man."**

At the same time, as quickly as it could be safely brought to pass, the
religious institutions of the land would be discredited and prohibited
from further activities, excepting those which might be under the
special authorization and direction of the State. When this was
accomplished, people would be gradually taught to worship the "State"
instead of God, and to scorn not only the ideals of the various
religions but even the purifying impulses of decency and morality. While
these effects were brought to pass, the women and little children, as
well as the men, (through the mediums of intensive physical training,
outdoor sports and athletics), would be hardened for military service.

Soon thereafter, the sanctity of marriage and the concepts of morality,
for which the human race has struggled

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

throughout so many long centuries, would have thereby been largely
uprooted, and men taught even to ridicule the concept of marriage, home
or church. Should the people occasionally wonder what had become of the
ideals of brotherhood, and from time to time remember that the only
sources from which they had ever received the teachings or been
impregnated with the desires of brotherhood or brotherly love had
invariably been in the protected atmosphere of the home, either at their
mothers’ knees or in the Sunday Schools or Churches,—(which latter,
would by that time have ceased to exist, and even be prevented by law
from ever attempting any further influence upon the thoughts of those
who were supposedly striving to bring to pass economic equality and
brotherly love),—**and should they start complaining because of the
cruelty or injustice of their dictators and officials, they would then
be reminded of the fact that their Rulers had been selected from their
own working classes, and they should therefore not complain.**

In the meantime, people would no longer suspect **"Capitalists"** or
believe that they were responsible for the loss of their homes and
churches, their freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and most of the
other liberties which had been granted to them under their previous
forms of government for, **(although the Dictators and Communist Rulers
would previously have been carefully selected by the world's wealthy
Hidden Rulers),** the public would be made to think that such Rulers had
attained to their position through their great love for their fellowman,
and had only the welfare of humanity at heart.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Even though their dictators might, with one breath utter inspiring
statements about the brotherhood of man, and in the next breath give an
order to slaughter some thousands of their own citizens for an
infraction of some minor regulation; even though one minute they might
sign an official publicity statement describing the great benefits which
the new form of Government had brought into the lives of the
**"Proletariat,"** and in the next instant affix their signatures to a
ruling which would abolish the churches of the various religions, annul
the sanctity of marriage, and prohibit freedom of speech, the rights of
assembly, or the privileges of a home; **nevertheless, the people would
be told that all of these actions were taken because of their dictator's
great love for them, and his courageous undying desire to assure their
economic security and happiness. Due to the gullibility of human
thought, the world's Rulers believed that men and women would not
awaken,—until it was too late, to the fact that the only sources from
which they had ever gained the desire for brotherhood or the generous
impulses of brotherly love, were those which by that time would be
prohibited by law from having any further influence upon the lives of
men; namely, the church, the sanctity of marriage and the home.**

**With the abolishment of all laws granting individual human rights,
these Dictators,—(under orders, day by day, received through the secret
agents of the world's Hidden Rulers),—carry forward their plans for the
building of great armies and the manufacturing of vast armaments and
munitions, in preparation for their share in the war which will, at its
conclusion, have slaughtered those who**

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

**fought for the overthrow of their previous forms of government, and
the establishment of that which they had been told was to end the rule
of the world's capitalists, end wars and poverty, and usher in an era of
brotherhood and equality.**

With the abolishment of the rights of free speech and the protection of
just laws, those in control of the nations which exchange their
respective forms of government for **Communism, Fascism, Naziism or some
other type of Dictatorship,** have little difficulty in controlling the
masses and compelling them to obey any and all orders issued by the
"Money Changers."

With the power of "Life or Death" over their subjects, and with
thousands of spies scattered throughout every corner of their countries,
it is only necessary to order the execution of anyone who questions or
complains about their authority. If one of their agents orders a man or
a woman to dig a ditch, and such a one objects or refuses to do so,
either torture or execution is the price that must be paid. **Dictators
do not take time to argue the enforcement of their orders,—"One either
obeys them or dies." That is the price paid by those who think that
through the avenues of a Dictatorship, Communism, Fascism, Naziism or
the world's present concept of Socialism, they are ushering in the
brotherhood of man. The only equality which will be experienced by those
who believe that they can forfeit their homes, their churches, their
freedom of speech and privileges of assembly, in exchange for these
various "isms" and dictatorships, "will be the equality of worms,"
crushed under the heels of the few**

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

**who win the right and who have the brutality of temperament to walk on
them.**

If gold and silver are still to constitute the basis of currency, or to
be used as such by any new form of government or any economic system
recommended by any person or group of persons appearing at this time
before the public with a panacea for its ills, such recommendations
either emanate from those who are "wholly ignorant" of the actual causes
of war, poverty and similar types of human suffering, or they emanate
**"directly"** from the world's "Money Changers;" its **"Hidden
Rulers."** Inasmuch as any government which continues to use a type of
money capable of being accumulated by any person or group of persons,
will always be under complete subjection to these Hidden
Rulers,—**(since their accumulations of these metals now exceed, and
through their ceaseless additions to their treasuries,—will always
exceed any amount which will ever be accumulated by any Government
"other than their own Hidden one, which includes the control of all
others"),**—the only difference between the so-called "Capitalistic
Government," and the "Communistic One," is that under a "Dictatorship"
the people "know" they are working for nothing, and that whatever they
earn is going into the hands of their Rulers; whereas, under the
"Private-Profit System" or so-called "Capitalistic" form of government,
they are made to **"think"** that at least a part of the fruitage of
their labors will be theirs to store away in their own little,
individual, diminutive treasure chests. **And in fact, under this latter
form of system, that is exactly what they are encouraged to do, for the
"Money Changers" know that they can empty out these little chests into
their**

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

**own big ones through the process of depressions, panics and
unemployment, any time they may so desire.**

However, with the vehicle of Communism and other forms of dictatorship
at their disposal, the world's Hidden Rulers have been able, during the
past few years, to travel much more rapidly than they would have
otherwise towards their goal of the great war of extermination, which
they plan to have reach the fulfillment of its purpose,—the slaughter of
the educated, religious and right-thinking human beings of every major
nation,—at an early date. Every effort is therefore being made at this
time to stir up bitterness and hate among the people of the advanced
nations in order that their governments may be overthrown, either
through the processes of revolution by armed force, or by means of
drastic constitutional changes in the basic foundation of their
governmental structure.

**With the destruction of the rights of free speech and privilege of
assembly, any possible sources of objection or opposition can quickly be
uprooted, and the "Money Changers" are then able to proceed without
interference with their production of vast armaments, the formation of
huge armies, and the use of a nation's entire resources for the
development and manufacture of facilities with which to perform its
share of the task of extermination during the next world war.** <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)

All men, women and children, who are able to read and write, are
scheduled to be murdered, excepting those who are either the relatives,
immediate associates, or trusted agents of the Hidden Rulers and who
will, at the conclusion of their war, occupy the same position and
relationship

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

to the remaining members of the human race, who may survive this war, as
the relationship which now exists between the Rajahs of India and their
starved illiterate masses. **The only difference between the government
of the Rajahs and that of the Hidden Rulers, is that the program of the
latter,—(this twentieth century autocracy, which is planned for our
world of to-morrow),will provide its Rulers with even greater luxuries
and even more certain control over their subjects; although it will of
course correspond fundamentally with the basic principles of the
governments in India which keep the masses ignorant and on the point of
starvation, in order that they may thereby be more readily controlled.**

*\* \* PLEASE NOTE \* \**

*In view of what many people consider to be an advanced civilization,
the revelations contained in the following chapter will seem wholly
unbelievable to a great number of our readers. Knowing this, our
Sponsors debated, at length, the advisability of publishing the
statements—comprising Chapter VI.—at this time.*

*However, after weighing the matter carefully, it was decided to include
it as written; for it was assumed that as soon as the message in
"Mankind United" was released to the public, copies of said book would
be delivered into the hands of the world's Hidden Rulers by some one of
their thousands of secret service operatives. In this way the "Money
Changers" would learn not only that their most secret plans had been
discovered, but that every move they might henceforth make towards the
consummation thereof would likewise be revealed to mankind long before
destructive action against the public welfare could be successfully
undertaken.*

*Nothing is more disconcerting to the general staff of an army of
destroyers than to learn that what they had thought to be their most
secret plots and plans of campaigning are known to their opponents*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[101:\*](mu08.htm#fr_2.md) *Unless a widespread
acceptance of its program is accomplished, the Institute can succeed in
only temporarily delaying the consummation of these insane dreams of
conquest*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. 40,000 Principalities—One Thousand Million
Slaves](mu09.md)
