[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu09)  [Next](mu11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### SHALL JESUS—OR—JUDAS PREVAIL

### ?

**For the benefit of those who although having eyes with which to see
and ears with which to hear yet are unwilling to either read or to try
to understand "The Signs of the Times," and for the benefit of "Those
who refuse to recognize the true meaning" in back of the mad scramble by
even the most advanced of the world's civilized nations to build up
armaments of warfare and vast quantities of munitions,—capable of
slaughtering the entire human race, if it were so desired,—we beg to be
allowed to remind such people that the eight million (8,000,000)
healthy, intelligent young men who died on the battlefields during the
world war of the years 1914 to 1918, also scoffed at the idea that there
could ever again be a war which would involve "even one" of the great
civilized nations, to say nothing of "all of the major ones," as was
actually the case.** Yet, that war "was planned and executed" with the
consent of the actual Rulers, (although not those whom mankind "thought"
to be their leaders), of each of those warring nations, working together
as one harmoniously united executive board, merely completing **"One"**
of the numerous tests, which have been going on throughout a number of
generations, in preparation for the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

time when the mechanical inventions and chemical discoveries of the
world would provide sufficient power with which to bring to
pass,—**through the purchasing power and influence of their centuries of
accumulated "Gold and Silver,"**—the complete and final destruction of
those influences which have for so many centuries interfered with the
"Hidden Rulers’" complete enslavement of the human race; namely, our
civilizations' educational and religious institutions.

**To those who may believe that prayers (without the actions which
"Christ Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount," and most particularly "His Golden
Rule," enjoins upon the human race) can save the world from another
war,—which will destroy not only the most enlightened members of our
present civilization but also all of the educational and religious
institutions which have required so many centuries to develop,—we bring
to their attention the fact that the combined prayers of the most
spiritual and enlightened thinkers of all of the religious movements in
all of the civilized nations, throughout the entire world, did not
prevent the last world war, nor did not prevent the past six years of
depression, nor can they possibly prevent the war which will complete
the "Hidden Rulers’" program of extermination, unless every man, woman
and child who claims to even believe in God—not only "gets down on his
knees and prays," but "also stands up on his feet and acts" some of the
"Golden Rule" talked and preached about for so many of the past
centuries.**

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

Those of us who utter words of brotherly love, which our actions have
not justified, are like the "whited sepulchers" of which Christ Jesus
spoke, and which He described as "being filled with all uncleanliness."
There is no man or woman on this earth today but who is still
obliged,—(if he has any but the qualities of a hypocrite in his
consciousness)—to bow his head as did the "Penitent Publican," and pray
that he might some day have the courage and goodness of spirit with
which to be worthy to partake, in some small part, of that Cup which
Christ Jesus "drained to the bitter dregs " that men might thereby be
taught the lesson "of doing unto others as they would have others do
unto them."

That men might understand and become worthy to receive the blessings
described by Christ Jesus’ "Sermon On The Mount," and the prayer to
which the world now refers as "The Lord's Prayer," the Sponsors and
officially selected co-workers of The International Institute of
Universal Research and Administration have dedicated their lives to the
uncovering of "Spiritual Wickedness In High Places," and the development
of a program which might open the eyes of men to the necessity of
establishing an economic system which would never again provide the
opportunity for any human being to successfully plot the destruction of
his brothers nor to contemplate the slaughtering of other human beings
for the purpose of financial gain, or to attempt to become some **"Puny
Little Swinish god"** in order that he might satisfy his ego by having
brass bands play when he appears before men, or if his brother man
displeases him, that he might have the power of deciding upon the life
or death of such an individual.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

That intelligent men and women can—after nearly two thousand (2000)
years—still fail to recognize the necessity of **"Absolute Obedience"**
to the universal law, which commands that **"We do unto others as we
would have others do unto us,"** now—in the light of our
discoveries—seems almost incomprehensible. For it should be
self-evident, that if even "one person" has more of this world's
goods—and broader opportunities or privileges than are available to
another—then either **"Jealousy,"** **"Envy,"** or **"Seeds of Hate,"**
are thereby propagated, and as all things have a tendency to
multiply,—**(but most particularly, qualities of thought)**,—it is not
long before those who believe they have been treated unfairly, attempt
to take away the goods of the one who appears to have more than they
themselves have received. Consequently, the wealthy man is forced to
build up walls of protection around his possessions, and construct
armaments and implements of warfare with which to fight off those who
have received less than he.

However, the greatest danger that results from mankind's unwillingness
to erect an economic system based upon an equal distribution of this
world's goods to all (and from their disobedience to "The Golden Rule"
and the principles of universal law expounded by Christ Jesus’
teachings) does not consist of the destructive qualities of "jealousy,"
"envy" or "hate," **but rather is it made up of those known as "Greed,"
"Selfishness" and "Self-glorification."** When a man has once tasted of
the dangerous fruit of "power and dominion over his fellows," or of the
feeling of "Superiority," which comes from having more clothes, more
food, finer homes or a greater variety and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

a superior quality of possessions than one's fellow beings, **the desire
to prove that "He is Superior to Others," takes hold of his thought,**
and soon becomes such an obsession, that he can neither be satisfied nor
happy, unless everything he owns is better than the possessions which
belong to anyone else. As one egotist vies with another, soon such
people no longer hesitate to lie, steal or even murder, in order that
they might surpass the ones whom they feel may possibly be in doubt as
to their individual superiority to others, until, (under our so greatly
glorified "Competitive Private Profit System"), **we have almost become
a world of egotists, thieves and murderers.**

It is to awaken those "who are still sane" and who are not either too
selfish, too greedy, too bigoted or too egotistical to heed our warnings
and accept our recommendations, that Our Sponsors have ceaselessly
striven to uncover the "actual causes of human suffering," and obtain
the proofs which now point to the utter futility and needlessness,—as
well as the danger,—of attempting to prove our "superiority" over other
human beings through the accumulation of possessions, when instead, we
should be endeavoring to improve our God-given talents and "our
birth-right of intelligence," through study, travel, observation and an
industriously-trained faculty of appreciation and gratitude for the vast
illimitable and gloriously beautiful universe, which our Creator has
given to the human race as its home; an indescribably beautiful estate
which God has given to **"All Men"** in much the same way,—and under
quite the same restrictions as a wealthy parent might give his dearly
beloved sons a great estate for their

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

mutual enjoyment, **subject only to "their equal sharing" of all of its
resources, facilities, pleasures and beauties.**

After all, there is not the slightest justification for any of us to
ever feel any "very great" sense of superiority over our fellow beings,
for when we go back through mankind's records of human history, and
trace the lives of "thousands upon thousands of billions of human beings
who have trod this globe," it is not possible for us to point to even
one who had anything to do with creating the sun, moon, stars, our earth
or its mountains, seas, flowers, trees, birds or bees, nor in fact, even
a single hair upon his own head. **In the face of such over-powering
evidence, even the most profound egotist would be unable to convince a
sane jury composed of any of the moderately intelligent men or women on
our globe, that he "actually deserves" any larger share of the world's
goods, or any greater honors than those bestowed upon even the most
lowly of God's children.**

**However, there is "over-powering evidence" in justification of the
fact that man should bow in humble reverence and recognition before the
all-wise Creator "who did fashion" our indescribably beautiful and
illimitable universal home.** His "wisdom," "power" and "might" should
be self-evident, even to the most self-centered atheist who ever
received his unappreciated benefits of life on this globe.

The recognition of the fact that the wisdom and versatility of the
infinite Creator of all things is so great that throughout the millions
of years since the first snowflake

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

fell upon our earth He has never even had to pattern two of them
alike,—(nor to design any two of His ideas from the infinitesimal to the
infinite after the same pattern),—should cause us to seek an
understanding of **"Him,"** rather than praise for ourselves. No, not
even the hairs on our head, nor the finger-print designs on the fingers
of any two of the men or women of all the billions upon billions of
human beings whom He has created, has He ever been forced through lack
of versatility or intelligence to form alike.

Is it not a more worthy form of ambition for those calling themselves
"The Sons of God," to study and seek, that they may thereby learn to
appreciate, love, and protect God's creatures, and the artistry of His
handiwork, rather than to strive to become gods themselves? Especially
is it so, because of the fact that the only reason for men desiring to
become "little gods," is that they may thereby gain the power to destroy
what they can of God's creation and whomever they may choose of God's
creatures, whenever the insane desire to do so takes possession of the
"swinish qualities" of their puny intellects;—(qualities of greed and
selfishness which they have so assiduously cultivated, that they might
thereby be made assured of their own "superiority" over any other of
God's creatures) .

Surely Christ Jesus’ life work, and the supreme sacrifice which He made
in order that men might learn what brotherly love "and true giving"
really mean, and that the human race might thus be saved from its own
selfish destruction, is not going to be so demoniacally reversed that
only those who have naught but selfishness, cruelty and

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

swinish bestiality in their thoughts, are to be the only ones to learn
the importance of equality!! Why!—Even the monstrous "Hidden Rulers,"
who know no other human feelings than those of greed and an insane
craving for power, have learned that they must divide the earth's
resources, and those who will then be their slaves, in such **"an
equally proportioned manner"** that there will never be any occasion for
one ruler to be jealous of another, nor for the qualities of envy or
hate to thereby cause a disruption among them which might cause a
division in their ranks, and as a result of envy, jealousy or hate,
bring about the self-destruction of their kingdoms. Even "their"
depraved mentalities have become so conscious of the cumulative
dynamically destructive forces of jealousy, envy and hate, and those of
greed, selfishness and self-glorification, that they have found it
desirable to unite upon the common ground of self-preservation, and a
full recognition of the power and might of unity based upon equality.
Even **"they"** have enough intelligence left to agree to stand as one,
and as a solid body against any one of their members who might ever
attempt to have even one slave more than the others, or the slightest
advantage which might cause either envy, jealousy, hate—"or the more
dangerous feeling of superiority"—to develop in the mentalities of any
of the men, who will,—upon the successful consummation of their plots a
short time hence,—become the full owners and unopposed rulers of our
world. Even **"they"**—(although it surely cannot be the slightest
quality of unselfed love which motivates them)—have agreed to come to
the aid of any of their member rulers, who might have trouble with his
slaves, **and every one**

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

**of their respective slaves will feel the sting of instant death, upon
the slightest appearance or evidence of any of those destructive
qualities to which we have referred.** Each of those slaves will be
taught that if he ever so much as harmed even one hair on his master's
head, that the combined forces of the rulers' bodyguards of millions of
men would search him out and subject him to the tortures of the damned
until he died.

**YES, EVEN OUR WORLD'S HIDDEN RULERS, WHOM WE CALL THE "MONEY CHANGERS"
OF TODAY, HAVE LEARNED ONE ASPECT OF THE PROFOUND LESSONS OF THE MASTER,
"CHRIST JESUS;" HE WHO CAME TO BRING "PEACE" AND NOT A "SWORD,"
"BROTHERLY LOVE," NOT "HATE," AND "UNITY" INSTEAD OF "DIVISION" TO THE
HUMAN RACE. EVEN "THEY" HAVE LEARNED THE VALUE OF "UNITY" BASED UPON
"EQUAL RIGHTS"! BUT UNFORTUNATELY—FOR THE REST OF HUMANITY—"EQUAL
RIGHTS" TO THEM MEAN EQUAL RIGHTS FOR THEMSELVES ALONE, AND SLAVERY FOR
ALL OTHERS.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Christians Wanted!](mu11.md)
