[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu11)  [Next](mu13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### MANKIND'S SELF-APPOINTED GODS

### AND

### THE MONSTER CALLED "GREED"

Is it not a fact that after we arrive here on earth, we are forced
within a few short years to leave without ever having actually seen it,
or viewed even a small part of its limitless attractions? It is not
because of any lack of desire, or of facilities for travel; nor is it
lack of appreciation or ingratitude on our part, which prevents us from
growing acquainted with and enjoying all of the gloriously beautiful
parts of our world home. **NO, IT IS SOLELY THE INFLUENCES OF GREED AND
SELFISHNESS WHICH WITHHOLD FROM US THE PRIVILEGE OF ENJOYING THE WORLD
AND ITS LOVELINESS, FOR THEY SURELY BELONG AS MUCH TO ONE AS TO
ANOTHER.**

To illustrate the practical importance of Christ Jesus’ **"Golden
Rule,"** suppose someone were to give you, in common with a number of
others, the free use of a palace surrounded with all manner of beautiful
gardens, and possessing ample facilities for supplying you with whatever
might add to your happiness; **assume for the moment that the condition
of your occupancy, and the use of this lovely estate, depended upon each
of those to whom it had been**

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

**offered, abiding in strict obedience by the rules of conduct implied
by "Moses' Ten Commandments," and "Christ Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount."**
Knowing that no one would be allowed to enjoy this estate who had not at
first agreed to these rules of action—and realizing that the palace with
its surrounding attractions belonged to another and was freely offered
to you for your use,—subject however, to your acceptance of the rules of
conduct governing those who occupied it, you would surely be most
anxious to not misuse this gift nor be barred from its benefits by your
failure to abide by the established laws of conduct.

However, suppose you happened by chance occurrence, quite beyond your
control, to make your first entrance into the palace by way of the
kitchen door. You are met by one who has also been given the privilege
of occupancy,—subject to the established rules of conduct and with no
greater or lesser privileges than you,—and yet he meets you at the
kitchen door with a ball and chain in his hands, which he fastens on
your ankle. After fastening the other end of the chain at a point in the
room where he knows that it will prevent you from getting out of the
kitchen, he hands you a dish rag and tells you that the kitchen is now
your home, and that it is the only part of the palace you are supposed
to occupy. Knowing that you have been given the **"equal use"** of
everything the estate contains,—and any rooms in the palace you might
desire to enjoy,—you rebel at your confinement and gradually grow filled
with bitterness, yet no ways of escape or means of breaking your chain
present themselves.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

**Under such circumstances, do you think that you could ever grow to
really appreciate or know and truly love this beautiful home?** Instead,
wouldn't you after a time grow to almost hate your life, and also the
one who had offered you the use of his lovely estate, feeling that
somehow it got been offered to you in good faith at all? However, if
your friend happened to be traveling in a far-off country and you did
not know how to communicate with him, wouldn't you finally welcome even
death itself as a means of escape?

If, after a time, there were ten people chained up in the kitchen, and
only "one" free to come and go throughout the palace, while the rest of
you did the work, how long, do you suppose, would the ten of you
"smilingly" take "his" statement and assurances that the home was just
as much yours as his, and that you should be very grateful for it, and
should sing praises all the day long to the owner—your mutual friend—who
had so graciously granted you the use of his great estate?

If each day the one who was free would come into the kitchen,—(and after
telling you how fortunate you were to have the use of the palace, he
would then steal even the few particles of food you had been able to
gather—and would torture and beat you for objecting to his
cruelty)—aren't you inclined to think that you would spend your every
waking hour in an attempt to figure out some way of breaking your
chains? Knowing that the one who was free could not possibly bind you
all at one time, and that once free you would never again be chained to
the drudgery you had experienced, **DO YOU THINK THAT**

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **YOU WOULD
HESITATE TO AGREE WITH EACH OF THE OTHER TEN CHAINED IN THE KITCHEN WITH
YOU, THAT WHEN YOU ALL HAD GAINED YOUR FREEDOM, YOU WOULD "EQUALLY"
SHARE THE NECESSARY DUTIES OF MAINTAINING THE ESTATE, PROVIDED YOU ALSO
WERE ASSURED BY EACH OF THE TEN THAT YOU WOULD BE ALLOWED TO ENJOY ALL
OF ITS ATTRACTIONS LIKEWISE EQUALLY?**

You surely wouldn't fear the one unchained and free tenant, **"once 'you
all' had won your freedom and broken your chains,"**—but—knowing his
selfishness, greed and brutality, "you would wait until you all had
broken your chains," before attempting to insist that he either do his
share of the work or leave the palace to those who were willing to do
so. Once you all were free, he wouldn't be a problem for your entire
group, but if you tried to attack him singly he might. Being more
familiar with the arrangement of the rooms in the palace, he could
easily arrange a surprise attack and tie each of you up again, one by
one, if you became separated from your group. Therefore, while you were
chained up in the kitchen together, **"and with ample day by day proofs
of the free tenant's selfishness and cruelty,"** you would of course
agree when free, to stay together in "one group," so that when you
finally located him you would have no trouble in forcing him to either
abide by the rules of conduct established for those who had been given
the equal use of the palace, or insist that he go off to some corner of
the grounds and live by himself. **HOWEVER, EVEN HIS FORMER CRUELTIES**

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **WOULD NOT
WARRANT YOU IN MAKING A SLAVE OF HIM, NOR IN DISOBEYING THE ESTATE'S
"GOLDEN RULES" OF CONDUCT,—EVEN THOUGH REVENGE MIGHT ALMOST SEEM TO BE
JUSTIFIED.**

This little illustration describes the experiences of the human race
today, and indicates the steps mankind must take, if they are ever to
gain their freedom from the bondage and slavery forced upon them by the
small handful of the world's citizens who have succeeded in enslaving
all of the rest of the earth's inhabitants, and limiting their use of
the world and its infinitely varied resources by shackles of poverty and
the menial tasks of life. There is no use in our attempting to attack
the small group of fabulously wealthy and powerful citizens who have the
rest of us in bondage, if we are going to do so singly or without
organization. They can never be forced to obey the rules of life
established by the wisdom of our Creator, until those of us who are
willing to abide by such rules, are sufficiently large in number to
insist upon obedience by all, and an equal sharing of the world's
resources and benefits as well as its duties. Until such a time, there
is little use in our expecting any privileges other than the duties of
the kitchen.

**SHALL WE CONTINUE, CENTURY AFTER CENTURY, FEEDING THE MONSTER CALLED
"GREED;"—A MONSTER WHICH IS FED WITH THE FIRST BORN OF OUR EVERY EFFORT,
AND YET WHICH WE ARE NEVER ABLE TO SATISFY?**

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

The lust for power, wealth and flattery can never be satisfied, nor can
you chain it up and kill an occasional one of its offspring, hoping
thereby to put it under control. **The causes of greed and their
malignant family,—"Selfishness and Self-glorification,"—must be stricken
from off the face of this globe and never be allowed to return. Laws
must be passed which will effectually prevent the production of any food
upon which such monsters can feed. Constant rotation in office—equal
distribution of the products of mankind's labor, and no individual ever
again allowed to gain power, wealth, or an insane sense of superiority,
constitute the only cure for greed and mad ambition.**

**RECOGNIZING THAT MEN ARE STILL BUT CHANGEABLE LITTLE CHILDREN IN THEIR
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT, IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT AN ECONOMIC SYSTEM BE
ESTABLISHED WHICH WILL FOR ALL TIME TO COME PREVENT THE WEAKNESSES OF
HUMAN CHARACTER FROM WARPING AND DISTORTING THE LIVES OF THE BILLIONS
UPON BILLIONS OF HUMAN BEINGS, TO WHOM THE USE OF OUR GLORIOUSLY
BEAUTIFUL WORLD HOME IS EQUALLY GRANTED.**

Our arrow is not aimed at the heart of any individual or any group of
individuals upon this globe,—for there is already far too great a
variety of "class antagonism" and "hate,"—but it is drawn, and straining
to be released, that it may pierce and destroy the vital spot of that
worldwide parent of man's age-old woes,—that monster with the many names
called "Greed"—"Self-glorification"—"Depraved

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Appetites"—"Jealousy"—"Envy"—"Hate"—"Murder"—"Power" and "Wasteful
Wealth;"—in short, **THE WORLD'S "GOLD AND SILVER"—"PRIVATE PROFIT"
MONETARY SYSTEM.**

We do not live our lives for the purpose of self-glorification, for the
Bible has truly stated that—**"Ye shall have no other Gods before Me."**
Naught else should be glorified—for there is nothing worthy of
glorification that is less in stature than the Creator of the entire
universe, and it is God and His complete Creation which we should
glorify,—not ourselves or some group of human beings. **Possibly we will
have earned a little credit or honor, when,—through united world
efforts,—mankind have destroyed the swamps of filthy environment, the
bondage and slavery to those indescribably cruel taskmasters—"Poverty
and War"—which warp the souls of men and make them abhorrent.**

When we have destroyed those forces which make life so needlessly
confused and hopeless, and cause men to either fear or hate their lives
so greatly that suicide seems the only solution to their problems, and
when thousands of suicides no longer occur each day in this country and
other so-called civilized nations—and when peace and
security—trust—confidence—gratitude and appreciation of each other's
efforts have uprooted the causes of mankind's broken dreams and broken
hearts—**possibly then, there might be some slight justification for a
"little" self-glorification.**

Millions of tons of food are thrown away daily in order that prices may
be held up to a level where manipulators

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

in the world's food supplies can gain a speculative profit, while not
only in the foreign so-called uncivilized nations of the world, but also
in our own country, people are going hungry each day.

**YES! WE CERTAINLY ARE AN ENLIGHTENED PEOPLE, AND OUR PRECIOUS PRIVATE
PROFIT SYSTEM A GREAT BOON TO MAN. THE WORLD HAS HAD THOUSANDS OF YEARS
TO BRING ABOUT SECURITY AND PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF MEN, THROUGH THE
APPLICATION OF THE SO-CALLED "PROFIT" SYSTEM, UNDER THE "EACH
WOLF-FOR-HIMSELF PLAN,"—AND YET IT IS NO CLOSER TO THAT RESULT THAN IT
WAS 10,000 YEARS AGO, NOR WILL IT BE 10,000 YEARS FROM NOW, UNLESS
MANKIND EVOLVE A SYSTEM CAPABLE OF PREVENTING GREED AND SELFISHNESS FROM
LOCKING THE DOORS OF OPPORTUNITY AGAINST THOSE WHO OCCUPY OUR WORLD.**

**"MANKIND UNITED"—ONE SINGLE BROTHERHOOD OF MAN—"ONE FOR ALL AND ALL
FOR ONE," WITH "ACTIONS" AS WELL AS "WORDS," AND THE WORLD NO LONGER A
HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF,—AND BUILT UPON THE SHIFTING SANDS OF
CHANGEABLE HUMAN CHARACTER,—BUT FINALLY ERECTED UPON A SYSTEM OF
"EQUALITY" AND "GUARANTEED SAFEGUARDS" AGAINST THE FRAILTIES OF FALLIBLE
HUMAN BEINGS, COMPRISES THE ONLY PLAN WHICH WILL EVER END**

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **EITHER WARS OR
POVERTY. "SUCH IS THE PROGRAM OF THE INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
UNIVERSAL RESEARCH AND ADMINISTRATION."**

What is wrong with our **"so-called leaders"** throughout the
world,—with our executives and powerful men of wealth? Have they become
so coarsened through the development of their dissipated and depraved
senses, that they can no longer see or hear the suffering going on
around about them? Do they no longer either **"see" or "hear,"** or does
the maintenance of their luxurious physical ease mean more to them than
the pitiable cries of hundreds of millions of helpless hungry human
beings? **Billions of men, women and little children who inhabit this
planet century after century—barely existing—living utterly hopeless
lives,—wretchedly oblivious to the gorgeous beauties of this infinitely
glorious universe—solely because of their under-nourished souls, and
starved little bodies,—and yet we sing the praises of leaders who order
us to destroy food right before the eyes of these hunger tortured human
beings.**

There is not **"one"** of the thousands of this world's competent
executives, but who would be justifiably insulted if his ability to
produce food, clothes and homes for the entire human family, and
distribute them fairly and justly to mankind, were questioned,—provided
he could be given absolute control of the production and distribution of
the world's sources of supply, and ample facilities for distributing
them,—and was allowed to do so "at actual cost figures" without "profit"
or "speculative returns" to any

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

one, but instead, for the "equal benefit" of all. Then if the world
admittedly has sufficient executive talent, and recognized inexhaustibly
abundant resources, why don't the world's executives use their talents
for the accomplishment of such a result, and why have they failed to do
so throughout the centuries?

**Mankind can only blame their suffering upon the falsities of an
economic system which encourages insane human desires for personal
glory, power or wealth, in those who would otherwise possess the talents
and ability with which to meet the world's problem of production and
distribution, and its educational and cultural development. "There is no
other reason!"**

**MORTAL MAN WAS NEVER INTENDED TO BECOME AN INDIVIDUAL PERSONALIZED
"GOD OR RULER," WITH THE POWER OF SLAVERY OR FREEDOM, LIFE OR DEATH,
OVER HIS FELLOW BEINGS.**

We have throughout all of our earthly history made the fatal mistake of
permitting a sense of "self-importance" and "superiority" to be
developed in men and women, and after cultivating such a sense, we have
placed in the hands of such depraved, abnormal types of mentality,
almost "unlimited power" and authority. This mistake has cost mankind
the loss of countless generations of painful progress out of poverty and
filth, and as the result of it, one civilization after another has been
destroyed, during a period of thousands of years, by those who become
insane with the lust for more, and ever more wealth and power.''!

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

Mankind's division into tribes and nations with their consequent
development of armaments, machines and powers of destruction, created
under the lying guise of "self-preservation,"—**(THOUGH ALWAYS ACTUALLY
MACHINES OF CONQUEST, THAT THE WEALTHY MIGHT GAIN MORE WEALTH AND
"INSANE MORAL IDIOTS" MORE POWER)**,—has, throughout the centuries,
created mountains of "dynamite," with fuses scattered over the face of
our planet. Anyone, (for the moment feeling a bit like a Napoleon),—by
igniting these fuses, could succeed in blowing up a civilization. **UP
TO THIS PRESENT DATE IN HUMAN HISTORY THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A
CIVILIZATION CAPABLE OF PREVENTING ITS OWN SELF-DESTRUCTION, AND THERE
NEVER WILL BE, UNTIL ARMIES AND MACHINES OF DESTRUCTION ARE NO LONGER
PERMITTED TO EXIST,**—nor until mankind is finally united into one
unselfish brotherhood, willing to live **"One for All and All for
One"**—with each inhabitant of our planet desiring the security,
independence and happiness of every other inhabitant—and willing to do
his part of the task of bringing about this universal result; no one
desiring nor striving for dominion over another, nor any form of
self-glorification; each one joyously free, having an abundance of every
good thing; and glad to be alive and to live and let live, with no
desire for self-aggrandizement; **each one striving to exceed his own
former accomplishments, and not attempting merely to surpass those round
about him;—not seeking to prove his superiority "over others," but only
his superiority over his own former attainments.**

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

A mad scramble, like so many "wolves,"—to see who can accumulate the
greatest number and variety of possessions, eat the most food, wear the
most clothes, have the most money,—does not constitute a type of
ambition worthy of "intelligent creatures," nor would man be motivated
by such false and unsatisfying goals were it not for the limitations and
forms of bondage forced upon him by our existing economic system.

**THE ONLY AMBITION WORTHY OF MAN, IS TO CEASELESSLY STRIVE TO
UNDERSTAND FROM WHENCE HE CAME, WHY HE IS HERE, AND THE ULTIMATE DESTINY
AND PURPOSE OF LIFE; IN OTHER WORDS, WHERE HE IS GOING.** Recognizing
that all of human progress has come **"first in the form of an idea"**
appearing to the consciousness of some individual,—either as a
mechanical invention, a new design for homes, or the vision of harmony
gained by way of a musical composition, a poem, or a beautiful
painting,—men should strive to understand more about the source from
whence ideas emanate. **ALWAYS HAS THE AVENUE,—THROUGH WHICH EVERY
DESIRABLE OBJECT OF LIFE HAS REACHED MANKIND,—CONSISTED OF "MEN'S
THOUGHT PROCESSES"—THE NATURE OF THEIR THINKING.**

**THE MOTIVES INSPIRING THOUGHT—THE VISIONS WHICH PROMPT MEN TO STRIVE
UNCEASINGLY TOWARDS THE ATTAINMENT OF SOME HIGH AND WORTHY GOAL—HAVE ALL
COME BY WAY OF THOUGHT. IS IT NOT TRUE THEN, THAT THE ONLY AMBITION
TRULY**

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **WORTHY OF MAN,
CONSISTS IN LEARNING HOW TO "THINK" MORE CONSTRUCTIVELY, MORE
INSPIRINGLY, MORE BEAUTIFULLY?** Inasmuch as such a statement is
indisputably true, should not **"the combined efforts of mankind"** be
directed towards the establishment of an economic system and the passing
of laws, rules and regulations, controlling the conduct of men in their
relationships with one another, in such a manner that no slightest
hindrance or obstruction would even momentarily delay man's progress
towards the goal of intelligent right thinking? **NO CONDITION SHOULD BE
PERMITTED TO EXIST WHICH WOULD FORCE US TO A LOWER LEVEL IN THE USE OF
OUR THOUGHT FACULTIES THAN THAT OF WHICH WE ARE WORTHY.**

**SURELY MEN ARE WORTHY OF THOUGHTS OTHER THAN JUST THOSE PERTAINING TO
THE ACCUMULATION OF FOOD AND THE SATISFACTION OF THEIR ANIMAL DESIRES.**
We do not spend hours each day pumping air into warehouses, nor keep
hundreds of thousands of men and women busy with bookkeeping entries to
record the amount of air we have accumulated, and yet it is very
apparent that no one on earth today has learned how to get along without
air. But the reason we are not ceaselessly contemplating the importance
of air, and morbidly concentrating our entire efforts upon its
accumulation, is traceable to the fact that it exists in such limitless
abundance that it is wholly unnecessary to waste either time or effort
thinking about its accumulation,—other than to be sincerely grateful for
the fact that it is free for our use, and does not require any

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

struggle for us to each receive our individual share of it.

**SURELY NEITHER FOOD NOR CLOTHES ARE OF ANY GREATER IMPORTANCE OR ANY
MORE ESSENTIAL TO OUR EXISTENCE THAN AIR! THEN WHY SHOULD IT BE, THAT WE
HAVE ADVANCED NO FARTHER THAN THE SAVAGES OF ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
(100,000) YEARS AGO, WHOSE ENTIRE LIVES CONSISTED OF DEVISING WAYS AND
MEANS OF GETTING FOOD;—SINCE—WITH OUR PRESENT DAY MACHINERY—THE EARTH
COULD READILY BE MADE TO PRODUCE A HUNDRED TIMES MORE FOOD EACH YEAR
THAN THE ENTIRE HUMAN RACE COULD POSSIBLY REQUIRE OR USE.**

Having been endowed with the priceless gift and faculty—**"which enables
us to think"**—and thereby to exist on a slightly higher mental plane
than the animals of the field,—"whose thought processes consist wholly
of physical impulses and desires,"—why must we be forced to waste this
precious gift in living lives of no greater usefulness than the swine in
their pigpens? WHY MUST THE MAJORITY OF THE WORLD'S "THINKING CREATURES"
BE FORCED BY A HANDFUL OF UTTERLY SELFISH HUMAN BEINGS, TO LEAVE NO MORE
WORTHY RECORD OF THEIR EXISTENCE "THAN THE CAST-OFF PHYSICAL BODY" TO
WHICH THEY HAVE BEEN COMPELLED TO DEVOTE THEIR ENTIRE THOUGHTS, EFFORTS
AND LIVES—(TO FEED, CLOTHE, AND HOUSE IT)—AND YET, WHICH, WHEN THEY DIE,
DOES NOT OF

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

ITSELF LEAVE ANY GREATER OR MORE LASTING PROOF OF ITS VALUE, THAN THE
PHYSICAL BODY OF EVEN THE LEAST INTELLIGENT OF GOD'S CREATURES?

Surely there must be some more permanent proof,—**"than just their
cast-off physical bodies,"**—that the people of each generation can
leave in evidence of the fact that they possessed **"the faculty of
thought,"**—even if such proof consisted only in larger and more
beautiful parks, more inspiring poems, songs and paintings capable of
raising the level of thought of our descendants slightly above that
which we occupied!

After all of men's thousands of years of endless struggles,—**"out of
complete and utter mental darkness and animalic desires,"**—to a level
upon which they have made such marvelous discoveries that,—**if they
would use them,**—they would no longer need to give even "a passing
thought" to how they are going to get food or clothes or homes,—surely
the people of this enlightened age are worthy of such discoveries! **WHY
SHOULDN'T WE MEASURE UP TO THE LIMITLESS POTENTIALITIES OF PROGRESS,
STRETCHING ETERNALLY BEFORE OUR GAZE, AND CEASE THINKING ON A LEVEL WITH
THE HERDS OF SWINE WHICH OCCUPY OUR PIGPENS?**

Surely,—even though we have made an art of such things,—we can
occasionally raise our thoughts above food, or clothes,—what we are
going to wear or how we are going to dress our hair,—the shape or design
of our shoes—or the variety and preparation of our food,—and have

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

time to give some slight thought to the discovery of what talents we may
possess, and to their development, that we may leave some worthy
evidence of having been thinking creatures,—when we finally pass on
beyond the gaze of our associates.

Why must we,—**who call ourselves "The Children of God,"** and
**"Intelligent Thinking Beings,"**—spend our entire lives working to
feed and perpetuate an economic system which raises to its positions and
offices of leadership, those men and women who have least advanced
beyond the level of the lowest forms of animal life, and whose every
impulse and ambition consists of the "swinish lusts of the flesh,"—an
insane driving force which causes them to use all of their wealth and
power and influence, solely for the accumulation of vast quantities of
food, clothes and luxuries, which neither they nor their children, nor
their "children's children," could possibly consume or use,—even with
the most fully developed of depraved appetites,—during a period of
thousands of years?

Why do we raise those who are still no more than animals,—in their
thinking processes,—to positions of leadership, and give them the power
to keep the rest of us on a level of life where we are forced to waste
our priceless natural talents and thought faculties upon ways and means
of getting even "the barest necessities" of life?

Why, when every boy or girl in every civilized nation on this globe,
dreams of great accomplishments and goals worthy of intelligent
creatures, must they be forced, even before they have attained to their
maturity, to adjust their ambitions to studies and mental development
unworthy of

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

any creatures other than wolves or pigs? Why must they be forced to
learn only those things which will enable them,—like wolves tearing at
each other's throats, or pigs pushing other pigs aside with their
snouts,—to express their priceless faculty of thought solely for the
accumulation of food, clothes and material possessions, when our
present-day machinery could produce a hundred times more of these things
than the entire human race could possibly consume?

**WITH BUT A SMALL PERCENTAGE OF THE EARTHS INHABITANTS REQUIRED TO
DEVOTE THEIR THOUGHTS AND EFFORTS,—(LARGELY IN A SUPERVISORY
CAPACITY),—THE WORLD'S MARVELOUS INVENTIONS, "FULLY USED," COULD RESULT
IN A PRODUCTION OF SUCH VAST QUANTITIES OF THE SO-CALLED NECESSITIES AND
LUXURIES OF LIFE, THAT MEN WOULD NO LONGER BE OBLIGED TO GIVE ANY MORE
THOUGHT TO THEIR ACCUMULATION, THAN THEY WOULD TO THE ACCUMULATION OR
STORAGE OF THE AIR WE BREATHE.**

Is it not "barely possible" that man freed from the endless struggle for
food,—(which would eternally keep him on a level with the lowest forms
of animal life),—might possibly make discoveries, and produce results in
the form of engineering and cultural attainments worthy of the creative
quality of mentality with which he is indisputably endowed? With
thousands of millions of men and women—all freed and enabled to release
the creative qualities of their thoughts in grand and noble attainments-

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

is it not possible,—(compared to the results of the few dozen men and
women who now leave a record of outstanding accomplishments each
century),—that the sum total attainments of the people,—**"not just of
each century, but of every generation,"**—might be so startlingly grand,
and gloriously beautiful, that there would shortly come to pass the
fulfillment of Christ Jesus’ teachings, and men might learn that **"The
Kingdom of Heaven is not afar off,"** neither "up nor down,"—"East nor
West"—"North nor South," **"but here at hand,"** and ready at any time
to be **"fully expressed?"**

**WHEN THE GREAT MASTER STATED,—"THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS WITHIN
YOU,"—SURELY HE DID NOT MEAN THE BONES AND MEMBRANES, NOR THE BLOOD
WHICH FLOWS THROUGH OUR BODIES; HE COULD ONLY HAVE MEANT "OUR CREATIVE
FACULTY OF THOUGHT," AND THROUGH THE EXPRESSION OF WHICH, ENDLESS
DISCOVERIES OF GLORIOUS BEAUTY WOULD BE ALWAYS AT HAND FOR US TO ENJOY.
IS IT SACRILEGIOUS THEN TO THINK THAT MEN MIGHT EVEN OVERCOME "DEATH
ITSELF," INASMUCH AS CHRIST JESUS RAISED THE DEAD AND REFERRED TO DEATH
AS "AN ENEMY" WHICH WE WOULD EVENTUALLY DESTROY?** Is it not possible
that sickness and all of its causes would shortly be done away with, and
that grief and human suffering would no longer be a concomitant of life,
if men were no longer filled with the fear of poverty, and could unite
their talents for purposes other than the mere accumulation of food?

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Men and women who are truly grateful that they possess the faculties of
**"thought,"**—instead of merely an accumulation of the lower forms of
animal instincts and desires,—should "combine" their talents, strength,
and "entire resources,"—**and if necessary, "dedicate their very
lives"** to the establishment of an economic system which will no longer
invite into public office, any man or woman motivated by the slightest
particle of selfish personal desire for wealth or power. **IS IT NOT
TIME THAT SUCH OF THE WORLD'S POPULATION AS ARE DESIROUS OF THE
PRIVILEGES OF FREEDOM OF THOUGHT, SPEECH AND ACTION, FINALLY UNITE THEIR
STRENGTH IN ONE GREAT BODY, ENCIRCLING THE ENTIRE EARTH, AND NO LONGER
REQUEST, "BUT DEMAND," THE RIGHT TO LIVE AS INTELLIGENT CREATURES SHOULD
LIVE, AND TO BE GRANTED THE BENEFITS OF THE INVENTIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS
OF RECENT YEARS, THAT THEY MIGHT NO LONGER BE FORCED TO WASTE THEIR
ENTIRE LIVES IN STRUGGLING FOR THOSE THINGS WHICH CAN,—TO A LARGE
EXTENT,—BE PRODUCED BY NON-THINKING MACHINES?**

**Recognizing the fact that there are hundreds of millions of
industrious and intelligent clear-thinking men and women, who are fully
aware of the availability of economic freedom and complete financial
independence, would we be worthy of receiving such freedom, if we were
unwilling to become acquainted with such people, and to associate with
them?**

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Knowing that over two hundred million (200,000,000) intelligent and
industrious men and women can receive the message contained in this
bulletin within a matter of months,—**as each one to whom it is given
assumes the responsibility of placing it in the hands of others,**—and
knowing that when said number of people have received this announcement,
that information will then be placed in their hands which will enable
them to form into **"one vast united working force;"**—knowing that when
this world-wide organization has been fully formed, the buying power of
its members will exceed one thousand million dollars ($1000,000,000.00)
per day,—(based upon their actual cash expenditures at this time),—and
knowing that with this buying power, **such an organization,
"equally-owned" and "equally-controlled" by each of its two hundred
million (200,000,000) members, could vote into existence a system which
would permanently outlaw—"not only war—but also poverty;"—KNOWING THESE
THINGS, ARE WE SO "DULL OF MIND" AND "BROKEN OF SPIRIT," THAT WE HAVE
NEITHER THE MENTAL ENERGY NOR PHYSICAL VITALITY LEFT, WITH WHICH TO
RAISE OUR VOICES IN BEHALF OF SUCH A RESULT?**

The International Institute of Universal Research and Administration
believes that the right-thinking, clear-minded men and women of the
world, are awake to the potentialities and possibilities of
**"world-wide unity of action,"**

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

not as a conglomeration of antagonistic movements, but as **"a
world-wide association of intelligent men and women"** meeting on the
common ground of identical aspirations and ideals of true brotherhood
and freedom; and irrespective of race, color, class, or religious
beliefs, willing to become part owners in a world-wide corporation
capable of supplying their individual as well as their collective
needs;—two hundred million (200,000,000) men and women willing to occupy
positions with said corporation, in accordance with their individual
talents and training, and willing, after expending of their respective
abilities, to receive an equal share of the sum total products of their
united labors. **Just as thinking creatures make no complaint over the
amount of air breathed by their fellow beings, nor have any desire to
receive a greater abundance of air than another, so likewise should we
be intelligent enough to realize that when the necessities and luxuries
of life are produced in such large quantities that we could not even use
"the smallest part" of our own share of them, we need hardly begrudge
others the privileges of similar abundance.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Priceless Gift of Life and What We Do With
It](mu13.md)
