[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu12)  [Next](mu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### CHAPTER X.

### THE PRICELESS GIFT OF LIFE

### AND

### WHAT WE DO WITH IT

The human race seems to be so busily engaged in honoring and glorifying
**"so-called great men,"** that it has had no time to glorify **"the
greatness of the creative source"** from which "all things," including
"our own lives " as well as "our entire universe," have emanated. A
source and Creator whose limitless wisdom and glorious creations make
the handiwork of even the world's combined great thinkers and great
doers of all of the many centuries of human progress, seem but the puny
efforts of a colony of ants. Throughout all past centuries, up to and
including the present era, the human race has glorified its "great
men,"—and while sacrificing "the very souls" of its billions upon
billions of men, women and helpless little children upon the altar of
its murderous and insane theory of **"the survival of the fittest,"**—it
has wasted its energies glorifying those who, (with but few
exceptions),—climb above the masses—not because of their benevolent
accomplishments, **BUT PRIMARILY BECAUSE OF THEIR DOMINEERING BRUTALITY,
GREED AND UTTER SELF-CENTEREDNESS.**

We have, throughout countless ages, broken the hearts and spirits of
"billions" of men and women, that

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

we might retain the questionable privilege of bowing down in
sacrilegious worship to a handful of egotists, insane with an
uncontrollable desire for "self-glorification." Instead of evolving an
economic system which would enable **"all mankind"** to fully develop
their God-given talents and abilities, we waste our lives and energies
glorifying a handful of people whom we raise to "imaginary heights of
grandeur," and then stand in awe-inspired contemplation of their "vast"
and "limitless" wisdom. **Worshiping human leaders who have yet to ever
make "even an attempt" to try and evolve an economic system capable of
"guaranteeing" food, clothes, homes, and an "equality of opportunity for
self-development," to the people of every land, and every class, and
every religion.** If **"even one"** of these "World Rulers" or
"Industrial Magnates," had really attempted to obey **"The Golden
Rule,"** or measure up,—"even ever so slightly,"—to **Christ Jesus’
Sermon on the Mount,** they could,—with their limitless wealth and
influence,—have brought to pass an economic system which would long
centuries ago have ended both war and poverty. **HOWEVER, WE IDOLIZE AND
GLORIFY THEM—NOT FOR ENDING WAR AND POVERTY BUT FOR SUCCESSFULLY
PERPETUATING THESE EVILS.**

Napoleon Bonaparte and countless other men before and since his time,
are remembered and glorified—(?)—not for the happiness, peace and
security they brought into the lives of mankind, **"but for the number
of men they killed,"** and for their success in burdening with debt, for
endless generations, the men and women who would have to pay the bills
of their extravagant and insane wholesale slaughter of human life.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

**What has continued the injustices, wars, poverty and uncertainties of
our present economic system, if it is not greed, selfishness and the
cruel ambitions of a few men or women each century, who
find—thereby—that they can rise to power and prominence, or attain a
questionable form of recognition and honor, because of their brutality
and cruelty?**

Is it not a fact that mankind—by now—should have learned that we did not
create either ourselves or this infinitely glorious and eternal universe
which we call our home, and that if any honor or glory is due for our
existence here,—then ordinary, every-day curiosity,—(if we as yet
possess no higher instincts),—should most certainly prompt us to make
some slight effort to learn who or what our "Creator" is, and to glorify
**"Him,"**—"not man" who is but the child of that source from whence all
things within the universe have come?

**Is it not time that we ceased magnifying the importance, or wisdom, or
power of any mortal man, who today is—yet tomorrow when we look
-around,—"like the grass of the fields,"—he is shriveled up, passed away
and no longer to be found? There must surely be something more
dependable, stable and worthy of glorification than the usually selfish
and "always vacillating" embodiment called a mortal man!**

**BEFORE WE CAN EVEN START BEING WORTHY OF HONOR, WE WOULD FIRST HAVE TO
EXPRESS "CHANGELESS WISDOM,"—THE DEPENDABLE GOODNESS OF "DIVINE
LOVE,"—THE UNALTERABLE PERFECTION OF "ETERNAL**

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **TRUTH,"—AND WE
ARE QUITE SURE THAT "NONE OF US HAS, AS YET, REACHED SUCH HEIGHTS OF
GRANDEUR."**

Do you not believe it is high time that all of us commenced thinking
more along the lines of those things which will make us worthy of at
least our own **"self-respect,"** before we seek honor and glory from
our fellows? Have we the courage or unselfish love for our brother man
which enables us to see the suffering of our fellow beings on every
side, and prompts us to an **"uncontrollable desire,"** to relieve it
and bring them happiness? If we have not, then we do not yet deserve
even **"self-respect,"** since the world today possesses such limitless
means of ready communication with our fellow beings, that there is no
longer any justifiable excuse for our failure to bring any widespread
sufferings we might observe, to the attention of mankind, with a
constructively worked-out remedy and solution for such problems.

We claim to be intelligent creatures, and to have "eyes with which to
see" and "ears with which to hear"—therefore it must surely be most
apparent to us all, that the world's present facilities of production
and distribution have permanently eliminated whatever excuses may have
seemed to exist in the past, for the wholesale slaughter we call
**"War,"** or the still greater suffering and loss of life which the
word **"Poverty"** describes.

Instead of blowing trumpets in honor of the world's false leaders who
have used their power, wealth, and influence to murder our loved ones,
(with carefully planned revolutions, wars and depressions), let us sing
our praises

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

in honor of the **"Omniscient," "Omnipotent" and "Omnipresent
Creator,"**—towards whom we have shown so little honest "respect,"
"gratitude" or "love," throughout the ages of mankind's sojourn upon
this planet.

**NO ONE WITH EYES TO SEE OR EARS TO HEAR THE AGONIZING CRIES OF
HELPLESS LITTLE CHILDREN, A N D BROKEN-SPIRITED FEAR-STRICKEN MEN AND
WOMEN, THE WORLD OVER, HAS TIME OR THE DESIRE TO BE HONORED OR PRAISED.
SUCH A ONE IS QUITE TOO BUSY TRYING TO FIND AND DESTROY THE ROOTS OF
THOSE THINGS FROM WHICH SPRING THE CAUSES OF HUMANITY'S STRUGGLES AND
WOES; QUITE TOO BUSY TO "EITHER DESIRE" OR "HAVE TIME" FOR
SELF-GLORIFICATION.**

For a few years at least, we believe that all of us, **"including our
so-called great men and women,"** might well profit by the example of
those few throughout the centuries, who have,—(being truly worthy of
honor),—been **"much too busy"** helping their less fortunate brothers,
to take the time to "even receive" the honors prepared for them by their
appreciative followers.

This book has been written for those whom we believe will agree with us,
that it is time all right-thinking men and women on this globe formed
into one compact group,—(waiving and forfeiting all chances of
individual glorification, wealth, power or honor),—and dedicated their
lives to the "sole purpose" of uprooting and wiping out for all time to
come, the world's accursed "humanly-planned,"

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and "humanly-perpetuated" causes of poverty and war.

**ONLY A PROFOUNDLY SINCERE DESIRE ON THE PART OF EVERY ONE OF THE
MILLIONS OF INTELLIGENT MEN AND WOMEN THROUGHOUT THE MAJOR NATIONS OF
THE EARTH, AND ONLY "WORLD-WIDE UNITY OF ACTION," WILL BE "POWERFUL
ENOUGH" TO UPROOT THE CAUSES OF MANKIND'S "HUMANLY PERPETUATED"
TRIBULATIONS.**

None of us can as yet stop the sun in its course, or cause the tides to
recede before their time, and the difference between even the most
brilliant man or woman on this globe and a South African savage, is
still very slight. No one need feel greatly abused if he is not honored
above the rest of his brothers, for after all none of us are worthy of
even very much of our own "self-respect," to say nothing of "special
recognition" or "public acclaim." Any impulse man might have to sing
praises, or to glorify something, had better—for the present—be devoted
to "humble prayers" and psalms to **"Our Creator,"** in evidence of our
recognition of the indescribably glorious, and priceless gift of
**"Consciousness"**—**"Life"**—the capacity to **"See"**—and to some
slight extent, **"Understand"**—God's limitless creations and gifts of
love prepared for our happiness, and so abundantly surrounding our
lives.

All of this brings us to just one point: Wouldn't it truly be a relief
to become more "childlike"—to give up the age-old struggle for
**"Superiority"** and to live for the clean, wholesome joy of just
**"Living,"** and really **"Strive"** to become

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

worthy of the "priceless" gift of life;—to have time and unlimited
opportunity for travel, and to learn to know and to love this gloriously
beautiful world of ours; to work to make it ever cleaner and more
beautiful as man's home, and then to strive that we may individually
become daily "superior to ourself" of yesterday, instead of merely
"superior to others;" seeking not to "surpass one another," but only to
overcome the weaknesses of that "most opaque" of all human
qualities—"self-love?"

**THE TIME AND EFFORT MEN HAVE SPENT THROUGHOUT THE AGES TRYING TO
ACCUMULATE POSSESSIONS WHICH THEY KNEW THEY COULD NEVER TAKE WITH THEM
WHEN THEY LEFT;—AND STRIVING FOR THOSE THINGS WHICH THEY KNEW THEY COULD
NOT POSSIBLY NEED, AND WHICH THEY USUALLY DO NOT EVEN WANT AFTER THEY
GET THEM; (OR STRIVING TO GAIN HONOR OR GLORY BELONGING NOT TO
THEMSELVES, BUT TO THEIR CREATOR),—WOULD,—IF THEY HAD SPENT THE SAME
INTENSITY OF EFFORT TO IMPROVE THE LIVES OF THEIR FELLOWMEN,—HAVE TURNED
THIS OLD WORLD OF OURS INTO A VERITABLE "GARDEN OF EDEN," AND MEN INTO
BEINGS TRULY WORTHY OF OCCUPYING IT—MANY, MANY CENTURIES AGO.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Shall We Be Master Builders Or Master Murderers . . .
“Extermination” or “Economic Equality”? . . . Mankind Must Choose](mu14)
