[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu16)  [Next](mu18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

### EARNINGS—HOURS—EDUCATION

### GENEROUS BENEFITS AND AMPLE VACATIONS

A "guarantee" of financial independence and security for all can be
assured by The Research Department of The International Institute of
Universal Research and Administration within a period of but a few
months after the formation of The Universal Service Corporation, and the
fulfillment of this guarantee can start taking place within ninety (90)
days from the date of its general worldwide acceptance. Thereafter, no
man or woman on the face of this earth need suffer from a lack of this
world's resources, nor be required to work over four (4) hours per day,
four (4) days per week, or eight (8) months each year, in order to earn
a living.

Upon the acceptance of our Research Department's program, all adults
will be guaranteed not less than three (3) days a week and four (4)
entire months each year of vacation time with pay. All men and women
will receive a minimum yearly salary of not less than three thousand
($3,000.00) dollars, which will gradually be increased to over ten times
this amount as mankind's discoveries and capabilities are fully
co-ordinated with efficient methods of production and distribution.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

Within a matter of months after the public's acceptance of the
Corporation Charter of The Universal Service Corporation—(which will
constitute the business vehicle of **"Mankind United"**)—we will live in
a world where no one will ever again be hungry, cold or homeless; a
world in which one hundred million (100,000,000) men and women will
spend their full working time planting and caring for gardens, parks and
playgrounds, and preparing features of beauty for the enjoyment and
happiness of all; a world where none need work more than twenty (20)
years of their lives at the rate of four (4) hours per day, four (4)
days per week, eight (8) months a year,—or if they prefer to work longer
hours "each day,"—they will be required to work only ten (10) years
during their lifetime, at the rate of eight (8) hours per day, four (4)
days per week, eight (8) months each year. Thereafter, they will be free
to travel in any part of the world they may desire to explore, or to
develop their talents or further whatever other constructive ambitions
they may possess, during the remainder of their lifetime here on our
earth.

**WITHIN TEN (10) YEARS MANKIND CAN LIVE IN A WORLD IN WHICH PEOPLE WILL
BE EDUCATED AND TRAINED FOR THE PRIMARY OBJECT OF DEVELOPING THEIR
LATENT TALENTS AND CAPABILITIES, AND OF OBTAINING THE GREATEST POSSIBLE
ENJOYMENT AND HAPPINESS FROM LIFE OF WHICH THEY ARE CAPABLE.
"INDIVIDUAL" AS WELL AS "COLLECTIVE" WELL-BEING AND HAPPINESS, AND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF NATURAL TALENTS, WILL**

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **BE CONSIDERED AS
THE PRIMAL OBJECT IN LIFE. "JOY"—NOT "STRIFE"—WILL BE RECOGNIZED AS THE
NATURAL EXPRESSION OF MAN. WE WILL LIVE IN A WORLD WHEREIN MAN WILL WORK
PRIMARILY FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADDING TO HIS OWN HAPPINESS AND THE
HAPPINESS OF HIS FELLOWMEN. HE WILL NO LONGER BE FORCED TO LIVE FOR THE
"SOLE PURPOSE OF WORKING FOR BREAD TO GET THE STRENGTH TO WORK FOR MORE
BREAD," UNTIL HE FINALLY TIRES OF THE ENDLESS STRUGGLE AND DIES.**

**"MAN DOES NOT LIVE BY BREAD ALONE," NOR CAN HE EVER FIND HAPPINESS OR
SATISFACTION IN A LIFE WHICH FORCES HIM TO CONSIDER ITS PREPARATION AS
THE MOST IMPORTANT OBJECTIVE OF HIS EXISTENCE.**

Again we remind our readers that "right here on our earth" there is over
one hundred (100) times as much land—capable of producing food—as
mankind now cultivates. But in spite of this fact, over "five hundred
million" (500,000,000) people are permitted to remain constantly hungry
and over "thirty million" (30,000,000) of them to die of starvation
annually. "Hunger and starvation" result solely from **"Man's Inhumanity
to Man,"**—the general "blindness" of the mass of human beings and the
wealthy men's frequently complete ignorance of either the "letter" or
the "spirit" implied by **The Golden Rule**.

**It has been complacently stated by economists—(who have learned so
much, but whose wealthy clients have**

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

**learned to do so little)—that enough food and enough material for
clothes could be produced, stored and preserved, within a ten (10) year
period, to feed and clothe the entire human family for the next "one
hundred (100) years."**

Within the following ten (10) years, in order that the human race may
guard against droughts, floods or other unforeseen calamities this will
be done, upon mankind's acceptance of our Research Department's charter.
However, except for some wholly "unheard-of" form of calamity, men need
not ever be deprived of the seasonally grown and freshly prepared foods
each year.

**NO FOOD WILL EVER AGAIN BE LEFT TO ROT IN THE FIELDS OR ON THE TREES,
NOR BE THROWN INTO THE OCEAN, AFTER "MANKIND UNITED" HAVE FORMED THEIR
"UNIVERSAL SERVICE CORPORATION."**

**THOSE OF US WHO HAVE HAD AN ABUNDANCE OF THE GOOD THINGS OF LIFE AND
YET HAVE STOOD BY AND WATCHED VAST QUANTITIES OF FOOD BEING DESTROYED
WHILE OUR FELLOW BEINGS—IN A HUNDRED DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE EARTH—WERE
STARVING TO DEATH, NEED NEVER AGAIN HIDE OUR HEADS IN SHAME OVER SUCH A
TRAVESTY ON BROTHERLY LOVE.**

Mankind's most experienced farmers, ranchers and producers will have the
satisfaction and worthy task of "directing" the production and
preparation of vast quantities of food and clothing materials, and of
seeing to it

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

that every man, woman and child on this "bountifully fruitful earth" of
ours has enough—and to spare—of varied and delicious foods to eat, and
warm—"modern"—attractive clothes to wear.

Over five hundred million (500,000,000) people will be kept busy in
these various activities, during their four-hour work periods, producing
and distributing the requirements of life for all mankind. There will be
no idle architects or builders during the ten (10) year period
immediately following the formation of **"Mankind United"** and **"The
Universal Service Corporation,"** nor any idle gardeners, inasmuch as
all of the world's architects and over one hundred million (100,000,000)
gardeners will be formed into a permanent department of The Service
Corporation. Over two hundred million (200,000,000) architects,
carpenters, building trade mechanics and furniture makers will be kept
busy twenty-four (24) hours per day—in four (4) hour shifts—during the
following ten (10) years, in order that, by the end of said period,
every family on this earth will be enabled to live in a beautiful home,
placed in the midst of a lovely park; a home which—if valued at today's
valuation—would cost twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars or more,
in buildings, furnishings and surrounding grounds. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

As heretofore mentioned,—in addition to the major languages which the
citizens of the various nations may desire to retain,—one universal
language will also be taught. Within much less than ten (10) years’ time
the people of every land will be able to readily converse with

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

one another, and the antagonisms resulting from the inability of people
to understand each other's habits and customs will thereby be
permanently uprooted.

When this one language has been universally learned, most of the
instruction in the various branches of human knowledge will be taught by
"radio" and "television," and will emanate from one great central
department of education. The brilliant scholars and most highly
qualified instructors of every nation will meet together and select
those most competent of their group to teach us all,—not only the
desirable academic subjects of the day,—but also how to live more
"intelligently" and "harmoniously" with one another. **Such instruction
will be amplified with free yearly travel—("during our entire
lifetime")—to any part of the world we may either desire to visit, or be
required to investigate as a part of the course of study we may
individually be pursuing. "FREE" FACILITIES FOR TRAVEL WILL ADD MUCH TO
OUR KNOWLEDGE, UNDERSTANDING AND APPRECIATION OF THE HABITS, CUSTOMS AND
LIVES OF THE PEOPLES OF THE VARIOUS NATIONS, AND WILL QUICKLY DISPEL THE
JEALOUSIES, ENVIES AND ANTAGONISMS WHICH NOW EXIST.**

**"FREE TRAVEL," "AMPLE LEISURE" AND "ADEQUATE INCOME" WITH WHICH TO
OBTAIN FULL ENJOYMENT FROM LIFE, WILL BE AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE ON THIS
GLOBE, LONG BEFORE OUR TEN (10) YEAR PROGRAM HAS BEEN COMPLETED.**

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Every normal man and woman on earth will be expected to spend an average
of not less than one hour each work day studying some
subject,—(according to each individual's selection),—either by means of
radio broadcast, television, or directly under the personal supervision
of qualified instructors. The nature of their instruction will be the
best that the world can provide, for all nations will be searched for
their most highly talented instructors in order that they may be made
available for those who desire self-improvement.

The acid tests of "proof and demonstration" will be applied to whatever
we sow in the minds of our children, for only that which is constructive
and good or true—and thereby "provable"—is worthy to be planted in the
fresh clean young intellects of children. Neither war nor warriors,—nor
any other kind of "murder" or type of "murderers"—will be glorified, nor
those so engaged set up on pedestals for our children to copy as
examples in the formation of their qualities of character. **"CHRIST
JESUS"—NOT "NAPOLEON"—A CHARACTER BUILDER, NOT A WHOLESALE MURDERER,
WILL BE THEIR EXEMPLAR. THEY WILL BE TAUGHT TO "BUILD"—NOT TO
"DESTROY."**

Only by "truly constructive thinking," will the superstitions and
groundless fears of mankind be ultimately destroyed. It matters not how
abundantly we supply man with "material possessions;"—such things are as
but a frame to a picture. If men are not taught what constitutes true
happiness—(and only truly intelligent thinking will reveal "true" joy to
them)—all of our love-inspired efforts

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

to bring peace, joy and progress to the human race would—within a
generation or two—be swallowed up by "greed," insanely futile "mad
ambition," and a renewed struggle for self-glorification, personal power
and self-gain. Men would once more be under the hypnotic spell of
self-centered ambitions;—once more they would be thinking that vast
wealth, or selfish personal power, constituted the highway to happiness,
and would again have forgotten that we all come here on an "equal"
footing—**"with no possessions"**—and leave unable to take any of our
accumulation of material objects with us., Once more men might forget
that the world and those in it are not here for the purpose of providing
pleasures and luxuries to some small handful of its population—or for
the pleasure of some one man; but instead, are here that they
might—through . their concerted efforts—assure joy and happiness to "all
mankind," as well as to themselves.

**UNLESS SUBJECTS OF "TRUE MERIT" ARE TAUGHT, MEN WOULD SOON FORGET THAT
IF THEY WOULD FIND HAPPINESS THEMSELVES, THEY MUST SHARE THIS WORLD'S
BEAUTY AND BOUNTY EQUALLY WITH ONE ANOTHER. MAN'S ONLY GUARANTEE OF
PERMANENT CONTENTMENT A N D JOYOUSNESS, RESTS SOLELY UPON HIS CAPACITY
TO LEARN—THROUGH THE HIGHER CONCEPTS O F "BROTHERLY LOVE"—WHAT "TRUE
HAPPINESS" REALLY IS; FOR SURELY IT CONSISTS AS MUCH IN "GIVING" AS IT
DOES IN "GETTING."**

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

**To assure mankind's permanent progress, every man, woman and child on
this earth must be helped to recognize the importance of regularly
studying and searching for wisdom, and of doing so a little "each day."
Once man stops growing mentally, he starts growing sensually, and when
he starts becoming a slave to his physical appetites and desires, he has
lost all chance of finding either "peace" or "happiness" until he first
destroys such taskmasters.**

Yes; the educational side of The Universal Service Corporation's
program,—in its development and production of those things which will
bring stability and happiness to the human race,—is indeed going to be
by far the most vital and important of its many activities, and it will
be but "barely starting" during the following 10-year period, on its
endless journey of service.

**The name which the Sponsors of this movement selected in designating
their organization as "The International Institute of Universal Research
and Administration," is intended to convey the "universal" and "endless"
nature of the program upon which you will be invited to vote during the
30 days of its final presentation to the public.** During the 10-year
period in which we have promised that all of the material needs of man
will be met and—through the construction of adequate
facilities—permanently assured to coming generations, The Universal
Service Corporation's program of education will have only commenced.

Organizing and co-ordinating the efforts of the world's most practical,
capable and brilliant research economists,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

industrialists, agricultural experts, and engineers, is a task which any
one of hundreds of outstanding business executives of this age could
readily accomplish, once he had received the order and authority to
**"go ahead"** from enough people who had definitely decided that they
would give up their "questionable chances" of winning great wealth,
power or prestige, in exchange for the assurance of "guaranteed economic
security" for all. Once two hundred million (200,000,000) clear-thinking
intelligently industrious men and women have decided to make this
exchange and accept, instead, an abundance of everything any "sane"
person could desire—and the leisure time in which to live and enjoy
life—then the task of bringing this result to pass is a comparatively
simple one, and one which any number of competent executives of today
could readily accomplish.

**TEN YEARS IS AMPLE TIME FOR FULFILLING THE INSTITUTE'S PROMISES, AND
ELIMINATING POVERTY, WAR, AND EVERY OTHER ACCURSED EFFECT OF "MAD
AMBITION" AND "ANIMAL GREED" FROM THE FACE OF THIS GLORIOUSLY BEAUTIFUL
PLANET. BUT WHEN THIS TASK HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED, AND THE MATERIAL NEEDS
OF MEN ARE PERMANENTLY ASSURED, THEN MANKIND WILL HAVE ONLY BARELY
STARTED UPON THE ADVENTURE OF LEARNING WHAT "LIFE" AND WHAT "HAPPINESS"
TRULY MEAN.**

Those who believe that "Mankind United" can obtain a greater degree of
security for the individual members

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

of the human race than they could hope to win by their own unaided
efforts, are asked to accept the "free gift" of our Research
Department's 30-day World-wide Program; during which time they will
learn how the establishment of a great Universal Service Corporation can
be quickly brought to pass,—and without "bloodshed," "revolution" or the
use of "brute force" of any kind. The people who attend our program,
will neither be asked to buy stock nor to make any sacrifices other than
to spend a few hours of their time in order that they may thereby obtain
sufficient information to vote intelligently upon the Corporation's
charter.

**The undying gratitude of countless generations of human beings will
follow the two hundred million (200,000,000) men and women who consent
to become equal owners of "The Universal Service Corporation"—(and who
will thereby unite as members and supporters of "A True Universal
Brotherhood of Man")—for the movement which it will bring to pass;
namely,—"Mankind United"—will be preserved for all time to come, as a
monument to the "20th Century Birth of Man" in the image and likeness of
the divine qualities of intelligence which are his birthright. The names
of these two hundred million (200,000,000) men and women,—and all others
who unite with them during this generation,—will be preserved throughout
countless thousands of years deeply engraved upon tablets of bronze and
placed in a gigantic monument erected on the crest of one of the world's
tallest peaks; a monument which will forever point upward to greater and
grander monuments to the**

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

**limitless potentialities of "Unity of Effort," when wedded to
"Justice" and "Brotherly Love."**

In this eternal monument, there will be deposited and sealed within
solid blocks of ageless granite—from century to century—each bit of
demonstrable Truth or scientific knowledge discovered, tested, and
demonstrated by the men and women of each successive generation, in
order that their footsteps of progress,—(dating from mankind's first
acceptance and "practical application" of Christ Jesus’ "Sermon on the
Mount" with its "Golden Rules" of human relationship),—may be traced by
those of later generations, and may stand forth as an eternal proof to
such future generations of the practical value of "Brotherly
Love"—"Unity" and "Unselfed Service"—as compared to the
"Each-Wolf-For-Himself" Private Profit System of our present generation.

As an indisputable proof of the advantages gained when the inhabitants
of the world unite as one family—**"One for All and All for
One,"**—(and, although they may be living in separate and differently
furnished rooms—or portions of the world—each individual receives the
benefit of the efforts of all the others, and in turn shares the
fruitage of his own talents with those who comprise the human
family),—this monument will evidence to all future generations—and stand
as a permanent reminder to them—that only when mankind had combined
their talents and efforts for their "mutual welfare," had their progress
been **"uninterrupted and continuous"**—unbroken either by wars, or
other similarly destructive forces, or by any weakening of their
unselfishly united energies.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

**ALSO WITHIN THIS ETERNAL MONUMENT, WILL BE CONTAINED A HUGE MUSEUM
FURNISHED WITH THE PROOFS AND EVIDENCES OF "MAD AMBITION," SELFISHNESS,
GREED, JEALOUSY, HATE, REVOLUTIONS, WARS, AND THE COUNTLESS OTHER
EXPRESSIONS OF UGLINESS WHICH CONSTITUTE "THE NATURAL FRUITAGE" OF
"MAN'S INHUMANITY TO MAN"—(WITH ITS RESULTANT JEALOUSIES, ENVIES AND
UNCONTROLLABLE HATREDS)—IN ORDER THAT THE PEOPLE OF ALL FUTURE
GENERATIONS MAY THEREBY "TAKE HEED," AND THAT THEY MAY NEVER AGAIN BE
TEMPTED BY FEELINGS OF "INDIVIDUAL SUPERIORITY," TO SUBSCRIBE TO THOSE
HUMANLY CONCEIVED AND PERPETUATED RULES OF RELATIONSHIP BASED UPON THE
"JUNGLE LAW" OF "THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST," WHICH THE WORLD NOW CALLS
"RUGGED INDIVIDUALISM" AND ITS "PRIVATE PROFIT SYSTEM."**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[197:\*](mu17.htm#fr_5) Over 800,000,000 expert
workers will be continuously employed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Universal Service Corporation Equally
Owned—Equally Controlled Equally Beneficial](mu18)
