[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu18)  [Next](mu20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

### BIGOTED SKEPTICISM

### AND INEVITABLE EXTERMINATION

### OR

### INTELLIGENT CO-OPERATION

### AND "ECONOMIC EQUALITY"

### WHICH SHALL IT BE

### ?

We seek only the privilege of presenting, as a gift to the human race,
the results of our sixty years of investigations, discoveries, and
perfected inventions,—all of which have been carefully tested and their
value fully proven during the past sixteen years of our Research
Department's preparations for its world-wide 30-day proclamation.

Inasmuch as no group of less than two hundred million (200,000,000)
clear-thinking and intelligently industrious men and women would have
either the buying power or combined influence with which to act upon our
recommendations, no further information than that which this book
contains will be released to the public until after our Research
Department has been assured by its co-workers in The International
Legion of Vigilantes, that their Branch Registration Bureaus and
4-4-8-3-4 Clubs (hereinafter described) can guarantee the availability
of such an audience.

**WE SHALL GIVE NO DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE FACILITIES THROUGH WHICH
OUR 30-DAY PROGRAM WILL BE IMPARTED TO OUR AUDIENCE, OTHER THAN TO STATE
THAT THEY ARE "THOROUGHLY ADEQUATE" FOR THIS PURPOSE.**

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

**A "general" does not send a detailed description of his armaments, the
position of his army, nor the place nor the time of his contemplated
attack, to his enemies. Neither shall our Research Department at this
time describe the nature of the discoveries which will enable it to
simultaneously communicate its information—"without cost"—to those who
previously agree to take the time to cast their votes for or against the
various measures which will be recommended for world-wide action at the
conclusion of its 30-day program. The world's "Hidden Rulers" have no
means by which to ascertain the nature of such discoveries until we
introduce their use to our audience. At that time it will be "much too
late" for any subversive forces to prevent the release of our program.**

**THE ONLY ASSISTANCE WE REQUEST IS YOUR GOOD WILL AND UNPREJUDICED AND
OPEN THOUGHT, TOGETHER WITH YOUR COOPERATION IN PLACING A COPY OF THIS
BOOK IN THE HANDS OF EACH MAN OR WOMAN WHOM YOU FEEL WOULD BE WILLING TO
DO AN "EQUAL SHARE" OF THE WORLD'S WORK, AND RECEIVE AN "EQUAL SHARE" OF
THE WORLD'S INDESCRIBABLY ABUNDANT RESOURCES IN PREFERENCE TO THE
UNCERTAINTIES OF THE "EACH-WOLF-FOR-HIMSELF" PLAN, WHICH THE WORLD NOW
CALLS ITS "PRIVATE-PROFIT SYSTEM."**

Only those to whom either a direct invitation to receive our Research
Department's 30-day program is—or

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

has already been—extended by The International Registration Bureau, or
those whose thoughts are prepared for said program through a thorough
study and understanding of the contents of this "Explanatory" bulletin
entitled **"Mankind United"**—(which you are now reading)—and who have
been sufficiently interested to acquire one or more copies thereof for
circulation,—will be invited to receive or to vote upon our
recommendations. In accordance with this ruling, a record of each person
who is officially registered as above described, or who purchases copies
of said bulletin, will be kept until such a time as 200,000,000 men and
women have been so listed in The Institute's files. To facilitate the
accomplishment of such a result, those who read "Mankind United" are
invited to acquire copies thereof for circulation among their friends
and acquaintances.

Although this book is, and will continue to be, published "exclusively"
by The International Registration Bureau's Pacific Coast Division of
North America, it will nevertheless, be circulated far and wide by
numerous other branches of The Institute and their associate workers,
throughout the civilized nations of our earth. Some single volumes may
be read by as many as from fifty to one hundred people, and it is hoped
that no volume will stop at just one reader. **HOWEVER, IT IS SUGGESTED
THAT NO COPY OF SAID BOOK BE PLACED IN THE HANDS OF ANYONE WHO WILL NOT
AGREE TO TAKE THE TIME TO CAREFULLY READ IT WITHIN "THREE (3) DAYS" FROM
THE DATE OF ITS**

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **RECEIPT AND,
IMMEDIATELY AFTER DOING SO, RETURN IT TO ITS OWNER FOR FURTHER
CIRCULATION.**

A selling price of $2.50 has been placed on this volume in order to
assist in defraying part of the total expenses of over five hundred
million ($500,000,000) dollars, which will be incurred in forming our
world-wide audience and in placing a copy of said publication in the
hands of each of the 200,000,000 men and women who will constitute a
part of said audience. The selling price of $2.50 is also intended to
defray part of the costs of preparing the necessary data for recording
and classifying such individuals according to their respective
professions and vocations on The Institute's carefully guarded official
records, and also as a means of compensating those who are helping to
place this book in the hands of the 200,000,000 people with whom we
desire to communicate.

**During our 30-day program, the members of our audience will be
supplied with "officially audited" and "properly authenticated" records
to prove that no portion of the $2.50 selling price above mentioned, has
been retained either as salaries, or in the form of financial profits,
by any official of The International Institute of Universal Research and
Administration, or by any member of said institute's Research
Department;—in fact not even so small an amount as 1/10th of 1 cent.
Their services and their lives have been—are now—and will "continuously"
be dedicated and donated to this cause.**

Due to the urgency of an early release of our 30-day proclamation, and
the vital importance of "immediately"

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

creating permanent positions for the needlessly unemployed and idle
inhabitants of our earth—(and thereby preventing the world's further
preparations for war)—a condition of the release of our program will be
that each of the 200,000,000 people who receive it, will agree to permit
The Universal Service Corporation to grant a lifetime pension of three
thousand ($3,000.00) dollars per year, to each one of the eight million
(8,000,000) men and women who are now being invited to assist us in the
formation of this necessary audience.

**By communicating with the branch registration bureau noted on the last
page hereof, you will obtain information as to how you may qualify for
one of these honorary pensions. Your principal responsibility will
consist of placing not less than twenty-five (25) copies of "Mankind
United" in the hands of a similar number of people—who have not
previously received a copy thereof—and obtaining a promise from each one
of them, that he will also take the time to introduce our message to his
friends and acquaintances, by placing one or more copies of said volume
in circulation among them.**

**In other words, eight million (8,000,000) men and women,—an average of
one out of every twenty-five of those who will constitute our world-wide
audience,—will be granted, as a reward for their assistance, a lifetime
pension of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year, to take effect
within six months from the date of the formation of the Universal
Service Corporation, and the acceptance of its charter by not less than
eighty (80%)**

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

**per cent of the men and women whom they invite to become our audience.
Inasmuch as said charter will be based upon the practical application of
"The Golden Rule" to the world's commercial activities, and inasmuch as
its ideals of "economic equality" will correspond essentially with the
general features described herein, there is but little doubt of its
acceptance by the above mentioned majority, after they have spent an
average of two hours per day—for thirty (30) days—investigating our many
discoveries and irrefutable proofs.**

**Unless mankind possess sufficient gratitude and appreciation for the
efforts which will have thus been made, by at least 8,000,000 alert,
clear-thinking people, to bring about the successful formation of the
audience we require, and unless the members of said audience are willing
to grant their consent to the lifetime pension rewards above
described,—they would not deserve even the smallest part of the benefits
which the successful establishment of the Universal Service Corporation
will make available to them and their families, nor would they be given
the privilege of receiving such benefits.**

Considering the fact that each one of the men and women who thus assist
in the formation of said audience, will be obliged to not only donate
the time for keeping not less than twenty-five (25) copies of "Mankind
United" in circulation, but will also be expected to spend the necessary
time to maintain and register an accurate record of the names,
addresses, vocations, or professions of the various people who purchase
copies as a result thereof; **AND CONSIDERING THE ALL-IMPORTANT FACT,**

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **THAT WE COULD
NOT POSSIBLY FORM AN AUDIENCE AS GIGANTIC AS THE ONE WE REQUIRE,—UNLESS
MANY MILLION "INDEPENDENT"—"UNBIGOTED"—"RIGHT-THINKING"—"INDUSTRIOUS"
MEN AND WOMEN OFFER US SUCH ASSISTANCE AS MAY BE NEEDED,—SURELY THOSE
WHO ARE EITHER "UNWILLING" OR "UNABLE" TO RENDER SUCH ESSENTIAL HELP AT
THIS TIME, WILL NOT HESITATE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THE JUSTICE OF OUR RESEARCH
DEPARTMENT'S RULING IN THIS MATTER.**

**Inasmuch as the allocation of honorary pensions is entirely dependent
upon the formation of The Universal Service Corporation, we believe that
these 8,000,000 pension awards, herein described, should constitute but
a very small part of the expression of gratitude mankind will owe to
those who thus make possible the consummation of our program and the
establishment of this great Service Corporation; therefore, a method has
been adopted which will provide an immediate income—at this time—for the
men and women who assist The International Registration Bureau in
accomplishing this result.**

Only those who place not less than four (4) of these books in
circulation, through the Branch Registration Bureau noted on the last
page of the copy first loaned to them,—will be eligible to form a branch
of our International Registration Bureau, or be allowed to qualify for a
position which will enable them to receive compensation for their
services while helping us to form our world-wide

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

audience. And only those who place not less than twenty-five (25) of
said books in circulation, and supply The International Registration
Bureau with an authentic record of the names, addresses, vocations or
professions of the people who purchase additional copies as a result
thereof, will be eligible for the lifetime pensions to which we have
previously made reference.

**The Branch Registration Bureau, noted on the last page of this volume,
will supply you with further information pertaining to the above matters
if you will follow the instructions contained thereon when you have
finished reading the following chapters.**

Inasmuch as there are no other means of preventing the further
overturning of existing democracies, or preventing another great
world-wide civilization-destroying war—than by mankind immediately
taking steps to end universal unemployment and poverty; and inasmuch as
those who control the world's currency—(and thereby its governments,
through their vast accumulations of gold and silver)—have only one
object in view; namely, **"the extermination of literally all educated
and religious people,"**—and since they have the money, and therefore
the influence, with which to force the production of the necessary
armaments and munitions of war for the accomplishment of this
result,—**unless the world's "sane" and "right-thinking" inhabitants
simultaneously organize in every major nation, and "immediately"
establish their own business facilities and "a new type of money" to
free them from their age-old bondage to the "war lords" and "money
changers" of the**

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

**world, and unless they thereby completely destroy the value of the
century-old accumulations of gold and silver belonging to these hidden
world rulers, "it will soon be too late to even talk about doing so."
WITH THE WORLDWIDE LOSS OF FREE SPEECH AND THE PRIVILEGES OF ASSEMBLY
RAPIDLY BEING BROUGHT TO PASS BY THESE HIDDEN RULERS, THROUGH THEIR
CAREFULLY PLANNED AVENUES OF WIDESPREAD UNEMPLOYMENT, COMMUNISM AND
FASCISM,—THE EARTH'S INHABITANTS WILL SOON NO LONGER BE ALLOWED TO "EVEN
VOICE" THEIR DESIRE FOR PEACE, FINANCIAL SECURITY OR FREEDOM.**

Our Research Department therefore feels justified in having adopted a
plan for the promulgation of "Mankind United," which will compensate the
men and women who co-operate with its International Registration Bureau
in the formation of its requisite world-wide audience: a plan which will
not only provide an "immediate income" for such co-workers, but will
also supply an opportunity for earning the lifetime pension described
herein.

**To those who may be inclined to think that we should establish a lower
selling price for these books,—(and absorb the difference in a price
substantially below $2.50, by paying less compensation to the men and
women who help us to circulate them,)**—we request the privilege of
bringing to their attention the fact that not only must these co-workers
give generously of their time in exchange for the income which they will
receive, but they must also

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

possess the requisite "moral fibre," "courage," and "perseverance," to
withstand the attacks of bigotry and sarcasm, and the malicious
criticism of unthinking people.—No amount of money can compensate them
for these experiences.

There will be many who will do no more than to glance hurriedly through
the pages of "Mankind United," and thereafter feel qualified to pass a
"profound judgment" of condemnation, upon the merits of a program which
even the world's most "brilliant" economists will be wholly unable to
"accurately" judge, until after they have seen the moving pictures and
numerous authenticated reports and proofs which will be given to the
world during our Research Department's 30-day program.

It will take real moral courage to circulate this book and to ignore the
skepticism of the type of people who will first have to "actually hear"
the deafening roar of hundreds of bomb-laden planes, and wake up in the
dead of night with poisonous gases streaming into their rooms and—(like
"white-hot coals")—eating out their lungs and tearing the flesh from
their bones,—before they will believe that the world's governmental and
financial structures are completely under the control of fabulously
wealthy "moral idiots;"—or before they will believe that there are men
who every second, of every hour, of every day and of every night, are
forcing the production of vast quantities of such gases—and other "death
dealing" elements—together with the necessary facilities for releasing
them in the populated centers of the world;—men who have such world-wide
influence, that they are actually paying for such things with

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

the tax money collected from the very people whom they intend to
slaughter!!

It is likewise a fact, that until the War Lords’ "radio-controlled
equipment", now secretly under construction in many parts of the
world—(and which was partly assembled and delivered into the hands of
their agents during October and November of 1937)—is installed and
actually put into operation in the populated centers of the world
and—(throughout an area of some hundreds of square miles surrounding the
well hidden location of each one of them)—the eyes of millions of people
are electrically vibrated from their sockets—**AND UNTIL EVERY DROP OF
WATER, AND EVERY POUND OF FOOD, IN EVERY THICKLY POPULATED CENTER OF THE
CIVILIZED WORLD HAS BEEN POISONED BY ORDER OF THESE "MONEY CHANGERS"
DURING THEIR WAR OF EXTERMINATION, WE ARE FULLY AWARE OF THE FACT THAT
THERE WILL CONTINUE TO BE MILLIONS OF "OSTRICH-LIKE" HUMAN BEINGS WHO
WILL SCOFF—AS THE BOYS BENEATH THE SOD IN THE FIELDS OF FRANCE ONCE
SCOFFED—AT THE IDEA THAT THERE COULD EVER AGAIN BE A GREAT WORLD WAR
DURING A CIVILIZATION "AS FAR ADVANCED" AS OURS.**

**THE NEXT WAR WILL NOT BE FOUGHT ON BATTLEFIELDS IN SOME FOREIGN LAND.
IT IS TO BE A WAR OF "EXTERMINATION"—NOT FOUGHT BY COURAGEOUS MEN ALONE
BUT**

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **INSTEAD
CONDUCTED BY COWARDS OF THE LOWEST TYPE—FROM "SAFE CONCEALMENTS"—AGAINST
MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN OF THE EDUCATED CLASSES IN ALL POPULOUS CENTERS
OF ALL CIVILIZED NATIONS.**

**YES, THERE WILL BE MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE NOT AWARE "OF THE TRUTH" OF
THE STATEMENT—IN THE BOOK OF PROVERBS—WHICH WARNS US THAT "WHERE THERE
IS NO VISION, THE PEOPLE PERISH,"—AND BECAUSE OF THE "BLINDNESS" OF SUCH
PEOPLE, THEY WILL NOT REALIZE THAT THE FACULTY OF "THOUGHT" HAS BEEN
GIVEN TO US NOT MERELY THAT WE MIGHT HAVE ENOUGH INTELLIGENCE WITH WHICH
"TO GET THE FOOD—TO GET THE STRENGTH—TO GET MORE FOOD,"—BUT ALSO THAT WE
MIGHT DEVELOP THE WISDOM NEEDED FOR OUR "SELF-PRESERVATION" AND
"PROGRESS," THROUGH THE "USE"—AS WELL AS THE "DISCUSSION"—OF MIND'S
LIMITLESS IDEAS OF VALUE.**

**OUR RESEARCH DEPARTMENT THEREFORE FEELS THAT BECAUSE OF SUCH QUALITIES
OF APATHY–AND THE NUMEROUS FALSE CONCEPTS OF SECURITY UNDER WHICH MANY
OF THE EARTH'S INHABITANTS ARE LABORING–THAT IT IS FULLY JUSTIFIED IN
CHARGING A PRICE FOR THIS BOOK WHICH WILL ENABLE IT,**

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **THROUGH THE
AVENUE OF ITS INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION BUREAU, TO GENEROUSLY
COMPENSATE ALL MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE SUFFICIENT "INDEPENDENCE OF
THOUGHT"—AND THE CONSEQUENT COURAGE—WITH WHICH TO HELP COMBAT NOT ONLY
THESE ENEMIES TO MAN'S WELFARE AND PROGRESS BUT ALSO THE WELL HIDDEN
FORCES WHICH HAVE, THROUGH THE AVENUES OF "MASS PSYCHOLOGY" AND
CEASELESS "PROPAGANDA," PERPETUATED THEIR HOLD UPON THE HUMAN RACE.**

**WE INVITE THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO READ "MANKIND UNITED," TO HELP US
CIRCULATE IT AMONG THEIR MANY FRIENDS AND ACQUAINTANCES, BY GENEROUSLY
COMPLYING WITH THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED ON THE LAST PAGE HEREOF. WE
EXTEND THIS INVITATION TO ALL WHO BELIEVE THAT THE WORLD HAS ENOUGH
EXECUTIVES, TRAINED WORKERS, MECHANICAL INVENTIONS, UNDEVELOPED LANDS,
AND THE RESOURCES WITH WHICH TO PERMANENTLY OVERCOME BOTH POVERTY AND
WAR;—AND ENOUGH EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES TO QUICKLY HEAL MANKIND'S
ILLITERACY, TOGETHER WITH THEIR RESULTANT SOUL-DESTROYING SUPERSTITIONS.
ALL MEN AND WOMEN WHO POSSESS "INDEPENDENCE OF THOUGHT" AND A**

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **CLEAR
REALIZATION OF THE LIMITLESS POTENTIALITIES OF "UNSELFISHLY MOTIVATED
UNITED WORLD-WIDE ACTION," BY THE EARTH'S INTELLIGENTLY INDUSTRIOUS
INHABITANTS, ARE INCLUDED IN THIS INVITATION.**

**ALTHOUGH—IF YOU SO DESIRE—BY COOPERATING WITH US, YOUR IMMEDIATE AS
WELL AS YOUR FUTURE FINANCIAL REWARDS WILL BE GRATIFYINGLY SUBSTANTIAL,
NEVERTHELESS, YOUR GREATEST AND MOST SATISFYING BLESSING WILL CONSIST OF
THE GRATITUDE OF COUNTLESS GENERATIONS OF HUMAN BEINGS, WHO WILL NEVER
CEASE TO BLESS YOUR COURAGEOUS GENEROSITY AND VISION.**

Only those who are sufficiently interested in the program of The
International Institute of Universal Research and Administration, to
purchase at least one copy of this book—either for further study or for
purposes of circulation in accordance with the instructions contained on
the last page hereof—(or who have otherwise qualified as a member of our
world-wide audience of 200,000,000 people)—will be notified of the date
of our Research Department's 30-day program, or be permitted to vote
upon its recommendations—and the charter of The Universal Service
Corporation—at the conclusion of said program. For only those who have
not only read—but who have also "carefully studied" the contents of this
"Explanatory" bulletin, or our other officially released publications,
will have had their thoughts adequately prepared to receive the thirty
days of proclamations and recommendations which will at that time be put
into the hands of our audience.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

**Prior to the date that the 30-day program is officially announced,
none of our branch Registration Bureaus—or their respective
secretaries—will be allowed to give out any additional information
relative to the discoveries or the plans of our Research Department, nor
are they authorized to make any statements other than those either
contained herein, or printed and copyrighted by The International
Registration Bureau. However, said Branch Registration Bureaus, and
their respective secretaries, are supplied with copies of all such
necessary printed data, as well as instructions to be given to those who
desire to co-operate with us in the formation of our world-wide
audience.**

**In order to protect the time and efforts of the men and women—(whose
names appear on the numerous copies of this book now being placed in
circulation)—who have been appointed as the secretaries of our various
branch Registration Bureaus, and to guard them against the demands of
people who may be motivated primarily by "curiosity," said secretaries
are specifically prohibited from giving out any information—other than
that which this volume contains—(relative either to our general program
or the subject of financial remuneration)—to anyone other than those who
have first evidenced the sincerity of their interest in our purposes and
plans, by having purchased at least one copy of "Mankind United" as a
proof of their desire to help us promulgate our message.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Mankind United—And—The International 4-4-8-3-4
Club](mu20)
