[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu20)  [Next](mu22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII.

### NOT A MAD DREAM

Burglars do not enter the homes of people who are sitting at their doors
and windows with loaded shotguns!!! It is quite possible that the
widespread circulation of the warnings contained in this book, will
cause many of the world's "wolves"—who are well camouflaged in their
costumes of "Sheep's Clothing"—to comb some of the tangles out of their
more or less worn-out coverings, and to even "appear" to take steps
through the League of Nations—and other similar avenues—to not only
outlaw war, but also to bring about the establishment of facilities
which may "seem" capable of ending the depression;—they may even start
placing large numbers of the unemployed back into "apparently" permanent
positions. Our widespread public warnings may also cause them to
somewhat alter their preparations for the next world war. However,
unless a medium of currency other than "Gold or Silver" (as described
herein) is universally adopted—and a lifetime "written guarantee" of not
less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year is placed in the
hands of every man and woman in every civilized nation on this
earth—**"any other steps" which our political leaders may offer**

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

**to take, and any promises that they may make, will not deceive those
who have carefully studied and who fully understand the contents of this
volume,—any more than such moves have—throughout the past few
years—deceived the carefully-trained and well-informed investigators of
our Research Bureau.**

The world's subversive forces—(and many honest leaders and other
well-intentioned people who are thoroughly mesmerized by their
influence)—will no doubt make numerous "libelous" attacks on the
character and motives of Our Sponsors, and will accuse them of fostering
everything from a "money-making scheme," up to and including a plan for
the overthrow of the world's major governments.

We cannot expect the co-operation of either "biased" or "bigoted"
mentalities, but it is with the belief that there are two hundred
million (200,000,000) right-thinking and intelligent men and women, (who
will base their opinion of our movement upon the "ideals" we have herein
described, and will withhold any judgment as to the "practicability" of
our program, until they have received—during a continuous 30-day
period—sufficient information with which to form a just opinion,)—that
we have published "Mankind United."

**THE TRUTH OF THE STATEMENT THAT "WHERE THERE IS NO VISION THE PEOPLE
PERISH," HAS THROUGHOUT TENS OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS BEEN FULLY VERIFIED
BY THE FACT THAT EVERY CIVILIZATION THROUGHOUT ALL OF HUMAN HISTORY HAS
BEEN "SELF-DESTROYED;" DESTROYED BY QUALITIES OF JEALOUSY,**

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **ENVY, PRIDE,
GREED, SELFISHNESS, BIGOTRY AND SELF-GLORIFICATION. THE WORLD'S
INHABITANTS DID NOT, DURING THOSE PERIODS, HAVE SUFFICIENT "VISION" TO
ESTABLISH AN ECONOMIC SYSTEM BASED UPON THE "SPIRIT" AS WELL AS THE
"LETTER" OF "THE GOLDEN RULE," YET IT HAS BEEN PROVEN—CENTURY AFTER
CENTURY—THAT ONLY BY ADOPTING AN ECONOMIC SYSTEM WHICH WILL PROVIDE
NEITHER FINANCIAL REWARD NOR ANY OTHER FORM OF GAIN FOR THOSE TEMPTED OR
MOTIVATED BY "SELFISH" OR "CRUEL" CHARACTERISTICS OF THOUGHT, CAN
MANKIND EVER EVEN "HOPE" TO FIND PEACE, CONTENTMENT OR HAPPINESS.**

It will be stated that the result which The International Institute of
Universal Research and Administration has promised to bring to pass is
but a "mad dream." In answer to such forms of attack, we might remind
our readers that it does not imply any lack of sound substantial value
in connection with The Institute's recommendations, merely because its
program is an ambitious one, nor because of the fact that it is somewhat
of an innovation compared to the generally accepted "poverty-stricken"
limitations of generations of "false education." However, as has
invariably been the case throughout countless centuries, even the most
"advanced thinkers" of each age through which mankind have traveled,
have strenuously resisted every recommendation of progress which did not
coincide

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

with the erroneous concepts of life which "false education" and
"superstition" have—throughout all past centuries—so strongly embedded
into the consciousness of man.

Those who find it profitable to prey upon mankind's superstitions,
ignorance and poverty, have with an enviable (?) degree of success,
perpetuated every form of "fear" and "limitation" which held promise of
keeping the human race in mental darkness. Yet, such people know that we
live in the midst of "limitless opportunities" for intelligent progress
and accomplishment, and that there is nothing capable of delaying
mankind's arrival in the promised land of "peace and plenty," other than
an educated sense of self-depreciation, fear and limitation; these
qualities of false thinking, the world's Hidden Rulers have made it
their business to ceaselessly propagate and perpetuate.

The characteristics of thought which hinder mankind's progress, are most
fittingly exemplified in a statement described by a prominent
lecturer <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) of a few years ago, which
was issued through the School Board of Lancaster, Ohio, in the year
1828, through a letter addressed to a debating society of young men; it
stated:—

**"You are welcome to the use of the school house to debate all proper
questions in, but such things as railroads and telegraphs are
'impossible' and rank infidelity. 'There is nothing in the Bible or the
word of God about them.' If God had desired that his intelligent
creatures should travel at**

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

**the frightful speed of fifteen miles an hour by steam, He would have
clearly foretold such things through His Holy Prophets. It is a device
of Satan to lead immortal souls down to hell."**

**THIS IS ALSO A REMINDER OF THE DECLARATION OF LOMBROSO, THAT:—"MAN IS
BY NATURE THE 'ENEMY' OF INNOVATION."**

**The lecturer who used the foregoing illustration then continued
stating:—**

**"If this letter, instead of saying in general terms that the railway
and telegraph were 'a device of Satan,' had followed the usual custom by
specifically uttering a libelous attack on the character and motives of
Morse and Stephenson; if it had violated every rule of justice, honor
and loving kindness, for the purpose of misrepresenting the intent and
the declarations of these discoverers, and had done it in order to
discredit them before the world, it would have fittingly shown forth the
ever-continuing disposition of the human mind to resist its own
progress, and to thrust martyrdom on every one who is first to discern
that which is possible of accomplishment."**

**"What argument or protest would have prevailed with the dense
traditional ignorance which constructed that letter? None!! Nothing but
'demonstration' with its persistent assertiveness. Nothing but the
dynamics of 'truth,' will suffice to overwhelm and drive such mental
perversity into silence and oblivion."**

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

**"It is fortunate for mankind, that the discoverers and reformers
throughout the ages have had the moral courage and mental poise which
enabled them to endure the storms of antagonism and persecution, while
they persisted in impressing the facts of their discoveries on the world
'in spite of itself.' It is fortunate that these discoverers have known
enough to expect that the rude hand of ignorance would strive to thrust
back every scientific advance or promise of advance. It is well that
they knew that it would be folly to stem the tide of unfriendly bias or
to keep pace—by means of 'dispute and recrimination'—with a bewildering
flood of utterances which were unjust or benighted. It is well that the
great benefactors of the world have known that there  is but 'one thing'
that will be sufficient to answer all slander and to put to rout all
antagonism.—'THAT ONE THING IS PROOF'!! The one who has discovered a
scientific verity and knows that it is demonstrable, may wait in serene
calm until demonstration justifies him and his cause. If it were not
thus, most of them would falter and go down in heart-broken despair, and
humanity would either stagnate or revert to barbarism."**

**"All the discoveries and inventions which by means of demonstration
and proof have forced themselves on a resisting world, must surely serve
to show how largely the world is in need. If humanity had rightly heeded
these things and the**

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

**lessons they imply, it would realize that it is barely on the
threshold of knowledge, and must progress in every direction for many
years yet to come, before it will be justified in contemplating its
handiwork with the thought that further progress is neither needed nor
possible. ITS MONOTONE OF COMPLAINT AND LAMENTATION; ITS TEARS, POVERTY,
AND DISASTER, CONSTITUTE BOTH 'CONFESSION' AND 'TESTIMONY' THAT MANKIND
IS IN 'DIRE TROUBLE' AND IN SUPREME NEED OF EARLY DELIVERANCE."**

**FOR TENS OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS, THE HUMAN RACE HAS FOUGHT THROUGH
RELIGIOUS, RACIAL AND CLASS ANTAGONISMS, TO ADVANCE ITSELF AND TO SOLVE
ITS PROBLEMS THROUGH THE APPLICATION OF ITS SO-CALLED PRINCIPLE OR LAW
OF "THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST." YET, NEVER, THROUGHOUT THESE THOUSANDS
OF YEARS, HAVE WAYS AND MEANS BEEN DISCOVERED BY WHICH IGNORANCE,
SUPERSTITION, POVERTY AND WARS MIGHT BE MADE TO CEASE OCCURRING ON THIS
PLANET OF OURS. IT HAS TRIED MANY WAYS IN THE DIRECTION OF THIS RULE OF
THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST; WAYS WHICH HAVE ONE AND ALL BEEN MISERABLE
FAILURES. "IF THERE BE A WAY WHICH IS EQUAL TO THE NEED, IT MUST SURELY
BE SOMEWHAT OR WHOLLY DIFFERENT FROM THE WAYS THAT HAVE FAILED."**

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

**INASMUCH AS ALL OF HUMAN SUPERSTITION, POVERTY AND WAR ARE THE EFFECT
OF SOME CAUSE, THE ONLY WAY TO ELIMINATE OR TO GET OUT OF THESE
TROUBLES, "IS TO UPROOT AND EXTERMINATE THE CAUSE." IS THERE ANY PROMISE
OR PROSPECT THAT THIS CAN BE DONE?**

**The International Institute of Universal Research and Administration,
after sixty years of ceaseless investigation, claims that there is a
solution and asks only that the substantial, intelligent, clear-thinking
people of the world's civilized nations, expend the slight amount of
time needed to establish the avenues through which the discoveries of
their Research Department may be made available to two hundred million
(200,000,000) such people in all parts of our world, in order that these
needless causes of human suffering may be attacked simultaneously on a
world-wide front. They further state to us—"and stand ready to prove
their claims"—that these causes are too widespread and deeply rooted to
be exterminated by the efforts of any smaller group, or in an area other
than "the entire surface" of our planet in one "over-powering" attack.**

**"SUPERSTITION," "POVERTY" AND "WAR," BESET THE PEOPLES OF OUR ENTIRE
WORLD, AND THESE RELENTLESS ENEMIES TO MANKIND'S FREEDOM—PEACE AND
PROGRESS—CAN ONLY BE DESTROYED BY THE "CONCERTED EFFORT" OF "ALL" OF THE
WORLD'S ENLIGHTENED THINKERS.**

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

**Whenever we of the human race have tired of our bondage to these
"age-old" foes, we need only rise up as a body and with "one
voice"—"demand our freedom"—in order to gain it. Have we ever had
greater opportunities for doing this? more rapid means of transportation
or inter-communication, or better avenues of education, than are now
available to us?**

**Our Research Department asks only your invitation to prove that the
unemployed of the world can immediately be given profitable and
desirable positions,—and through the many avenues of already developed
mechanical inventions,—that short working hours and many months of
vacations each year "for all" are available—not a thousand years
hence—but within less than "one year" after the world accepts its
program.**

**OUR PLANS DO NOT CONFLICT WITH ANY "TRULY" RELIGIOUS OR HUMANITARIAN
GROUP, NOR COULD ANY "UNSELFISH" MAN OR WOMAN ON THIS EARTH OBJECT TO
OUR RECOMMENDATIONS.**

Eight million (8,000,000) combination Branch Registration Bureaus and
4-4-8-3-4 Clubs,—each composed of a membership of not less than
twenty-five (25) sincere, intelligent, clear-thinking people,—must be
formed throughout the nations of the earth during the following few
months, in order that The Institute's program can be readily imparted to
those who are capable of acting upon its recommendations, and who are
willing to have wars,

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

ignorance and poverty, forever removed from human experience, and are
"truly" desirous of helping to accomplish such a result.

These Clubs will literally constitute a group of 8,000,000 "separate
research bureaus," whose secretaries and members will have evidenced
their willingness to undertake a sincere and careful study of the
fundamental causes of poverty and war and to investigate our Research
Department's claims that the world's executives, its trained workers,
its labor-saving mechanical inventions and its limitless abundance of
raw materials, are "more than sufficient" for the immediate eradication
of each and every one of the humanly perpetuated and "utterly needless
causes" of world-wide illiteracy, poverty and war.

**Our plans constitute "an immediately practical solution" to the
world's grievous problems of unemployment, poverty, and a rapidly
approaching war of self-annihilation;—no worthier invitation to action
has ever been offered to intelligent men and women.**

**It has been rightly stated, that "nothing bigger can come to a human
being than to love a great cause more than life itself, and to have the
privilege throughout life of working for that cause." Although we ask
you to spend but a small part of your life in helping us to establish
our program,—your satisfaction and your reward will be permanent—and
constantly increasing.**

**We invite you to participate in the most ambitious and constructive
adventure ever undertaken by the people of any age. We invite you to
journey with us into a land of**

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **"universal
unselfishness and generosity;"—a land, the inhabitants of which give
"freely" of their individual capabilities and talents for the welfare
and happiness of all; and all combine their strength and their talents
as a guarantee to one another of security, equal opportunity, freedom,
leisure and happiness;—and extend this guarantee to even the least
talented of their brethren.**

**WE INVITE YOU TO HELP US "UNITE MANKIND" UPON THE PLATFORM OF CHRIST
JESUS’ GOLDEN RULE OF "BROTHERLY LOVE" AND "IMPARTIAL ECONOMIC
EQUALITY."**

**HAVE YOU THE GENEROSITY—THE WISDOM—AND THE COURAGE TO ACCEPT THIS
INVITATION???**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[272:\*](mu21.htm#fr_7) EDWARD A. KIMBALL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Christians of the World! . . . Have You the Courage
to Accept Our Invitation?](mu22)
