[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu21)  [Next](mu23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

### CHRISTIANS OF THE WORLD!

### HAVE YOU THE COURAGE

### TO

### ACCEPT OUR INVITATION

### ?

This book has been published and copyrighted in the United States of
America,—not because there is no other country which grants its people
the privilege of free speech or assembly, nor because of the fact that
the world's subversive influences are any less aggressive here than in
any other liberty-loving nation, nor because the people of America are
any more "enlightened" or any less "bigoted" than the citizens of any
other country,—but solely because of the fact that, throughout recent
generations, millions of people from all of the world's great nations
have settled in America. **Therefore, our message can be quickly placed
in the hands of millions of men and women who not only understand the
world's various major languages, but also understand the customs of its
many classes of inhabitants, and consequently through them it will
quickly spread to all parts of the civilized world.**

Here in America, the Sponsors of The International Institute of
Universal Research and Administration have

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

found millions of right-thinking, clean-living, high-principled men and
women of each of the great nations;—men and women whom they are now
inviting to participate in the establishment of an economic system based
upon "Practical Idealism," instead of the "Jungle Law" of selfishness
and "brute force."

**CHRIST JESUS TAUGHT THAT "THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN"—THE PROMISED LAND—WAS
"HERE AT HAND," AND READY TO BE FULLY ENJOYED ANY TIME THAT MEN WERE
WILLING TO LIVE IN OBEDIENCE TO HIS TEACHINGS AND PRECEPTS. "CHRISTIANS
OF THE WORLD!"—ARE YOU READY TO START "LIVING" AS WELL AS "PREACHING"
THOSE PRECEPTS? ARE YOU WILLING "TO LIVE AND TO LET LIVE" AND NOT JUST
TALK ABOUT IT???**

The Universal Service Corporation—the formation of which will be brought
to pass during our Research Department's 30-day program—will constitute
a sturdy beginning towards the building of a great and beautiful
world-wide estate and universal home for all mankind, with spacious
living quarters, delightful gardens, security, opportunity, leisure,
smiles, laughter and limitless happiness, to be equally shared and
enjoyed in a great and true brotherhood of man: **A brotherhood not in
name alone, nor as an insidious and subtly planned ensnaring
counterfeit—such as**

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

**is now being offered to the world under the names of "Communism" and
"Dictatorships"—but instead, the highest human concept of the divine
idea of "the brotherhood of man," a brotherhood built upon the solid
foundation of Christ Jesus’ "Golden Rule;"—"ABSOLUTE ECONOMIC EQUALITY"
IN "FACT" AS WELL AS IN "THEORY."**

**Again we remind you, that it has been most truly stated:—"There is a
principle which is a bar against all information, which is proof against
all argument, and which cannot fail to keep man in ever-lasting
ignorance; THIS PRINCIPLE IS 'CONTEMPT' PRIOR TO EXAMINATION."** <span
id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md)

Inasmuch as the only favor we ask of the world's un-bigoted and
enlightened men and women, is that they will assist us in forming our
audience—(through the circulation of this book)—in order that the
Research Department of The International Institute of Universal Research
and Administration may safely present its proofs,—and since our
requisite audience of 200,000,000 people can readily be formed within a
matter of but a few months—(if those of you who constitute the world's
"independent," "right-thinking inhabitants" will help us to accomplish
this result)—we feel justified in inviting your co-operation.

**In order that the oft-repeated statement—"it can't be done"—may be
refuted, we have prepared a chart to indicate just how readily—"it could
be done"—if each one who**

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

**hears of our movement, will spend just a few minutes to "pass the word
along," by placing as many copies of this book in circulation as his
time will permit.**

Recognizing the fact that many human beings are largely controlled by
habits of apathy and procrastination, we cannot logically expect more
than a moderate percentage of the result indicated on said chart, and
therefore those of you who have recognized the importance of this
movement, must work just so much more zealously if the formation of our
audience is to be quickly brought to pass. **HOWEVER, THE CHART
IRREFUTABLY PROVES THAT "IT CAN BE DONE."**

The following chart will indicate to you the possible far-reaching
effect of your influence provided that—when you have finished reading
"Mankind United"—you will then order "four" copies of this book
and—within 24 hours after their receipt—invite "four" of your
acquaintances to read them, and request that they mail an acknowledgment
of having done so—"together with their respective orders for 'four'
copies thereof"—in accordance with the instructions on the last page of
this volume. If they in turn invite "four" of their acquaintances—within
not to exceed "three" days thereafter—to similarly co-operate, and each
group does likewise, you will observe from the chart the possible
far-reaching effect of the influence of just—"one"—person constructively
directed in such a manner:

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

**IF ALL WHO READ THIS BOOK WOULD COOPERATE TO THE EXTENT OF PLACING
JUST "FOUR" COPIES THEREOF IN CIRCULATION, NO ONE WOULD NEED TO DO MORE
THAN THIS, AND YET A WORLD-WIDE ORGANIZATION SUFFICIENTLY POWERFUL TO
ACCOMPLISH THE RESULTS WE HAVE DESCRIBED HEREIN, COULD THEN BE FORMED
WITHIN LESS THAN FOUR (4) MONTHS' TIME.**

Estimating "one" week for mailing—or other losses of time—to enable each
one who reads "Mankind United" to order "four" copies thereof and place
them in circulation by lending them to "four" of his acquaintances, we
will now assume that "two" weeks have elapsed since you obtained your
first four copies and invited four of your acquaintances to do likewise.
You will have thereby made it possible for a total of twenty (20) people
to read "Mankind United" and to place their orders for copies
thereof—within a period of only "two" weeks—as the direct result of the
"four" books you generously took time to place in circulation. **FROM
THIS LOWLY BEGINNING, THE CHART ON THE NEXT PAGE WILL PARTLY ILLUSTRATE
THE POSSIBLE INFLUENCE OF YOUR GRACIOUS ACCEPTANCE OF OUR INVITATION
UPON THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF SUCH "UNSELFISHLY" MOTIVATED "UNITED
EFFORT."**

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

**\*\*THE CUMULATIVE POWER OF CO-OPERATION \*\***

**READ CHART FROM LEFT TO RIGHT**

|                          |            |            |                           |             |                       |               |
|--------------------------|------------|------------|---------------------------|-------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| The 1st week's total of  | 4          | register 4 | people each or a total of | 16          | people by the end of  | the 2nd week  |
| The 2nd week's total of  | 16         | register 4 | „                         | 64          | „                     | the 3rd week  |
| The 3rd week's total of  | 64         | register 4 | „                         | 256         | „                     | the 4th week  |
| The 4th week's total of  | 256        | register 4 | „                         | 1,024       | „                     | the 5th week  |
| The 5th week's total of  | 1,024      | register 4 | „                         | 4,096       | „                     | the 6th week  |
| The 6th week's total of  | 4,096      | register 4 | „                         | 16,384      | „                     | the 7th week  |
| The 7th week's total of  | 16,384     | register 4 | „                         | 65,536      | „                     | the 8th week  |
| The 8th week's total of  | 65,536     | register 4 | „                         | 262,144     | „                     | the 9th week  |
| The 9th week's total of  | 262,144    | register 4 | „                         | 1,048,576   | „                     | the 10th week |
| The 10th week's total of | 1,048,576  | register 4 | „                         | 4,194,304   | „                     | the 11th week |
| The 11th week's total of | 4,194,304  | register 4 | „                         | 16,777,216  | „                     | the 12th week |
| The 12th week's total of | 16,777,216 | register 4 | „                         | 67,108,864  | „                     | the 13th week |
| The 13th week's total of | 67,108,864 | register 4 | „                         | 268,435,456 | „                     | the 14th week |

**The 14th week's total of 268,435,456 added to the rest is a sum total
of 357,913,936 people who could—within less than four months’ time—be
invited to register their willingness to vote on the question of forming
a Universal Service Corporation capable of guaranteeing individual as
well as collective economic security for the entire human race.**

**The above figures indicate how readily such a group can be assembled
and without undue hardship or sacrifice on the part of anyone.**

**If you desire, together with the rest of the right-thinking people of
this earth, to receive and vote upon the Institute's program, PLEASE DO
NOT PROCRASTINATE. REGISTER YOUR INTEREST BY ORDERING FOUR COPIES OF
THIS BOOK TODAY, AND INVITE AT LEAST FOUR OF YOUR FRIENDS TO DO
LIKEWISE.**

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

*Lincoln most wisely reminded the people of America, of a great Biblical
Proverb (Matthew 12:25) when he stated:*—

**"A HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF  
CANNOT STAND"**

**MANKIND "UNITED"  
MEANS  
MANKIND FOREVER "UNLIMITED"**

**Help humanity to unite on the common ground of  
unselfed service to one another!!!**

**It can quickly be done after 200 million intelligently  
industrious people combine their votes  
and  
DEMAND WORLD-WIDE PEACE  
AND SECURITY**

**The following pages describe the vital importance of your  
immediate co-operation in obtaining these votes.**

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Although the Communists, Fascists and War Mongers of this age have
learned the secret of "undeviating singleness of purpose," the world
must still wait for those of us who call ourselves its "Christians and
Idealists," to learn the lesson of "courage" and "immovable
convictions;"—for at the least sign of danger, opposition, ridicule, or
criticism, we quickly withdraw our support from the activities which,
(deep down in our hearts) we may have become fully convinced deserve our
help. **IS IT POSSIBLE THAT THERE IS LESS LOVE OF FREEDOM THAN THERE IS
OF SLAVERY, OR THAT THE CHRISTIANS OF THIS AGE HAVE LESS "CHARACTER" AND
"COURAGE" THAN ATHEISTS OR HEATHENS?**

**COMMUNISTS AND FASCISTS WILL DISCIPLINE AND EXERCISE THEIR BODIES—AS
WELL AS THEIR MINDS—GIVE UP THEIR LEISURE HOURS, AND EVEN SACRIFICE
THEIR "WEDDING RINGS," THAT SWORDS MIGHT THEREBY BE MADE—(WITH WHICH TO
MUTILATE THEIR OWN SONS, HUSBANDS, FATHERS OR BROTHERS)—IN ORDER TO
ESTABLISH AND ADVANCE THEIR MOVEMENTS;—BUT DURING THIS GENERATION THE
WORLD HAS YET TO SEE THOSE OF US WHO CALL OURSELVES "CHRISTIANS," DO
MORE—AS A CLASS OR GROUP—THAN TO SMUGLY SIT BACK WITH FOLDED HANDS AND
EXPRESSIONS OF "SANCTIMONIOUS SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS," WHILE WE WAIT FOR
"GOD" TO DO OUR WORK FOR US, AND IN SOME MIRACULOUS MANNER "TO REWARD US
FOR THE WORK WE HAVE LEFT UNDONE," AND**

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **FOR OUR
SELFISHNESS, INDOLENCE, AND MENTAL AND PHYSICAL LAZINESS. GOD HAS NO
REWARD FOR "APATHY"!!**

**THE OLD SAYING THAT "GOD HELPS THOSE WHO HELP THEMSELVES" HAS NEVER
BEEN MORE TRUE THAN IT IS TODAY.**

If women do not wish to again become just the "property" of men—"as they
were for so many thousands of years"—and if free men do not desire the
shackles of "physical slavery," as well as their present "mental
slavery," they will soon have to not merely "pray" to become
better,—(and for God to lay bare a heart which one prophetic woman once
wrote—"men already know quite too much about"),—but they must actually
"become better," and not just talk about it!!! While we are "praying"
for Liberty, and for lives of greater security and a fuller abundance of
the good things of this world, we had also better take the time to
"work" for that which we claim to want, and to "protect" that which we
already possess.

**IT HAS LIKEWISE BEEN MOST TRULY STATED, THAT "GOD DOES NOT REWARD MEN
FOR EITHER THE WORK THEY LEAVE UNDONE OR FOR THAT WHICH IS POORLY DONE."
WE SHUDDER IN HORRIFIED DISGUST AT THE COMMUNISTS' ACCUSATIONS AGAINST
THE RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS OF OUR DAY, WHEN THEY BLUNTLY STATE THAT
"ALL" CHRISTIAN MEN AND WOMEN ARE NOTHING MORE THAN
"WHITE-LIVERED-SPINELESS MORONS," WITH NEITHER THE "INTELLIGENCE" NOR
THE**

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **"COURAGE" TO
RECOGNIZE AND "UNITEDLY OPPOSE" THE VAST INCREASE IN STRENGTH AND POWER
OF THOSE WHO DESIRE TO DESTROY THE EDUCATIONAL AND RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTIONS AND FREE GOVERNMENTS OF THIS EARTH. YET, WHAT HAVE WE
DONE—"AS A CLASS"—TO DISPROVE THESE ACCUSATIONS???**

**IT SHOULD CERTAINLY BE NO LONGER NECESSARY TO PROVE TO ANY
WELL-INFORMED MAN OR WOMAN, THAT MANKIND ARE ON THE VERGE OF LOSING NOT
ONLY THEIR "RELIGIOUS FREEDOM," BUT EVEN THE PRIVILEGES OF "FREE
SPEECH," AND TO BE GIVEN IN EXCHANGE EVEN LESS THAN THE NEGRO SLAVES OF
OLD; FOR WITH THE "MONEY CHANGERS" COMMUNIST AND FASCIST POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS INCREASING THEIR MEMBERSHIPS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD AT THE
RATE OF "TENS OF THOUSANDS OF NEW RECRUITS PER DAY," SUCH A CONDITION
SHOULD BE "SELF-EVIDENT" TO EVEN THE MOST "OSTRICH-LIKE" HUMAN BEING;—NO
MATTER HOW DEEPLY HE MAY HIDE HIS HEAD IN THE SHIFTING SANDS OF A
BIGOTED OR APATHETIC "FALSE SENSE" OF SECURITY.**

**IS IT POSSIBLE THAT CHRISTIAN MEN AND WOMEN DO NOT REALIZE THAT WITH
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNISM AND FASCISM THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, THERE
WILL NO LONGER BE HOMES—SUCH AS WE NOW ENJOY—**

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **NOR CHURCHES,
SUNDAY SCHOOLS OR PUBLIC SCHOOLS; NOR IN FACT, EVEN THE PRIVILEGE OF
BEING TAUGHT TO "READ AND WRITE" AVAILABLE TO ANY BUT THE RULING
ARISTOCRACY—AND THAT THIS RULING CLASS WILL BE COMPOSED OF THE MOST
SELFISH AND BRUTAL MEN ON OUR EARTH?? FOR THEY ARE THE ONES WHO WILL
EMERGE VICTORIOUS IN THE STRUGGLE TO DESTROY THE FREE INSTITUTIONS AND
LIBERTIES OF THIS CIVILIZATION, UNLESS THE INTELLIGENT, CLEAR-THINKING
MEN AND WOMEN, "WHO CALL THEMSELVES CHRISTIANS," SHOW AS MUCH AMBITIOUS
WILLINGNESS TO "FIGHT"—NOT WITH "SWORDS," BUT WITH "USEFUL AND
CONSTRUCTIVE IDEAS"—FOR THEIR RIGHTS, AS ARE THOSE WHO DESIRE TO STEAL
THE GOD-GIVEN BIRTHRIGHT OF FREEDOM FROM HUMANITY.**

**Where is our much-preached-of love of the Golden Rule? Is there
actually any energy, vitality or even "sincerity" in back of our
pretended love of its precepts? Do we deserve the right to have even
been taught this soul-inspiring definition of a logical and intelligent
type of human relationship when, generation after generation, those of
us "who call ourselves Christians," sit back—"like inarticulate beasts
of the field"—and let hundreds of millions of our brother and sister
members of the human family suffer from the nameless fears and
superstitions which accompany their complete—yet utterly
needless—ignorance and illiteracy?**

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

Where is the proof that we deserve either freedom or security, while no
united voice is raised in protest of the fact that five hundred million
(500,000,000) men, women, and little children are always hungry—(one out
of every four of the earth's inhabitants)—and hundreds of millions are
suffering from wholly inexcusable exposure;—homeless, unclothed, unfed,
unwanted—"children of God?"—Children who are just as "precious" to Him
as any one of the smug well-fed humans who sanctimoniously raises his
voice in prayer and thanksgiving for life's blessings;—blessings which
God has no intention of letting men continue to enjoy, unless they are
shared with all alike, as is even the sunshine, the air, and the songs
of birds.

**WE FULLY DESERVE THE TITLE OF "SELF-RIGHTEOUS HYPOCRITES," WHEN WE
THANK GOD FOR FOOD AND CLOTHES, WHILE WE PLOW UP MILLIONS OF ACRES OF
WHEAT AND COTTON CROPS, DESTROY TENS OF MILLIONS OF CATTLE—AND COMMIT
SUCH CRIMES—KNOWING FULL WELL THAT THIRTY MILLION (30,000,000) PEOPLE
WILL DIE OF STARVATION THIS YEAR. MILLIONS OF HUMAN BEINGS MURDERED EACH
MONTH, AFTER SUFFERING MONTHS OR YEARS OF THE SLOW EXCRUCIATING TORTURE
OF HUNGER, AND YET THOSE OF US "WHO CALL OURSELVES CHRISTIANS," CANNOT
EVEN CLAIM AS AN EXCUSE, THAT WE HAVEN'T, THE TIME TO HARVEST AND
DISTRIBUTE THESE NECESSITIES OF LIFE TO OUR**

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **NEEDY BROTHERS,
FOR RIGHT WHILE THEY ARE DYING OF STARVATION, TENS OF MILLIONS OF OUR
OWN PEOPLE ARE IDLE AND ENTIRELY UNEMPLOYED. SINCE WE FEED THE
UNEMPLOYED WITH TAXES WE PAY TO THE GOVERNMENT FOR THE DOLES THEY
RECEIVE, SURELY WE COULD HIRE THEM WITH THIS TAX MONEY TO
HARVEST—INSTEAD OF TO DESTROY—THE FOOD FOR WHICH COUNTLESS MILLIONS OF
STARVING HUMAN BEINGS ARE DAILY APPEALING TO US!!!**

**No, we do not deserve either our liberties or the enjoyment of
independence or security, when we are neither willing to fight for such
blessings—(through the application of constructive ideas)—nor to share
them with others. We no longer have the right to thank God for these
blessings, while we are too cowardly or too lazy to protect or to share
them; nor any justification for expecting either "progress or happiness"
while such qualities of selfishness control our thoughts and our lives:
For "God Is Love" and we forfeit the right to commune with Him, when we
no longer express this quality. Instead of raising our eyes to Heaven,
"like the self-righteous Pharisee," we should bow our heads in shame and
grief as did the "Penitent Publican," in the Biblical narrative.**

**Is it so strange, or any very great wonder, that the "War Mongers" and
"Money Changers" of the world have been able to discredit its Christian
or so-called enlightened governments; its freedom of speech and freedom
of worship;—the home, the benefits of lessons learned at our**

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

**mothers' knees, and the Sunday schools and Churches which are supposed
to teach brotherly love?**

**Is it any wonder that hundreds of millions of starved, bitter,
hate-filled, neglected and unwanted human beings will reach for the bait
of "counterfeit brotherhood" offered to them under its many names called
"Communism," "Fascism," "Socialism," "Naziism," "White Shirts," "Blue
Shirts," "Pink Shirts," "Green Shirts," "Black Shirts," "Gold Shirts,"
"Silver Shirts," and shirts with all colors of the rainbow;—or that such
people are easily deceived into believing that they will find a
"mountain of gold" either just around the corner—or at the end of the
shirt?**

**IS IT ANY WONDER THAT THEY GRASP AT SUCH STRAWS OF HOPE—"AS THE 'TALE'
OF A SHIRT"—WHEN THE CHRISTIAN PEOPLE OF THE WORLD TO WHOM THEY HAVE
THOUGHT THEY COULD APPEAL, HAVE TURNED BACKS OF SCORN AND CONTEMPT UPON
THEM, AND HAVE DESTROYED THE FOOD WHICH THEY SO SORELY NEEDED?**

**IS IT ANY WONDER THAT MILLIONS UPON MILLIONS OF THOSE WHO ONCE LOVED
THE TEACHINGS OF THE GENTLE MASTER, AND WHO LOOKED TO THE WORLD'S
CHRISTIAN PEOPLE AS CIVILIZATION'S "ONE HOPE" OF SALVATION, HAVE LOST
CONFIDENCE IN THOSE WHO CALL THEMSELVES CHRISTIANS?—THOSE W H O STAND
IDLY BY "PRATTLING" ABOUT "A GOLDEN RULE," WHILE WITH ONE HAND THEY
DESTROY THE WORLD'S RESOURCES OF FOOD, AND**

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

**WITH THE OTHER HAND PUSH AWAY THOSE WHO WOULD NEED LITTLE MORE THAN A
CRUST OF BREAD OR A HANDFUL OF MEAL TO STILL THE TORTURES OF THEIR
STARVED PAIN-RACKED LITTLE BODIES!!!**

**No, it is not enough just to pray, to preach, or to sing, for unless
the Christians of the world are willing to unite into one great
"International Body," that they may thereby acquire the influence with
which to take "concerted action" for the immediate relief of human
suffering,—(instead of—as is so often the case—expending their energies
and satisfying their emotions with psalm singing,)—they will soon no
longer be given even the opportunity to sing. Unless they have
sufficient vision to "quickly" awaken and make use of their privileges
of "free speech," and the right to assemble and unite their efforts in
behalf of worthy activities, their voices will soon be raised with those
of the rest of the world's starved, hopeless human beings, while they
lie crushed under the heels of the world's "Money Changers."**

**THIS "EXPLANATORY" BULLETIN—FROM THE RESEARCH DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNIVERSAL RESEARCH AND
ADMINISTRATION—PRESENTS AN APPEAL IN BEHALF OF INTELLIGENTLY
CO-ORDINATED "WORLD-WIDE" ACTION.**

**CHRISTIANS OF THE WORLD!!! HAVE YOU THE "WISDOM"—THE "VISION"—AND THE
"COURAGE" TO ACT UPON OUR INVITATION???**

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

**In answer to those who may believe that it would take years to form a
world-wide organization two hundred million (200,000,000) strong, we beg
to call their attention to the fact that with present day methods of
intercommunication—rapid
transportation—telephones—radios—automobiles—airmail, etc., etc., such
an organization could readily be formed within less than "four months’"
time,—and yet not even "one" of the 200,000,000 people we seek, would be
required to place more than four (4) copies of this book in circulation,
nor spend more than a few hours of time in order to accomplish such a
result,—provided that "each" of those who read "Mankind United," will
make it his or her business to immediately obtain not less than "four
(4) copies" thereof, and place them in circulation. (See chart on page
[286](#page_286).md).**

**In fact, when only eight million (8,000,000) of the world's
right-thinking inhabitants have each formed a Branch of our
International 4-4-8-3-4 Club, (previously described,) it will require
less than "one month" thereafter, to complete our audience of
200,000,000 people. Within thirty days from the date that this result
has been brought to pass, The Universal Service Corporation can be
formed, and within less than one month from that date, the world's
unemployed men and women will be going back to work at the rate of over
two million (2,000,000) people per week!!!**

**IF YOU BELIEVE THAT THE CHRISTIAN INHABITANTS OF OUR EARTH HAVE AS
MUCH INTELLIGENCE AS THE COMMUNISTS AND FASCISTS,—(OR AS MUCH
INTELLIGENCE AS THEIR ATHEISTIC FINANCIAL BACKERS—"THE MONEY**

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **CHANGERS" AND
"WAR LORDS")—WE SUGGEST THAT YOU HELP US TO PROVE IT; FOR AFTER "SIXTY
YEARS" OF CEASELESS RESEARCH, WE HAVE YET TO FIND EVEN "ONE" MAJOR
RELIGIOUS GROUP—(WHICH CLAIMS TO BE FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF "OUR
MASTER")—WHICH EITHER "IS WILLING," OR "HAS THE COURAGE," TO PUT CHRIST
JESUS' "GOLDEN RULE" OF "ECONOMIC EQUALITY" TO A WORLDWIDE TEST IN THE
PRACTICAL EVERY-DAY BUSINESS AFFAIRS OF HUMAN LIFE. NO, NOT EVEN "ONE"
MAJOR RELIGIOUS GROUP WILLING TO SPONSOR THE PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
OF OUR EARTH'S RESOURCES FROM THE STANDPOINT THAT THEIR INEXHAUSTIBLE
ABUNDANCE BELONGS AS MUCH TO ONE AS TO ANOTHER! HAVE YOU THE COURAGE AND
THE UNSELFISHNESS TO RAISE "YOUR VOICE" IN BEHALF OF THE "PRACTICAL
APPLICATION" OF CHRIST JESUS' PRECEPTS TO WORLD ECONOMICS—"EQUAL
OPPORTUNITIES"—"EQUAL FREEDOM"—AND "EQUAL INCOME" FOR ALL???**

**There is no other way on this earth of preventing the spread of the
atheistic teachings of Fascism and Communism! For they are winning new
recruits at the rate of tens of thousands "per day," and it will not be
long before they will be thoroughly capable of overpowering the
democracies of the world by "brute force" and "weight of numbers alone;"
nor are there any other means of preventing the "Money Changers’"
planned civilization-destroying war than by the immediate "United
Action" of those of us who**

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

**call ourselves "Christians." We must forget our personal antagonisms
and theological differences of opinion at least long enough to
practically apply Christ Jesus’ "Golden Rule" to the every-day task of
producing and distributing the necessities and luxuries of human life,
as well as man's spiritual requirements. OUR "DIVINELY WISE" MASTER MOST
CERTAINLY TAUGHT A "GOLDEN RULE" WHICH IS NOT MERELY TO BE "PREACHED
ABOUT"—BUT ONE WHICH IS ALSO TO BE "THOUGHT ABOUT," AND TO BE
"LIVED"!!!**

**UNLESS WE ARE WILLING TO ESTABLISH AN ECONOMIC SYSTEM WHICH WILL BE
CAPABLE OF "IMMEDIATELY" PROVIDING A UNIVERSAL STANDARD OF ECONOMIC
EQUALITY FAR SURPASSING EVEN "THE PROMISES" OF THE COMMUNISTS, (WHOSE
POISONOUS BAIT IS NOW BEING SWALLOWED "HOOK, LINE AND SINKER," BY
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF OUR WORLD'S "HOMELESS AND HOPELESS"
INHABITANTS), WE NO LONGER DESERVE THE RIGHTS OF EITHER "LIFE, LIBERTY,
OR THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS." AND THEY SHOULD—"AS THEY INEVITABLY
WILL"—BE TAKEN FROM US, UNLESS WE HAVE SUFFICIENT "LOVE" OF THESE RIGHTS
TO MEASURE UP TO THE PRIVILEGES OF PROGRESS AND "UNIVERSAL WELFARE"
WHICH THEY PROVIDE, AND UNLESS WE ARE WILLING TO START DOING UNTO OTHERS
"AS WE WOULD THAT THEY SHOULD DO UNTO US:"—AND NOT JUST "PREACH" AND
"SING PSALMS" ABOUT IT!!!**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[283:\*](mu22.htm#fr_8.md) Herbert Spencer

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. A Call to Arms and a Brief Summary of the Institute's
Program—What You Can Do to Help](mu23.md)
