[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20209.md) 
[Next](rp20211.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### THE STELE OF THOTHMES IV (OF THE EIGHTEENTH DYNASTY)

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by D. Mallet</span>

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> stele had been buried for ages,
under the sand which again and again has covered the body of the Sphinx,
when it was disinterred in 1818 by an Englishman, Captain Caviglia.
Salt, who had taken part in his friend's excavations, gave a detailed
account of the disinterment, and his narrative, preserved in MS. at the
British Museum, has been published by Col. Vyse in the appendix to his
work on the *Operations carried on at the Pyramids of Gizeh* (8vo,
London 1842, vol. iii. pp. 107 *sqq*.) After uncovering all the hinder
portion of the Sphinx, Caviglia found at the end of the long passage
which lay between the paws, a small temple, ten feet in length by five
in breadth, immediately below the chin of the figure. The extremity of
it was occupied by a block of granite, fourteen feet in height, covered
with sculptures and hieroglyphics recording the name of Thothmes IV;
this block is the stele of which we are about to give a translation.

It was set up against the breast of the Sphinx,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

without, however, actually touching it. The two walls, built along the
paws at right angles to that at the end of the shrine, had been adorned
with two other stelæ of smaller size and of limestone; one of them,
containing the name of Ramses II, was still *in situ;* the other had
fallen into the interior of the chapel among other masses of rubbish, in
which fragments of the beard once attached to the chin of the figure, as
in the case of all Egyptian figures of gods or kings, could still be
recognised. A door opened between the two walls of lesser elevation
which enclosed the shrine on the eastern side. Before the temple, a sort
of paved court extended about three-fourths of the length of the paws,
and was also enclosed by two walls separated from one another by a
roofless opening before which was erected a square altar of granite.

Caviglia succeeded in uncovering the Sphinx as far as the base, over an
area of more than one hundred feet. Unfortunately the sand of the desert
soon recommenced its work, and later Lepsius, and subsequently the Duc
de Luynes, had again to undertake the task of removing it at great
expense in order to reach the curious stele of Thothmes IV. In 1880
Mariette undertook new and important excavations on the same spot. Like
Caviglia, he brought to light the huge staircase of two stages which
descends from the plateau of the desert and led the curious and the
devout to the extremity of the shrine, where the colossal image of the
god

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Harmakhis, as
embodied in the Sphinx, rises from the ground; and he recognised the
remains of buildings, the existence of which had already been noticed by
his predecessor. Prof. Maspero, Mariette's successor as Director-General
of excavations in Egypt, was anxious to push the work of exploration yet
further. Ancient authors, Pliny among others, had stated that the body
of the Sphinx contained a royal tomb, and Arab writers had recounted all
sorts of marvellous legends on the subject. Certain Egyptian monuments,
moreover, represented the Sphinx as lying on a lofty pedestal and
adorned with those prismatic grooves of which the architects of the Old
Empire were so fond. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110.md) This pedestal
might enclose the tomb of which Pliny speaks, and might have been buried
in the sand as far back as the age of Khafri (Khephren) of the fourth
dynasty. To solve the problem it was necessary to lower the level of the
soil as far as the rocky platform on which the monument stands, and thus
to restore it to the condition in which it was towards the commencement
of the second century of our era. Then soundings would have to be taken
in order to see whether the supposed tomb existed or not. A sum of
15,000 francs, collected by subscription by the *Journal des Débats*,
allowed the work of clearing away the sand to begin in the winter of
1885–6 and to be followed

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

up with great activity. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md) After the
departure of Prof. Maspero from Egypt, however, the work was
interrupted, and the question accordingly has not yet been settled.

The stele of Thothmes IV is of peculiar importance for the history of
the Sphinx. It furnishes, in fact, two landmarks for periods very
distant from one another. Towards the middle of it, mention is made of
Khafri, the third king of the fourth dynasty, in terms which the state
of the stone unfortunately does not permit us to determine quite
exactly. They have been held by some to imply that the monument was
constructed by that king. It is probable, however, that it is much more
ancient, mounting back, perhaps, to the ages preceding Menes. To Khafri
would have fallen the task of clearing away for the first time during
the historical period the masses of sand which had already almost
covered it. Towards the fifteenth century B.C. the work had to be done
again, and Thothmes IV, in consequence of a dream, undertook in his turn
to disclose the image of the god to the veneration of its worshippers.
The work was doubtless difficult, and once achieved he determined to
preserve the memory of it. He accordingly caused a stele to be made, and
inscribed upon it an account of his vision and of the labours which had
been the result of it. However, he did not go to any great expense in

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

searching for stone; instead of transporting a new block from Syene "he
took one of the architraves of the neighbouring temple, now called the
temple of the Sphinx, and engraved upon it his inscription, without
troubling himself even to smooth the reverse." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md)

As for the text, it had been copied by Salt in 1818, and his copy is at
present in the British Museum among the papers which have been alluded
to above. It was published by Young in his *Hieroglyphics* (London,
1820, pl. 80), and afterwards reproduced more imperfectly in Vyse's work
on the *Pyramids of Gizeh* (London, 1842, iii. Appendix, pl. 6). Lepsius
gave a new and more correct copy of it in his *Denkmäler* (iii. pl. 68),
but the copy was less complete in certain parts, the monument having
suffered during the interval of time which had separated his journey
from that of Caviglia and Salt.

Birch explained some fragments of the inscription in the work of Vyse in
1842. The historical portion has been translated into German by Brugsch
(*Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache*, 1876, pp. 89 *sqq*.), and this
translation has been reproduced in the German and English editions of
his *History of Egypt*.

Birch gave the first complete translation of it in the twelfth volume of
the former series of *Records of the Past*. It has been further
explained word by

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

word and commented on by M. Pierret in his lectures at the École du
Louvre 1885–6. Prof. Maspero, finally, has analysed the whole and
translated several lines of the text in his *Rapport à l’Institut
égyptien sur les fouilles de 1885–6* (in the *Bulletin de l’Institut
égyptien*, 1886).

At the head of the stele the solar disk, with its two uræi serpents and
two great wings, commands the two scenes which occupy the first
compartment. On the left the king, in a wig crowned by the uræus,
presents in his two uplifted hands a large-bodied vase to the divine
sphinx with human head, who reclines on a lofty pedestal. Above is an
inscription which occupies all the length of the scene: "The King of the
South and of the North, Men-khopiru-Ri Thothmos Khakeu who grants life
stable and pure." And the god replies: "I have given life stable and
pure to the master of the two lands Thothmos Khakeu." In front of the
king is a short legend, much injured, which contained the words: "Homage
of the vase Nemast."

On the right the king, in a helmet, with the left hand presents the
sphinx, reclined on a pedestal similar to the other but turned in the
opposite direction, with incense which smokes in a vase, and with the
right hand offers a libation which he pours over an altar of very
elongated form. Above the head of the king is the same formula as
before: "The King of the South and of the North, Men-khopiru-Ri Thothmos
Khakeu." And Harmakhis

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

replies: "I have given the sword to the master of the two lands,
Thothmos Khakeu."

Between the two scenes, below the disk, is a vertical inscription, which
occupies all the upper part of the first compartment and passes between
the two figures of the sphinxes, which lie back to back. It runs thus:
"1 have caused Men-khopiru-Ri to rise on the throne of <span
class="smallcaps">Seb</span>, Thothmos Khakeu in the function of <span
class="smallcaps">Tum</span>."

The pedestals on which the two sphinxes recline consist of three
horizontal platforms, and of a wall which is ornamented alternately with
incised squares and rectangles, interrupted towards the extremities by
four designs, symmetrically arranged and somewhat resembling the leaves
of trefoil. It is this decoration which has already been noted above,
and which is found on monuments of the Old Empire.

An irregular fracture, which commences towards the twelfth line of the
inscription, runs from right to left, leaving intact only a part of the
two following lines. The measurements taken by Lepsius (*Denkmäler*,
iii. pl. 68) allow us to determine the extent of the text which has been
destroyed. The monument was originally 7 ft. 2 in. in length and 11 ft.
10 in. in height. Now the hieroglyphics have been destroyed to a height
of nearly 4 ft. on the left side, of 4 ft. 4 in. in the middle, and of 5
ft. 4 in. on the right side. Taking no notice of the double tableau,
which forms the upper compartment

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of the stele, we see that nearly one half of the inscription has become
illegible.

The conclusion must have contained the answer of Thothmos to the words
of the god, and then a recital of the works which were executed in
accordance with his commands. It ended, doubtless, with a dithyramb in
honour of the monarch, Harmakhis assuring to him a glorious reign as a
reward for his piety. As a matter of fact, Thothmos had hardly ascended
the throne before he commenced the work and erected the stele. Then the
sand of the desert recommenced to rise little by little, and probably as
far back as the fourteenth or thirteenth century B.C. the Sphinx was
already enshrouded by it again. In the Greek and Roman epochs it was
once more removed several times. The staircase was constructed which
gave access to the temple, and numerous tourists were able to engrave
their names on the wall of the temple and the paws of the Sphinx. In
spite of much trouble and expense, the savans of the nineteenth century
have not yet succeeded in completely disinterring this unique monument
of primeval Egypt or in discovering its hidden secret.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[47:1](rp20210.htm#fr_110.md) See the picture
which precedes that of our stele in Lepsius, *Denkmäler*, iii. pl. 68.
Cf. also ii. pll. 16, 17, where a similar decoration is to be seen in
the tomb of Nofri-t-keu, daughter of Snefru of the third dynasty.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[48:1](rp20210.htm#fr_111.md) Maspero, *Rapport
sur les fouilles de* 1885–6 in the *Bulletin de l’Institut égyptien*,
1886.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[49:1](rp20210.htm#fr_112.md) Maspero, *Rapport*,
p. 47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20211.md)
