[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20200) 
[Next](rp20202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

THE present volume of *Records of the Past* possesses a melancholy
interest. It contains the last literary monument of one of the most
valued of my fellow-workers, M. Arthur Amiaud, who died suddenly just
after completing the final pages of his translations of the inscriptions
of Tel-loh. No other Assyrian scholar had so thoroughly mastered the
secrets of the non-Semitic language of ancient Chaldæa, and the
knowledge which has perished with him is for science an irreparable
loss. The hand that traced the interpretation of the mysterious records
of primeval Shinar was not permitted to revise it in proof.

It will be seen that I have been able to redeem my promise of editing
the latest and most authoritative translations of the early Egyptian
texts, and I am fortunate in having secured the help of Professor
Maspero, the most eminent of living Egyptologists, for the work. I hope
next year to be able to redeem my other promise of bringing out two
volumes during the same year.

I must take this opportunity of correcting a misreading which I have
allowed to appear in two

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

passages of the last volume of the *Records*. The name of the Hittite
prince mentioned by the Vannic king Menuas is not Sada-hadas, as it is
given on pages 97 and 165, but Sada-halis, as it is correctly
transcribed in the transliteration and translation of the inscription
itself (pp. 165, 166).

In the translations doubtful words and expressions are followed by a
note of interrogation, the preceding word being put into italics where
necessary. The names of individuals are distinguished from those of
deities or localities by being printed in Roman type, whereas the names
of deities and localities are in capitals.

A. H. SAYCE.

<span class="smallcaps">Queen's College, Oxford</span>,  
          *July* 1889.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](rp20202)
