[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20225) 
[Next](rp20227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### THE ASSYRIAN CHRONOLOGICAL CANON

<span class="smallcaps">By the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Chronological</span> records were kept in
Assyria by the help of certain officers called *limmi*, who corresponded
to the eponymous archons of Greek history. At the beginning of each year
a *limmu* or eponym was appointed, who gave his name to the year. In the
age of the first Assyrian Empire it was customary for the king to
commence his reign by taking the office; later, the year in which the
king became eponym was regulated by no fixed rule. Shalmaneser II held
the office twice during his long reign of thirty-five years—once in the
first year of his reign and again in his thirtieth year. Otherwise there
is no example of the same king being twice eponym. The system was of
ancient origin. An inscription of Rimmon-nirari I, the great-grandson of
Assur-yuballidh and the father of Shalmaneser I, is dated in the eponymy
of a certain Shalmaneser who may have been his son. The date of
Shalmaneser I is approximately determined by an inscription engraved on
a seal belonging to his son

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tiglath-Uras I.
The seal had been carried away to Babylon and there recovered by
Sennacherib "600 years" afterwards, so that its deportation must have
taken place about B.C. 1290. Whether it was carried away during the
reign of Tiglath-Uras or after his death, we cannot say; in any case
Shalmaneser—who, it may be added, was the builder of the city of
Calah—would have lived before the close of the fourteenth century B.C.

Lists of eponyms drawn up in their chronological order were carefully
kept, as well as other lists in which notice was taken of the principal
events occurring during their term of office. Fragmentary copies of
these lists have been preserved, thus enabling us to restore the
chronology of the Assyrian Empire during the most important period of
its existence. The copies were first brought to light by Sir Henry
Rawlinson, who gave them the name of the Assyrian Canon, and pointed out
their character and bearing on the vexed questions of chronology in the
pages of the *Athenæum* (1862). Four of the copies have been published
in the *Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia*, vol. ii. pll. 52, 68,
69; and vol. iii. pl. 1. None of them is complete, but a comparison of
the several texts supplies their individual deficiencies, and allows us
to compile a continuous Assyrian chronology from B.C. 893, or 909 (if we
accept Mr. George Smith's restoration), to B.C. 659. Two fixed dates are
given within this period by the capture of Samaria B.C. 722, which took
place in the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

first year of the reign of Sargon, and the solar eclipse of the 15th of
June B.C. 763, which occurred in the ninth year of the reign of
Assur-dân III. A line drawn across the tablet marks the commencement of
a new reign.

An exhaustive account of the Canon has been given by George Smith in his
*Assyrian Eponym Canon* (Bagster and Sons), and a translation of it,
with dates and notes attached, will be found in Prof. Schrader's
*Cuneiform Inscriptions and the Old Testament*, vol. ii. (English
translation 1888); and *Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*, vol. i. (1889).
Supplementary copies of the Canon from fragments in the British Museum
have also been published by Prof. Fr. Delitzsch in the second edition of
his *Assyrische Lesestücke*, and by Dr. Bezold in the *Proceedings of
the Society of Biblical Archæology* for May 1889.

Two different versions of the Canon were current in Assyria, one
containing merely a list of the eponyms in their chronological order,
while the other added their titles and the principal events which
distinguished their term of office. We may call the latter the Assyrian
Chronicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20227)
