[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20205) 
[Next](rp20207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### THE ADVENTURES OF SINUHIT (OF THE TWELFTH DYNASTY)

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by Prof. Maspero</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Berlin Papyrus No. 1, purchased by
Lepsius in Egypt and published by him in the *Denkmäler aus Aegypten and
Ethiopien*, vi. pl. 104–107, is injured at the beginning. In its present
condition it contains 312 lines of text. The first 179 lines are
vertical; then come 96 lines (180–276) which are horizontal; but from
line 277 to the end the scribe has returned to the system of vertical
columns. The first 40 lines that are preserved have suffered more or
less from wear and tear; five of them (I, 13–15, 38) present lacunæ
which I could never have succeeded in filling up, had I not had the good
fortune to discover at Thebes a new manuscript. The end is intact and
concludes with the well-known formula: "It is completed from its
commencement to its termination as has been found in the book." The
writing, very clear and bold in the vertical portions, becomes clumsy
and confused in the horizontal portions; it is full of ligatures and
rapidly-written forms which at times render its decipherment difficult.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

The Berlin Papyrus has been analysed and translated by Chabas: *Le
Papyrus de Berlin, récits d’il y a quatre mille ans* and *Panthéon
littéraire*, vol. i., in part only; by Goodwin in full in *Frazer's
Magazine*, 1865, pp. 185–202, and in a separate form under the title of
*The Story of Saneha* (Williams and Norgate, 1865); this translation was
corrected by the author in Lepsius’s *Zeitschrift* (1872, pp. 10–24),
and reproduced in the former series of *Records of the Past*, vol. vi.
pp. 131–150. Maspero transcribed it in hieroglyphics and translated it
in French: *Le Papyrus de Berlin* *No*. 1 (1874–76), in the *Mélanges
d’Archéologie égyptienne et assyrienne*, vol. iii. pp. 68–82, 140
*sqq*.; partly reproduced with corrections in the *Histoire ancienne des
peuples de l’Orient*, 4th edit., pp. 97, 98, 101–104, and in full in the
*Contes Egyptiens*, 2d edit., pp. 87–130. Dr. H. D. Haigh has examined
the historical and geographical data contained in the story in an
article in Lepsius’s *Zeitschrift*, 1875, pp. 78–107, and Prof. Erman
has inserted a short analysis of it in his book: *Aegypten und
aegyptisches Leben im Altertum* (1885–88), pp. 494–497.

We possess on an ostrakon in the British Museum (No. 5629) the duplicate
of a part of the text. This ostrakon, first mentioned by Dr. Birch in
his memoir on the Abbott Papyrus, has been published by him, in
facsimile, in his *Inscriptions in the Hieratic and Demotic character,
front the Collections of the British Museum* (1868), pl. xxiii. p. 8.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The identity of the text on the ostrakon with that of the last lines of
the Berlin Papyrus was pointed out for the first time by Goodwin: *On a
Hieratic Inscription upon a stone in the British Museum* (Lepsius’s
*Zeitschrift*, 1872, pp. 20–24), where the transcription and translation
of the text are given at full length. The script belongs to the age of
the twentieth dynasty, and this fact is important, as it proves that the
story, composed at the latest in the epoch of the sixteenth or
seventeenth dynasty, remained a classic for long afterwards.

As the version given on the ostrakon differs in certain details from
that of the Papyrus, it will be useful to insert here a complete
translation of it:—

"\[I was allowed\] to construct \[a pyramid\] of stone, in the circle of
the pyramids.

The stone-cutters cut the tomb, and divided its walls; the architects
designed them; the superintendent of the sculptors sculptured them; the
superintendent of the works in the necropolis traversed the country
(for) all the furniture with which I furnished this tomb. I allotted
peasants to it, and there were lakes, fields (and) gardens in its
domain, as in the case of Friends of the highest rank. \[There was\] a
statue of gold with a silver-gilt hilt, which the sons of the king made
for me, rejoicing to do so for me; for I was in favour with the king
until the day arrived when one attains the other bank.

It is ended prosperously in peace."

The portion wanting at the commencement has been found at Thebes on an
ostrakon, picked up on the 6th of February 1886 in the tomb of Sonnozmu.
It is a fragment of limestone, broken in half, more

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

than three feet in length and about seven inches in breadth, covered
with hieratic characters of somewhat large size, punctuated with red ink
and divided into paragraphs like most of the MSS. of the epoch of the
Ramessids. On the back, two lines, unfortunately almost illegible, give
us the name of a scribe which I cannot decipher, probably the name of
the person who wrote the text. The fracture is not recent. The limestone
has been broken at the very moment of its introduction into the tomb,
and the act has not been accomplished without injury to the inscription;
some splinters of the stone have disappeared and have carried portions
of words away with them. Most of these lacunæ can be filled up without
difficulty. The text is very incorrect, like that of all works intended
for the use of the dead. Many of the variants presented by it result
from faulty readings of the original manuscript; the scribe could not
read with accuracy the archaic style of writing. The ostrakon has been
published by Maspero: *Les premières lignes des Mémoires de Sinouhit,
restituées d’après l’Ostracon 27,419 du musée de Boulaq*, with two
plates in facsimile in the *Mémoires de l’Institut égyptien*, ii. pp.
I-23.

The discovery of this new document allows us to reconstruct the route
followed by Sinuhit in his flight. He left the camp on the Libyan
frontier in the land of the Timihu, thus starting from the west and
turning his back on the "Canton of the Sycomore." According to Brugsch
(*Dictionnaire*

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

*géographique*, p. 53), Nuhit, "the Canton of the Sycomore," is the
Panaho of the Copts, the Athribis of the Greeks, the modern Benha
el-Assal. This identification, however, falls of itself, since Nuhit is
mentioned at the very beginning of the journey, and consequently must
have been on the western bank of the Nile, whereas Benha is on the
eastern. I had at first considered the "Canton of the Sycomore" as a
mode of designating the whole of Egypt. But we have long been acquainted
with a Nuhit or Pa-nib-nuhit, which appears to have been in the first
instance only a quarter of Memphis, and subsequently to have denoted the
whole of Memphis (Brugsch, *Diction. Géog.*, pp. 330–332). The "Canton
of the Sycomore" is probably this "Quarter of the Sycomore," and
Sinuhit, the son of the Sycomore, the Memphite, in declaring that he
turns his back on Nuhit, simply means to tell us that he departs from
Memphis, his native place, to go to Shi-Snofrui. The "Wady of Snofrui"
is not otherwise known. Brugsch, however, identifies it with the
Myekphorite nome of Herodotos (iii. 166), thanks to a pronunciation
Mui-hik-Snofru, borne according to him by the characters which compose
the name (*Diction. Géog.*, p. 54). The position occupied by this town
in the itinerary leads me to look for it between the Libyan desert,
Memphis, and the city of Khri-Ahu or the Egyptian Babylon, about a day's
journey from this latter and perhaps in the vicinity of the pyramids of
Gizeh and Abu-Roâsh. When the evening arrived, Sinuhit

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

approached Khri-Ahu, crossed the Nile, and resumed his journey, passing
eastward of the country of Iauku. This country was hitherto unknown; it
is, I believe, the district of the stone-cutters, all the region of
quarries which extends from Tourah to the desert along the Gebel Ahhmar
or "Red Mountain." Thence Sinuhit marched on foot as far as one of the
fortified posts which protected Egypt on this side, between Abu-Zabel
and Belbeis. Beyond this, he mentions only Puteni and Qimoîri. Brugsch
identifies Puteni with a country of Pât which he has met with on a
monument of the Saitic period, and of which the modern city of Belbeis
would represent the centre (*Diction. Géog.*, pp. 54, 55). The great
Ptolemaic stele discovered by Mr. Naville at Tel el-Maskhuta furnishes
some data for determining pretty exactly the position of Qimoîri. It
contains a name Qimoîr, which Mr. Naville has identified, with good
reason, with the Qimoîri of the story of Sinuhit (*The Store-city of
Pitkom and the route of the Exodus*, pp. 21, 22). Ptolemy Philadelphus
built here the city which he called Arsinoe after his sister, which
became one of the emporia of Egyptian trade with the Red Sea. Mr.
Naville places Arsinoe, and consequently Qimoîri, near the modern
el-Maghfâr in the heart of the ancient Gulf of Suez. This site would
suit our narrative admirably; after having quitted Puteni, Sinuhit would
have plunged into the desert, towards the north-east, and would have
lost himself in the sands in his endeavour to reach Qimoîri.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Beyond this point he entered the country of Edimâ or Edumâ, in which
Chabas has recognised the land of Edom (*Les Papyrus de Berlin*, pp. 39,
75, 76). The scribe states expressly that it was a canton of the Upper
Tonu. Tonu accordingly must enclose at least the district between the
Dead Sea and the Sinaitic Peninsula. The prince of Tonu gives the
Egyptian hero a very rich district, Aâa, or better Aïa, the name of
which denoted a species of plant, and recalls that of Aïan, Æan, given
by the geographers of the classical epoch to the cantons bordering on
the Gulf of Akabah. Sinuhit remained there some years in the company of
the nomad archers or Sittiu; on his return to Egypt, he was received by
the Egyptian garrison at the frontier station of Hriu-horu, "the roads
of Horus," that is to say, of Pharaoh, who was identified with Horus:
where this locality was I cannot say.

Five years of labour have allowed me to transcribe and translate this
difficult text. I believe that the narrative portion of it may be
considered as entirely explained in almost every word. The petitions,
letters, and discourses with which the story is filled, still present
considerable difficulties. Many details will doubtless have to be
modified in the approaching future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20207)
