[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20208) 
[Next](rp20210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

#### THE LEGEND OF THE EXPULSION OF THE HYKSOS

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> happened that the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> belonged to the Impure, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) and as there was no lord monarch that
day, it happened then that the king Soqnun-rî <span
id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101) was sovereign over the country of the
South, and that the Impure of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ra</span> <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102) were
subject to Ra-Apôpi <span id="fr_103"></span>[4](#fn_103) in <span
class="smallcaps">Hâuâru</span>; <span id="fr_104"></span>[5](#fn_104)
the entire country paid him tribute together with its manufactured
products and so loaded him with all the good things of To-miri. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[6](#fn_105) Now the king Ra-Apôpi took the god <span
class="smallcaps">Sutekhu</span> for his master, and he no longer served
any (other) deity who was in the whole country excepting only <span
class="smallcaps">Sutekhu</span>, and he built a temple of excellent and
imperishable workmanship at the gate of the king Ra-Apôpi, and he arose
each day to sacrifice daily victims to <span
class="smallcaps">Sutekhu</span>; and the vassal chiefs of the sovereign
were there with garlands of flowers, just as is the case in the temple
of Ph-Ra-Har-ma-khuti.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the king
Ra-Apôpi bethought himself of sending a message to announce it to the
king Soqnun-rî, the prince of the city of the South. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) And many days after that, the king
Ra-Apôpi summoned his great chiefs.…

\[The text is interrupted here and begins again at the top of page 2:
when it recommences after an almost complete lacuna of five lines and a
half we find phrases which evidently belong to the message of king
Apôpi. Now numerous texts teach us that a message entrusted to a person
is always repeated by him almost word for word; we can therefore feel
convinced that the two lines put into the mouth of the envoy on page 2,
were already contained in the lost lines of page 1, and in fact, the
small isolated fragment at the foot of the published facsimile contains
the remains of characters which exactly correspond to the sentences of
the message. This first version of the message, accordingly, was put
into the mouth of the royal councillors; but who were these councillors?
Were they the "great chiefs" who were summoned at the point where the
text breaks off? That is impossible, as in the fragments of line 7
mention is made of "the learned scribes," and in line 2 of page 2 it is
expressly stated that Apôpi sent to Soqnun-rî the message "which his
learned scribes had repeated to him." We must therefore admit that
Apôpi, after consulting his civil and military chiefs, was counselled to
apply to his scribes. The words of the latter begin at the end of line 7
with the customary exclamation: "O suzerain, our master!" In short, for
the whole of this first part of the lacuna we have a consultation
similar to that carried on afterwards at the court of Soqnun-rî, and in
the story of the Two Brothers, when the Pharaoh desires to discover the
owner of the curl which perfumed his linen. Consequently I continue the
tale as follows:\] And many days after that, the king Ra-Apôpi summoned
his great chiefs, as well as his captains and his prudent generals, but
they could not suggest to him a speech which was good to send to the
king Soqnun-rî the chief of the country of the South. So the king Apôpi
summoned his scribes versed in magic. They

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

said to him: "O suzerain, our master." … <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) and they suggested to the king Ra-Apôpi
the discourse which he desired: Let a messenger go to the chief of the
city of the South and say to him: The king Ra-Apôpi sends to say: Let
the hippopotamuses which are in the canals of the country be chased on
the pool, in order that they may allow sleep to visit me night and
day.…"

\[A line and a half, perhaps even more, still remains to be supplied.
Here again, the sequel permits us to restore the sense, if not the
letter, of what is wanting in the text. We see that after having
received the message recounted above, king Soqnun-rî assembles his
council, which is perplexed and at a loss for an answer; whereupon king
Apôpi sends a second embassy. It is evident that the embarrassment and
silence of the Thebans were foreseen by the scribes of Apôpi, and that
the part of their advice which is preserved at the top of page 2
contained the end of the second message which Apôpi was to send, if the
first met with no reply. In similar stories, some extraordinary action
is described which has to be performed by one of two kings; the penalty
is always stated to which he must submit in case of ill-success and the
reward he will receive in case of success. There must have been a
similar description in the Legend, and I therefore propose to restore
the text as follows:\]

He will not know what to answer, whether good or bad: then thou shalt
send him another message: "The king Ra-Apôpi sends saying: If the chief
of the South cannot answer my message, let him serve no other god than
<span class="smallcaps">Sutekhu</span>! But if he answers it, and does
that which I bid him do, <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108) then I
will take nothing from him, and I will no more bow down before any other
god of the land of <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> except <span
class="smallcaps">Amon-Ra</span> the king of the gods!"

And many days after that, the king Ra-Apôpi sent to the prince of the
country of the South the message which his scribes versed in magic had
suggested to him; and the messenger of the king Ra-Apôpi came to the
chief of the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

land of the South. He said to the messenger of the king Ra-Apôpi: "What
message dost thou bring to the land of the South? Why hast thou made
this journey?" The messenger replied: "The king Ra-Apôpi sends to say:
Let the hippopotamuses which are in the canals of the country be chased
on the pool, in order that they may allow sleep to visit me day and
night.…" The chief of the land of the South was astounded and knew not
what answer to make to the messenger of the king Ra-Apôpi. So the chief
of the land of the South said to the messenger: "This is what thy master
sends to … the chief of the land of the South … the words which he has
sent me … his goods.…" The chief of the land of the South caused all
kinds of good things, meats, cakes, … (and) wine to be given to the
messenger; then he said to him: "Return and tell thy master … all that
which thou hast said, I approve.…" The messenger of the king Ra-Apôpi
set himself to return to the place where his master was. Then the chief
of the South summoned his great chiefs as well as his captains and his
able generals, and he repeated to them all the message which the king
Ra-Apôpi had sent to him. Then they were silent with a single mouth for
a long moment (of time), and did not know what answer to make whether
good or bad.

The king Ra-Apôpi sent to the chief of the land of the South the other
message which his scribes versed in magic had suggested to him.…

\[It is unfortunate that the text is broken just in this place. The
three Pharaohs who bore the name of Soqnun-rî reigned during a troublous
period and must have left enduring memories in the minds of the Theban
people. They were active and warlike princes, and the last of them
perished by a violent death, perhaps in battle against the Hyksos. He
had shaved his beard the morning before, "arraying himself for the
combat like the god <span class="smallcaps">Montu</span>," as the
Egyptian scribes would say. His courage led him to penetrate too far
into the ranks of the enemy; he was surrounded and slain before his
companions could rescue him. The blow of an axe removed part of his left
cheek and laid

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

bare the teeth, striking the jaw and felling him stunned to the ground;
a second blow entered far within the skull, a dagger or short lance
splitting the forehead on the right side a little above the eye. The
Egyptians recovered the body and embalmed it in haste, when already
partially decomposed, before sending it to Thebes and the tomb of his
ancestors. The features of the mummy, now in the Museum of Boulaq, still
show the violence and fury of the struggle; a large white piece of brain
is spread over the forehead, the retracted lips uncover the jaw and the
tongue is bitten between the teeth. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) The author of the Legend may probably
have continued his story down to the tragic end of his hero. The scribe
to whom we owe the papyrus on which it is inscribed must certainly have
intended to complete the tale; he had recopied the last lines on the
reverse of one of the pages, and was preparing to continue it when some
accident intervened to prevent his doing so. Perhaps the professor at
whose dictation he appears to have written did not himself know the end
of the Legend. It is probable, however, that it went on to describe how
Soqnun-rî, after long hesitation, succeeded in escaping from the
embarrassing dilemma in which his powerful rival had attempted to place
him. His answer must have been as odd and extraordinary as the message
of Apôpi, but we have no means even of conjecturing what it was.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[40:1](rp20209.htm#fr_100) This is one of the
insulting epithets lavished by the resentment of the scribes on the
Shepherds or Hyksos and the other foreigners who had, occupied Egypt.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[40:2](rp20209.htm#fr_101) This is the most
probable pronunciation of the name usually and wrongly transcribed
Ra-skenen. Three kings of Egypt bore this *praenomen*, two of the name
of Tiu-âa and one of the name of Tiu-âa-qen, who reigned some years
before Ahmosi the founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[40:3](rp20209.htm#fr_102) That is Heliopolis,
the On of the North, the daughter of whose priest was married by Joseph.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[40:4](rp20209.htm#fr_103) As it had been
repeatedly advanced that Apôpi, being an Hyksos, could not possibly add
the title of Ra to his name, I beg to state here that the dot which
represents the cursive hieratic form of the disk is as perfectly legible
in the original manuscript as it is in the facsimile.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[40:5](rp20209.htm#fr_104) The Avaris of
Manetho, the Egyptian fortress of the Shepherd-kings. E. de Rougé has
shown that Avaris was one of the names of Tanis, the Zoan of the Old
Testament.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[40:6](rp20209.htm#fr_105) Lower Egypt.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[41:1](rp20209.htm#fr_106) Thebes.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[42:1](rp20209.htm#fr_107) This line must
contain a compliment to the king.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[42:2](rp20209.htm#fr_108) The part of the text
which is preserved recommences here.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[44:1](rp20209.htm#fr_109) Maspero: *Les Momies
royales d’Egypte récemment mises au jour*, pp. 14, 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20210)
