[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20207) 
[Next](rp20209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### THE LEGEND OF THE EXPULSION OF THE HYKSOS

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by Professor Maspero</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> story of the quarrel between the
Shepherd-king Apôpi and Soqnun-rî the hereditary prince of Thebes, which
eventually led to the expulsion of the Hyksos from Egypt, is found,
though unfortunately in a mutilated condition, in the first pages of the
Papyrus Sallier I. The value of a historical document has long been
attributed to it; but its style, as well as the expressions and the
general character of the subject, imply a romance, where the principal
parts in the scene are played by persons who belong to real history,
though the scene itself is almost entirely the offspring of the popular
imagination.

Champollion thrice saw the papyrus in the hands of its original owner,
M. Sallier of Aix in Provence, in 1828, some days before his departure
for Egypt, and in 1830 on his return. The notes published by Salvolini
prove that he had recognised, if not the exact nature of the story, at
all events the historical significance of the royal names occurring in
it. The manuscript, purchased in 1839 by the British

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Museum, was
published in facsimile (in 1841) in the *Select Papyri*, vol. i. pl. i
*sqq*.; the notice by Hawkins, evidently compiled from information given
by Birch, furnishes the name of the antagonist of Apophis, which had not
been read by Champollion, but it attributes the cartouche of Apophis to
king Phiops of the fifth dynasty. E. de Rouge was the first who
actually-understood the contents of the first pages of the papyrus.
Already in 1847 he gave Soqnun-rî his true place in the list of the
Pharaohs; in 1 854 he pointed out the name of Hâuâru or Avaris in the
fragment and inserted in the *Athénæum Français* 1854, p. 352, a fairly
detailed analysis of the document. The discovery was popularised in
Germany by Brugsch, who attempted to render the three first lines word
for word (*Ægyptische Studien*, ii. 1854), then in England by Goodwin,
who believed himself able to offer a complete translation of the papyrus
("Hieratic Papyri" in the *Cambridge Essays*, 1858, pp. 243–245). Since
then, the text has been frequently studied, by Chabas (*Les Pasteurs en
Égypte*, 1868), by Lushington (*Fragment of the first Sallier Papyrus in
the Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archæology*, iv. pp.
263–266, reproduced in the first series of *Records of the Past*, vol.
vii.), by Brugsch (*History of Egypt*, 2d Edit., vol. i. pp. 274
*sqq*.), by Ebers (*Ægypten und die Bücher Moses*, 1868, pp. 204
*sqq*.). Goodwin, after mature examination, hesitatingly advanced the
opinion that an accurate narrative indeed could not be found in it, but
only a historical novel

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (in the English
translation of Bunsen's *Egypt's Place in History*, iv. p. 671). It is
the opinion which I share, and which appears to have generally
prevailed. The transcription and translation of the text and a
commentary upon it are given in my *Études égyptiennes*, i. pp. 195–216;
the translation alone is reproduced in my *Contes égyptiens*, 2d Edit.,
pp. 273286.

I believe the existing fragments allow us to restore almost the whole of
the first two pages. Perhaps the attempt at restoration which I propose
will appear adventurous even to Egyptologists; at all events it will be
seen that I have not undertaken it rashly. A minute analysis of the text
has led me to the results which I here submit to criticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20209)
