[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20229) 
[Next](rp20231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

#### THE ANNALS OF ASSUR-NATSIR-PAL

<span class="small">COLUMN I</span>

1\. To <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span>, the strong, the almighty,
the supreme, the firstborn of the gods, the lusty warrior, the unique
one, whose onset in battle is unrivalled, the

2\. eldest son, the crusher of opposition, the firstborn of <span
class="smallcaps">Ea</span>, the powerful warrior of the angels
(*Igigi*), the counsellor of the gods, the offspring of the temple of
the earth, <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_330) the binder of the bonds

3\. of heaven and earth, the opener of fountains, who treads down the
widespreading earth, the god without whom the laws of heaven and earth
are unmade,

4\. the strong champion (?) who changes not the command of his mouth,
the firstborn of the zones, the giver of the sceptre and law to all
cities, the forceful

5\. minister, the utterance of whose lips alters not, in power
far-reaching, the augur of the gods, the exalted one, the meridian
Sun-god, the lord of lords, who the extremities of heaven

6\. (and) earth superintends with his hand, the king of battle, the
illustrious one who overcomes opposition, the sovereign, the unique one,
the lord of fountains and seas,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

7\. the strong, the unsparing, whose onset is the deluge that sweeps
away the land of the enemy, the slayer of the wicked, the lusty god
whose counsel is unchanging,

8\. the light of heaven (and) earth, the illuminator of the recesses of
the deep, the destroyer of the evil, the subduer of the disobedient, the
uprooter of the hostile, whose name in the assembly of the gods

9\. no god has changed, the giver of life, the god of mercy to whom
prayer is good, who dwells in <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span>, <span id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_331)
the great lord, my lord; \[I\] Assur-natsir-pal the powerful king,

10\. the king of hosts, the king unrivalled, the king of all the four
regions (of the world), the Sun-god of multitudes of men, the favourite
of <span class="smallcaps">Bel</span> <span
id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_332) and <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span>,
the beloved of <span class="smallcaps">Anu</span>

11\. and <span class="smallcaps">Dagon</span>, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[3](#fn_333) the hero of the great gods who bows
himself (in prayer), the beloved of thy heart, the prince, the favourite
of <span class="smallcaps">Bel</span> whose high-priesthood

12\. has seemed good to thy great divinity so that thou hast established
his reign, the warrior hero who has marched in the service of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> his lord, and among the princes

13\. of the four regions (of the world) has no rival, the shepherd of
fair shows who fears not opposition, the unique one, <span
id="fr_336"></span>[4](#fn_334) the mighty, who has not

14\. an opponent, the king who subdues the unsubmissive, who has
overcome all the multitudes of men, the powerful hero, who treads

15\. upon the neck of his enemies, who tramples upon all that is
hostile, who breaks in pieces the squadrons

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of the mighty, who in reliance on the great gods, his lords,

16\. has marched, and whose hand has conquered all lands, has overcome
the mountains to their furthest bounds, and has received their tribute,
who has taken

17\. hostages, who has established empire over all lands. At that time
<span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the lord, the proclaimer of my
name, the enlarger of my kingdom,

18\. entrusted his weapon that spares not to the hands of my lordship,
(even to me) Assur-natsir-pal the exalted prince, the adorer of the
great

19\. gods, the mighty monster, <span id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_335) the
conqueror of cities and mountains to their furthest bounds, the king of
lords, the consumer of the violent, who is crowned with

20\. terror, who fears not opposition, the valiant one, the supreme
judge who spares not, who overthrows resistance, the king of all
princes,

21\. the lord of lords, the shepherd-prince, the king of kings, the
exalted prophet, named by <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span> the
warrior-god (and) hero of the great gods, the avenger of his fathers,

22\. the king who has marched with justice in reliance on <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Samas</span>, <span id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_336)
the gods his helpers, and powerful countries and princes his foemen

23\. he has cast down like a reed (and) has subjugated all their lands
under his feet, the supplier of the freewill offerings for the great

24\. gods, the established prince, who is provident to direct the laws
of the temples of his country, the work of whose hands and

25\. the gift of whose sacrifices the great gods of heaven and earth
desire and have established his high-priesthood in the temples for ever;

26\. their strong weapons have they given for the spoil of my lordship;
the terror of his weapon, the glory of his lordship, over the kings

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

27\. of the four regions (of the world) have they made strong for him;
the enemies of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> to their furthest
bounds above and below he has combated, and tribute and gifts

28\. he has laid upon them; (he), the conqueror of the foes of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, the powerful king, the king of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, the son of Tiglath-Uras, the high
priest of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, who upon all his foemen

29\. has laid the yoke, has set up the bodies of his adversaries upon
stakes; the grandson of Rimmon-nirari the high-priest of the great gods,

30\. who brought about the overthrow of those who would not obey him,
and overcame the world; the great-grandson of Assur-dân, who

31\. founded fortresses (and) established shrines: <span
id="fr_339"></span>[1](#fn_337) in those days from the mouth of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> (and) the great gods kingdom, sovereignty
(and) majesty issued forth.

32\. I am king, I am sovereign, I am exalted, I am strong, I am
glorious, I am lusty, I am the firstborn, I am the champion, I am the
warrior,

33\. I am a lion, I am a hero; Assur-natsir-pal, the powerful king, the
king of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, named of the <span
class="smallcaps">Moon God</span>, the favourite of <span
class="smallcaps">Anu</span>, the beloved of <span
class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span> mightiest among the gods,

34\. (am) I; a weapon that spares not, which brings slaughter to the
land of his enemies, (am) I; a king valiant in battle, the destroyer of
cities and mountains,

35\. the leader of the conflict, the king of the four regions (of the
world), who lays the yoke upon his foes, who *enslaves* (?) all his
enemies, the king of all the zones of all princes,

36\. every one of them, the king who subjugates the un-submissive to
him, who has overcome all the multitudes of men. This is the destiny
which from the mouth of the great gods

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

37\. has issued forth for me, and they have established (it) firmly as
my destiny. According to the desire of my heart and the stretching forth
of my hand <span class="smallcaps">Istar</span>, <span
id="fr_340"></span>[1](#fn_338) the lady who loves

38\. my high-priesthood, looked with favour upon me and set her heart to
make combat and battle, and in those days Assur-natsir-pal, the exalted
prince, the worshipper of the great gods,

39\. whom <span class="smallcaps">Bel</span> has caused to obtain the
desire of his heart so that his hand conquered the lands of all princes
who submitted not unto him, the conqueror

40\. of his foes who in difficult places has broken through the
squadrons of the mighty—at that time <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my great lord, the proclaimer of my name,

41\. the enlarger of my kingdom over the kings of the four regions (of
the world), has mightily magnified my name, the weapon that spares not
unto the hands of my lordship

42\. he has given to hold. To effect the submission and homage of
countries and mighty mountains powerfully has he urged me. In reliance
on <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord

43\. I traversed impassable paths (and) trackless mountains with the
forces of my armies: a rival unto me existed not. At the beginning of my
reign,

44\. in my first year, when the <span class="smallcaps">Sun-god</span>
the judge of the zones (of the world) had thrown his kindly shadow over
me, on the throne of royalty mightily I had sat, (and) the sceptre

45\. that shepherds mankind he had caused my hand to hold, I collected
my chariots (and) armies. Impassable roads (and) trackless mountains,
which for the passage

46\. of chariots and armies were not suited, I traversed; against the
land of <span class="smallcaps">Nimme</span> <span
id="fr_341"></span>[2](#fn_339) I marched: <span
class="smallcaps">Libê</span> <span id="fr_342"></span>[3](#fn_340)

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

their strong city (and the cities of) <span
class="smallcaps">Surra</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Apuqu</span>,

47\. <span class="smallcaps">Arura</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Arubê</span>, which are in sight of the mountains of
<span class="smallcaps">Urini</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Aruni</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Etini</span>, <span id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_341)
strong cities, I captured; their fighting-men

48\. in numbers I slew; their spoil, their goods (and) their oxen I
carried away. (Their) soldiers sought the inaccessible mountain. The
inaccessible mountain they reached. With (my) forces after them

49\. I marched. <span id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_342) The summit of the
mountain was like the point of an iron blade, and the flying bird of
heaven had not swooped upon it. Like a nest

50\. of *hawks* (?) in the midst of the mountain they made their
stronghold. Into the midst of them where none among the kings my fathers
had penetrated, in three days

51\. the hero beheld the mountain; against it did his heart offer
opposition: he ascended the mountain on his feet; he overthrew (and)
destroyed their nest; their forces

52\. he shattered; 200 of their warriors he slew with weapons. Their
spoil, multitudinous as a flock of sheep, I carried away.

53\. With their blood I dyed the mountain like wool (?). The ravine
(and) torrent of the mountain devoured <span
id="fr_345"></span>[3](#fn_343) what was left of them. Their cities

54\. I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire. From the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Nimme</span> I departed; into the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span> <span
id="fr_346"></span>[4](#fn_344) I descended, the tribute of the
countries of <span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span>

55\. <span class="smallcaps">’Sime’si</span>, <span
id="fr_347"></span>[5](#fn_345) (and) <span
class="smallcaps">’Simera</span>, the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ulmania</span>, (and)

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Adaus</span>, <span
id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_346) of the <span
class="smallcaps">Murgians</span>, (and) of the <span
class="smallcaps">Murmia’sians</span>, <span
id="fr_349"></span>[2](#fn_347) horses, mules, <span
id="fr_350"></span>[3](#fn_348)

56\. oxen, sheep, wine, (and) a bowl of copper, as their tribute I
received. I established a governor over them. When in <span
class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span>

57\. I was slaying, the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my
lord overwhelmed the people of <span class="smallcaps">Gozan</span> and
<span class="smallcaps">Khupuska</span>: <span
id="fr_351"></span>[4](#fn_349) horses, silver,

58\. gold, lead, copper (and) a bowl of copper as their tribute they
brought before me. From <span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span> I
departed,

59\. into the lowlands of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khulun</span>, into the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> <span id="fr_352"></span>[5](#fn_350) of
<span class="smallcaps">Betani</span> I descended. The cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Khatu</span>, <span id="fr_353"></span>[6](#fn_351)
<span class="smallcaps">Khataru</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Nistun</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Irbidi</span>,

60\. <span class="smallcaps">Mitqia</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Arzania</span>, <span id="fr_354"></span>[7](#fn_352)
<span class="smallcaps">Tela</span>, <span
id="fr_355"></span>[8](#fn_353) (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Khalua</span>, the cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> which in sight of the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">U’su</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Arua</span>

61\. (and) <span class="smallcaps">Arardhi</span>, <span
id="fr_356"></span>[9](#fn_354) mighty mountains, are situated, I
captured; their soldiers in multitudes I slew; their spoil (and) their
goods I carried away.

62\. \[Their\] soldiers sought the peak (of the mountain); they reached
the summit which (is) at the entrance to the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Nistun</span>, which hangs from the sky like a cloud.
Into the midst of them, where none

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

among the kings my fathers had penetrated, my warriors flew upon them
like birds:

64\. 260 of their fighting-men I slew with weapons; their heads I cut
off (and) built into a pyramid. The rest of them like a bird

65\. made (their) nest in the rocks of the mountain. Their spoil (and)
their goods from the midst of the mountain I brought down. The cities
which in the midst

66\. of the mighty ranges were situated I overthrew, I dug up, I burned
with fire. All the soldiers who had fled from the face of my weapons
descended; my feet

67\. they embraced. Tribute, gifts, and a satrap I imposed upon them.
Bubu the son of Bubâ, <span id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_355) the son of
the chief of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Nistun</span>,

68\. I flayed in the city of <span class="smallcaps">Arbela</span> (and)
clothed the wall of the fortress with his skin. At that time I made an
image of my person; the glorious deeds of my abundant power

69\. I inscribed upon (it). I erected (it) in the mountains of the land
of <span class="smallcaps">Eqi</span> in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur-natsir-pal</span> at the head of the
river-source. <span id="fr_358"></span>[2](#fn_356) In the year when I
was eponym <span id="fr_359"></span>[3](#fn_357) on the 24th day of the
month Ab, <span id="fr_360"></span>[4](#fn_358)

70\. by the command of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Istar</span> the great gods my lords I departed from
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span>; against the cities
which at the foot of the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">Nibur</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Pazate</span>, mighty mountains,

71\. are situated I marched; I conquered the cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Atkun</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Uskhu</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">Pilazi</span> (and) 20 (other) cities dependent
on them. Their numerous fighting-men I slew;

72\. their spoil (and) their goods I carried away; the cities I burned
with fire. All the soldiers who had fled from the face of my weapons
descended

73\. (and) embraced my feet. I imposed tribute upon them. I departed
from the cities which (are) at

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the foot of the mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Nibur</span> (and)
<span class="smallcaps">Pazate</span>. The river <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed;

74\. to the land of <span class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span> <span
id="fr_361"></span>[1](#fn_359) I approached. I received the tribute of
the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Muski</span>, <span id="fr_362"></span>[2](#fn_360)
plates of copper, oxen, sheep (and) wine. While in the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span>

75\. I was staying, they brought me back news that the <span
class="smallcaps">’Suru</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span> <span
id="fr_363"></span>[3](#fn_361) had revolted (and) had murdered their
governor Khamatâ. <span id="fr_364"></span>[4](#fn_362)

76\. Akhi-yababa a plebeian <span id="fr_365"></span>[5](#fn_363) whom
they had brought from <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span>, <span
id="fr_366"></span>[6](#fn_364) they raised to the sovereignty over
them. With the help of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span>,

77\. the great gods, the enlargers of my sovereignty, I assembled (my)
chariots (and) armies, I occupied the banks of the <span
class="smallcaps">Khabur</span>. <span id="fr_367"></span>[7](#fn_365)
On my march the tribute

78\. abundant of Sallimmanu-khaman-ilani of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Sadikan</span>, <span id="fr_368"></span>[8](#fn_366)
the son of Ilu-Rimmon <span id="fr_369"></span>[9](#fn_367) of the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Qatna</span>, <span
id="fr_370"></span>[10](#fn_368) silver, gold,

79\. lead, plates of copper, variegated cloths, (and) linen vestments I
received. To the city of <span class="smallcaps">’Suri</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span> I approached;

80\. the fear of the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my
lord overwhelmed

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

them; the nobles (and) the elders of the city, to save their lives, came
forth to meet me;

81\. they took my feet, saying, Thou wiliest (it and) it is death, thou
willest (it and) it is life, the will of thy heart will we perform.
Akhi-yababa, the son of a plebeian

82\. whom they had brought from <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span>
I seized by the hand. In the prowess of my heart and the violence of my
weapons I attacked the city. All the soldiers who had rebelled

83\. they had seized (and) delivered up. I brought my nobles into its
palace (and) its temples: its silver, its gold, its goods, its spoil,
copper,

84\. iron, lead, plates of copper, sacrificial knives of copper,
sacrificial bowls of copper, (other) objects of copper in abundance,
alabaster, a cup

85\. with handles, the amazons <span id="fr_371"></span>[1](#fn_369) of
its palaces, its daughters, the spoil of the soldiers who had rebelled
along with their goods, its gods along with their goods,

86\. precious stones from the mountain, its chariot(s), (its) yokes of
horses bound to the yoke, the trappings of the horses, the accoutrements
of the soldiers,

87\. variegated cloths, linen vestments, a beautiful altar of
cedar-wood, sweet-smelling herbs, a shrine of cedar,

88\. red purple (and) blue purple garments, <span
id="fr_372"></span>[2](#fn_370) its wagons, its oxen, (and) its sheep,
its exceeding spoil, which like the stars of heaven could not be
numbered,

89\. I carried away. Aziel I appointed over them as my vicegerent. I
erected a pyramid at the approach to its chief gate. The nobles, as many
as

90\. had revolted, I flayed; with their skins I covered the pyramid.
Some (of these) I immured in the midst of the pyramid; others above

91\. the pyramid I impaled on stakes; others round about the pyramid I
planted on stakes; many at the exit from my own country

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

92\. I flayed; with their skins I clad the fortress-walls. The limbs of
the chief officers who (were) the chief officers of the kings who had
rebelled I cut off.

93\. I brought Akhi-yababa to <span class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span>
(and) flayed him; with his skin I clad the fortress-wall of <span
class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span>. Power and might

94\. I laid upon the land of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span>. <span
id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_371) While I was staying in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">’Suri</span> the tribute of the kings of the land of
<span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> every one of them,

95\. silver, gold, lead, copper, a plate of copper, oxen, sheep,
variegated cloths (and) linen vestments, as tribute

96\. and gifts I prescribed (and) imposed upon them. At that time the
tribute of Khayanu of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khindan</span>, <span id="fr_374"></span>[2](#fn_372)
silver,

97\. gold, lead, copper, *umu* stone, *alabaster* (?), red purple
garments, (and) *wild asses* (?) as his tribute I received. At that time
an image

98\. of my majesty grandly I made; (the story of my) power and
exaltation I inscribed upon (it); in the midst of his palace I set (it)
up. I erected my stelæ;

99\. (the story of) the exaltation of my strength I inscribed upon
(them); at the gate of his (city) I placed (them). In the same year
during my eponymy, <span id="fr_375"></span>[3](#fn_373) by the command
of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord and <span
class="smallcaps">Uras</span> who loves my priesthood,

100\. whereas in the time of the kings my fathers no one of the country
of the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> <span
id="fr_376"></span>[4](#fn_374) had gone to the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, Ilu-epus <span
id="fr_377"></span>[5](#fn_375) the <span
class="smallcaps">Shuhite</span>, to save his life, together with his
brothers (and)

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

101\. his sons brought silver (and) gold as tribute to Nineveh to my
presence. In the course of the eponymy <span
id="fr_378"></span>[1](#fn_376) I was staying in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span> when news

102\. was brought that the <span class="smallcaps">Assyrian</span>
colonists whom Shalmaneser <span id="fr_379"></span>[2](#fn_377) king of
<span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, a prince who went before me,

103\. had planted in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khalzi-dibkha</span>, <span
id="fr_380"></span>[3](#fn_378) had revolted (with) Khulâ the lord of
their city (and) were on the march to capture my royal city of <span
class="smallcaps">Damda-mu’sa</span>.

104\. By the command of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Samas</span>, and <span
class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span>, the gods my ministers I assembled my
chariots (and) armies. At the head of the sources of the river <span
class="smallcaps">’Supnat</span>, <span id="fr_381"></span>[4](#fn_379)
where the image(s)

105\. of Tiglath-Pileser and Tiglath-Uras <span
id="fr_382"></span>[5](#fn_380) king(s) of Assyria my fathers had been
erected, I executed an image of my royal self (and) erected (it) by the
side of theirs.

106\. At that time the tribute of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Izala</span>, oxen, sheep (and) wine I received. I
crossed the mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span>. <span
id="fr_383"></span>[6](#fn_381) To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kinabu</span>,

107\. the fortified city of Khulâ, I approached. With the strength of my
army (and with) violent battle I attacked the city. I captured (it) Six
hundred of their fighting men

108\. I slew with the sword. Three thousand of their captives I burned
with fire. I left not one alive among them to become a hostage. Khulâ

109\. the lord of their city I captured alive with (my) hand. I built
their bodies into pyramids. Their young men (and) their maidens I burned
to ashes.

110\. Khulâ the lord of their city I flayed. With his skin I clad the
fortress-wall of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Damdamu’sa</span>.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The city I threw
down, dug up (and) burned with fire.

111\. I captured the city of <span class="smallcaps">Mariru</span> which
(was) dependent on them. Fifty of their warriors I slew with weapons;
200 of their captives I burned with fire; 332

112\. soldiers of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbi</span> <span id="fr_384"></span>[1](#fn_382) I
slew in combat in the field. I brought away their spoil, their oxen
(and) their sheep. The (people of the) country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbu</span> which (lies) at the foot of Mount <span
class="smallcaps">Ukhira</span>

113\. encouraged one another. Against the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tela</span>, <span id="fr_385"></span>[2](#fn_383)
their stronghold, I descended. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kinabu</span> I departed. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tela</span> I approached.

114\. The city was very strong. Three fortress-walls surrounded (it).
The inhabitants trusted to their strong walls and their numerous army,
and had not descended (into the field).

115\. They did not embrace my feet. With combat and slaughter I attacked
the city (and) captured (it): 3000 of their fighting men I slew with the
sword. Their spoil,

116\. their goods, their oxen (and) their sheep I carried away. Their
numerous captives I burned with fire. I captured many of the soldiers
alive with the hand.

117\. I cut off the hands (and) feet of some; I cut off the noses, the
ears (and) the fingers of others; the eyes of the numerous soldiers I
put out.

118\. I built up a pyramid of the living (and) a pyramid of heads. In
the middle (of them) I suspended their heads on vine-stems in the
neighbourhood of their city. Their young men

<span class="small">COLUMN II</span>

1\. (and) their maidens I burned as a holocaust. The

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

city I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire. I annihilated it. The
cities of the land of <span class="smallcaps">Nirbi</span>

2\. (and) their strong fortress-walls I overthrew, dug up (and) burned
with fire. At that time from the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbi</span> I departed. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span> <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_384)

3\. I approached. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span> I
restored afresh. Its old wall I changed. Its site I purified. Its
strength I took (in hand). A new wall

4\. from its foundations to its coping I built up, completed (and)
strengthened. I erected a palace for the seat of my majesty at its
gates. <span id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_385)

5\. I built this palace up from its foundations to its coping. I made an
image of my person of white limestone. The might

6\. of my power, the record and history of my conquests which I-
achieved in the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> <span
id="fr_388"></span>[3](#fn_386) I inscribed upon (it). In the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span>

7\. I set (it) up. I inscribed a tablet of stone. In its wall I placed
(it). Those colonists from <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, who
in consequence of a famine to other lands

8\. (even) to the land of <span class="smallcaps">Rure</span> had
ascended I brought back. In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span> I planted them. This city for myself

9\. I took. Grain and straw from the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbi</span> I heaped up within (it). 'The remaining
inhabitants of the land of <span class="smallcaps">Nirbi</span> who had
fled from the face of my weapons

10\. descended (and) took my feet. Their cities (and) their houses
(which were) suitable I caused them to occupy. As tribute and gifts,
horses,

11\. mules, oxen, sheep, wine, (and) plates of copper, in addition to
what I formerly prescribed I imposed upon them. Their sons as hostages

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

12\. I took. While I was staying in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span> the tribute of Ammi-bahla, <span
id="fr_389"></span>[1](#fn_387) the son of Zamani, of Ilu-Khite <span
id="fr_390"></span>[2](#fn_388) of the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Rure</span>,

13\. of Labdhuri the son of Dhubu’si of the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirdun</span>, and the tribute of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Urume</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Bitani</span> <span id="fr_391"></span>[3](#fn_389)
(and) of the kings of the land of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>,

14\. chariots, horses, mules, silver, gold, plate(s) of copper, oxen,
sheep (and) wine, as their tribute I received.

15\. I established a lord of the marches over the lands of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>. On my return from the lands of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>, the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbu</span> which (is) within

16\. the mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span> revolted.
Their nine cities they left. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ispilipria</span> <span
id="fr_392"></span>[4](#fn_390) their stronghold and the inaccessible
mountain

17\. they trusted, and the summits of the mountain I attacked (and)
seized. In the midst of the mighty mountain I slew their warriors. With
their blood like *wool* (?) the mountain

18\. I dyed. What was left of them was swallowed up by the ravines and
torrents of the mountain. Their spoil (and) their goods I carried away.
The heads of their fighting-men

19\. I cut off. I built up a column (of them) at the top of their city.
Their young men (and) their maidens I burned as a holocaust. Into the
lowlands of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Buliyani</span>

20\. I descended. The banks of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Luqia</span> I occupied. In my passage the cities of
the land of <span class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> <span
id="fr_393"></span>[5](#fn_391)

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

which (is) in the lowlands I conquered. Their numerous soldiers

21\. I slew. Their spoil I carried away. The cities I burned with fire.
To the city of <span class="smallcaps">Ardupa</span> I came forth. At
that time the tribute

22\. of Akhi-ramu <span id="fr_394"></span>[1](#fn_392) the son of
Yakhiri of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Zalla</span>, <span
id="fr_395"></span>[2](#fn_393) of the son of Bakhiani of the country of
the <span class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>, and of the kings of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Khani-rabbat</span>, <span
id="fr_396"></span>[3](#fn_394) silver, gold,

23\. lead, plate(s) of copper, oxen, sheep (and) horses as their tribute
I received. In the eponymy of Assur-idin <span
id="fr_397"></span>[4](#fn_395) news was brought that

24\. Tsab-Dadi <span id="fr_398"></span>[5](#fn_396) the prince of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Dagara</span> had revolted. The
(people of the) country of <span class="smallcaps">Zamua</span> <span
id="fr_399"></span>[6](#fn_397) throughout its circuit encouraged one
another. The lowlanders of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Babite</span>

25\. built up a wall. To make war and battle they came against me. In
reliance on <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my
lord, and <span class="smallcaps">Nergal</span>

26\. who marches before me, with the forceful weapons which <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the lord gave unto me, my arms (and)
armies I assembled; to the lowlands

27\. of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Babite</span> I marched. The
inhabitants trusted to the strength of their armies and offered battle.
In the powers supreme of <span class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who
marches

28\. before me I fought with them. I made a destruction of them. I
shattered their forces; 1460 of their fighting-men in the lowlands

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

29\. I slew. The cities of <span class="smallcaps">Uze</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Birutu</span>, (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Lagalaga</span> their stronghold, together with 100
towns dependent on them, I captured.

30\. Their spoil, their possessions, their oxen (and) their sheep I
carried away. Tsab-Dadi, to save his life, to an inaccessible mountain

3r. ascended; 1200 of their soldiers I transported. From the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Dagara</span> I departed. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Bara</span> I approached. The city of <span
class="smallcaps">Bara</span>

32\. I captured. Three hundred and twenty of their soldiers I slew with
weapons. Their oxen, their sheep (and) their heavy spoil I brought away.

33\. Three hundred of their soldiers I transported. On the i 5th day of
the month Tisri <span id="fr_400"></span>[1](#fn_398) I departed from
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Kalzi</span>. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[2](#fn_399) Into the lowlands of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Babite</span> I descended.

34\. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Babite</span> I departed.
To the country of <span class="smallcaps">Nizir</span> which they call
the land of <span class="smallcaps">Lullu</span> (and) the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Kinipa</span> <span id="fr_402"></span>[3](#fn_400) I
approached. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Buna’si</span> their
stronghold

35\. belonging to Mutsatsina and 20 cities dependent upon it I captured.
The soldiers banded together; they occupied an inaccessible mountain.
Assur-natsir-pal the hero after them

36\. pursued like birds. In the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Nizir</span> he scattered their scouts; 326 of their
fighting men he utterly destroyed. Its horses he seized.

37\. The ravines and torrents of the mountain devoured their remnants.
Seven cities which (are) in the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nizir</span>, which they had made their strongholds, I
captured. Their warriors

38\. I slew. Their spoil, their goods, their oxen (and) their

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

sheep I carried away. The cities I burned with fire. At my camp
thereupon I made a halt.

39\. From this camp I next departed. To the cities in the plain of the
land of <span class="smallcaps">Nizir</span>, <span
id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_401) whose site had been seen by no one, I
marched. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Larbu’sa</span>,

40\. the stronghold of Kirtiara (and) 8 cities dependent on it I
captured. The men banded together; they occupied an inaccessible
mountain. The mountain like the blade of an iron sword

41\. was in appearance, the *lair* (?) <span
id="fr_404"></span>[2](#fn_402) of his armies. After them I ascended.
Into the midst of the mountain I threw their bodies; 172 of their
warriors I slew; the soldiers

42\. I piled up on the rocks of the mountain. Their spoil, their goods,
their oxen (and) their sheep I brought away. The cities with fire

43\. I burned. I hung their heads on the vines of the mountain. Their
young men (and) their maidens I burned as a holocaust. Thereupon I made
a halt at my camp;

44\. from this camp I next marched forth. One hundred and fifty cities
of the citizens of <span class="smallcaps">Larbu’sa</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Dur-Luluma</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Bunai’sa</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Bara</span> I captured.

45\. Their warriors I slew. Their spoil I carried away. The cities I
threw down, dug up (and) burned with fire. Fifty men of the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Bara</span> I slew in combat in the field.

46\. At that time the kings of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Zamua</span>, every one of them, were overwhelmed by
the fear of the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord.
They embraced my feet. Horses, silver (and) gold

47\. I received. I made all the country to turn (to me) with one voice.
I laid on them a present of horses, silver, gold, grain (and) straw.

48\. I departed from the city (I had named)
*Tukulti-Assur-atsbat*. <span id="fr_405"></span>[3](#fn_403) The foot
of the mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Nispi</span> I

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

occupied. All the night I pursued (my march). To cities whose situation
(is) remote, which in sight of the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Nispi</span> <span id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_404)

49\. are situated, which Tsab-Dadi had made his strongholds, I marched.
The city of <span class="smallcaps">Birutu</span> I captured (and)
burned with fire. During the eponymy of Bel-aku <span
id="fr_407"></span>[2](#fn_405) I was staying in Nineveh when news

50\. was brought that Ameka (and) Arastua had withheld the tribute and
dues of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord. By the command of
<span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord, (and)
<span class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who goes before me,

51\. on the first day of the month Sivan <span
id="fr_408"></span>[3](#fn_406) for the third time against the country
of <span class="smallcaps">Zamua</span> I made a campaign. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[4](#fn_407) The face of my chariots and armies I
could not see. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Kalzi</span> I
departed. The lower <span class="smallcaps">Zab</span> <span
id="fr_410"></span>[5](#fn_408)

5 2. I crossed. Into the lowlands of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Babite</span> I entered. The river <span
class="smallcaps">Radanu</span> <span id="fr_411"></span>[6](#fn_409) I
crossed. To the foot of the mountain of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">’Simaki</span> I was continually <span
id="fr_412"></span>[7](#fn_410) approaching. Oxen,

53\. sheep (and) wine, the tribute of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Dagara</span> I received. From the foot of the
mountain of <span class="smallcaps">’Simaki</span> strong chariots <span
id="fr_413"></span>[8](#fn_411) (and) riding-horses which had been bred
there I brought away with me in store. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[9](#fn_412) (All) night long till

54\. dawn I pursued (my) march. The river <span
class="smallcaps">Dhurnat</span> <span id="fr_415"></span>[10](#fn_413)
I crossed. In a *car* (?) of dark-blue stone I approached the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Ammali</span> the stronghold of Arastua.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

55\. With combat (and) slaughter I attacked the city; I captured (it);
800 of their fighting-men I slew with weapons. With their bodies I
filled the streets of their city. With their blood

56\. I dyed their houses. I captured the soldiers alive with the hand.
Their numerous spoil I carried away. The city I overthrew, dug up (and)
burned with fire. Their young men

57\. (and) maidens I burned as a holocaust. The city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kizirtu</span> their

58\. stronghold belonging to Zabini and the cities which (were)
dependent upon them I captured. Their warriors I slew. Their spoil

59\. I carried away. The cities of <span class="smallcaps">Bara</span>
belonging to Kirtiara, of <span class="smallcaps">Dura</span> (and) of
<span class="smallcaps">Buni’sa</span> as far as the lowlands of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Khasmar</span> I overthrew, dug up
(and) burned with fire.

60\. To mounds and ruins I reduced (them). From the midst of the cities
of Arastua I departed. Into the lowlands which (are) in sight of the
mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Lara</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Bidirgi</span>, inaccessible mountains, which for the
passage

61\. of chariots and soldiers were not suited, I descended. To the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Zamri</span> <span
id="fr_416"></span>[1](#fn_414) the royal city of Ameka the <span
class="smallcaps">Zamuan</span> I approached. Ameka from the face of my
mighty weapons (and) my battle

62\. vehement fled away and betook himself to an inaccessible mountain.
The furniture of his palace (and) his chariot I carried off. From the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Zamri</span> I departed. The river <span
class="smallcaps">Lallu</span> I crossed. To the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">Etini</span>,

63\. a difficult locality, which for the passage of chariots and armies
was unsuited, into the midst of which none of the kings my fathers had
penetrated, I marched. The king leaving his armies to the mountains of
<span class="smallcaps">Etini</span>

64\. ascended. His property (and) his goods, numerous utensils of
copper, a wild bull of copper, a plate of

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

copper, bowls of copper, rings (?) of copper, the treasures of his
palace (and) his treasury

65\. from the midst of the mountains I carried off. At my camp thereupon
I made a halt. In reliance upon <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>
(and) <span class="smallcaps">Samas</span> the gods my helpers from that
camp I next departed. After him

66\. I betook myself. The river <span class="smallcaps">Edir</span> I
crossed. To within sight of the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">’Suani</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Elaniu</span>, mighty mountains, I slew their numerous
warriors. His property, his goods, a wild bull of copper,

67\. plates of copper, bowls of copper, cups of copper, numerous
utensils of copper, a dish of gold with a handle, their oxen, their
sheep, their goods,

68\. (and) their heavy spoil I carried away from the foot of the
mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Elaniu</span>, I stripped him of
his horses. Ameka, to save his life, ascended to the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">’Sabua</span>.

69\. The cities of <span class="smallcaps">Zamru</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Ara’sitku</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Ammaru</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Par’sindu</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Iritu</span>
(and) <span class="smallcaps">’Suritu</span> his stronghold, together
with 150 cities

70\. which (were) dependent on it I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with
fire. To mounds and ruins I reduced (them). While I was staying at the
entrance to the city of <span class="smallcaps">Par’sindu</span>, upon
riding-horses (I made) the eunuchs

71\. sit as a seat. Fifty fighting-men of Ameka I slew in the field.
Their heads I cut off. On vines in the arbour of his palace I hung
(them).

72\. Twenty soldiers I captured alive with the hand. In the wall of his
palace I immured (them). From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Zamri</span> I carried the riding-horses (and) eunuchs
along with me.

73\. To the cities of Ata the <span class="smallcaps">Arzizan</span>,
into which none of the kings my fathers had penetrated, I marched. The
cities of <span class="smallcaps">Arzizu</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Ar’sindu</span>

74\. his stronghold, together with ten cities which (were) dependent on
it, which are situated in the midst of the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Nispi</span>, an inaccessible mountain,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I conquered. Their
warriors I slew. The cities I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire.

75\. To my camp thereupon I returned. At that time copper, *tabbili* of
copper, rings of copper (and) bracelets, the tribute of the country of
<span class="smallcaps">’Sitammena</span>, which like women

76\. they wear, <span id="fr_417"></span>[1](#fn_415) I received. From
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Zamri</span> I departed. To the
mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Lara</span>, an inaccessible
mountain, which for the passage of chariots and armies was unsuited,
with axes of iron I hewed (my way).

77\. With picks of bronze I excavated (my path). I made a passage for
the chariots and soldiers. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tukulti-Assur-atsbat</span> which the people of <span
class="smallcaps">Lulu</span> call <span class="smallcaps">Arakdi</span>
I descended. The kings

78\. of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Zamua</span>, every one
of them, were terrified at the appearance of my weapons and the
magnitude of my sovereignty, and embraced my feet. Tribute (and) gifts
of silver, gold, lead,

79\. copper, plates of copper, variegated cloths, horses, oxen, sheep
(and) wine in addition to what I had before prescribed I imposed upon
them. Their governor

80\. in the city of <span class="smallcaps">Calah</span> <span
id="fr_418"></span>[2](#fn_416) I appointed. While I was staying in the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Zamua</span>, the cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Khudun</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Khartis</span>, <span id="fr_419"></span>[3](#fn_417)
<span class="smallcaps">Khupuska</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Gozan</span> <span id="fr_420"></span>[4](#fn_418) the
fear

81\. of the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord
overwhelmed. Tribute (and) gifts of silver, gold, horses, variegated
cloths, oxen, sheep (and) wine they brought to me., As for the men,

82\. as many as had fled from the face of my weapons (and) had ascended
the mountains, I marched after them. In sight of the countries of <span
class="smallcaps">Aziru</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">’Simaki</span> they had encamped. The city of <span
class="smallcaps">Me’su</span> their stronghold

83\. they had made. The land of <span class="smallcaps">Aziru</span> I
overthrew (and)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

dug up. From within sight of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">’Simaki</span> as far as the river <span
class="smallcaps">Dhurnat</span> I piled up their corpses. Five hundred
of their fighting-men I utterly destroyed.

84\. Their heavy spoil I carried away. I burned the cities with fire. At
that time in the country of <span class="smallcaps">Zamua</span> the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Adlilia</span>, which ’Sibir king of
<span class="smallcaps">Kar-Dunias</span> <span
id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_419) after capturing it had destroyed

85\. (and) had reduced to mounds and ruins, Assur-natsir-pal king of
<span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span> restored again. Its wall I
encircled. A palace for the seat of my majesty in the middle (of it) I
founded, adorned (and) strengthened. In addition to what I had before
prescribed

86\. grain (and) straw from all the country I heaped up within (it). I
called its name <span class="smallcaps">Dur-Assur</span>. <span
id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_420) On the first day of the month Sivan,
during the eponymy of Sa-samu-damqu <span
id="fr_423"></span>[3](#fn_421) I assembled my chariots (and) armies.

87\. The river <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed. Into the
land of <span class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span> I descended. A palace in
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Tiluli</span> I *occupied* (?) I
received the tribute of the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span>. From the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span> I departed. Into the lowlands

88\. of the land of the <span class="smallcaps">Astartê</span>
goddesses <span id="fr_424"></span>[4](#fn_422) I descended. In the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Kibaki</span> I made a halt. Oxen, sheep,
wine (and) plates of copper I received as the tribute of the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Kibaki</span>. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kibaki</span> I departed.

89\. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Matteyate</span> I approached.
The city of <span class="smallcaps">Matyaute</span> (*sic*) together
with the city of <span class="smallcaps">Kabranisa</span> I captured:
2,800 of their soldiers I slew with weapons: their numerous spoil I
carried away.

90\. All the men who had fled from the face of my

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

weapons embraced my feet. Their cities I let them occupy. Tribute, gifts
(and) governors I appointed <span id="fr_425"></span>[1](#fn_423); upon
them

91\. I imposed. An image of my person I made. The power of my strength I
inscribed upon (it). In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Matteyate</span> I erected (it). From the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Matteyate</span> I departed. To the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Zazabukha</span>

92\. I directed (my) camp. The tribute of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span>, oxen, sheep, wine, plates of copper,
wild bulls of copper (and) bowls of copper I received. From the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Zazabukha</span> I departed.

93\. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">Ir’sia</span> I made a halt.
I burned the city of <span class="smallcaps">Ir’sia</span> with fire.
The tribute of the city of <span class="smallcaps">’Sura</span>, oxen,
sheep, wine (and) plates of copper I received in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ir’sia</span>.

94\. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Ir’sia</span> I departed.
In the midst of the mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span> I
made a halt. The city of <span class="smallcaps">MADARANZU</span> (and)
two cities which (were) dependent upon it I captured. Their warriors I
slew.

95\. Their spoil I carried away. I burned the cities with fire. For six
days in the heart of the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span>, a mighty mountain, a locality
difficult (of access), which for the passage of chariots and armies

96\. was unsuited, the mountain with axes of iron I hewed, with picks of
bronze I excavated. I made a passage for the chariots and soldiers. In
the cities by the side of the bridge which (is) in the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span>

97\. oxen, sheep, wine, plates of copper (and) bowls of copper I
received. I crossed Mount <span class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span> in the
centre. For the second time I descended into the lands of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>. (In) the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Singisa</span> <span id="fr_426"></span>[2](#fn_424)

98\. I made a halt. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Sigisa</span> I departed

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Madara</span>, the stronghold of Labdhuri the
son of Dhubu’si I approached. The city was very strong. Four walls

99\. surrounded (it). I attacked the city. They dreaded the face of my
powerful weapons, and its spoil, its goods (and) their sons I received
in ransom. In place of their lives I accepted them. <span
id="fr_427"></span>[1](#fn_425)

100\. Tribute, gifts (and) governors I imposed upon them. The city I
overthrew (and) dug up. To a mound and ruin I reduced (it). From the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Madara</span> I departed. Into the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Tuskhan</span> <span
id="fr_428"></span>[2](#fn_426)

101\. I descended. A palace in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskhan</span> I commenced. <span
id="fr_429"></span>[3](#fn_427) The tribute of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirdun</span>, horses, mules, plate(s) of copper,
bowls of copper, oxen, sheep

102\. (and) wine in the city of <span class="smallcaps">Tuskhan</span> I
received. Sixty cities (and) strong fortresses in the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span> belonging to Labdhuri the son of
Dhubu'si I overthrew (and) dug up. To mounds

103\. (and) ruins I reduced (them). In reliance on <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord I departed from the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskhan</span>. *Gift* (?) chariots <span
id="fr_430"></span>[4](#fn_428) (and) riding-horses bred therein I
carried off in store with me. By means of ropes

104\. I crossed the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>. All night I
pursued (my way). To the city of <span class="smallcaps">Pitura</span>
the stronghold of the <span class="smallcaps">Dirrans</span> I
approached. The city was very difficult (of access).

105\. Two walls surrounded (it). Its citadel was situated like the peak
of a mountain. Through the hands supreme of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord, (and) with the might of my
armies and my vehement battle,

106\. I fought with them. After two days, towards midday I roared upon
them like <span class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span> the inundator of the
plain. I rained destruction upon them. With violence

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

107\. and power my fighting-men flew upon them like the vulture. I
captured the city; Boo of their fighting-men I slew with weapons; their
heads

108\. I cut off. Many soldiers I took alive with the hand; the rest of
them I burned with fire. Their heavy spoil I carried away. A pyramid of
the living (and) of heads

109\. I built up at the entrance to its chief gate. I impaled 700 men
upon stakes at the approach to their great gate. The city I overthrew,
dug up (and) reduced to a mound and ruin. Their young men

110\. (and) their maidens I burned as a holocaust. The city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kukunu</span> which (is) at the mouth of the pass of
the mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Madni</span> I captured. I slew
with weapons 700 of their soldiers.

111\. Their numerous spoil I carried away. Fifty cities of the country
of <span class="smallcaps">Dirra</span> I captured. Their warriors I
slew. Their spoil I carried away. Fifty soldiers I captured alive with
the hand. The cities I overthrew,

112\. dug up (and) burned with fire. I outpoured upon them the splendour
of my sovereignty. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Pitura</span> <span id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_429) I
departed. Into the city of <span class="smallcaps">Arbaki</span> in the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Betani</span> I descended.

113\. They were terrified before the glory of my majesty, and deserted
their cities (and) their strong fortresses. To save their lives they
ascended Mount <span class="smallcaps">Madni</span>, a mighty mountain.

114\. I pursued after them. A thousand of their fighting-men I cut to
pieces in the midst of the inaccessible mountain. With their blood I
dyed the mountain. With their bodies the valleys

115\. (and) torrents of the mountain I filled. I took 200 soldiers alive
with the hand. I cut off their hands. I carried away 2000 captives.
Their oxen (and) their sheep

116\. to a countless number I took home. The towns of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Iyaya</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">’Salaniba</span>, the strongholds of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Arbaki</span> I captured. I slew their warriors. I
carried away their spoil.

117\. I overthrew (and) dug up 250 cities whose walls (were) strong in
the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>. To mounds and
ruins I reduced (them). The harvests of their mountain I reaped; the
corn

118\. (and) straw I accumulated in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskhan</span>. Against Ammi-bahla the son of Zamani
his nobles revolted and murdered him. In order to avenge

119\. Ammi-bahla I marched. Before the appearance of my weapons and the
grandeur of my sovereignty

120\. they had fear, and chariots (with) yokes of horses, trappings of
men (and) horses, 460

121\. horses bound to the yoke, 2 talents of silver, 2 talents of gold,
100 talents

122\. of lead, 100 talents of copper, 300 talents of iron, 100 plates of
copper, 3000 handles of copper, bowls of copper, cups of copper,

123\. 1000 variegated cloths, linen vestments, a dish of black wood,
ivory (and) gold, the possessions

124\. (and) treasure of the palace, 2000 oxen, 5000 sheep, his wife with
her rich dowry (and) the daughters

125\. of the nobles with their rich dowries I received. <span
id="fr_432"></span>[1](#fn_430)

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Assur-natsir-pal
the great king, the powerful king, the king of multitudes, the king of
<span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, the son of Tiglath-Uras the
great king, the powerful king,

126\. the king of multitudes, the king of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, the son of Rimmon-nirari the great
king, the powerful king, the king of multitudes, the king of the same
<span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>; the hero warrior who has marched
in reliance upon <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> his lord, and
among the kinglets

127\. of the four zones has had no rival; the king who from the fords of
the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> to the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Lebanon</span> and the great sea, <span
id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_431)

128\. the land of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> throughout its
circuit (and) the land of the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> as
far as the city of <span class="smallcaps">Rapiqi</span> <span
id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_432) has subdued beneath his feet; from the
head of the sources

129\. of the <span class="smallcaps">’Supnat</span> <span
id="fr_435"></span>[3](#fn_433) as far as the lowlands of <span
class="smallcaps">Bitani</span> his hand has conquered; from the
lowlands of <span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span> to the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Gozan</span>, from the fords of the Lower <span
class="smallcaps">Zab</span>

130\. to the city of <span class="smallcaps">Tel-Bari</span> which (is)
above the land of <span class="smallcaps">Zaban</span>, <span
id="fr_436"></span>[4](#fn_434) from the city of the *Tel* <span
id="fr_437"></span>[5](#fn_435) of <span class="smallcaps">Aptani</span>
to the city of the *Tel* of <span class="smallcaps">Zabdani</span>, the
cities of <span class="smallcaps">Khirimu</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Kharutu</span> (and) the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Birate</span> <span id="fr_438"></span>[6](#fn_436)

131\. belonging to <span class="smallcaps">Kar-Dunias</span> <span
id="fr_439"></span>[7](#fn_437) to the frontiers of my country I have
restored (the territory), and the broad regions of the countries of
<span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> throughout

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

its whole extent I have conquered. I took the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span> (in hand) anew. The old mound

232\. I changed. I deepened (it) as far as the level of the waters. To a
depth of 120 *tikpi* I consolidated (it). The temple of <span
class="smallcaps">Uras</span> my lord upon the middle of it I founded.
At that time

133\. I made an image of the same <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span>
which did not previously exist in the inventiveness of my heart, even a
colossus of his great divinity, with the best of mountain-stone and fine
gold.

134\. I accounted him my great divinity in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span>. His festivals I ordained in the months
Sebat and Elul. <span id="fr_440"></span>[1](#fn_438) His sanctuary
which had not been built <span id="fr_441"></span>[2](#fn_439) I
designed.

135\. The holy of holies of <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span> my lord
I constructed firmly in the midst of it. The temple of <span
class="smallcaps">Beltis</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Sin</span>, <span id="fr_442"></span>[3](#fn_440) and
<span class="smallcaps">Gula</span>, the image of <span
class="smallcaps">Ea</span> the king (and) the image of <span
class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span> the master of heaven and earth I
erected.

<span class="small">COLUMN III</span>

1\. In the month Sivan, on the 22d day, during the eponymy of
Dagon-bil-natsir, <span id="fr_443"></span>[4](#fn_441) I departed from
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Calah</span>. The <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed. On the further bank of the
<span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>

2\. abundant tribute I received. In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tabite</span> I made a halt. On the 6th day of the
month Tammuz I departed from the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tabite</span>. I occupied the banks of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Kharmis</span>. <span id="fr_444"></span>[5](#fn_442)

3\. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">Margari’si</span> I made a
halt. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Margari’si</span> I
departed. I occupied the banks of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Khabur</span>. <span id="fr_445"></span>[6](#fn_443)
(In) the city of <span class="smallcaps">Sadikanni</span> I made

4\. a halt. The tribute of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Sadikanni</span>, silver, gold, lead, plates of
copper, oxen, (and) sheep I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Sadikanni</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

5\. I departed. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">Qatni</span> I
made a halt. The tribute of the city of the <span
class="smallcaps">Qatnians</span> I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Qatni</span> I departed.

6\. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">Dur-Kadlime</span> <span
id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_444) I made a halt. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Dur-Kadlime</span> I departed. In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span> I made a halt. The tribute

7\. of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span>,
silver, gold, lead, plates of copper, variegated cloths, linen
vestments, oxen (and) sheep I received.

8\. From the country of <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span> I
departed. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">’Sirqi</span> <span
id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_445) I made a halt. The tribute of the

9\. (city of the <span class="smallcaps">’Sirqians</span>, silver, gold,
lead, plates, oxen and) sheep I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">’Sirqi</span> I departed. In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tsupri</span> I made a halt. The tribute of the city
of the <span class="smallcaps">Tsuprians</span>, silver,

10\. gold, lead, plates, oxen (and) sheep I received. From the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Tsupria</span> I departed. In the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Naqarabani</span> I made

11\. a halt. The tribute of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Naqarabani</span>, silver, gold, lead, plates, oxen
(and) sheep I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Naqarabani</span>

12\. I departed. At the approach to the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khindani</span> I made a halt. On the further bank of
the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> it is situated.

13\. The tribute of the city of the <span
class="smallcaps">Khindanians</span>, silver, gold, lead, plates, oxen
(and) sheep I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khindani</span>

14\. I departed. In the mountains above the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I made a halt. From the mountains I
departed. In <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Sabaya</span> <span
id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_446) at the approach to the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kharidi</span>

15\. I made a halt. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Kharudu</span>
(*sic*) is situated on the further bank of the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>. From <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Sabaya</span> I departed. At the head of the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Anat</span> <span
id="fr_449"></span>[4](#fn_447)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

16\. I made a halt. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Anat</span> is
situated in the middle of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>.
From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Anat</span> I departed. The
city of <span class="smallcaps">’Suru</span> <span
id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_448) the stronghold of

17\. Sadudu of the land of the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> I
attacked. To the far-spread soldiers of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kassi</span> <span id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_449) he
trusted, and to make war and battle against me

18\. he came. The city I attacked. For two days I fought within (it).
Before my mighty weapons Saduta (*sic*) and 70 of his soldiers to

19\. save his life plunged into the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>. I captured the city. Fifty
riding-horses and (their) grooms, the property of Nebo-baladan <span
id="fr_452"></span>[3](#fn_450) king of <span
class="smallcaps">Kar-Dunias</span>

20\. (and) Zabdanu his brother together with 3000 of their soldiers,
(and) Bel-bal-iddin the prophet who went before their hosts I carried
off captive along with them.

21\. Many soldiers I slew with weapons. Silver, gold, lead, plates,
precious mountain-stone for the adornment of his palace,

22\. chariots, horses trained to his yoke, the trappings of the
soldiers, the trappings of the horses, the amazons <span
id="fr_453"></span>[4](#fn_451) of his palaces, his spoil

23\. abundant I carried away. The city I overthrew (and) dug up. My
prowess and power I laid upon the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span>. The fear of my sovereignty prevailed
as far as the country of <span class="smallcaps">Kar-Dunias</span>.

24\. The descent of my weapons overwhelmed the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Kaldu</span>. <span id="fr_454"></span>[5](#fn_452) On
the countries beside the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I
outpoured terror. An image

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

25\. of my person I made. My prowess and power I inscribed upon (it). In
the city of <span class="smallcaps">’Suru</span> I erected (it).
Assur-natsir-pal the king whose fame

26\. (and) power are everlasting, and whose face has been directed
towards the desert; for his rule (and) his *protection* (?) his heart
cries out. In the city of <span class="smallcaps">Calah</span> I was
Staying

27\. (when) news was brought that the men of the country <span
id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_453) of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span>,
of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Khindanu</span> (and) of the
country of the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> had revolted,
every one of them; the river <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>

28\. they had crossed. On the 18th day of the month Sivan I departed
from the city of <span class="smallcaps">Calah</span>. I crossed the
<span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>. I entered the desert. To the city
of <span class="smallcaps">’Suru</span>

29\. in <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Khalupe</span> I approached. Boats
for myself I constructed in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">’Suru</span>. I occupied the water towards the source
of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>. As far as

30\. the narrows of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I
descended (the stream). The cities of Khenti-el (and) Azi-el of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> I captured. Their
warriors I slew. Their spoil

31\. I carried away. The cities I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with
fire. In the course of this campaign I encompassed the lakes <span
id="fr_456"></span>[2](#fn_454) of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Khabur</span> as far as

32\. the city of <span class="smallcaps">Tsibate</span> in the land of
the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span>. The cities on the hither
bank of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> in the land of
<span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> (and) in the land of the <span
class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with
fire. <span id="fr_457"></span>[3](#fn_455) Their crops (?) I cut down.
Four hundred and seventy

33\. of their soldiers I slew with weapons. I captured 20 <span
id="fr_458"></span>[4](#fn_456)

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

alive (and) impaled (them) on stakes. In the boats I had constructed,

34\. the boats of *hardened* (?) skin, which were fastened from both
sides <span id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_457) in the form of a pontoon, I
crossed the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> at the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Kharidi</span>. The people of the countries of
the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> (and) of <span
class="smallcaps">Laqe</span>

35\. (and) of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Khindanu</span>
trusted to the strength of their chariots, their armies (and) their
forces, and mustered 6000 of their soldiers to make war and battle.

36\. When they came forth against me, I fought with them. I utterly
destroyed them. Their chariots I minished. I slew 6500 (*sic*) of their
fighting-men with weapons. What was left of them

37\. was devoured by the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> amid
famine in the desert. <span id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_458) From the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Kharidi</span> in the country of the
<span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> as far as the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kipina</span> the cities of the people of <span
class="smallcaps">Khindanu</span>

38\. (and) of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> which (are) on the
further bank (of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>) I
captured. Their warriors I slew. Their spoil I carried away. The cities
I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire. Azi-el the <span
class="smallcaps">Laqian</span>

39\. trusted to his forces and occupied the fords at the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kipina</span>. I fought with them. (Starting) from the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Kipina</span> I utterly destroyed them.
A thousand

40\. of his soldiers I slew. His chariots I minished. His abundant spoil
I carried away. His gods I carried off. To save his life Mount <span
class="smallcaps">Bi’suru</span>, <span id="fr_461"></span>[3](#fn_459)
an inaccessible mountain towards the source

41\. of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>, he occupied. For
two days I pursued after him. The relics of his army I slew with
weapons. The mountain (and) the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>
devoured those I had destroyed of them. <span
id="fr_462"></span>[4](#fn_460) As far as

42\. the cities of <span class="smallcaps">Dummete</span> <span
id="fr_463"></span>[5](#fn_461) (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Azmu</span>, the cities of the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

son of Adinu, I pursued him. The relics of his army I slew with weapons.
His abundant spoil, his oxen (and) his sheep,

43\. which like the stars of heaven were numberless I carried away. At
that time I carried off Ila the <span class="smallcaps">Laqian</span>,
his chariots (and) yokes of horses, (and) 500 of his soldiers.

44\. To my country of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span> I brought
(them). The cities of <span class="smallcaps">Dummut</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Azmu</span> I captured, overthrew, dug up (and) burned
with fire. From the narrows of the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I came out. In the course of this
campaign

45\. I encompassed Azi-el. Before my mighty weapons, in order to save
his life, he ascended (the country). Ila, the prince of the land of
<span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span>, his soldiers, his chariots (and)
his teams

46\. I carried off. To my city of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> <span id="fr_464"></span>[1](#fn_462) I
brought (them). Khimti-el the <span class="smallcaps">Laqian</span> I
besieged in his city. By the help of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord before my mighty weapons, my
vehement battle

47\. (and) my enormous forces he was terrified, and the booty of his
palace, silver, gold, lead, copper, plates of copper (and) variegated
cloths, his abundant spoil, I received, and tribute

48\. (and) gifts above what I had before prescribed I imposed upon them.
At that time 50 strong wild bulls on the further side of the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I killed; 8 wild bulls

49\. I captured alive with the hand; 20 *esir*-birds I killed; 20
*esir*-birds I caught alive with the hand. I founded two cities upon the
<span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>, one on the hither bank

50\. of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> whose name I called
<span class="smallcaps">Kar-Assur-natsir-pal</span>, <span
id="fr_465"></span>[2](#fn_463) the other on the further bank of the
<span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> whose name I called <span
class="smallcaps">Nibarti-Assur</span>. <span
id="fr_466"></span>[3](#fn_464)

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On the 20th day of
the month Sivan I departed from the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span>;

51\. I crossed the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>; to the country
Of <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span> I marched. To the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Kar-rabi</span> <span
id="fr_467"></span>[1](#fn_465) their stronghold I approached. The city
was very strong. Like a cloud of heaven it was elevated.

52\. The inhabitants trusted to their numerous soldiers and descended
not to embrace my feet. By the command of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord, and <span
class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who marches before me I attacked the
city.

53\. With *mounds* (?) <span id="fr_468"></span>[2](#fn_466)
*overthrowing* (?) (and) battering-rams I captured the city. Their
numerous warriors I slew. I utterly destroyed 800 of their fighting-men.
This spoil (and) their goods I carried away; 2400

54\. of their soldiers I carried off. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span> I transported (them). The city I
overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire. I put an end to it. I laid the
fear of the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord upon
<span class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span>.

55\. At that time the tribute of Akhuni the son of Adini (and) of
Khabini of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Tel-Abna</span>, <span
id="fr_469"></span>[3](#fn_467) silver, gold, lead, copper, variegated
cloths, linen vestments (and) beams

56\. of cedar, the treasures of his palace, I received. I took their
hostages. I extended mercy to them. On the 8th day of the month
Iyyar <span id="fr_470"></span>[4](#fn_468) I departed from the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Calah</span>. The <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>

57\. I crossed. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Carchemish</span> <span
id="fr_471"></span>[5](#fn_469) in the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Hittites</span> I took the road. To the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Bit-Bakhiani</span> I approached. The tribute of
the son of Bakhiani, chariots, teams, horses, silver,

58\. gold, lead, copper (and) plates of copper I received. The chariots,
riding-horses (and) grooms of the son of Bakhiani I took away with me.
From <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Bakhiani</span> I departed.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

59\. To the country of <span class="smallcaps">Azalli</span> <span
id="fr_472"></span>[1](#fn_470) I approached. The tribute of
Dadu-imme <span id="fr_473"></span>[2](#fn_471) the <span
class="smallcaps">\[A\]zalian</span>, chariots, teams, horses, silver,
gold, lead, copper,

60\. plates of copper, oxen, sheep (and) wine I received. The chariots,
riding-horses (and) grooms I carried off in store with me. From the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Azalli</span> I departed. To <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span> I approached.

61\. The tribute of Akhuni the son of Adini, silver, gold, lead, copper,
plate(s) of copper, dishes of ivory, couches of ivory, yokes of ivory,

62\. thrones made of ivory, of silver (and) of gold, torques of gold,
beads <span id="fr_474"></span>[3](#fn_472) of gold in large quantities,
*pendants* (?) of gold, a sword-blade of gold, oxen, sheep (and) wine as
his tribute I received.

63\. The chariots, riding-horses (and) grooms of Akhuni I carried off
with me. At that time the tribute of Khabini of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Tel-Abna</span>, <span id="fr_475"></span>[4](#fn_473)
manehs of silver (and) 400 sheep I received from him.

64\. Ten manehs of silver in his first year as a tribute I imposed upon
him. From the country of <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span> I
departed. The <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> at its flood in
boats of *hardened* (?) skin thereupon

65\. I crossed. To the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Carchemish</span> I approached. The tribute of
’Sangara king of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>, 20 talents of silver, beads of gold,
a chain of gold, *sword-blades* (?) of gold, 100 talents

66\. of copper, 250 talents of iron, sacred bulls of copper, bowls of
copper, libation-cups of copper, a *censer* (?) of copper, the
multitudinous furniture of his palace, of which the like

67\. was never received, <span id="fr_476"></span>[4](#fn_473) couches,
seats (and) thrones, dishes (and) weapons made of ivory, 200
slave-girls, variegated cloths,

68\. linen vestments, black transparent stuffs (and) gray

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

transparent stuffs, *sirnuma* stones, the tusks of elephants, a white
chariot, (and) small images of gold in quantities, the ornaments of his
royalty, I received from him. The chariots,

69\. riding-horses (and) grooms of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Carchemish</span> I carried off with me. All the kings
of the (surrounding) countries came to my presence and embraced my feet.
Their hostages I took.

70\. They rejoiced at my face. To the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Lebanon</span> they went. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Carchemish</span> I departed. In sight of the
countries of <span class="smallcaps">Munzigani</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Khamurga</span> I took (my way).

71\. I passed the country of <span class="smallcaps">Akhanu</span> on my
left. To the city of <span class="smallcaps">Khazazi</span> <span
id="fr_477"></span>[1](#fn_474) belonging to Lubarna the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> I approached; gold, cloths (and) linen
vestments I received.

72\. I forded the river <span class="smallcaps">Apre</span>. <span
id="fr_478"></span>[2](#fn_475) I crossed (it) making a halt. From the
banks of the <span class="smallcaps">Apre</span> I departed. To the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Kunulua</span> <span
id="fr_479"></span>[3](#fn_476) the capital of Lubarna the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span>

73\. I approached. The face of my powerful weapons (and) vehement battle
he feared, and to save his life he embraced my feet. Twenty talents of
silver, one talent of gold,

74\. 100 talents of lead, 100 talents of iron, 1000 oxen, 10,000 sheep,
1000 variegated cloths (and) linen vestments, small images (and) weapons
in quantities,

75\. the legs of couches, seats (and) couches in quantities, dishes of
ivory (and) numerous utensils, the multitudinous furniture of his
palace, the like of which

76\. had never been received, so female musicians, rings (and) numerous
… <span id="fr_480"></span>[4](#fn_477) (and) the great *maces*
(?) <span id="fr_481"></span>[5](#fn_478) of the great lords, as his
tribute I received from him. Mercy unto him

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

77\. I extended. The chariots, riding-horses (and) grooms of the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinians</span> I carried off with me. His hostages I
took. At that time the tribute of Gu’si <span
id="fr_482"></span>[1](#fn_479)

78\. the <span class="smallcaps">Yakhanian</span>, silver, gold, lead,
\[copper\], <span id="fr_483"></span>[2](#fn_480) oxen, sheep,
variegated cloths, (and) linen vestments, I received. From the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Kunulua</span> the capital of Labarna

79\. the <span class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> I departed. The river
<span class="smallcaps">\[Oron\]tes</span> I crossed. On the banks of
the <span class="smallcaps">Orontes</span> I halted. From the banks of
the <span class="smallcaps">Orontes</span> I departed. In sight

80\. of the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Yaraqi</span> <span
id="fr_484"></span>[3](#fn_481) (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Yahturi</span> I took (my way). The country of … <span
class="smallcaps">ku</span> I traversed. On the banks of the river <span
class="smallcaps">’Sangura</span> <span id="fr_485"></span>[4](#fn_482)
I made (a halt). From the banks of the river <span
class="smallcaps">’Sagura</span> (*sic*) I departed. In sight

81\. of the countries of <span class="smallcaps">’Saratini</span> (and)
<span class="smallcaps">Kalapani</span> <span
id="fr_486"></span>[5](#fn_483) I took (my way). On the banks \[of the
river\] … I made \[off\]erings. Into the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Aribua</span> the stronghold of Lubarna I entered.

82\. The city I took for myself. The corn and straw of the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Lukhuti</span> I harvested (and) heaped up
within (it). I made a feast in his palace. Colonists from <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>

83\. I settled within (it). While I was staying in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Aribua</span> I conquered the cities of the land of
<span class="smallcaps">Lukhuti</span>. Their numerous warriors I slew.
I overthrew, dug up, and with fire

84\. I burned. I captured (some) soldiers alive with the hand. On stakes
I impaled (them) at the approach to their cities. At that time I
occupied the slopes of <span class="smallcaps">Lebanon</span>. To the
great sea

85\. of <span class="smallcaps">Phœnicia</span> I ascended. At the great
sea I hung up my weapons. I offered sacrifices to the gods. The tribute
of the kings of the coasts of the sea,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

86\. of the <span class="smallcaps">Tyrians</span>, the <span
class="smallcaps">Sidonians</span>, the <span
class="smallcaps">Gebalites</span>, the <span
class="smallcaps">Makhallatians</span>, the <span
class="smallcaps">Maizians</span>, the <span
class="smallcaps">Kaizians</span>, <span id="fr_487"></span>[1](#fn_484)
the <span class="smallcaps">Phœnicians</span>, and of the citizens of
<span class="smallcaps">Arvad</span>

87\. in the middle of the sea, silver, gold, lead, copper, plate\[s\] of
copper, variegated cloths, linen vestments, great *maces* (?) (and)
small *maces* (?),

88\. *usu* wood, seats of ivory (and) a porpoise the offspring of the
sea, as their tribute I received. They embraced my feet. To the
mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Khamani</span> <span
id="fr_488"></span>[2](#fn_485) I ascended. Logs

89\. of cedar, sherbin, <span id="fr_489"></span>[3](#fn_486) juniper
(and) cypress I cut. I offered sacrifices to my gods. I erected a
memorial of my warlike deeds. Upon it I *wrote* (?) <span
id="fr_490"></span>[4](#fn_487)

90\. The logs of cedar were *transported* (?) from the mountain of <span
class="smallcaps">Amanus</span>, as materials for <span
class="smallcaps">E-sarra</span>, <span id="fr_491"></span>[5](#fn_488)
for my temple have I stored (them), even (for) the Temple of Rejoicing
(and) for the temple of <span class="smallcaps">Sin</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Samas</span> the holy gods.

91\. To the country of fir-trees <span id="fr_492"></span>[6](#fn_489) I
went. The country of fir-trees [throughout](errata.htm#1) its whole
extent I conquered. Logs of fir I cut. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span>

92\. I brought (them). To <span class="smallcaps">Istar</span> the lady
of <span class="smallcaps">Ninevah</span>, my benefactress I offered
(them). During the eponymy of Samas-nuri, <span
id="fr_493"></span>[7](#fn_490) by the command of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord, on the 20th day
of the month Iyyar <span id="fr_494"></span>[8](#fn_491) from

93\. the city of <span class="smallcaps">Calah</span> I departed. The
<span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed. Into the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Qipani</span> I descended. The tribute of the
city-chiefs of the land of <span class="smallcaps">Qipani</span> in the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Khuzirina</span>

94\. I received. While I was staying in this city of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Khuzirina</span> the tribute of Ittih the <span
class="smallcaps">Zallian</span> (and) Giri-Dadi <span
id="fr_495"></span>[1](#fn_492) the <span
class="smallcaps">Assaian</span>, silver,

95\. gold, oxen (and) sheep, I received. In those days beams of cedar,
silver (and) gold, the tribute of Qata-zili

96\. the <span class="smallcaps">Komagenian</span> I received. From the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Khuzirina</span> I departed. The banks
of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> towards (its) upper part
I occupied. The country of <span class="smallcaps">Kuppu</span>

97\. I traversed. I entered the midst of the cities of the countries of
<span class="smallcaps">Assa</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> which (are) opposite to the land of the
<span class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>. The cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Umalia</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Khiranu</span>

98\. the strongholds which are situated in the neighbourhood of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Adani</span> I conquered. Their
numerous warriors I slew. Their spoil to a countless amount

99 I carried away. The cities I overthrew (and) dug up. I burned with
fire 150 cities which were dependent on them. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Karania</span>

100\. I departed. Into the lowlands of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Amadani</span> <span id="fr_496"></span>[2](#fn_493) I
descended. Into the midst of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Dirria</span> I entered. The cities in sight

101\. of the countries of <span class="smallcaps">Amadani</span> (and)
<span class="smallcaps">Arqania</span> I burned with fire. The country
of <span class="smallcaps">Mallanu</span> which adjoins the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Arqania</span> I took for myself. From the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Mallanu</span> I departed.

102\. Into the cities of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Zamba</span> on the banks of the bridge (I entered
and) burned (them) with fire. The river <span
class="smallcaps">Tsua</span> I crossed. On the river <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I made (a halt). The cities

103\. on the hither and further side of the <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>, in the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Arkania</span> (*sic*) I reduced to mounds and ruins.
All the land of <span class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span> was afraid and my
feet

104\. embraced. Their hostages I took. I appointed a

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

governor of my own to be over them. From the lowlands of the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Amadani</span> I came out at the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Barza-nistun</span>. <span
id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_494)

105\. To the city of <span class="smallcaps">Damdammu’sa</span> the
stronghold of Ilani the son of Zamani <span
id="fr_498"></span>[2](#fn_495) I approached. The city I besieged. My
warriors flew like bird(s) upon them.

106\. I slew 600 of their fighting-men with weapons. I cut off their
heads. I captured 400 soldiers alive with the hands.

107\. I brought away 3000 of their captives. I took this city for
myself. The living soldiers (and) the heads I brought to the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Amedi</span> his capital. <span
id="fr_499"></span>[3](#fn_496)

108\. I built up a pyramid with the heads at the approach to his main
gate. The living soldiers I impaled on stakes at the gates of his city.

109\. I fought a battle within his main gate. I cut down his
plantations. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Amedi</span> I
departed. Into the lowlands of Mount <span
class="smallcaps">Kasyari</span> (and) of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Allab’sia</span>

110\. which none among my fathers had cut off or proclaimed (war)
against (and) approached, <span id="fr_500"></span>[4](#fn_497) I
descended. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Uda</span> the stronghold
of Labdhuri, the son of Dhubu'si

111\. I approached. The city I attacked. With *mounds* (?)
*battering-rams* (?) and war-engines I captured the city. I slew
14\[00\] of their soldiers with weapons. Five hundred and eighty men
alive

112\. I took with the hand. I brought away 3000 of them captive. The
soldiers (I had captured) alive I impaled on stakes round about his
\[city\]. Of some

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

113\. I put out the eyes. The rest of them I transported (and) brought
to <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>. The city I took for
\[myself\]. Assur-natsir-pal the great king, the powerful king, the king
of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>; the son of Tiglath-Uras,

114\. the great king, the powerful king, the king of multitudes, the
king of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>; the son of Rimmon-nirari
the great king, the powerful king, the king of multitudes, the king of
the same <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>; the warrior hero, who
has marched in reliance upon <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> his
lord and among the kinglets of the four zones

115\. has no rival; the shepherd of fair shows who fears not opposition,
the unique one, the strong one who has no confronter, the king who
subdues the disobedient, who all

116\. the legions of the mighty has conquered; the powerful male who
tramples on the neck of his enemies, who treads upon hostile lands, who
breaks in pieces the squadrons of the strong, who in reliance on the
great gods

117\. his lords has marched, and his hand has overcome all countries,
has conquered all mountains and has received all their tribute; the
exacter of hostages, who has established empire

118\. over all the world. At that time <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the lord the proclaimer of my name, the
magnifier of my sovereignty, his unsparing weapon to the hands of my
lordship

119\. entrusted. The widespread forces of the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Lullume</span> I slew with weapons in mid battle. By
the help of <span class="smallcaps">Samas</span>

120\. and <span class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span>, the gods my ministers,
over the forces of the countries of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>, the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Qurkhi</span>, the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Subari</span> and the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbe</span> <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_498) I
roared like <span class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span> the inundator.

121\. The king, who from the fords of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> to the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">Lebanon</span> and the great sea, the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

land of <span class="smallcaps">Laqe</span> throughout its circuit, the
land of the <span class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span> as far as the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Rapiqi</span>

122\. has subdued beneath his feet. From the head of the sources of the
river <span class="smallcaps">’Supnat</span> to the lowlands of <span
class="smallcaps">Bitani</span> his hand has conquered. From the
lowlands of <span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span> to

123\. the country of <span class="smallcaps">Gozan</span>, from the
fords of the Lower <span class="smallcaps">Zab</span> to the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Tel-Bari</span> <span
id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_499) which is above the <span
class="smallcaps">Zab</span> as far as the city of the Mound of <span
class="smallcaps">Zabdani</span> and the city of the Mound

124\. of <span class="smallcaps">Aptani</span>, the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khirimu</span>, the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kharutu</span>, the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Birate</span> <span id="fr_503"></span>[2](#fn_500)
belonging to <span class="smallcaps">Babylonia</span> I have restored to
the frontiers of my country. From the lowlands of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Babite</span>

125\. to the country of <span class="smallcaps">Khasmar</span> I have
accounted (the inhabitants) as men of my own country. In the lands which
I have conquered I have appointed my governors. They have done homage.
Boundaries

126\. I have set for them. Assur-natsir-pal, the exalted prince, the
adorer of the great gods, the unique monster, the lusty, the conqueror
of cities and mountains to their furthest limits, the king of lords, the
consumer

127\. of the strong, the hero who spares not, the annihilator of
opposition, the king of all kinglets, the king of kings, the exalted
prophet, named by <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span> the warrior, the
hero

128\. of the great gods, the king who in reliance upon <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Uras</span>
the gods his ministers has marched in righteousness, and trackless
mountains and hostile princes (with) all

129\. their countries has subdued beneath his feet. With the foes of
<span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> above and below he has contended
and has imposed upon them tribute and gifts. Assur-natsir-pal

130\. the powerful king, named by <span
class="smallcaps">Sin</span>, <span id="fr_504"></span>[3](#fn_501) the
servant of

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Anu</span>, <span id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_502) the
favourite of <span class="smallcaps">Rimmon</span>, <span
id="fr_506"></span>[2](#fn_503) the strongest of the gods, the weapon
unsparing, the slaughterer of the land of his enemies (am) I. The king
(who is) strong in battle,

131\. the destroyer of cities and mountains, the firstborn of battle,
the king of the four zones, the subjugator of his foes, of mighty
countries (and) of \[trackless\] mountains. Kings valiant and
*unsparing* (?) from the rising

132\. of the sun to the setting of the sun have I subdued beneath my
feet. One speech have I made them utter. The former city of <span
class="smallcaps">Calah</span> which Shalmaneser <span
id="fr_507"></span>[3](#fn_504) king of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, a prince who went before me, built,

133\. this city had fallen into decay and had become a mound and a ruin.
To restore this city anew I worked. The men whom I had captured from the
countries I had conquered, from the land of the <span
class="smallcaps">Shuhites</span>, from the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Laqe</span>

134\. throughout its circuit, from the city of <span
class="smallcaps">’Sirqi</span> at the ford of the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> (and) the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Zamua</span> to its furthest limits, from <span
class="smallcaps">Bit-Adini</span> and the land of the <span
class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>, and from Liburna the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span>, I took (and) planted within (it).

135\. A canal from the Lower <span class="smallcaps">Zab</span> I
excavated (and) the river <span
class="smallcaps">Pati-khigal</span> <span
id="fr_508"></span>[4](#fn_505) I called its name. I established
plantations in its neighbourhood. I brought fruit and wine for <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord and the temples of my country.

136\. I changed the old mound. I dug deep as far as the level of the
water. I sunk (the foundations) 120 *tikpi* to the bottom. I built up
its wall. I built (it) up (and) completed (it) from its foundation to
its coping-stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[134:1](rp20230.htm#fr_332) *E-kur*, opposed to
*E-sarra*, the temple of the firmament. It represented the earth and the
lower world, and so became synonymous with Arabi or Hades. Temples were
built after the supposed likeness of this "temple of the earth," and the
name consequently came to signify a "temple" in general. Uras was the
messenger of Mul-lil "the lord of the ghost-world," worshipped at Nipur
or Niffer, and identified by the Semites with their supreme Bel. His
connection with the ghost-world or Hades explains why Uras should be
called "the offspring of the temple of the earth."

<span id="fn_331"></span>[135:1](rp20230.htm#fr_333) Now represented by
the mounds of Nimrûd at the junction of the Upper or Great Zab and the
Tigris.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[135:2](rp20230.htm#fr_334) This is Bel of
Nipur, the Accadian Mul-lil, not the younger Bel-Merodach of Babylon.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[135:3](rp20230.htm#fr_335) The Assyrian Dagon
was a word of Accadian origin meaning "exalted." He was usually
associated with Anu the sky-god, and the worship of both was carried as
far west as Canaan. Anat, the wife of Anu, gave her name to the
Canaanite town of Beth-Anath (Josh. xix. 38).

<span id="fn_334"></span>[135:4](rp20230.htm#fr_336) *Edû*, which of
course does not mean "a flood" here.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[136:1](rp20230.htm#fr_337) *Usumgal*, a
fabulous beast which was supposed to devour the corpses of the dead.
Comp. Isaiah xiii. 21, 22; xxxiv. 14.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[136:2](rp20230.htm#fr_338) The Sun-god.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[137:1](rp20230.htm#fr_339) *Isriti* or
*esrête*, of the same origin as the Hebrew *ashêrâh*, the symbol of the
goddess of fertility, mistranslated "grove" in the authorised version of
the Old Testament.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[138:1](rp20230.htm#fr_340) The Ashtoreth of
the Old Testament.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[138:2](rp20230.htm#fr_341) This must be a
different Nimme from the Armenian one, in the neighbourhood of the
modern Mush, mentioned by Tiglath-Pileser I. See vol. i. p. 106, note 1.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[138:3](rp20230.htm#fr_342) The name can also
be read, but with less probability, Gubbê.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[139:1](rp20230.htm#fr_343) The Mount Etini in
eastern Kurdistan mentioned in col. ii. line 62.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[139:2](rp20230.htm#fr_344) *Lallik* for *lu
allik*.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[139:3](rp20230.htm#fr_345) *Akul* for *yakul*
after *sade*.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[139:4](rp20230.htm#fr_346) Kirruri (or
Gurruri) was the district under Mount Rowandiz in Kurdistan, eastward of
Assyria, from which a pass led directly into the city of Arbela.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[139:5](rp20230.htm#fr_347) ’Sime’si lay
immediately to the north-east of the pass of Holwan.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[140:1](rp20230.htm#fr_348) Adaus is mentioned
by Tiglath-Pileser I; see vol. i, p. 102.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[140:2](rp20230.htm#fr_349) Or Kharga’sians.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[140:3](rp20230.htm#fr_350) The word is
expressed by ideograph s which signify "animals with large feet." It is
therefore probable that a species of horse, like our cart-horse, is
meant rather than mules.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[140:4](rp20230.htm#fr_351) Gozan lay to the
south of the kingdom of Ararat between the northern bank of the Tigris
and Lake Van. Whether the country of Gozan had anything to do with the
city of Gozan which gave its name to Gauzanitis in classical times is
doubtful. The city seems to be meant by the Gozan of Scripture (2 Kings
xix. 12) which lay on the river Khabour. Khupuska lay to the north of
Assyria and the Upper Zab.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[140:5](rp20230.htm#fr_352) Qurkhi of Betani or
Armenia extended eastward of Diarbekir along the northern bank of the
Tigris. See vol. i. p. 96, note 3. Qurkhi formed the eastern boundary of
the Hittite tribes.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[140:6](rp20230.htm#fr_353) The name-of this
city seems to signify "Hittite."

<span id="fn_352"></span>[140:7](rp20230.htm#fr_354) A variant text
gives Artsuain. It may be the Artsuinis of the Vannic inscriptions, the
modern Sirka near Van.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[140:8](rp20230.htm#fr_355) Perhaps the modern
Tilleh, at the junction of the Sert river and the Tigris.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[140:9](rp20230.htm#fr_356) This seems to be
the earliest form of the name of Urardhu, the Biblical Ararat.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[141:1](rp20230.htm#fr_357) A variant text
gives Babua.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[141:2](rp20230.htm#fr_358) The Tigris seems to
be referred to rather than the Euphrates.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[141:3](rp20230.htm#fr_359) B.C. 883.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[141:4](rp20230.htm#fr_360) July.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[142:1](rp20230.htm#fr_361) The Komagênê of
classical geography; see vol. i. p. 95, note I.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[142:2](rp20230.htm#fr_362) The Moskhi of
classical geography, the Meshech of the Old Testament; see vol. i. p.
94, note 3.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[142:3](rp20230.htm#fr_363) The modern Helebi
on the western bank of the Euphrates, midway between the mouths of the
Balikh and the Khabour. The classical Sura (now Surieh), a little above
the mouth of the Balikh, preserved the name of the ’Suru.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[142:4](rp20230.htm#fr_364) The name means "the
Hamathite."

<span id="fn_363"></span>[142:5](rp20230.htm#fr_365) Literally "the son
of nobody."

<span id="fn_364"></span>[142:6](rp20230.htm#fr_366) Bit-Adin was on the
eastern bank of the Euphrates, not far from its junction with the
Balikh. It may be the Eden of Ezek. xxvii. 23 and 2 Kings xix. 12.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[142:7](rp20230.htm#fr_367) The modern Khabour,
which joins the Euphrates at the site of Circesium.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[142:8](rp20230.htm#fr_368) Now Arban, on the
eastern bank of the Khabour, where Sir A. H. Layard discovered the
remains of a palace. Dr. Peiser may be right in reading the name
Gar-dikan.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[142:9](rp20230.htm#fr_369) Or Ilu-Dadu, "Hadad
is god." Dadu or Hadad was the Syrian name of the deity which the
Assyrians identified with their Rimmon. The compound Hadad-Rimmon is
found in Zech. xii. 11.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[142:10](rp20230.htm#fr_370) We may compare the
name of Yoktan in Gen. x. 25. In W. A. I. ii. 60, 30, mention .is made
of "Qatnu the god of the city of Qatan."

<span id="fn_369"></span>[143:1](rp20230.htm#fr_371) Literally "female
soldiers."

<span id="fn_370"></span>[143:2](rp20230.htm#fr_372) *Argamanu takiltu*,
the Hebrew *argamân* and *thekêleth*, Exod. xxv. 26, xxvi. 4.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[144:1](rp20230.htm#fr_373) The land of Laqe
adjoined the territory of the ’Suru on the north.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[144:2](rp20230.htm#fr_374) Khindan may be the
Giddan of classical geography, on the eastern bank of the Euphrates.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[144:3](rp20230.htm#fr_375) Literally "in the
eponymy of the year of my name."

<span id="fn_374"></span>[144:4](rp20230.htm#fr_376) Assyrian ’Sukhi.
Their territory extended along the western bank of the Euphrates, from
the mouth of the Balikh to the mouth of the Khabour. It was to the
Shuhites that Bildad (Bel-Dadu), the friend of Job, belonged (Job ii.
11).

<span id="fn_375"></span>[144:5](rp20230.htm#fr_377) Or, as it may also
be read, Ilu-bani.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[145:1](rp20230.htm#fr_378) *Limesamma*.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[145:2](rp20230.htm#fr_379) Shalmaneser I, the
builder of Calah, B.C. 1300.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[145:3](rp20230.htm#fr_380) Or Khalzi-lukha.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[145:4](rp20230.htm#fr_381) The Sebbeneh Su,
which falls into the Tigris to the north of Diarbekir.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[145:5](rp20230.htm#fr_382) Tiglath-Pileser I,
B.C. 1130, and Tiglath-Uras, B.C. 889–883, are referred to.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[145:6](rp20230.htm#fr_383) The Mount Masius of
classical geography.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[146:1](rp20230.htm#fr_384) The "lowlands" in
the neighbourhood of Diarbekir. The "land of the Hittites" lay
immediately to the east of them.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[146:2](rp20230.htm#fr_385) Possibly the same
as the Tela of line 60.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[147:1](rp20230.htm#fr_386) Also called
Tuskhan. It lay between Mount Masius and the Tigris, south of Diarbekir.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[147:2](rp20230.htm#fr_387) Or according to a
variant text: "I founded a palace for the seat of my majesty in the
midst (of it); I made doors; at its gates I erected (them)."

<span id="fn_386"></span>[147:3](rp20230.htm#fr_388) The district
between Lake Van and the northern frontier of Assyria; see vol. i, p.
106, n. 7.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[148:1](rp20230.htm#fr_389) The name means
"Ammi is Baal." Ammi or Ammon was the supreme god of Ammon, as found in
the name of Ammi-nadab, a king of Ammon in the time of Assur-bani-pal.
Dr. Neubauer has shown that the name also occurs in the compounds
Rehobo-am (the son of an Ammonitess), Jerobo-am, and Bal-aam. Salaam
came from "the land of the children of Ammo" (rendered "his people" by
the A. V.; Numb. xxii. 5).

<span id="fn_388"></span>[148:2](rp20230.htm#fr_390) Or, perhaps,
Ankhite. But the name seems to mean "A god is Khite" (? the Hittite
deity).

<span id="fn_389"></span>[148:3](rp20230.htm#fr_391) Bitani is the
district south of Lake Van. Urume may be the Urima of classical
geography, the modern Urum. See vol. i. p. 99, n. 3.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[148:4](rp20230.htm#fr_392) One of the Vannic
gods was called Elipris, and a Vannic chieftain had the name Lut-ipris.
The suffix -*a* in Vannic denotes "the people of."

<span id="fn_391"></span>[148:5](rp20230.htm#fr_393) See above, p. 140,
n. 5.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[149:1](rp20230.htm#fr_394) The same name as
that of Hiram king of Tyre.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[149:2](rp20230.htm#fr_395) Called Azalla in
col. iii. line 99. It bordered Bit-Adin on the northwest, the district
belonging to "the son of Bakhian" being again to the north of it.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[149:3](rp20230.htm#fr_396) "Khani the great,"
so called to distinguish it from another Khani nearer Babylonia. It was
the district of which Malatiyeh was the capital.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[149:4](rp20230.htm#fr_397) B.C. 882.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[149:5](rp20230.htm#fr_398) "The man of Hadad"
or Rimmon. The name may also be read Nur-Dadi, "the light of Hadad."

<span id="fn_397"></span>[149:6](rp20230.htm#fr_399) Zamua lay among the
mountains of eastern Kurdistan, between Sulamaniyeh and the Shirwan, and
must be distinguished from another Zamua, called "Zamua of Bitani," and
more correctly Mazamua, which adjoined the shores of Lake Van.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[150:1](rp20230.htm#fr_400) September.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[150:2](rp20230.htm#fr_401) Now Shamamah
(Hazeh), south-west of Arbela.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[150:3](rp20230.htm#fr_402) The "mountain of
Nizir" was that on which the ark of the Chaldæan Noah was believed to
have rested. It lay among the Kurdish mountains of Pir Mam, a little to
the south of Rowandiz, between latitudes 35° and 36°. The sentence may
also be rendered "which the (people of) Lullu call Kinipa," and Lullu
may be identified with the country called Lullubu. Cp. line 77.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[151:1](rp20230.htm#fr_403) Not "above the
mountain of Nizir," as Peiser reads.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[151:2](rp20230.htm#fr_404) *Manta*, from
*manitu*, "a couch."

<span id="fn_403"></span>[151:3](rp20230.htm#fr_405) "I have put my
trust in Assur,"

<span id="fn_404"></span>[152:1](rp20230.htm#fr_406) A variant text has
"in sight of the whole mountain (and) the plain" (<span
class="smallcaps">Edinu</span>).

<span id="fn_405"></span>[152:2](rp20230.htm#fr_407) B.C. 881. The
reading of the name of the eponym is uncertain.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[152:3](rp20230.htm#fr_408) May.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[152:4](rp20230.htm#fr_409) Literally "a
muster."

<span id="fn_408"></span>[152:5](rp20230.htm#fr_410) The Kapros of
classical geography, which flows from the east into the Tigris a little
to the south of Kalah Sherghat (the ancient Assur).

<span id="fn_409"></span>[152:6](rp20230.htm#fr_411) The modem Adhem,
which passes through the district of Râdhân. It was the Physkos of
classical geography, joining the Tigris at Opis.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[152:7](rp20230.htm#fr_412) Literally "all my
days."

<span id="fn_411"></span>[152:8](rp20230.htm#fr_413) A variant text has
"gift-chariots."

<span id="fn_412"></span>[152:9](rp20230.htm#fr_414) Literally "I
deposited with myself."

<span id="fn_413"></span>[152:10](rp20230.htm#fr_415) The Tornadotus of
classical geography, the modern Diyâleh, which falls into the Tigris a
little below Bagdad.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[153:1](rp20230.htm#fr_416) Compare the Zimri
of Jer. xxv. 25.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[155:1](rp20230.htm#fr_417) *Tsapruni;* not
from *tsaparu*, "to murmur."

<span id="fn_416"></span>[155:2](rp20230.htm#fr_418) Now Nimrûd.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[155:3](rp20230.htm#fr_419) Or Murtis.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[155:4](rp20230.htm#fr_420) See above, [p.
140](#page_140), note [4](#fn_349).

<span id="fn_419"></span>[156:1](rp20230.htm#fr_421) Babylonia.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[156:2](rp20230.htm#fr_422) "The fortress of
Assur."

<span id="fn_421"></span>[156:3](rp20230.htm#fr_423) B.C. 880.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[156:4](rp20230.htm#fr_424) We know front the
treaty concluded between Ramses II and the Hittites that the Hittites
worshipped Astarte' by the side of their supreme god Sutekh. The goddess
who presided over Hierapolis, the successor of Carchemish in classical
times, was Alargatis, that is Atar-’Ati or Astartê-’Ati.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[157:1](rp20230.htm#fr_425) Literally
"strengthened."

<span id="fn_424"></span>[157:2](rp20230.htm#fr_426) Or Sigisa,
according to a variant text.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[158:1](rp20230.htm#fr_427) Literally "to the
preservation of their lives I turned them."

<span id="fn_426"></span>[158:2](rp20230.htm#fr_428) Also written
Tuskha.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[158:3](rp20230.htm#fr_429) Or, perhaps, "laid
out broadly."

<span id="fn_428"></span>[158:4](rp20230.htm#fr_430) The printed text
has "weapons."

<span id="fn_429"></span>[159:1](rp20230.htm#fr_431) Also written
Bitura.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[160:1](rp20230.htm#fr_432) An inscription of
Assur-natsir-pal, engraved on a monolith found among the ruins of Kurkh
on the Tigris (20 miles below Diarbekir), has the following variant
account of the campaign:—"(42) I flayed the skin of Bur-ramânu the
rebel: I covered (with it) the wall of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">’Sinabu</span>. Arteanu his brother I raised to the
chieftainship; (43) 2 manehs of gold, 13 manehs of silver, 1000 sheep
(and) 2000 … as tribute … I imposed upon him. The cities of <span
class="smallcaps">’Sinabu</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Tidu</span>, the fortresses which \[(44)Shalmaneser
king of Assyria, a prince who went before me, had occupied for himself
against the country of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>, which the
<span class="smallcaps">Arumu</span> Aramæans\] had taken away by force,
to (45) myself I restored: the men of the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> who had garrisoned the fortresses of (the
god) <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> in the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>, whom in the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Arumu</span> (the <span
class="smallcaps">Aramæans</span>) (46) had oppressed, their cities
\[and\] their farmsteads \[*bit-kummi*\] which had been destroyed (?) I
caused them to occupy (and) I settled them in quiet seats. Fifteen
hundred (47) soldiers, <span class="smallcaps">Akhlame</span> from the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Arman</span> \[Aramæans?\] belonging
to Ammi-pahli the son of Zamâni I removed, to <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span> I brought (them). The harvests of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> (48) I cut down; in the cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Tuskha</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Damdamu’sa</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">’Sinabu</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Tidu</span> for the benefit of my country I stored
(them) up. (49) The cities of the <span id="page_161">p. 161</span>
countries of <span class="smallcaps">Nirdun</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Luluta</span>, the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ki(?)rra</span> (and) the countries of <span
class="smallcaps">Aggunu</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Ulliba</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">Arbaki</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Nirbe</span> I conquered, their fighting-men I slew,
(50) their spoil I carried away, their cities I threw down, dug up (and)
burned with fire. To mounds and ruins I reduced (them). Taxes (Heb.
*halâk*), tribute, and a governor I imposed upon the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>. (51) My own prefect I imposed upon them;
they performed homage. The sight of my weapons (and) the terror of my
sovereignty I outpoured upon the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span>.''

<span id="fn_431"></span>[161:1](rp20230.htm#fr_433) The Mediterranean.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[161:2](rp20230.htm#fr_434) On the
north-western frontier of Babylonia.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[161:3](rp20230.htm#fr_435) The Sebbeneh Su,
which joins the Tigris north of Diarbekir.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[161:4](rp20230.htm#fr_436) Zaban was on the
southern side of the Lower Zab.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[161:5](rp20230.htm#fr_437) Or "mound."

<span id="fn_436"></span>[161:6](rp20230.htm#fr_438) "Fortresses."

<span id="fn_437"></span>[161:7](rp20230.htm#fr_439) Babylonia.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[162:1](rp20230.htm#fr_440) January and August.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[162:2](rp20230.htm#fr_441) Or perhaps "with
bowing down."

<span id="fn_440"></span>[162:3](rp20230.htm#fr_442) The Moon-god.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[162:4](rp20230.htm#fr_443) B.C. 879.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[162:5](rp20230.htm#fr_444) The classical
Hermos or Hirmas, flowing into the Khabour. Nisibis was built upon its
banks.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[162:6](rp20230.htm#fr_445) The modern Khabour.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[163:1](rp20230.htm#fr_446) Or Dur-Kumlime.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[163:2](rp20230.htm#fr_447) The Circesium of
classical geography, at the junction of the Euphrates and the Khabour.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[163:3](rp20230.htm#fr_448) Sabaya is the name
of a chief.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[163:4](rp20230.htm#fr_449) The modern Anah.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[164:1](rp20230.htm#fr_450) This must be a
different ’Suru from that mentioned above ([p. 142](#page_142), note
[3](#fn_361)).

<span id="fn_449"></span>[164:2](rp20230.htm#fr_451) The Kassi, or
Kossæans, originally a tribe from the mountains of Elam, had occupied a
part of Babylonia, and imposed a dynasty of kings upon that country. The
Kassi mentioned here were those who had settled in Babylonia.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[164:3](rp20230.htm#fr_452) Nabu-bal-iddina,
"Nebo has given a son." We may compare the name of Merodach-baladan.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[164:4](rp20230.htm#fr_453) Literally "female
soldiers."

<span id="fn_452"></span>[164:5](rp20230.htm#fr_454) The Kaldâ were a
tribe who were settled in the marshes at the head of the Persian Gulf.
This is the first time that we hear of their name, but at a later
period, under Merodach-baladan, the son of Yagina, they occupied
Babylonia and became so integral a part of the population as to give
their name to its inhabitants among Greek and Latin writers.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[165:1](rp20230.htm#fr_455) A variant text has
"city."

<span id="fn_454"></span>[165:2](rp20230.htm#fr_456) We must read
*tamâti*.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[165:3](rp20230.htm#fr_457) A variant text has
"as far as the city of Tsibate in the land of the Shuhites (and) the
cities on the hither bank of the Euphrates in the land of Laqe,"
omitting the following words.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[165:4](rp20230.htm#fr_458) A variant text has
"30."

<span id="fn_457"></span>[166:1](rp20230.htm#fr_459) *Kilallan*.
*Idulâni* is from *edilu*, "to be bolted."

<span id="fn_458"></span>[166:2](rp20230.htm#fr_460) Or perhaps "(and)
amid disease."

<span id="fn_459"></span>[166:3](rp20230.htm#fr_461) Probably the modern
Tel-Basher.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[166:4](rp20230.htm#fr_462) Literally "their
destruction."

<span id="fn_461"></span>[166:5](rp20230.htm#fr_463) Called Dummut in
line 44.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[167:1](rp20230.htm#fr_464) Now Kaleh Sherghat,
on the western bank of the Euphrates a little above the mouth of the
Lower Zab. The statement in the text seems to be derived from the
memorandum of some scribe other than the one who furnished the account
in lines 43, 44.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[167:2](rp20230.htm#fr_465) "The fortress of
Assur-natsir-pal."

<span id="fn_464"></span>[167:3](rp20230.htm#fr_466) "The ford of
Assur."

<span id="fn_465"></span>[168:1](rp20230.htm#fr_467) "The great rock" in
Aramaic.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[168:2](rp20230.htm#fr_468) *Billim*.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[168:3](rp20230.htm#fr_469) "The mound of the
stone."

<span id="fn_468"></span>[168:4](rp20230.htm#fr_470) April.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[168:5](rp20230.htm#fr_471) Written *Gargamis*,
the Hittite capital on the western bank of the Euphrates, now marked by
the ruins of Jarablûs, a little to the north of the junction of the
Sajur and the Euphrates.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[169:1](rp20230.htm#fr_472) See above, col. ii.
line 22.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[169:2](rp20230.htm#fr_473) Also written
Dadu-ihme.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[169:3](rp20230.htm#fr_474) *’Sahri*, the
Hebrew *Saharonim*, translated "crescents" in the Revised Version of
Isa. iii. 18.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[169:4](rp20230.htm#fr_476) Or, making <span
class="small">KI-LAL</span> ideographic "whose weight could not be
estimated."

<span id="fn_474"></span>[170:1](rp20230.htm#fr_477) Now ’Azaz, a few
miles north-west of Aleppo.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[170:2](rp20230.htm#fr_478) The modern Afrin.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[170:3](rp20230.htm#fr_479) Kunulua seems to be
the Gindarus of the classical writers. It is called Kinalua by
Shalmaneser II, and Kunalie by Tiglath-Pileser III.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[170:4](rp20230.htm#fr_480) *Kam*\[*mate*\] …
\[*ma*\]*hdi*.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[170:5](rp20230.htm#fr_481) *Pagutu*, written
*pagiti* in S 2039, 11.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[171:1](rp20230.htm#fr_482) Called Agu’si by
Shalmaneser II, the successor of Assur-natsir-pal.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[171:2](rp20230.htm#fr_483) There is a lacuna
here in the text.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[171:3](rp20230.htm#fr_484) Yaraqi was a
district of Hamath in the time of Tiglath-Pileser III.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[171:4](rp20230.htm#fr_485) The modern Sajur,
which flows from the north-west into the Euphrates near the site of
Pethor and a little to the south of that of Carchemish.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[171:5](rp20230.htm#fr_486) Not Duppani, as Dr.
Peiser reads.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[172:1](rp20230.htm#fr_487) The three cities of
Makhallat, Maiz, and Kaiz are identified by Prof. Delitzsch with the
later Tripolis (now Tripoli).

<span id="fn_485"></span>[172:2](rp20230.htm#fr_488) Amanus, bordering
on the Gulf of Antioch.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[172:3](rp20230.htm#fr_489) The smaller cypress
or *Oxycedrus*.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[172:4](rp20230.htm#fr_490) The reading of the
word is uncertain. It is perhaps *asqup*, from *saqapu* "to cover."

<span id="fn_488"></span>[172:5](rp20230.htm#fr_491) E-sarra, "the
temple of the firmament," was properly the mythological name of the sky;
but actual temples were named after it in the cities of Babylonia and
Assyria.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[172:6](rp20230.htm#fr_492) *Mekhri*.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[172:7](rp20230.htm#fr_493) B.C. 867.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[172:8](rp20230.htm#fr_494) April.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[173:1](rp20230.htm#fr_495) Called Kigiri-Dadi
by Shalmaneser II. Instead of Zallian we have Azallian above, line 59.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[173:2](rp20230.htm#fr_496) The country
surrounding the classical Amida, now Diarbekr. The capital Amedi is
mentioned in line 107.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[174:1](rp20230.htm#fr_497) Perhaps identical
with the Nistun mentioned in col. i. line 63. In the Vannic language of
ancient Armenia *barza-nis* signified "a chapel."

<span id="fn_495"></span>[174:2](rp20230.htm#fr_498) Or "the son of a
rebel." According to col. i. line 110, Assur-natsir-pal had already
destroyed Damdamu’sa.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[174:3](rp20230.htm#fr_499) See [p.
173](#page_173), note [2](#fn_493).

<span id="fn_497"></span>[174:4](rp20230.htm#fr_500) Literally "of which
none had made a cutting off or a proclaiming (and) approach." An army
was accompanied by an *asipu* or "prophet," who determined by his
*sipti* or "proclamations" whether or not it should engage in battle.
Compare line 20 above. Dr. Peiser's corrections of the text are quite
unnecessary.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[175:1](rp20230.htm#fr_501) "The lowlands."

<span id="fn_499"></span>[176:1](rp20230.htm#fr_502) "The Mound of
Bari."

<span id="fn_500"></span>[176:2](rp20230.htm#fr_503) Or "the
Fortresses."

<span id="fn_501"></span>[176:3](rp20230.htm#fr_504) The Moon-god.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[177:1](rp20230.htm#fr_505) The Sky-god.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[177:2](rp20230.htm#fr_506) The Air-god.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[177:3](rp20230.htm#fr_507) Shalmaneser I,
about B.C. 2300.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[177:4](rp20230.htm#fr_508) "The opening of
fertility," also called Babelat-khigal, "bringer of fertility" (W. A.
I., i. 27, 6).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20231)
