[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20206) 
[Next](rp20208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

#### THE ADVENTURES OF SINUHIT (TWELFTH DYNASTY)

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> hereditary prince, the man of the
king in his quality of sole Friend, <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)
the jackal who makes the round of the frontiers to guard the country,
the sovereign of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span>, the veritable cousin of the king who
loves his lord, <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) the servant Sinuhit
says:

As for me, I am the servant of his master, the slave of the king, the
superintendent of the palace, the hereditary prince honoured with the
favour of the queen Usirtasen, one of the intimates <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26) of the royal son Amenemhâit, in his
residence. In the year XXX, the 2d month of Shaït, the 7th (day), the
god entered his double horizon, the king Shotphîtrî ascended to
heaven, <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27) and when he had united
himself with the solar disk the gods rejoiced at the event. Within the
palace there was nothing but distressed and mourning people; the great
gates were sealed; the courtiers

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

sat crouching in sign of mourning; the men were overcome by dolour and
silence. Now his majesty had despatched an army to the country of the
<span class="smallcaps">Timihu</span>; <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) his eldest son Usirtasen commanded it,
forcefully he marched, he took prisoners alive among the <span
class="smallcaps">Timihu</span> as well as all their innumerable cattle.
The Friends of the Seraglio sent people to the region of the west to
inform the new king of the regency which had befallen them unexpectedly
in the Palace. <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) The messengers found
him and reached him at nightfall; whereas running was not sufficiently
rapid, the Hawk flew with his servants <span
id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30) without informing the army, and as all the
royal sons who were in the army were in the field, none of them was
summoned. Now as for me, I was there, I heard the words which He uttered
on this matter, and I felt myself sinking; my heart palpitated, my arms
drooped, the fear of the king smote all my limbs; I wondered as I crept
along where I could find a place wherein to hide myself; <span
id="fr_31"></span>[4](#fn_31) I flung myself into the midst of the
thickets to wait (there) until they <span id="fr_32"></span>[5](#fn_32)
had passed. Then I turned towards the south, not with the wish of
reaching the palace, for I did not know whether war had broken
out, <span id="fr_33"></span>[6](#fn_33) and without even pronouncing a
wish to live after the (former) sovereign, I turned my back on the
(Canton of the) Sycomore. I reached <span
class="smallcaps">Shi-Snofru</span> and passed the night there on the
soil of the field. I started again at daybreak and joined a man who was
standing in the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

middle of the road; he implored my mercy, for he was afraid of me.
Towards supper-time I approached the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khri-Ahu</span>, <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)I
and crossed the water on a barge without a rudder. I quitted the country
of the west and passed over the eastern territory of <span
class="smallcaps">Iauxu</span> to the domain of the goddess <span
class="smallcaps">Hirit</span> the mistress of the Red Mountain; <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) then I proceeded on foot straight towards
the north, and I reached the walls of the prince, which he has
constructed to repel the <span class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span> and to
destroy the <span class="smallcaps">Nomiu-Shaiu</span>; I remained in a
crouching posture among the bushes, for fear of being seen by the guard,
relieved each day, which keeps watch from the summit of the fortress. I
proceeded on my way at nightfall, and at dawn I reached <span
class="smallcaps">Puteni</span> and directed my steps to the Wady of
<span class="smallcaps">Qimoîri</span>. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36) Then thirst fell and darted upon me; my
throat rattled and contracted and I already said to myself: "It is the
taste of death," when I rallied my heart and recalled my strength; I
heard afar the lowing of cattle. A <span class="smallcaps">Sitti</span>
perceived me and recognised from my appearance that I came from <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>. Behold he gave me water and boiled some
milk for me; I went with him to his tribe. They wished to give me a
territory out of their territory, but I departed at once and hurried to
the country of <span class="smallcaps">Edimâ</span>. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[4](#fn_37)

When I had passed a year there, Amu-ânshi <span
id="fr_38"></span>[5](#fn_38)—he is the prince of the Upper <span
class="smallcaps">Tonu</span>—bade me come and he said to me: "Dwell
with me; thou shalt hear the language of <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>." He said this because he 1 new my worth
and had heard of my merits, according to the testimony given of me by
the Egyptians who were in the country. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[6](#fn_39) This is what he said to me: "What is the
reason on account of which thou art come hither? Is it that there has
been a death in the palace of the king of the two <span
class="smallcaps">Egypts</span>, even of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shotphîtrî, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) without our having known what has passed
on this occasion?" I began to celebrate the king in a poetical effusion:
"When I came from the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Timihu</span> and my heart found for itself a new
home, if I failed, <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) it was not
remorse for a fault which sent me on the paths of a fugitive; I had not
been negligent, my mouth had uttered no biting speech, I had listened to
no perverse counsel, my name had not been heard in the mouth of the
magistrate. I know not how I can explain what has led me into this
country; it is as it were by the will of God, for ever since the time
when this land of <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> was as it were in
ignorance of this beneficent god \[the king\] the fear of whom is spread
among foreign nations, like <span class="smallcaps">Sokhit</span> <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42) in a year of pestilence, I have declared
to him my thought and replied to him: Save us! <span
id="fr_43"></span>[4](#fn_43) Behold now his son enters the palace in
his place and has undertaken the direction of the affairs of his father.
He is a god who verily has no second; none is before him. He is a master
of wisdom, prudent in his designs, beneficent in his disposition, at
whose good pleasure one goes and comes, for by his ability he subdues
foreign regions, and even when his father was still

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

in the interior of his palace, it was he who realised what his father
had determined should be accomplished. He is a hero who verily works
with his sword, a champion who has no rival; we see in him one who
rushes against the barbarians and bursts upon the pillagers. He is a
hurler of the javelin who makes feeble the hands of the enemy; those
whom he strikes can no longer lift the buckler. He is a fearless (hero)
who crushes the skulls (of his foes); none has stood before him. He is a
rapid runner who destroys the coward; none is able to run after him. He
is a heart resolute in its season. He is a lion who strikes with the
claw; never has he surrendered his arms. He is a heart closed to pity;
when he sees the multitudes he lets nothing remain behind him. He is a
hero who flings himself forward when he sees resistance, he is a soldier
who rejoices when he flings himself on the barbarians; he seizes his
buckler, he leaps, he has never had need to repeat his blow, he slays
without its being possible to turn aside his lance, and even without his
stretching his bow, the barbarians fly his two arms like greyhounds, for
the great goddess <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) has granted unto
him to combat those who know not his name, and if he attains (the prey)
he lets nothing remain. He is a favourite who has known marvellously how
to acquire love; his country loves him more than itself and rejoices in
him more than in its own god; men and women hasten at his summons. As
king he governs since he was in the egg; <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) he himself, since his birth, is a
multiplier of births, he is also an unique being, of the divine essence,
by whom this earth rejoices at being governed. He is an enlarger of
frontiers who will take the lands of the south, but covets not the lands
of the north; on the contrary, he has acted against the chiefs of the
<span class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span> and to destroy the <span
class="smallcaps">Nomiu-Shâiu</span>. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46) Should he come here, let him know thy name
by the homage thou wilt address to his majesty!

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For does he not do
good to the foreign country which obeys him?

The chief of <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span> answered me: "May the
government of <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> be fortunate, and may
its prosperity be of long duration! While thou art with me I will do
good to thee!" He set me above his children, marrying me to his eldest
daughter, and he granted that I should choose for myself in his domain,
among the best of what he possessed on the frontier of a neighbouring
country. It is an excellent country; <span class="smallcaps">Aïa</span>
is its name. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) There are figs in it
and grapes; its wine is more plentiful than water; abundant is the milk,
numerous the olives and all the products of its trees; there are corn
and meal without limit and every kind of cattle. It was noble, indeed,
what he conferred on me, when the prince came to invest me (with the
government), appointing me tribal prince in the best part of his
country. I had daily rations of bread and wine for each day, cooked
meat, roast fowl, together with the game that I caught or that was
placed before me, over and above what my dogs brought from the chase.
Plenty of butter <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) was made for me and
boiled milk of every sort. I passed many years (there); the children I
had became strong, each ruling his tribe. When a traveller went and
returned from the interior, he turned aside from his road to visit me,
for I rendered services to all the world. I gave water to the thirsty, I
set on his journey the traveller who had been hindered from passing by,
I chastised the brigand. The <span class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span> <span
id="fr_49"></span>[3](#fn_49) who departed afar to strike and to repel
the princes of the foreign countries I commanded, and they marched, for
the prince of <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span> allowed that I should
be during long years the general of

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

his soldiers. Every country towards which I marched, when I had made my
invasion, they trembled on the pastures beside their wells; I seized
their cattle, I removed their vassals and I carried away their slaves, I
slaughtered their population; <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) (the
country) lay at the mercy of my sword, my bow, my marches, my plans
well-conceived and glorious for the heart of my prince. Thus he loved me
when he knew my valour, making me chief of his children, when he saw the
vigour of my two arms.

A hero of <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span> came to defy me in my
tent; it was a hero who had no rivals, for he had destroyed them all. He
exclaimed: "Let Sinuhit combat with me, for he has not yet smitten me,"
and he flattered himself that he would take my cattle for the use of his
tribe. The prince deliberated thereupon with me. I said: "I know him
not. Certainly I am not his brother, I keep myself at a distance from
his abode; have I ever opened his door or cleared his fences? He is some
jealous fellow who is envious at seeing me and who fancies himself
summoned to despoil me of cats, of she-goats as well as of cows, and to
throw himself on my bulls, on my sheep, and on my oxen, in order to take
them for himself. If he is a wretch who thinks of enriching himself at
my expense, not a Beduin and a Beduin skilled in fighting, then let him
manage the matter with judgment! But if he is a bull who loves the
battle, a choice bull who loves ever to have the last word, if he has
the heart to fight, let him declare the intention of his heart! Will God
forget any one whom he has always favoured until now? It is as if the
challenger were already among those who are laid on the funeral couch!"
I strung my bow, I took out my arrows, I agitated my dagger, I furbished
up my arms. At dawn, the country of <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span>
came together; it had collected its tribes, (and) convoked all the
foreign lands which were dependent on it; it desired this combat. Each
heart burned for me, men and women shouted "Ah!" for every heart

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

was anxious on my account, and they said: "Is it really a strong man
that is going to fight with him? See, his adversary has a buckler, a
battle-axe, an armful of javelins." When I had gone forth, and he had
appeared, I turned his darts aside from me. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) As not a single one hit (me), he flung
himself upon me, and then I discharged my bow at him, when my dart
buried itself in his neck, he cried and struck himself on the nose; I
caused his lance to fall, I lifted up my shout of victory over his back.
While all the people rejoiced, I caused his vassals whom he had
oppressed to show their gratitude to <span
class="smallcaps">Montu</span> <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) in
deed. The prince Ammi-ânshi <span id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53) gave me
all that the conquered one possessed, and then I carried away his goods,
I took his cattle; that which he desired to make me do I made him do; I
seized what there was in his tent, I despoiled his abode; so that the
riches of my treasures increased and the number of my cattle.

Now behold what God has done for me who have trusted in him. He who had
deserted and fled to a foreign land, now each day his heart is joyous. I
saved myself by flight from the place where I was, and now good
testimony is rendered to me here. After I had fainted, dying of hunger,
now I give bread here where I am. I had quitted my country naked and
behold I am clothed in fine linen. After having been a fugitive without
servants, behold I possess numerous serfs. My house is beautiful, my
domain large, my memory is established in the temple of all the
gods. <span id="fr_54"></span>[4](#fn_54) And nevertheless I take refuge
always in thy goodness (?):

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

restore me to <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) grant me the favour of once more seeing in
the flesh the place where my heart passes its time! Is there any
objection to my corpse reposing in the country where I was born? To
return there is happiness. I have given good things to God, doing that
as suitable to consolidate… The heart of him suffers who is saved to
live in a foreign land: is there an every-day for him? As for him, he
hears the distant prayer, and he starts, directing his course towards
the country where he has trodden the earth for the first time, towards
the place from whence he is come. I was once at peace with the king of
<span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, I lived on his gifts, I performed
my duties towards the "Regent of the Earth" <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) who is in his palace, I listened to the
conversation of his children; ah! the youthful vigour of my limbs was
his! Now old age comes, feebleness has attacked me, my two eyes no
longer recall what they see, my two arms droop heavily, my two legs
refuse their service, the heart ceases (to beat): death approaches me,
soon shall I be borne away to the eternal cities, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57) I shall follow thither the Universal
Master; <span id="fr_58"></span>[4](#fn_58) ah, may he describe to me
the beauties of his children and bring eternity unto me!

Then the majesty of king Khopirkerî, <span id="fr_59"></span>[5](#fn_59)
of the true voice, <span id="fr_60"></span>[6](#fn_60)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

spoke to the officer who was near him. His majesty sent a message to me
with presents on the part of the king, and filled me with joy, even me
who speak to you, like the princes of every foreign land; and the
Children <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) who are in his palace made
me listen to their conversation.

Copy of the order which was brought to me who speak to you to restore me
to <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>.

"The Horus, whose births are life, the master of diadems, whose births
are life, the king of Upper and Lower <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, Khopirkerî, the son of the Sun,
Amenemhâit, <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62) living for ever and
ever!

"Order for the servant Sinuhit. This order of the king is brought to
thee to inform thee of his will.

"Now that thou hast traversed the foreign countries, from <span
class="smallcaps">Edimâ</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span>,
passing from country to country according to the wish of thy heart,
behold, whatever thou hast done and has been done against thee, thou
dost not break forth into blasphemies, but if thy word is repulsed, thou
dost not speak in the assembly of the Young, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63) even if invited to do so. Now, then, that
thou hast carried out this project which came into thy mind, let not thy
heart vacillate any longer, for Pharaoh is thy heaven unto thee, he is
stable, he is prosperous, his head is exalted among the royalties

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of the earth, his children are in the hidden part of the palace. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

"Leave the riches which thou hast for thyself and with thee, all of
them! when thou hast arrived in <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>,
behold the palace, and when thou shalt be in the palace, prostrate
thyself with thy face to the ground before the Sublime Porte. Thou shalt
be master among the Friends (of the king). And from day to day, behold,
thou art \[ever\] growing older; thou hast lost the strength of manhood,
thou hast dreamed of the day of burial. Behold thyself arrived at the
state of beatitude; on the night whereon the oils of embalming are
applied, there are given to thee the bandages by the hand of the goddess
<span class="smallcaps">Taït</span>. <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65)
Thy funeral is followed on the day of burial, the mummy case gilded, its
head painted blue, <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) a canopy above
thee of cypress-wood; <span id="fr_67"></span>[4](#fn_67) oxen draw
thee, singers go before thee, and the funeral dances are performed for
thee, mourners sit crouching at the entrance to thy tomb, the prescribed
offerings are presented to thee with loud voice, victims are slain for
thee on thy tables of offering, and thy steles are erected of white
stone, in the circle of the royal children. Thou hast no rival; no man
of the people reaches thy high rank; thou art not laid in a sheep's skin
when thou art entombed; <span id="fr_68"></span>[5](#fn_68)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

every one strikes the earth and laments over thy corpse while thou goest
to the grave."

When this order reached me, I was standing in the middle of my tribe.
When it was handed to me, having thrown myself on the stomach I lay upon
the ground, I crawled upon my breast, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) and so I made the circuit of my tent to
mark the joy which I felt at receiving it: "How can it be that such an
event can have happened to me, even to me who am here present, who, of a
rebellious heart, have fled to foreign countries, hostile to Pharaoh?
Now—deliverance excellent and lasting—I am delivered from death and thou
wilt make me powerful in my own country!"

Copy of the answer made to this order by the lord Sinuhit:—

"O pardon (?) great and unheard-of for the flight which I took, even I
here present, as one who knows not what he does, which thou accordest
unto me, even thou, the good god, friend of the god <span
class="smallcaps">Ra</span>, favourite of the god <span
class="smallcaps">Montu</span> (?) lord of <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> and of the god <span
class="smallcaps">Amon</span> lord of <span
class="smallcaps">Karnak</span>, son of the god <span
class="smallcaps">Ra</span>, image of the god <span
class="smallcaps">Tumu</span> <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) and of
his cycle of gods, may <span class="smallcaps">Suptu</span>, <span
id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71) may the god <span
class="smallcaps">Nofir-biu</span>, <span id="fr_72"></span>[4](#fn_72)
may the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

divine Firstborn, <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) may <span
class="smallcaps">Horus</span> of the Orient, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) may the royal Uræus who is lord of thy
head, the chiefs who are on the basin of the West, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75) <span class="smallcaps">Horus</span> who
resides in foreign countries, <span id="fr_76"></span>[4](#fn_76) <span
class="smallcaps">Urrit</span> the mistress of <span
class="smallcaps">Arabia</span>, <span id="fr_77"></span>[5](#fn_77)
<span class="smallcaps">Nüit</span>, <span id="fr_78"></span>[6](#fn_78)
<span class="smallcaps">Horus</span> the elder, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[7](#fn_79) (and) <span class="smallcaps">Ra</span>,
may all the gods of the Delta and the isles of the Great Green <span
id="fr_80"></span>[8](#fn_80) grant life and force to thy nostrils; may
they give reins to their liberality and grant thee time without limit,
eternity without measure, spreading the fear of thee throughout all the
countries of the plain and the mountain, fettering for thee all the
course of the sun! It is the prayer which I here present make for my
lord, delivered as I am from the foreign land!

"O sage king, the sage word which the majesty of the sovereign has
pronounced in his sageness, I who am here present, I fear to utter it,
and it is a momentous matter to repeat it. For the mighty god, image of
<span class="smallcaps">Ra</span> in (his) wisdom, he has himself laid
his hand to the work, and I

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

here present, I am of the number of the subjects whereon he has
deliberated, and I have been placed under his direct inspection! Verily
thy majesty is a <span class="smallcaps">Horus</span>, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) and the power of thine arms extends over
all lands!

"Now, then, let thy majesty cause Mâki of <span
class="smallcaps">Edimâ</span>, Khonti-âush of <span
class="smallcaps">Khonti-Kaushu</span>, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) <span class="smallcaps">Monu's</span> of
the subjugated countries, <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) to be
brought: they are princes ready to testify that all has happened
according to thy wish, and that <span class="smallcaps">Tonu</span> has
not growled against thee within itself after the fashion of thy
greyhounds. For as to me who speak to you, my flight, if it has been
voluntary, was not premeditated; far from plotting it, I could not tear
myself from the spot where I was; it was like a trance, like the dream
of a man of <span class="smallcaps">Athu</span> who sees himself at
<span class="smallcaps">Abu</span>, <span id="fr_84"></span>[4](#fn_84)
of a man of the plain of <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> who sees
himself in the mountain. <span id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85) I dreaded
nothing; there was no pursuit after me, my name had never been in the
mouth of the herald up to the moment when fate assailed me, but then my
legs darted forward, my heart guided me, the divine will which had
destined me to this exile led me along. I had not carried my back high,
for the individual fears when the country knows its master, and <span
class="smallcaps">Ra</span> had granted that thy

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

terror should be over the foreign land. Behold me now in my own country,
behold me in this place. Thou art the vesture of this place; <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) the sun rises at thy pleasure; the water
of the canals irrigates him who pleases thee; the breeze of heaven
refreshes him whom thou addressest. As for me who speak to thee, I will
bequeath my goods to the generations which I have begotten in this
place. And as to the messenger who is come unto me, let thy majesty do
as it hears; for we live on the air thou givest; thine august nostril is
the love of <span class="smallcaps">Ra</span>, of <span
class="smallcaps">Horus</span> (and) of <span
class="smallcaps">Hathor</span>, it is the will of <span
class="smallcaps">Montu</span> master of <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> that thou livest eternally."

I celebrated a festival in <span class="smallcaps">Aïa</span> to hand
over my property to my children: my eldest son was chief of my tribe,
all my property passed to him, and I gave away all my cattle as well as
my plantations of every species of fruit-tree. When I travelled towards
the south and arrived at <span class="smallcaps">Hriu-Hor</span>, the
governor, who was there at the head of the garrison, despatched a
messenger to the palace to give information of the fact. His majesty
sent the excellent superintendent of the peasants of the king and, with
him, a ship laden with presents from the king for the <span
class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span> who came in my train to conduct me to
<span class="smallcaps">Hriu-Hor</span>. I addressed by his name each of
those who were there; as there were servants of every kind, I received
and could carry with me means of subsistence and clothing sufficient to
last me until I arrived at an estate belonging to me.

When the earth revealed itself the following morning, each of them came
to salute me, each of them departed. I had a prosperous journey as far
as the palace; the introducers struck the ground with their foreheads
before me, the \[royal\] Children stood in the hall to conduct me, the
Friends who betook themselves to the hall of audience for the march-past
set me on the way to the Royal Lodge. I found his majesty on the great
platform in the Hall of Silver-gilt; <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87)
when I entered towards it, I sank on my

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

stomach, I lost consciousness of myself in his presence. The god
addressed me with kindly words, but I was like a person suddenly
blinded, my tongue failed, my limbs fainted, my heart was no longer in
my breast, and I knew what is the difference between life and death. His
majesty said to one of the Friends: "Let him be raised and speak to me!"
His majesty said: "So then thou art returned! In hanging about foreign
lands and playing the fugitive, age has attacked thee, thou hast reached
old age, thy body is not a little worn out. Dost thou not rise? Art thou
become a <span class="smallcaps">Sitti</span> in duplicity, for thou
dost not answer? Declare thy name." I feared to refuse, and replied thus
in answer: "I am afraid; nevertheless to that which my master has asked
me, this is what I reply: I have not called upon myself the hand of God,
but it is fear, yea, fear which seized my heart so that I took the fatal
flight. <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) Now, behold me again before
thee; thou art life; let thy majesty do what he will!"

The march-past of the Children ended, his majesty said to the queen:
"This is Sinuhit who comes like a rustic with the appearance of a <span
class="smallcaps">Sitti</span>." The Children burst into a loud shout of
laughter all together and said before his majesty: "It is not he in
truth, O sovereign, my master!" His majesty said: "It is he in truth."
Then they took their necklaces, their wands of office, their
sistra, <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89) and after they had brought
them to his majesty \[they said\]: "May thy two hands prosper, O king!
Put on the adornments of the Mistress of Heaven, <span
id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90) offer the emblem of life to my

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

nose. Be powerful as master of the stars, traverse the firmament in the
celestial bark; satiety is the image of the mouth of thy majesty. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) Thou art set with the uræus-serpent on thy
brow, and the wicked are scattered from thee; thou art proclaimed <span
class="smallcaps">Ra</span>, master of the two countries, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) and men cry unto thee as unto the master
of the universe. Thy lance overthrows, thy arrow destroys. Grant that he
may live who is in annihilation! Grant us to breathe at our ease in the
good way where we are! Simihit, <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93) the
<span class="smallcaps">Sitti</span> born in <span
class="smallcaps">To-miri</span>, if he has fled, it was from fear of
thee; if he has gone far from his country, it was from terror of thee;
does not the face grow pale which sees thy face? does not the eye fear
which thou hast arrested?" The king said: "Let him fear no longer, let
him dismiss (all) terror! He shall be among the Friends of the order of
the Young, and let him be placed among those of the Circle <span
id="fr_94"></span>[4](#fn_94) who are admitted into the Royal Lodge. Let
orders be given that he be provided with an appanage!"

I went out towards him in the interior of the Royal Lodge, and the
Children gave me their hands, while we walked behind the P-ruti doubly
great. <span id="fr_95"></span>[5](#fn_95) I was placed in the house of
the Royal Son, where there were riches, where there was a kiosk for
taking the fresh air, where there were

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

divine decorations and mandates on the treasury for silver, vestments of
royal materials, for royal gums and essences, such as the young like to
have in every house, as well as every sort of artisan in numbers. As the
years had passed over my limbs and I had lost my hair, I was given what
came from foreign lands, and the materials of the <span
class="smallcaps">Nomiu-shâiu</span>; I arrayed myself in fine linen, I
bedewed myself with essences, I lay on a bed, I was given cakes to eat
and oil wherewith to anoint myself. I was given a whole house suitable
for one who is among the Friends; I had plenty of materials for building
it, all its timbers were repaired and fruits of the palace were brought
to me three and four times a day, besides that which the children gave
without ever an instant's cessation. A pyramid of stone was begun for me
in the midst of the funerary pyramids, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) the chief of the land surveyors of his
majesty selected its site, the chief of the architects planned it, the
chief of the stone-cutters sculptured it, the chief of the works which
are executed in the necropolis traversed the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> to obtain all the materials necessary for
its decoration. When the necessary appointments had been made in the
pyramid itself; I took peasants and made there a lake, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) a kiosk, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98)

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (and) fields in
the interior of the sepulchral domain, <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) as is the case with Friends of the first
degree; there was also a statue carved out of gold with a robe of
electrum, and it was his majesty who bestowed it. It is not a common man
for whom he has done so much, and in truth I enjoyed the favour of the
king until the day of death.—\[The history\] is completed from the
commencement to the end as has been found in the book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[18:1](rp20207.htm#fr_24) The Friends occupied
the highest posts in the court of the Pharaoh; in the Papyrus Hood of
the British Museum they are placed in the seventh grade after the king.
They were divided into several groups: the "sole Friends," the "Friends
of the Seraglio," the "golden Friends," and the "young," whose exact
position cannot be determined. The title continued to be used in the
court of the Ptolemies, and spread throughout the Macedonian world (see
Maspero, *Études égyptiennes*, ii. pp. 20, 21).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[18:2](rp20207.htm#fr_25) This introduction
includes among the ordinary Egyptian titles that of "sovereign of the
country of the <span class="smallcaps">Sittiu</span>," or nomad archers
of the Sinaitic Peninsula and the adjoining desert. Sinuhit had been
chief of a tribe among them, and even after his return to Egypt,
continued to bear the title at the court of the Pharaoh. The fact is a
new one, which deserves to be noted by Egyptologists.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[18:3](rp20207.htm#fr_26) Literally "he who is
among those who join the dwelling-house with the royal son," that is to
say, one of those who have the right of living in the same house as the
royal son.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[18:4](rp20207.htm#fr_27) That is to say,
"died."

<span id="fn_28"></span>[19:1](rp20207.htm#fr_28) The Berber tribes
inhabiting the Libyan desert, to the west of Egypt.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[19:2](rp20207.htm#fr_29) On the death of the
king, the Friends of the Seraglio had to undertake the duties of a
regency during the absence of the heir.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[19:3](rp20207.htm#fr_30) "The hawk who flies"
is, according to Egyptian idiom, the new king, identified with the
hawk-god Haroîri, "Horus the elder," or Har-si-isit, "Horus the son of
Isis."

<span id="fn_31"></span>[19:4](rp20207.htm#fr_31) Sinuhit avoids telling
us by what accident he found himself in a position to hear, unlike every
one else, the news which the messenger had brought to the new king. We
do not, know whether the Egyptian law decreed death to the wretch who
had committed such an act of indiscretion, even though it might have
been involuntary; all we know is that Sinuhit feared for his life and
determined upon flight.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[19:5](rp20207.htm#fr_32) That is, the king and
his attendants.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[19:6](rp20207.htm#fr_33) This passage must
allude to a civil war. In Egypt, as in all Oriental countries, a change
of ruler often brings with it a revolt; the princes who have not been
chosen to succeed their father taking up arms against their more
fortunate brother.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[20:1](rp20207.htm#fr_34) Babylon, now Old
Cairo.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:2](rp20207.htm#fr_35) \[The Gebel Ahhmar,
eastward of Cairo.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_36"></span>[20:3](rp20207.htm#fr_36) For the position of
Qimoîri, see the Introduction.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[20:4](rp20207.htm#fr_37) Edom.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[20:5](rp20207.htm#fr_38) \[The first part of
the name is probably to be identified with the Hebrew *âyom*,
"terrible," whence the name of the Emim (Gen. xiv. g; Deut. ii. 11), the
second part of the name being perhaps *’anash*, "to punish "or
"fine.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_39"></span>[20:6](rp20207.htm#fr_39) Probably refugees from
Egypt, like Sinuhit himself.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[21:1](rp20207.htm#fr_40) The question of the
prince of Tonu, designedly somewhat obscure, was quite natural, since we
know that Amenemhâit I had fallen a victim to a palace conspiracy.
Amu-ânshi asks if Sinuhit has not been implicated in some attempt of the
kind and has in consequence been compelled to fly from Egypt.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[21:2](rp20207.htm#fr_41) The text is so
mutilated here that I cannot guarantee the sense. The part of the phrase
which I translate "and my heart found for itself a new home" signifies
literally "my heart was renewed there for me." The heart of Sinuhit was
Egyptian; by renewing itself it made him an Asiatic in the land of Tonu.
Further on the hero is regarded as a Sitti.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[21:3](rp20207.htm#fr_42) Sokhit or Sokhmit,
long confounded with Pakhit, was one of the chief goddesses of the
Egyptian Pantheon. She belonged to the triad of Memphis and was entitled
"the great friend of Phtah." She was a lion or a goddess with the head
of a lion; with the head of a cat she was called Bastit and was adored
at Bubastis.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[21:4](rp20207.htm#fr_43) Sinuhit here answers
the question of the prince of Tonu, as to whether his exile was not due
to complicity in a plot against the life of the king. His flight was a
fatality and he had served his sovereign from the period when he had not
yet been recognised by all Egypt, and had prayed him to save his unhappy
country, distracted by civil war, as we learn from other documents. Then
the better to prove that he could never have mixed in any plot, he
plunges into an eulogy of the new Pharaoh Usirtasen I. The exaggeration
of the eulogy becomes a proof of loyalty and innocence.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[22:1](rp20207.htm#fr_44) One of the titles
given to Sokhit in her warlike character.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[22:2](rp20207.htm#fr_45) That is, since he was
in the womb of his mother.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[22:3](rp20207.htm#fr_46) The nomad population
which inhabited the desert to the east of Egypt. They are elsewhere
called Hriu-Shâiu, the "masters of the sands." The name of *Nomiu-Shâiu*
appears to signify "one who is lord of the sands."

<span id="fn_47"></span>[23:1](rp20207.htm#fr_47) For the locality see
the Introduction.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[23:2](rp20207.htm#fr_48) The word has been left
blank in the manuscript of Berlin. Very probably it was illegible in the
original papyrus, from which the copy of the story we now possess was
made, the scribe having preferred to insert nothing rather than fill up
the lacuna on his own authority. My restoration is suggested by the
juxtaposition of the words: "boiled milk of every sort."

<span id="fn_49"></span>[23:3](rp20207.htm#fr_49) Literally "the
archers." It is the generic name given by the Egyptians to the nomad
populations of Syria in opposition to the Montiu or agricultural
population. \[The latter were the Perizzites or "fellahin" of the Old
Testament.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_50"></span>[24:1](rp20207.htm#fr_50) These are the phrases
used in the official reports to describe the ravages of the wars carried
on by the Pharaohs. Usirtasen III says similarly; "I have taken their
women, I have removed their vassals, manifesting myself towards their
wells, chasing before me their cattle, devastating their houses and
setting them on fire."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[25:1](rp20207.htm#fr_51) The buckler was held
with the left hand in front of the body which it was destined to
protect, and presented up at any arrow, lance, or javelin which was
directed against it.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[25:2](rp20207.htm#fr_52) Montu was the god of
war at Thebes. He was adored at Hermonthis (now Erment) in the
neighbourhood of the capital, and the Greeks identified him with Apollo;
he was in fact a solar deity, and the monuments frequently confound him
with Ra the Sun-god.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[25:3](rp20207.htm#fr_53) The final *i* is given
in the papyrus, like the final *u* above.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[25:4](rp20207.htm#fr_54) The Egyptians of high
rank obtained from the king, by special decree, permission to place in
the temples statues representing themselves; they could also have a
stele erected in certain celebrated sanctuaries containing their names
and a prayer. This is what was meant by saying that the deceased was
assured of an "excellent memorial" in the temples of the gods.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[26:1](rp20207.htm#fr_55) It is the king whom
Sinuhit now begins to address.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[26:2](rp20207.htm#fr_56) Perhaps the queen, but
more probably the royal *uræus* serpent worn on the forehead by the
king, which was supposed to think and fight for him. It inspired him
with its counsels and during the battle destroyed the enemy with the
flame that issued from its mouth.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[26:3](rp20207.htm#fr_57) That is the tomb, also
called the "eternal house."

<span id="fn_58"></span>[26:4](rp20207.htm#fr_58) Osiris, whom every
dead Egyptian served and followed. The text seems to refer to a feminine
"Eternal Mistress," and it is possible that a female Osiris is intended.
We know too little about the religion of the period for me to guarantee
the exactitude of my translation.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[26:5](rp20207.htm#fr_59) The *praenomen* of
Usirtasen I. the son and successor of Amenemhâit I.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[26:6](rp20207.htm#fr_60) The Egyptians, like
all oriental peoples, attached a great importance not only to the words
which composed their religious formulæ, but also to the intonation given
to each of them. For a prayer to be of avail and to exercise its full
effect upon the gods, it was necessary that it should be recited in the
traditional cadence. Accordingly the highest praise which could be
bestowed on a person obliged to recite an orison, was to call him
*mâ-khrôu* "correct of voice," to say that he had a "correctly-modulated
voice" and knew the tone to be given to each phrase. The king or priest
who filled the office of reader (*khri-habi*) during the sacrifice was
termed mâ-khrôu. The gods triumphed over evil by the "correctness of
their voice" when <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> they pronounced the
words destined to render the evil spirits powerless. The dead man, who
passed the whole of his funerary existence in reciting incantations, was
the *mâ-khrôu* par excellence. The phrase ended by becoming a laudatory
epithet which was always added to the names of the defunct and of every
one in the past who was spoken of with affection.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[27:1](rp20207.htm#fr_61) The "Children" are
either the children of the reigning king or of one of his predecessors;
they were ranked in the Egyptian hierarchy immediately after the king,
the regents, the queen, and the queen-mother (see Maspero, *Études
égyptiennes*, ii. pp. 14, 25).

<span id="fn_62"></span>[27:2](rp20207.htm#fr_62) The name of the king
is formed from the *praenomen* (Khopirkerî) of Usirtasen I. and the name
of Amenemhâit II.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[27:3](rp20207.htm#fr_63) The Egyptian word
properly signifies "a young man," and represented one of the degrees of
the hierarchy of the court. Perhaps it was peculiar to the age of the
twelfth dynasty, as I have not found it in the Papyrus Hood of the
British Museum which has acquainted us with the hierarchy of Egyptian
society in the time of the nineteenth and twentieth dynasties. We shall
see further on that the "Young" were a subdivision of the "Royal
Friends."

<span id="fn_64"></span>[28:1](rp20207.htm#fr_64) The beginning of the
order is so obscure that I cannot guarantee my translation. I believe it
means that the king declares himself satisfied with the tone of
Sinuhit's letter and with the temper it betrays.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[28:2](rp20207.htm#fr_65) This name signifies
literally "linen, bandages;" the goddess presided over the swaddling of
an infant and the enshrouding of the deceased. The ceremonies here
alluded to are described in a special treatise which I have published
and translated under the title of *Rituel de l’Embaumement* (in my
*Mémoire sur quelques Papyrus du Louvre*).

<span id="fn_66"></span>[28:3](rp20207.htm#fr_66) The mummy cases of the
eleventh and following dynasties now in the Louvre are completely
gilded, with the exception of the human face, which is painted red, and
the head dress, which is painted blue.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[28:4](rp20207.htm#fr_67) The mummy was laid on
a funerary bed surmounted by a wooden canopy during the ceremonies of
interment. Rhind discovered one at Thebes which is now at Edinburgh. I
myself have discovered three, one at Thebes of the thirteenth dynasty,
another of the twentieth dynasty also at Thebes, and a third at Akhmîm
of the Ptolemaic epoch. These are all in the Boulaq Museum, which
further possesses two sledges with canopies of the twentieth dynasty,
disinterred at Thebes in 1866 in the tomb of Sonnozmu. They are the sort
which was drawn to the tomb by bulls.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[28:5](rp20207.htm#fr_68) We know from Herodotus
(II. 81) that the Egyptians did not like to put wool with their dead; we
know also that nevertheless a sheep's skin <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> was occasionally employed at burials, and one of the mummies
from Der el-Bahari (No. 5289) was enveloped in a white skin still
covered with its fleece (Maspero, *Les momies royales* in the *Mémoires
présentés par les Membres de la Mission permanente*, i. p. 548). As the
mummy is that of an unknown prince who seems to have been poisoned, we
may ask whether the sheep's skin was not reserved for criminals or
prisoners condemned to remain impure even in the grave. If so, we can
understand the place assigned to the sheep's skin in the royal Order.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[29:1](rp20207.htm#fr_69) *Son-to*, literally
"to smell the earth," the necessary accompaniment or every royal
audience or divine offering.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[29:2](rp20207.htm#fr_70) Tumu or Atumu was the
god of Heliopolis, the On of Gen. xli. 50, and chief of the divine
Ennead, who had created and preserved the world.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[29:3](rp20207.htm#fr_71) A form of Horus. He
was the god adored in the Arabian nome of Egypt, sometimes represented
as a man crowned with the solar disk and bearing the title of "the most
noble of the Souls of Heliopolis." He must not be confounded with the
goddess Soptit, the Greek Sothis, who represented the most brilliant
constellation of the Egyptian sky.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[29:4](rp20207.htm#fr_72) "He whose souls are
good," a form of the god Tumu, better known as Nofir-tumu.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[30:1](rp20207.htm#fr_73) A form of Horus.
Egyptian trinities consisted generally of a father, a mother, and a son.
In the divine family the son was heir presumptive, like the firstborn
son in the family of the Pharaoh.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[30:2](rp20207.htm#fr_74) Often confounded with
Suptu, and often also with the god Mînu. He reigned over the deserts
which extend eastward of Egypt between the Nile and the Red Sea.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[30:3](rp20207.htm#fr_75) The portion of the
celestial waters which the bark of the gods reaches at sunset. The
chiefs of the basin were the gods who presided over this mythic ocean,
the gods of the dead. Every Egyptian was supposed after death to journey
to Abydos and penetrate through a cleft westward of the city into the
"basin of the West," where he joined the escort of the nocturnal sun in
order to traverse Hades and be born again the next morning in the East.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[30:4](rp20207.htm#fr_76) Properly speaking, the
god of the Libyans, but regarded more generally as the god of all the
foreign nations which bordered on Egypt.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[30:5](rp20207.htm#fr_77) The name of Urrit
occurs only here. Her title seems to show that she was a secondary form
of Hâthor, whom different traditions of great antiquity spoke of as
coming from Arabia.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[30:6](rp20207.htm#fr_78) The goddess of the
sky. With Sibu, the god of the earth, she formed a divine couple, one of
the most ancient among the divine couples of the Egyptian religion,
which could not be reduced to a solar type by the theologians of the
great Theban school in the age of the Ramessids. Nuit is represented as
bent over the body of her husband and figuring by the curve of her own
body the vault of the sky.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[30:7](rp20207.htm#fr_79) Haroîrû, whence the
Greek Aroêris, god of Heaven, and afterwards a solar deity like Ra, not
to be confounded with Horus the younger, the son of Isis and Osiris.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[30:8](rp20207.htm#fr_80) That is "the sea,"
sometimes the Red Sea, more usually the Mediterranean.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[31:1](rp20207.htm#fr_81) The Egyptian monarch
was the incarnation of the deity, and was consequently identified with
the third person of the Egyptian trinity.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[31:2](rp20207.htm#fr_82) *Khonti-Kaushu*
properly signifies "he who is in Kaushu" (or Kush), and hence denotes a
native of Ethiopia. The neighbourhood of Edimâ, however, rather
indicates here some Syrian locality. \[Compare the application of the
term "Ethiopian" or "Kushite" to the Midianite wife of Moses in Numbers
xii.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed</span>.\]

<span id="fn_83"></span>[31:3](rp20207.htm#fr_83) Rendered "the country
of the Phœnicians" by Brugsch and others. Without entering into the
question whether the Egyptian word Fonkhu really denotes Phœnicia, it is
sufficient to say that the word is not really met with in this passage.
But I do not know what region is intended by the phrase.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[31:4](rp20207.htm#fr_84) Abu was the Egyptian
name of Elephantinê, opposite Assuân, Athu that of a district in the
Delta. The two places, like Dan and Beersheba in the Old Testament,
proverbially indicated the whole length of Egypt. The difference between
a Northern and Southern Egyptian extended not only to manners but even
to dialect, so that the unintelligible language of a bad writer is
compared to the conversation of a man of Abu who finds himself at Athu.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[31:5](rp20207.htm#fr_85) Literally "in the land
of Khonti." In opposition to the *Kha-to* or cultivated plain of the
Nile, it must denote the sterile cliffs on either side of the valley.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[32:1](rp20207.htm#fr_86) Such curious metaphors
are common in Egyptian literature.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[32:2](rp20207.htm#fr_87) The hall probably
derived its name from its ornamentation with electrum or pale gold.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[33:1](rp20207.htm#fr_88) Sinuhit protests his
innocence more than once. We have seen already that the circumstances
connected with his flight gave reason for a suspicion that he was
concerned in a plot against the king. Moreover, the treaty between
Ramses II and the prince of the Hittites shows with what care the
Pharaoh endeavoured to recover those of his subjects who had deserted to
the foreigner. Hence the repeated attempts of Sinuhit to clear himself.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[33:2](rp20207.htm#fr_89) The ceremonial of the
Pharaoh's court included songs prescribed beforehand as in the court of
the Byzantine emperors. The Children having saluted the king, commence
this part of the ceremonial; they resume their ornaments, which had been
laid aside before the march-past and the adoration of the king, and
along with their ornaments the sistrum on which they accompanied their
song.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[33:3](rp20207.htm#fr_90) This seems to mean,
act with clemency. Several divinities bore the title of Mistress of
Heaven.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[34:1](rp20207.htm#fr_91) This apparently
signifies that the king is sated with all good things, and consequently
the equal of the gods, who never suffer from hunger. In fact, he is the
god himself, and as such traverses the waters of the sky in his bark,
like the Sun-god, and sums up in himself all the powers of the solar
deities.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[34:2](rp20207.htm#fr_92) \[Upper and Lower
Egypt—<span class="smallcaps">Ed</span>.\]

<span id="fn_93"></span>[34:3](rp20207.htm#fr_93) This variant of the
name of Sinuhit, due to the caprice of the scribe, signifies literally
"the son of the North." Sinuhit is called "the Sitti" on account of his
long sojourn among the Beduin. *To-miri*, "the land of the canals," was
a name of the Delta which was also applied to the whole of Egypt.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[34:4](rp20207.htm#fr_94) Persons attached to
the court of the Pharaoh received two collective titles, that of
*Shonitiu*, or "people of the Circle," who surrounded the sovereign, and
that of *Qabitiu*, or "people of the Angle," perhaps those who stood in
the angles of the hall of audience.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[34:5](rp20207.htm#fr_95) The Ruti, or with the
article P-ruti, is like *Pirui-âa*, "Pharaoh," a topographical name
which first denoted the palace of the monarch and then the monarch
himself. It is from this title that the Greek legend of Proteus king of
Egypt was derived, who received Helen and Paris and Menelaos at his
court (Herodot. ii. 112–116).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[35:1](rp20207.htm#fr_96) The facts which are
mentioned here and there in the sepulchral inscriptions are here united
in a continuous narrative. Sinuhit receives from Usirtasen the supreme
favour, a tomb built and endowed at the expense of the Pharaoh. The site
is given to him gratuitously, the pyramid constructed, the funerary
feasts instituted, the revenues and endowments intended for the support
of the sacrifices are levied on the royal domains; finally, the statue
itself which should sustain the double of Sinuhit is of precious metal.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[35:2](rp20207.htm#fr_97) A lake, or rather a
piece of water surrounded with a border of stone, was the indispensable
ornament of every comfortable country-house. The ideal tomb being above
all things the image of the terrestrial house care was taken to place in
it a lake like the lake of a villa; the deceased sailed over it in a
boat drawn by his slaves, or sat on its banks under the shade of its
trees.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[35:3](rp20207.htm#fr_98) The kiosk was, like
the lake, an indispensable adjunct of a garden. The bas-reliefs of
Thebes represent it in the midst of trees, sometimes on the edge of the
lake. Its construction was simple; a flooring raised two or three steps
above the ground, four slender columns supporting a painted cornice and
a slightly sloping roof, the sides open to admit the breeze, and a
balustrade, breast-high, on three sides. The defunct came there like the
living, to converse with his wife, to read stories or to play with the
ladies.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[36:1](rp20207.htm#fr_99) The fields of the
sepulchral domain were the property of the deceased, and furnished him
with all he required. Each of them produced a special object, or the
revenue derived from them was devoted to procuring for the defunct a
special object of food or clothing, and bore the name of the object in
question; that, for example, from which Ti derived his figs was called
"the figs of Ti." The property was administered by the priests of the
"double" or of the funereal statue, who were frequently the priests of
the principal temple of the locality where the tomb was situated. The
family made a contract with them, in accordance with which they engaged
the necessary sacrifices for the well-being of the deceased in exchange
for certain rents paid by the domains which were bequeathed to the tomb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20208)
