[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod03)  [Next](ebod05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE LEGEND OF OSIRIS.

The main features of the Egyptian religion constant.

The chief features of the Egyptian religion remained unchanged from the
Vth and VIth dynasties down to the period when the Egyptians embraced
Christianity, after the preaching of St. Mark the Apostle in Alexandria,
A.D. 69, so firmly had the early beliefs taken possession of the
Egyptian mind; and the Christians in Egypt, or Copts as they are
commonly called, the racial descendants of the ancient Egyptians, seem
never to have succeeded in divesting themselves of the superstitious and
weird mythological conceptions which they inherited from their heathen
ancestors. It is not necessary here to repeat the proofs, of this fact
which M. Amélineau has brought together,\[1\] or to adduce evidence from
the lives of the saints, martyrs and ascetics; but it is of interest to
note in passing that the translators of the New Testament into Coptic
rendered the Greek {Greek *a!'dhs*} by \#\#\#, *amenti*, the name which
the ancient Egyptians gave to the abode of man after death,\[3\] and
that the Copts peopled it with beings whose prototypes are found on the
ancient monuments.

Persistence of the legend of Osiris and the belief in the resurrection.

The chief gods mentioned in the pyramid texts are identical with those
whose names are given on tomb, coffin and papyrus in the latest
dynasties; and if the names of the great cosmic gods, such as Ptah and
Khnemu, are of rare occurrence, it should be remembered that the gods of
the dead must naturally occupy the chief place in this literature which
concerns the dead. Furthermore, we find that the doctrine of eternal
life and of the resurrection of a glorified or transformed body, based
upon the ancient story of the resurrection of Osiris after a cruel death
and horrible mutilation, inflicted by the powers of evil, was the same
in all periods, and that the legends of the most ancient times were
accepted without material alteration or addition in the texts of the
later dynasties.

\[1. *Le Christianisme chez les anciens Coptes*, in *Revue des
Religions*, t, xiv., Paris, 1886, PP, 308-45

2\. I.e., \#\#\#.

3\. See St. Matthew xi., 23; Acts ii., 27, etc.\]

{p. xlix}

Plutarch's version of the legend.

The story of Osiris is nowhere found in a connected form in Egyptian
literature, but everywhere, and in texts of all periods, the life,
sufferings, death and resurrection of Osiris are accepted as facts
universally admitted. Greek writers have preserved in their works
traditions concerning this god, and to Plutarch in particular we owe an
important version of the legend as current in his day. It is clear that
in some points he errs, but this was excusable in dealing with a series
of traditions already some four thousand years old.\[1\] According to
this writer the goddess Rhea \[Nut\], the wife of Helios \[Ra\], was
beloved by Kronos \[Seb\]. When Helios discovered the intrigue, he
cursed his wife and declared that she should not be delivered of her
child in any month or in any year. Then the god Hermes, who also loved
Rhea, played at tables with Selene and won from her the seventieth part
of each day of the year, which, added together, made five whole days.
These he joined to the three hundred and sixty days of which the year
then consisted.\[2\] Upon the first of these five days was Osiris
brought forth;\[3\] and at the moment of his birth a voice was heard to
proclaim that the lord of creation was born. In course of time he became
king of Egypt, and devoted himself to civilizing his subjects and to
teaching them the craft of the husbandman; he established a code of laws
and bade men worship the gods. Having made Egypt peaceful and
flourishing, he set out to instruct the other nations of the world.
During his absence his wife Isis so well ruled the state that Typhon
\[Set\], the evil one, could do no harm to the realm of Osiris. When
Osiris came again, Typhon plotted with seventy-two comrades, and with
Aso, the queen of Ethiopia, to slay him; and secretly got the measure of
the body of Osiris, and made ready a fair chest, which was brought into
his banqueting hall when Osiris was present together with other guests.
By a ruse Osiris was induced to lie down in the chest, which was
immediately closed by Typhon and his fellow conspirators, who conveyed
it to the Tanaitic mouth of the Nile.\[4\] These things happened on the
seventeenth day of

\[1. For the text see *De Iside et Osiride*, ed. Didot (Scripta Moralia,
t. iii., pp. 429-69), § xii. ff.

2\. The days are called in hieroglyphics \#\#\#, "the five additional
days of the year," *e?pago'menai!hme'rai pe'nte*; see Brugsch,
*Thesaurus Inscriptionum Aegytiacarum*, Abt. ii. (*Kalendarische
Inschriften*), Leipzig, 1883, pp. 479, 480; Brugsch, *Aegyptologie*, p.
361 Chabas, *Le Cálendrier*, Paris (no date), p. 99 ff.

3\. Osiris was born on the first day, Horus on the second, Set on the
third, Isis on the fourth, and Nephthys on the fifth; the first, third,
and fifth of these days were considered unlucky by the Egyptians.

4\. The mouths of the Nile are discussed and described by Strabo, XVII.,
i., 18 (ed. Didot, p. 681) and by Diodorus, I., 33, 7 (ed. Didot, p.
26).\]

{p. l}

Plutarch's version.

the month Hathor,\[1\] when Osiris was in the twenty-eighth year either
of his reign or of his age. The first to know of what had happened were
the Pans and Satyrs, who dwelt hard by Panopolis; and finally the news
was brought to Isis at Coptos, whereupon she cut off a lock of hair\[2\]
and put on mourning apparel. She then set out in deep grief to find her
husband's body, and in the course of her wanderings she discovered that
Osiris had been united with her sister Nephthys, and that Anubis, the
offspring of the union, had been exposed by his mother as soon as born.
Isis tracked him by the help of dogs, and bred him up to be her guard
and attendant. Soon after she learned that the chest had been carried by
the sea to Byblos, where it had been gently laid by the waves among the
branches of a tamarisk tree ({Greek *e?pei'khj tini\`*}), which in a
very short time had grown to a magnificent size and had enclosed the
chest within its trunk. The king of the country, admiring the tree, cut
it down and made a pillar for the roof of his house of that part which
contained the body of Osiris. When Isis heard of this she went to
Byblos, and, gaining admittance to the palace through the report of the
royal maidens, she was made nurse to one of the king's sons, Instead of
nursing the child in the ordinary way, Isis gave him her finger to suck,
and each night she put him into the fire to consume his mortal parts,
changing herself the while into a swallow and bemoaning her fate. But
the queen once happened to see her son in flames, and cried out, and
thus deprived him of immortality. Then Isis told the queen her story and
begged for the pillar which supported the roof. This she cut open, and
took out the chest and her husband's body,\[3\] and her lamentations
were so terrible that one of the royal children died of fright. She then
brought the

\[1. In the Calendar in the fourth Sallier papyrus (No. 10,184) this day
is marked triply unlucky, and it is said that great lamentation by Isis
and Nephthys took place for Un-nefer (Osiris) thereon. See Chabas, *Le
Calendrier*, p. 50. Here we have Plutarch's statement supported by
documentary evidence. Some very interesting details concerning the
festivals of Osiris in the month Choiak are given by Loret in *Recueil
de Travaux*, t. iii., p. 43 ff; t. iv., p. 21 ff.; and t. v., p. 85 ff.
The various mysteries which took place thereat are minutely described.

2 On the cutting of the hair as a sign of mourning, see W. Robertson
Smith, *The Religion of the Semites*, p. 395; and for other beliefs
about the hair see Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, vo1. ii., p. 364, and
Fraser, *Golden Bough*, pp. 193-208.

3 The story continues that Isis then wrapped the pillar in fine linen
and anointed it with oil, and restored it to the queen. Plutarch adds
that the piece of wood is, to this day, preserved in the temple of Isis,
and worshipped by the people of Byblos. Prof. Robertson Smith suggests
(*Religion of the Semites*, p. 175) that the rite of draping and
anointing a sacred stump supplies the answer to the unsolved question of
the nature of the ritual practices connected with the Ashera. That some
sort of drapery belonged to the Ashera is clear from 2 Kings xxiii., 7.
See also Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, vol. ii., p. 150; and Fraser,
*Golden Bough*, vol. i., p. 304 ff.\]

{p. li}

Plutarch's version.

chest by ship to Egypt, where she opened it and embraced the body of her
husband, weeping bitterly. Then she sought her son Horus in Buto, in
Lower Egypt, first having hidden the chest in a secret place. But
Typhon, one night hunting by the light of the moon, found the chest,
and, recognizing the body, tore it into fourteen pieces, which he
scattered up and down throughout the land. When Isis heard of this she
took a boat made of papyrus\[1\]--a plant abhorred by crocodiles--and
sailing about she gathered the fragments of Osiris's body.\[2\] Wherever
she found one, there she built a tomb. But now Horus had grown up, and
being encouraged to the use of arms by Osiris, who returned from the
other world, he went out to do battle with Typhon, the murderer of his
father. The fight lasted many days, and Typhon was made captive. But
Isis, to whom the care of the prisoner was given, so far from aiding her
son Horus, set Typhon at liberty. Horus in his rage tore from her head
the royal diadem; but Thoth gave her a helmet in the shape of a cow's
head. In two other battles fought between Horus and Typhon, Horus was
the victor.\[3\]

Identity of the deceased with Osiris.

This is the story of the sufferings and death of Osiris as told by
Plutarch. Osiris was the god through whose sufferings and death the
Egyptian hoped that his body might rise again in some transformed or
glorified shape, and to him who had conquered death and had become the
king of the other world the Egyptian appealed in prayer for eternal life
through his victory and power. In every funeral inscription known to us,
from the pyramid texts down to the roughly written prayers upon coffins
of the Roman period, what is done for Osiris is done also for the
deceased, the state and condition of Osiris are the state and condition
of

\[1. The ark of "bulrushes" was, no doubt, intended to preserve the
child Moses from crocodiles.

2\. {Greek *Mo'non de\` tw^n merw^u tou^ O?si'ridos th\`n I?^sin ou\`x
e\`urei^n to\` ai?doi^n e\`uðu\`s ga\`r ei's to\`n potamo\`n r!ifh^nai
kai\` geu'sasðai to'n te lepidwto\`n au\`tou^ kai\` to\`n fa'gron kai\`
to\`n o?ksu'rugxon. k.t.l.*}. By the festival celebrated by the
Egyptians in honour of the model of the lost member of Osiris, we are
probably to understand the public performance of the ceremony of
"setting up the Tet in Tattu", which we know took place on the last day
of the month Choiak; see Loret, *Les Fêtes d'Osiris au mois de Khoiak*
(*Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 32, § 87); Plutarch, *De Iside*, §
xviii.

3\. An account of the battle is also given in the IVth Sallier papyrus,
wherein we are told that it took place on the 26th day of the month
Thoth. Horus and Set fought in the form of two men, but they afterwards
changed themselves into two bears, and they passed three days and three
nights in this form. Victory inclined now to one side, and now to the
other, and the heart of Isis suffered bitterly. When Horus saw that she
loosed the fetters which he had laid upon Set, he became like a "raging
panther of the south with fury," and she fled before him; but he pursued
her, and cut off her head, which Thoth transformed by his words of
magical power and set upon her body again in the form of that of a cow.
In the calendars the 26th day of Thoth was marked triply deadly. See
Chabas, *Le Calendrier*, p. 28 ff.\]

{p. lii}

the deceased; in a word, the deceased is identified with Osiris. If
Osiris liveth for ever, the deceased will live for ever; if Osiris
dieth, then will the deceased perish.\[1\]

\[1. The origin of Plutarch's story of the death of Osiris, and the
Egyptian conception of his nature and attributes, may be gathered from
the following very remarkable hymn. (The text is given by Ledrain, *Les
Monuments Égyptiens de la Bibliothèque Nationale*, Paris, 1879, pll.
xxi-xxvii. A French translation of it was published, with notes, by
Chabas, in *Revue Archéologique*, Paris, 1857, t. xiv., p. 65 ff.; and
an English version was given in *Records of the Past*, 1st series, vol.
iv., p. 99 ff. The stele upon which it is found belongs to the early
part of the XVIIIth dynasty, by which is meant the period before the
reign of Amenophis IV.; this is proved by the fact that the name of the
god Amen has been cut out of it, an act of vandalism which can only have
been perpetrated in the fanatical reign of Amenophis IV.):

Hymn to Osiris.

"(1) Hail to thee, Osiris, lord of eternity, king of the gods, thou who
hast many names, thou disposer of created things, thou who hast hidden
forms in the temples, thou sacred one, thou KA who dwellest in Tattu,
thou mighty (2) one in Sekhem, thou lord to whom invocations are made in
Anti, thou who art over the offerings in Annu, thou lord who makest
inquisition in two-fold right and truth, thou hidden soul, the lord of
Qerert, thou who disposest affairs in the city of the White Wall, thou
soul of Ra, thou very body of Ra who restest in (3) Suten-henen, thou to
whom adorations are made in the region of Nart, thou who makest the soul
to rise, thou lord of the Great House in Khemennu, thou mighty of terror
in Shas-hetep, thou lord of eternity, thou chief of Abtu, thou who
sittest upon thy throne in Ta-tchesert, thou whose name is established
in the mouths of (4) men, thou unformed matter of the world, thou god
Tum, thou who providest with food the ka's who are with the company of
the gods, thou perfect *khu* among *khu's*, thou provider of the waters
of Nu, thou giver of the wind, thou producer of the wind of the evening
from thy nostrils for the satisfaction of thy heart. Thou makest (5)
plants to grow at thy desire, thou givest birth to . . . . . . . ; to
thee are obedient the stars in the heights, and thou openest the mighty
gates. Thou art the lord to whom hymns of praise are sung in the
southern heaven, and unto thee are adorations paid in the northern
heaven. The never setting stars (6) are before thy face, and they are
thy thrones, even as also are those that never rest. An offering cometh
to thee by the command of Seb. The company of the gods adoreth thee, the
stars of the *tuat* bow to the earth in adoration before thee, \[all\]
domains pay homage to thee, and the ends of the earth offer entreaty and
supplication. When those who are among the holy ones (7) see thee they
tremble at thee, and the whole world giveth praise unto thee when it
meeteth thy majesty. Thou art a glorious *sahu* among the *sahu's*, upon
thee hath dignity been conferred, thy dominion is eternal, O thou
beautiful Form of the company of the gods; thou gracious one who art
beloved by him that (8) seeth thee. Thou settest thy fear in all the
world, and through love for thee all proclaim thy name before that of
all other gods. Unto thee are offerings made by all mankind, O thou lord
to whom commemorations are made, both in heaven and in earth. Many are
the shouts of joy that rise to thee at the Uak\[\*\] festival, and cries
of delight ascend to thee from the (9) whole world with one voice. Thou
art the chief and prince of thy brethren, thou art the prince of the
company of the gods, thou stablishest right and truth everywhere, thou
placest thy son upon thy throne, thou art the object of praise of thy
father Seb, and of the love of thy mother Nut. Thou art exceeding
mighty, thou overthrowest those who oppose thee, thou art mighty of
hand, and thou slaughterest thine (10) enemy. Thou settest thy fear in
thy foe, thou removest his boundaries, thy heart is fixed, and thy feet
are watchful. Thou art the heir of Seb and the sovereign of all the
earth;

\[\* This festival took place on the 17th and 18th days of the month
Thoth; see Brugsch, Kalendarische Inschriften, p. 235.\]

{footnote page liii}

Seb hath seen thy glorious power, and hath commanded thee to direct the
(11) universe for ever and ever by thy hand.

"Thou hast made this earth by thy hand, and the waters thereof, and the
wind thereof, the herb thereof, all the cattle thereof, all the winged
fowl thereof, all the fish thereof, all the creeping things thereof, and
all the four-footed beasts thereof. (12) O thou son of Nut, the whole
world is gratified when thou ascendest thy father's throne like Ra. Thou
shinest in the horizon, thou sendest forth thy light into the darkness,
thou makest the darkness light with thy double plume, and thou floodest
the world with light like the (13) Disk at break of day. Thy diadem
pierceth heaven and becometh a brother unto the stars, O thou form of
every god. Thou art gracious in command and in speech, thou art the
favoured one of the great company of the gods, and thou art the greatly
beloved one of the lesser company of the gods.

"Thy sister put forth her protecting power for thee, she scattered
abroad those who were her enemies, (14) she drove back evil hap, she
pronounced mighty words of power, she made cunning her tongue, and her
words failed not. The glorious Isis was perfect in command and in
speech, and she avenged her brother. She sought him without ceasing,
(15) she wandered round and round the earth uttering cries of pain, and
she rested\[\*\] not until she had found him. She overshadowed him with
her feathers, she made wind with her wings, and she uttered cries at the
burial of her brother. (16) She raised up the prostrate form of him
whose heart was still, she took from. him of his essence, she conceived
and brought forth a child,\[+\] she suckled it in secret (?) and none
knew the place thereof; and the arm of the child hath waxed strong in
the great house of Seb. (17) The company of the gods rejoiceth and is
glad at the coming of Osiris's son Horus, and firm of heart and
triumphant is the son of Isis, the heir of Osiris."\[++\]

\[\*. Literally, "she alighted not,"; the whole passage here justifies
Plutarch's statement (*De Iside Osiride*, 16) concerning Isis: {Greek
*Au?th\`n de\` genome'nhn xelido'na tu\~j ki'oni peripi'tesðai kai\`
ðrhnei\~n*}.

+. Compare Plutarch, *op. cit.*, §19: {Greek *T\`hn d' I?'sin th\`n
teleuth\`n e\`ks O?si'ridos suggenome'nou tekei\~n h?li'to'mhnon kai\`
a?sðenh\~ toi\~s ka'twðen gui'ois to\`n A?rpokra'thn*}.

++. The remainder of the hymn refers to Horus.\]\]

{p. liii}

Osiris invested with the attributes of Ra.

Later in the XVIIIth, or early in the XIXth dynasty, we find Osiris
called "the king of eternity, the lord of everlastingness, who
traverseth millions of years in the duration of his life, the firstborn
son of the womb of Nut, begotten of Seb, the prince of gods and men, the
god of gods, the king of kings, the lord of lords, the prince of
princes, the governor of the world, from the womb of Nut, whose
existence is for everlasting,\[1\] Unnefer of many forms and of many
attributes, Tmu in Annu, the lord of Akert,\[2\] the only one, the lord
of the land on each side of the celestial Nile."\[3\]

In the XXVIth dynasty and later there grew up a class of literature

\[1. For the text see the papyrus of Ani, pl. ii., and pl. xxxvi., 1. 2.

2\. *I.e.*, the underworld.

3\. *neb atebui*; see Ani, pl. xix., 1. 9.\]

{p. liv}

Osiris the god of the resurrection.

represented by such works as "The Book of Respirations,"\[1\] "The
Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys,"\[2\] "The Festival Songs of Isis and
Nephthys,"\[3\] "The Litanies of Seker,"\[4\] and the like, the hymns
and prayers of which are addressed to Osiris rather as the god of the
dead and type of the resurrection\[5\] than as the successor of the
great cosmic god Tmu-Ra. He is called "the soul that liveth again,"\[6\]
"the being who becometh a child again," "the firstborn son of unformed
matter, the lord of multitudes of aspects and forms, the lord of time
and bestower of years, the lord of life for all eternity."\[7\] He is
the "giver of life from the beginning;"\[8\] "life springs up to us from
his destruction,"\[9\] and the germ which proceeds from him engenders
life in both the dead and the living.\[10\]

\[1. \#\#\#. The text of this work, transcribed into hieroglyphics, was
published, with a Latin translation, by Brugsch, under the title, *Sai
an Sinsin sive Aber Metempsychosis veterum Aegyptiorum*, Berlin, 1851;
and an English translation of the same work, but made from a Paris MS.,
was given by p. J. de Horrack in *Records of the Past*, 1st series,
vol., iv., p. 121 ff. See also Birch, *Facsimiles of Two Papyri*,
London, 1863, p. 3; Devéria, *Catalogue des MSS. Égyptiens*, Paris,
1874, pp. 130 ff., where several copies of this work are described.

2\. The hieratic text of this work is published with a French
translation by p. J. de Horrack, Les Lamentations d'Isis et de Nephthys,
Paris, 1886.

3\. A hieroglyphic transcript of these works, with an English
translation, was given in *Archælogia*, vol. iii., London, 1891.

4\. What Devéria says with reference to the Book of Respirations applies
to the whole class: "Toutefois, on remarque dans cet écrit une tendance
à la doctrine de la résurrection du corps plus marquée que dans les
compositions antérieures" (*Catalogue*, p. 13).

5\. \#\#\#. Festival Songs, iv., 33.

6\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, viii., 21, ix., 8.

7\. *Litanies of Seker*, col. xviii.

8\. \#\#\#. *Festival Songs*, vi., 1.

9\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, iii., 18.

10\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, ix., 26.\]

{p. lv}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Doctrine Of Eternal Life.](ebod05.md)
