[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod11)  [Next](ebod13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PAPYRUS OF ANI.

General Description

The papyrus of Ani, was found at Thebes, and was purchased by the
Trustees of the British Museum in 1888. It measures 78 feet by 1 foot 3
inches, and is the longest known papyrus of the Theban period.\[1\] It
is made up of six distinct lengths of papyrus, which vary in length from
26 feet 9 inches to 5 feet 7 inches. The material is composed of three
layers of papyrus supplied by plants which measured in the stalks about
41 inches in diameter. The several lengths have been joined together
with great neatness, and the repairs and insertion of new pieces (see
plates 25, 26) have been dexterously made. When first found, the papyrus
was of a light colour, similar to that of the papyrus of Hunefer (B. M.
No. 9901), but it became darker after it had been unrolled, and certain
sections of it have shrunk somewhat.

It contains a number of chapters of the Book of the Dead, nearly all of
which are accompanied by vignettes; and at top and bottom is a border of
two colours-red and yellow.\[2\] At the beginning and end of the papyrus
spaces of six and eleven inches respectively have been left blank. The
inscribed portion is complete, and the loss of the few characters which
were damaged in unrolling\[3\] does not interrupt the text. It was
written by three or more scribes; but the uniformity of the execution of
the vignettes suggests that fewer artists were employed on the
illustrations. The titles of the chapters, rubrics, catchwords, etc.,
are in red. In some instances the artist has occupied so much space that
the

\[1 The papyrus of Nebseni, of the XVIIIth dynasty (B.M., No. 9900),
measures 76 feet 81 inches by 13 inches; and the papyrus of Hunefer, of
the XIXth dynasty (B.M., No. 9601), 18 feet 10 inches by 1 foot 3 5/8
inches; the Leyden papyrus of Qenna, of the XVIIIth dynasty, measures
about 50 feet; and the Dublin papyrus (*Da* of M. Naville's edition),
XVIIIth dynasty, 24 feet 9 inches.

2 In some sections the border is painted yellow and orange.

3 See plates 1, 15, 24.\]

{p. cxliii}

General description.

scribe has been obliged to crowd the text (*e.g.*, in plate 11) and at
times he has written it on the border (see plates 14, 17). This proves
that the vignettes were drawn before the text was written.

All the different sections of the papyrus were not originally written
for Ani, for his name has been added in several places' by a later hand.
As however such additions do not occur in the first section, which
measures 16 feet 4 inches in length, it must be concluded that that
section was written expressly for him, and that the others were some of
those ready-written copies in which blank spaces were left for the
insertion of the names of the deceased persons for whom they were
purchased. The scribe who filled in Ani's name in these spaces wrote
hurriedly, for in Chapter XXXB., line 2 (pl. 15), he left himself no
space to write the word "Osiris" in the phrase, "Ani victorious before
Osiris" (compare pl. 1, line 5); in Chapter XLIII., lines 1, 2 (pl. 17),
he has written it twice; in Chapter IX., l. 1 (pl. 18), he has omitted
the determinative in Chapter XV., line 2 (pl. 20) he meant to write
"Ani, victorious in peace (pl. 19), but wrote "Ani in triumph" in
Chapter CXXV., line 18 (pl. 30), the word \#\#\# is written twice,
probably, however, with the view of filling up the line; in Chapter CLI.
(Pl. 34) the name is written crookedly, and the determinative is
omitted; and in Chapters XVIII. (Introduction, pl. 12) and CXXXIV. (pl.
22). the scribe has, in two spaces, omitted to write the name. It seems
tolerably certain that all the sections of the papyrus were written
about the same time, and that they are the work of scribes of the same
school; the variations in the depth of the space occupied by the text
and the difference in the colours of the border only show that even the
best scribes did not tie themselves to any one plan or method in
preparing a copy of the Book of the Dead. The text has many serious
errors: by some extraordinary oversight it includes two copies of the
XVIII th Chapter, one with an unusual introduction and the other without
introduction; and a large section of the XVIIth Chapter, one of the most
important in the whole work, has been entirely omitted. Such mistakes
and omissions, however, occur in papyri older than that of Ani, for in
the papyrus of Nebseni (B.M., No. 9900), which was written at Memphis
early in the XVIIIth dynasty, of Chapters L., LVI., LXIV., CLXXX., two
copies each, of

\[1. See Chapter XXVI, l. 1 (pl. 15); Chapter XLV., l. 1 (pl. 16);
Chapter IX, 1. 6 (pl. 18); Chapter CXXXIV., 1. 15 (pl. 22); Chapter
LXXVIII., l. 1 (p. 25); Chap. LXXX., l. 1 (pl. 28); Chapter CLXXXV., l.
15 (pl. 36).\]

{p. cxliv}

Chapters C. and CVI., three copies, and of Chapter XVII. two extracts
are given in different parts of the papyrus.\[1\]

Ani's rank.

The papyrus of Ani is undated, and no facts are given in it concerning
the life of Ani, whereby it would be possible to fix its exact place in
the series of the illustrated papyri of the Theban period to which it
belongs. His full titles are:--

suten in maa an hesb hetep neter en neteru nebu

Royal scribe veritable, scribe and accountant of the divine offerings
(*i.e.*, revenues) of all the gods.

mer tenti en nebu Abtu an hetep neter en

The governor of the granary of the lords of Abydos, scribe of the divine
offerings (i.e., revenues) of

nebu Uast.

the lords of Thebes;

and he is said to be "beloved of the lord of the North and South" and to
"love him". The name of the king thus referred to cannot be stated. That
Ani's rank of "royal scribe" \[2\] was not titular only is shown by the
addition of the word "veritable," and his office of scribe and
accountant of all the gods was probably one of the highest which a
scribe could hold.\[3\] His other offices of "governor of the granary of
the lords of Abydos," and "scribe of the sacred property of the lords of
Thebes," further prove his rank and importance, for Abydos and Thebes
were the most ancient and sacred cities of Egypt.

Ani's wife.

Ani's wife Thuthu is described as "the lady of the house, the *qematet*
of Amen".\[4\] What the title "lady of the house

\[1. Naville, *Einleitung*, pp. 48-54.

2\. See Brugsch, *Aegyptologie*, p. 223.

3\. In the list of the high officers of the priesthood given by Brugsch
(*Aegyptologie*, p. 218), we meet with an official whose title is
\#\#\#, "the scribe set over the sacred property of the gods"; Ani held
a similar appointment.

4 Plate 19; her name is nowhere else mentioned in the papyrus.\]

{p. cxlv}

means has not yet been decided, but *qemat* is the title applied to the
noble ladies who sang or played on an instrument in the temple of a
god.\[1\] The lady Thuthu belonged to the number of the priestesses of
the god Amen-Ra at Thebes, and she always carries in her hands the
sistrum. and the instrument *menat*, the emblems of her office. Thus Ani
and his wife were high ecclesiastical dignitaries connected with the
famous confraternity of the priests of Amen.

Copies of the Book of the Dead in the Theban period.

Age of the papyrus.

An examination of the papyri of the Theban period preserved in the
British Museum shows that two distinct classes of Book of the Dead
papyri existed in the XVIIIth dynasty. In the first both text and
vignettes are traced in black outline,\[2\] the rubrics, catchwords,
*etc.*, alone being in red colour; in the second the text only is black,
the rubrics, *etc.*, being red, and the vignettes beautifully painted in
a number of bright colours. To the latter class the papyrus of Ani
belongs, but, if the text and vignettes be compared with those found in
any other early Theban papyri, it will be seen that it occupies an
independent position in all respects. Though agreeing in the main with
the papyri of the XVIIIth dynasty in respect of textual readings, the
papyrus of Ani has peculiarities in spelling, *etc.*, which are not
found in any of them. The handwriting of the first section at least
suggests the best period of the XVIIIth dynasty; but as the scribe forms
some of the characters in a way peculiarly his own, the palæographic
evidence on this point is not decisive. That the papyrus belongs to the
period which produced such documents as the papyrus of Neb-qet,\[3\] and
the papyrus of Qenna,\[4\] *i.e.*, to some period of the XVIIIth
dynasty, is tolerably certain; and we may assume that it is older than
the papyrus of Hunefer, which was written during the reign of Seti I.;
for, though belonging to the same class of highly decorated papyri, the
execution of the vignettes is finer and more careful, and the free, bold
forms of the hieroglyphics in the better written sections more closely
resemble those of the texts inscribed in stone under the greatest kings
of the XVIIIth dynasty. The "lord of the two lands," *i.e.*, of Upper
and Lower Egypt, or the North and South, mentioned in pl. 4, is probably
one of the Thothmes or Amenhetep kings, and accordingly we may place the
period of our papyrus between 1500 and 1400 years B.C.

\[1. In the stele of Canopus, is rendered by {Greek *ta\`s i'era\`s
parðe'nous*}; see Brugsch, Wörterbuch, P. 1454.

2\. Compare the papyrus of Nebseni (British Museum, No. 9, 900)

3\. *Le Papyrus de Neb-Qued*, ed. Devéria, Paris, 1872. M. Pierret, its
translator, says, "Il appartient la plus ancienne époque des exemplaires
sur papyrus."

4 *Papyrus Égyptien Funéraire Hiéroglyphique* (t. ii.), ed. Leemans,
Leyden, 1882.\]

{p. cxlvi}

The text.

The text may be divided into two parts. The first part contains unusual
versions of two hymns to Ra and Osiris, the vignette of the sunrise
(Chapter XVIA.), and the judgment Scene accompanied by texts, some of
which occur in no other papyrus. The second part comprises about
sixty-two Chapters of the Theban edition of the Book, in the following
order:--I., XXII. LXXII., rubric, XVII., CXLVII., CXLVI., XVIII.,
XXIII., XXIV., XXVI. XXXB., LXI., LIV., XXIX., XXVII., LVIII., LIX.,
XLIV., XLV., XLVI., L., XCIII., XLIII., LXXXIX., XCI., XCII., LXXIV.,
VIII., II., IX., CXXXII., X., \[XLVIII.\], XV., CXXXIII., CXXXIV.,
XVIII., CXXIV., LXXXVI., LXXVII., LXXVIII., LXXXVII., LXXXVIII.,
LXXXII., LXXXV., LXXXIII., LXXXIV., LXXXIA., LXXX., CLXXV., CXXV.
Introduction and Negative Confession, XLII., CXXV., Rubric, CLV., CLVI.,
XXIXB., CLXVI., CLI., VI., CX., CXLVIII., CLXXXV., and CLXXXVI. The
titles of these Chapters arranged according to the numeration introduced
by Lepsius are as follows :--

List of Chapters.

Chapter I. "Here begin the chapters of 'coming forth by day,' and of the
songs of praise and of glorifying, and of coming forth from and of going
into the glorious Neter-khert in the beautiful Amenta; to be said on the
day of the burial going in after coming forth." (See pp. 19, 270 and
pll. 5, 6.)

The papyri belonging to the early part of the XVIIth dynasty call this
Chapter the "Chapter of going in to the divine chiefs of Osiris,"
\#\#\#. The large numbers of the men attending the bier and of the
weeping women are peculiar to the Ani papyrus.

Chapter II. "The Chapter of coming forth by day and of living after
death." (See pp. 120, 321, and pl. 18.)

This Chapter is found only in one other papyrus of the Theban period
(British Museum, No. 9964). Another copy of it is inscribed upon a mummy
bandage preserved in the Louvre, No. 3097.'

Chapter VI.--\[See Chapter CLI., of which it forms a part, pp. 233, 362,
and pl. 32.\] In the papyrus of Nebseni (British Museum, No. 9900) this
Chapter stands by itself, and is entitled "Chapter of making the
*ushabti* figures to perform work for a man in the Neter-khert,"

\[1. See Naville, *Einleitung*, p. 103.\]

{p. cxlvii}

Chapter VIII. "The Chapter of passing through Amenta, and of coming
forth by day." (See pp. 119, 320, and pl. 18.)

As a separate composition, this Chapter is found in only two other
papyri of the XVIIIth dynasty.\[1\]

Chapter IX. "The Chapter of coming forth by day, having passed through
the tomb." (See pp. 120, 321, and pl. 18.)

The vignette in the papyrus of Ani is similar to that which stands at
the head of Chapters VIII. and IX. in other papyri of this period.

Chapter X. \[See Chapter XLVIII., pp. 123, 321, and pl. 18.\]

Chapter XV. 1. "A hymn of praise to Ra when he riseth in the eastern
sky." (See pp. 1, 236, and pl. I.)

This version is found in no other papyrus.

Chapter XV. 2. "A hymn of praise to Osiris Unnefer, the great god in
Abydos,"\[2\] *etc.* (See pp. 8, 253, and pl. 2.)

Chapter XV. 3. "A hymn of praise to Ra when he riseth in the eastern
sky, and when he setteth in the \[land of\] life." (See pp. 123, 322,
and pl. 18-21.)

The Litany to Osiris (pl. 19) and the hymn to Ra (pll. 24, 25) which
follow are variants of the XVth Chapter, similar to those published by
M. Naville.\[3\]

Chapter XVIA. consists of a vignette only. (See p. 252, and pl. 2.)
Strictly speaking, it should form the vignette of the XVth Chapter, or
of that part of it which refers to the rising sun. Like many other
ancient papyri, the papyrus of Ani has no vignette referring to the
sunset.

Chapter XVII. "Here begin the praises and glorifyings of coming out from
and of going into the glorious Neter-khert in the beautiful Amenta, of
coming forth by day in all the transformations which please him, of
playing at draughts, and of sitting in the Sekh hall, and of coming
forth as a living soul." (See pp. 27, 280, and Pll. 7-10.)

This is one of the oldest and most important of all the Chapters in the
Book of the Dead, and it contains the most complete statements
concerning the Egyptian cosmogony as formulated by the college of
priests of Heliopolis. The scribe seems to have accidentally omitted a
large section.

Chapter XVIII. This Chapter has no title.

\[1. *I.e.*, in British Museum papyrus, No. 9964, and in a papyrus in
Rome; see Naville, Einleitung, p. 118.

2\. This hymn may form no part of the XVth chapter, and may have been
inserted after the hymn to Ra on account of Ani's official connection
with the ecclesiastical endowments of Abydos.\]

{p. cxlviii}

List of Chapters.

The papyrus of Ani contains two copies of this Chapter. In the first the
gods of the localities are grouped separately, and it is preceded by a
very rare introduction, in which the An-mut-f and Sa-mer-f priests
introduce Ani to the gods, whom he addresses in two speeches. (See p.
71, 301, and pll. 12-14.) In the second the text is not divided into
distinct sections, and the gods are not grouped. (See p. 330, and pll.
23-24.)

Chapter XXII., "The Chapter of giving a mouth to Osiris Ani, the scribe
It and teller of the holy offerings of all the gods." (See pp. 25, 274,
and pl. 6.)

The ceremony of giving a mouth to the deceased was, according to the
vignette in the papyrus of Nebseni, performed by the "Guardian of the
Balance ". In the papyrus of Ani there is no vignette, and it is
remarkable that this Chapter follows immediately after Chapter 1.

Chapter XXIII. "The Chapter of opening the mouth of Osiris, the scribe
Ani." (See pp. 84, 306, and pl. 15.)

Chapter XXIV. "The Chapter of bringing charms unto Osiris Ani in
Neter-khert." (See pp. 85, 306, and pl. 15.)

As with other ancient Theban papyri, the papyrus of Ani gives no
Vignette.

Chapter XXVI. "The Chapter of giving a heart unto Osiris Ani in
Neter-khert." (See pp. 88, 308, and pl. 15.)

The vignette is probably unique.

Chapter XXVII. "The Chapter of not letting the heart of a man be taken
away from him in Neter-khert." (See pp. 100, 312, and pl. 15.)

The vignette is unusual.

Chapter XXIX. "The Chapter of not letting the heart of a man be taken
away from him in Neter-khert." (See pp. 97, 311, and pl. 15.)

No other copy of this Chapter is at present known.

Chapter XXIXB. "The Chapter of a heart of carnelian." (See pp. 228, 359,
and pl. 33.)

Chapter XXXB. "The Chapter of not letting the heart of Osiris Ani be
driven away from him in Neter-khert." (See pp. I 1, 90, 258, 309, and
pl. 15-)

Chapter XLII. This Chapter is without title (see pp. 213, 353, and pl.
32), but in other ancient papyri it is called "Repulsing of slaughter in
Suten-henen."

Chapter XLIII. "The Chapter of not letting the head of a man be cut off
from him in Neter-khert." (See pp. 111, 317, and pl. 17.)

{p. cxlix}

List of Chapters.

As in other ancient Theban papyri, this Chapter is without vignette.

Chapter XLIV. "The Chapter of not dying a second time in Neter-khert."
(See pp. 105, 315, and pl. 16.)

The vignette is peculiar to the papyrus of Ani.

Chapter XLV. "The Chapter of not suffering corruption in Neter-khert."
(See pp. 106, 315, and pl. 16.)

Only one other copy of the text of this Chapter is known.\[1\] Among
Theban papyri the vignette is peculiar to the papyrus of Ani.

Chapter XLVI. "The Chapter of not perishing and of becoming alive in
Neter-khert." (See pp. 107, 316, and pl. 16.)

Only one other copy of the text of this Chapter is known (B.M. No.
9900). Among Theban papyri the vignette is peculiar to the papyrus of
Ani.

Chapter XLVIII. "Another Chapter of one who cometh forth by day against
his foes in Neter-khert." (See pp. 123, 321, and pl. 18.)

Only one other copy of the text of this Chapter is known (B.M. No.
9900). Among Theban papyri the vignette is peculiar to the papyrus of
Ani.

Chapter L. "The Chapter of not entering in unto the block." (See pp.
108, 315, and pl. 16.)

The text of this Chapter agrees rather with the second version in the
papyrus of Nebseni than with that in B.M. papyrus No. 9964. As the Ani
papyrus is of Theban origin this was to be expected.

Chapter LIV. "The Chapter of giving breath in Neter-khert." (See pp. 94,
310, and pl. 15.)

Only one other copy of this Chapter is known, and it is without
vignette.\[2\]

Chapter LVIII. " The Chapter of breathing the air, and of having power
over the water in Neter-khert." (See pp. 103, 314, and pl. 16.)

No other copy of this Chapter is known.

Chapter LIX. "The Chapter of breathing the air, and of having power over
the water in Neter-khert." (See pp. 104, 315, and pl. 16.)

Only one other copy of this Chapter is known.\[2\]

Chapter LXI. "The Chapter of not letting the soul of a man be taken away
from him in Neter-khert." (See pp. 91, 309, and pl. 15.)

The vignette is similar to that in the papyrus of Sutimes, which M.
Naville believes to be no older than the XIXth dynasty.\[3\]

\[1. Naville, *Einleitung*, p. 134.

2\. *Ibid.*, p. 136.

3\. *Ibid.*, p. 100.\]

{p. cl}

List of Chapters

Chapter LXXII.--Rubric. (See pp. 26, 275, and pl. 6.)

Chapter LXXIV. "The Chapter of walking with the legs and of coming forth
upon earth." (See pp. 118, 320, and pl. 18.)

Chapter LXXVII. " The Chapter of changing into a golden hawk ." (See pp.
152, 332, and pl. 25.)

Chapter LXXVIII. "The Chapter of changing into a divine hawk." (See pp.
154, 333, and pl. 25, 26.)

Chapter LXXX. "The Chapter of changing into the god who giveth light in
the darkness." (See pp. 182, 341, and pl. 28.)

Chapter LXXXIA. "The Chapter of changing into a lotus." (See pp. 181,
340, and pl. 28.)

The pool of water in the vignette is uncommon.

Chapter LXXXII. "The Chapter of changing into Ptah." (See pp. 170, 337,
and pl. 27.)

As in other XVIIIth dynasty papyri, this Chapter has a vignette.

Chapter LXXXIII. "The Chapter of changing into a bennu bird" (phœnix?).
(See pp. 176, 339, and pl. 27.)

Like other XVIIIth dynasty papyri, this Chapter lacks the addition which
is found in the papyrus of Sutimes.

Chapter LXXXIV. "The Chapter of changing into a heron." (See pp. 178,
339, and pl. 28.)

Chapter LXXXV. " The Chapter of changing into the soul of Tmu." (See pp.
172, 338, and pl. 27.)

The vignette to this Chapter is similar to that of the papyrus of Tura,
surnamed Nefer-uben-f, of the XVIIIth dynasty.'

Chapter LXXXVI. "The Chapter of changing into a swallow." (See pp. 250,
331, and pl. 25.)

Chapter LXXXVII. "The Chapter of changing into Seta." (See pp. 169, 337,
and pl. 27.)

Chapter LXXXVIII. "The Chapter of changing into a crocodile." (See pp.
170, 337, and pl. 27.)

Chapter LXXXIX. "The Chapter of causing the soul to be united to its
body in Neter-khert." (See pp. 112, 318, and pl. 17.)

The two incense burners which stand, one at the head and one at the foot
of the bier, are peculiar to the papyrus of Ani.

\[1. Naville, *Einleitung*, p. 97.\]

{p. cli}

List of Chapters.

Chapter XCI. "The Chapter of not letting the soul of a man be captive in
Neter-khert." (See pp. 114, 319, and pl. 17.)

Chapter XCII. "The Chapter of opening the tomb to the soul and the
shadow, of coming forth by day, and of getting power over the legs."
(See pp. 115, 319, and pl. 17.)

The vignette of this Chapter is unusual and of great interest, for in it
Ani's soul accompanies his shadow.

Chapter XCIII. "The Chapter of not letting a man pass over to the east
in Neter-khert." (See pp. 109, 317, and pl. 17-)

The vignette as here given is peculiar to the papyrus of Ani.

Chapter XCIIIA. "Another Chapter." (See pp. 110, 317, and pl. 17.)

Chapter CX. "Here begin the Chapters of the Sekhet-hetepu, and the
Chapters of coming forth by day, and of going into and coming out from
Neter-khert, and of arriving in the Sekhet-Aanru, and of being in peace
in the great city wherein are fresh breezes." (See pp. 236, 362, and pl.
34.)

The text is here incomplete.

Chapter CXXIV. "The Chapter of going unto the divine chiefs of Osiris."
(See pp. 146, 330, and pl. 24.)

In the vignette we should expect four, instead of three, gods.

Chapter CXXV. "The Chapter of entering into the Hall of double Right and
Truth: a hymn of praise to Osiris." (See pp. 189, 344, and pl. 30.)

The Introduction to this Chapter as found in the papyrus of Ani is not
met with elsewhere; the text which usually follows the "Negative
Confession" is however omitted. The vignette as here given is peculiar
to the papyrus of Ani.

Chapter CXXXII. "The Chapter of making a man to return to see again his
home upon earth." (See pp. 121, 321, and pl. 18.)

Chapter CXXX III. "\[A Chapter\] to be said on the day of the month."
(See pp. 138, 327, and pl. 21.)

Chapter CXXXIII.--Rubric. (See pp. 142, 328, and pl. 22.)

Chapter CXXXIV. "A hymn of praise to Ra on the day of the month wherein
he saileth in the boat." (See pp. 142, 329, and pl. 22.)

Chapter CXLVI. "The Chapter of renewing the pylons in the House of
Osiris which is in the Sekhet-Aanru." (See pp. 63, 295, and pll. 11,
12.)

Chapter CXLVII. "A Chapter to be said when Ani cometh to the first
Aril." (See pp. 56, 291, and pll. 11, 12.)

Chapter CXLVIII. Without title. See pp. 239, 366, and pl. 35.)

{p. clii}

List of Chapters.

Chapter CLI. Scene in the mummy chamber. (See pp. 229, 360, and Pll. 33,
34.)

Chapter CLV. "The Chapter of a Tet of gold." (See pp. 225, 357, and pl.
33.)

Chapter CLVI. "The Chapter of a Buckle of carnelian." (See pp. 227, 359,
and pl. 33.)

Chapter CLXVI. "The Chapter of the Pillow which is placed under the
head." (See pp. 228, 359, and pl. 33.)

Chapter CLXXV. " The Chapter of not dying a second time." (See pp. 184,
341, and pl. 29.)

Only one other much mutilated copy of this most important Chapter is
known. In it it is declared that neither men nor gods can conceive what
great glory has been laid up for Ani in his existence in the next world,
and that his life therein shall be for "millions of millions of years."

Chapter CLXXXV. "A Hymn of Praise to Osiris, the dweller in Amenta,
Un-nefer within Abtu (Abydos)." (See pp. 241, 367, and pl. 36.)

Chapter CLXXXVI. "A Hymn of praise to Hathor." (See pp. 242, 368. and
pl. 37.)
