[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod18)  [Next](ebod20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATES XI. AND XII.

Vignette I.: Ani and his wife Thuthu approaching the first Arit,\[3\]
the cornice of which is ornamented with \#\#\# *i.e.*, emblems of power,
life, and stability. At the entrance sit three gods, the first having
the head of a hare, the second the head of a serpent, and the third the
head of a crocodile. The first holds an ear of corn (?), and each of the
others a knife.

Text \[CHAPTER CXLVII.\]: (I) THE FIRST ARIT. The name of the doorkeeper
is Sekhet-hra-asht-aru\[3\]; the name of the (2) watcher is Meti-heh
(?)\[4\]; the name of the herald is Ha-kheru.\[5\]

\[WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN OSIRIS COMETH TO THE FIRST ARIT IN
AMENTA.\[6\]\] Saith (3) Ani, triumphant, when he cometh to the first
Arit: "I am the mighty one who createth his own light. (4) I have come
unto thee, O Osiris, and, purified from that which defileth thee, I
adore thee. Lead on; (5) name not the name

\[1. Lepsius (*Todtenbuch*, Bl. XI.) adds, after this: "Now those who
rise up against me and among whom is evil \[see above, l. 141\] are the
powers of darkness of the god Sut, when there is strife among them, for
strife is flame."

2\. "May it be granted to \[the dead\] by the decree of \[the gods\] who
are in Tattu to destroy the souls of his foes!"

2 House or mansion. in the upper line of Plates XI. and XII. there is a
series of seven *Arits*, or mansions, through which the deceased is
supposed to pass. In the lower line are the ten *Sebkhets*, or
pylon-shaped gateways.

3 "Reversed of face: of many forms." Var. \#\#\#.

4 Var. \#\#\#.

5 "The voice that travelleth." Var. \#\#\#. "The high-voiced."

6 Supplied from Naville, *Todtenbuch*, 1. 165.\]

{p. 292}

of Re-stau unto me. Homage to thee, O Osiris, in thy might and in thy
strength (6) in Re-stau. Rise up and conquer, O Osiris, in Abtu. Thou
goest round about heaven, thou sailest in the presence of Ra, (7) thou
seest all the beings who have knowledge.\[1\] Hail Ra, who circlest in
\[the sky\]. Verily I say \[unto thee\], O Osiris, I am a (8) godlike
ruler. (9) Let me not be driven hence\[2\] (10) nor from the wall of
burning coals. \[I have\] opened the way in Re-stau; (11) I have eased
the pain of Osiris; \[I have\] embraced that which the balance I hath
weighed; \[I have\] made a path for him in the great valley, it and
\[he\] maketh a path. Osiris shineth(?)."

Vignette II.: The second Arit, guarded by three gods; the first of whom
has the head of a lion, the second the head of a man, and the third the
head of a dog. Each one holds a knife.

Text: (1) THE SECOND ARIT. The name of (2) the doorkeeper is
Un-hat\[4\]; (3) the name of the watcher is (4) Seqet-hra; the name of
the herald is Uset.\[5\]

\(6\) Saith Osiris Ani, when he cometh unto this Arit; "He sitteth to do
his heart's desire, and he weigheth (7) words as the second of Thoth.
The strength of Thoth\[6\] humbleth the (8) hidden Maata gods\[7\] who
feed upon Maat throughout the years \[of their lives\].\[8\] I make
offerings at the (9) moment when \[he\] passeth on his way; I pass on
and enter on the way; Grant thou that I may pass through and that I may
gain sight of Ra together with those who make offerings."

\[1. Birch: "Pure Spirits." Pierret: "Intelligents."

2\. *I.e.*, the *Arit*.

3 Literally standard or perch. Var. \#\#\#.

4 Var. \#\#\#.

5 Var. \#\#\#.

6\. Var. "the strength of Osiris is the strength of Thoth."

7 Varr. *Nemasa*, and *Sah*, "Orion." The reading in Lepsius is *Masti*,
"gods of the thigh."

8\. Var. "their years are the years of Osiris."

9\. The text here differs from all others and may be corrupt.\]

{p. 293}

Vignette III.: The third Arit, guarded by three gods; the first with the
head of a jackal, the second the head of a dog, and the third the head
of a serpent. The first holds an ear of corn (?), and each of the others
a knife.

Text: (1) THE THIRD ARIT. The name of the (2) doorkeeper is
Qeq-hauau-ent-pehui;\[1\] the name of the (4) watcher is
Se-res-hra;\[2\] the name of the herald is Aaa.\[3\]

Saith Osiris Ani, \[when he cometh to this Arit\]: (6) "I am hidden
\[in\] the great deep, \[I am\] the judge of the Rehui.\[4\] I have come
and I have done away with the offences of Osiris. I am building up the
standing place (7) which cometh forth from his *urerit* (?) crown. I
have done his business in Abtu, I have opened the way in Re-stau, I have
(8) eased the pain which was in Osiris. I have made straight his
standing place, and I have made \[his\] path.\[5\] He shineth in
Re-stau."

Vignette IV.: The fourth Arit, guarded by three gods; the first with the
head of a man, the second the head of a hawk, and the third the head of
a lion. The first holds an ear of corn and each of the others a knife.

Text: (1) THE FOURTH ARIT. The name of the (2) doorkeeper is
Khesef-hra-asht- (3) kheru;\[6\] the name of the (4) watcher is
Seres-tepu;\[7\] (5) the name of the herald is (6) Khesef-At.\[8\]

Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant, \[when he cometh to this
Arit\]: "I am the \[mighty\] bull, the (7) son of the ancestress of
Osiris. O grant ye that his father, the lord of his godlike (8)
companions, may bear witness for him. Here the guilty are weighed in
judgment. I have brought unto (9) his nostrils eternal life. I am the
son of Osiris, I have made the way, I have passed thereover into
Neter-khert."

PLATE XII.--**Vignette V.:** The fifth Arit, guarded by three gods; the
first with the head of a hawk, the second the head of a man, and the
third the head of a snake. Each holds a knife.

\[1. *I.e.*, "Eater of his own filth."

2\. *I.e.*, "Making to lift up his face."

3\. *I.e.*, "Great One."

4\. *I.e.*, Horus and Set.

5\. Var. \#\#\#. See the end of the speech of the Osiris at the first
*arit*.

6\. *I.e.*, "Repulsing the face, great of speech."

7 Var. \#\#\#

8\. *I.e.*, "Repulser of the crocodile."\]

{p. 294}

Text: (1) THE FIFTH ARIT. The (2) name of the doorkeeper is
Ankh-f-em-fent;\[1\] the name of the (3) watcher is Shabu; the name of
the herald is Teb-hra-keha-kheft.\[2\]

Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant, \[when he cometh to this
Arit\]: I have brought unto thee the bones of thy jaws in Re-stau, I
have brought thee thy backbone in Annu, (7) gathering together all thy
members there. (8) I have driven back Apep for thee. I have poured water
upon the wounds; I have made a path among you. I am the Ancient One
among the gods. I have\[3\] made the offering of Osiris, who hath
triumphed with victory, gathering his bones and bringing together all
his limbs."

Vignette VI.: The sixth Arit, guarded by three gods; the first with the
head of a jackal, and the second and third the head of a dog. The first
holds an ear of corn (?), and each of the others a knife.

Text: (I) THE SIXTH ARIT. (2) The name of the doorkeeper is
Atek-au-kehaq-kheru;\[4\] the name of the (4) watcher is An-hri; (5) the
name of the herald is Ates-hra.

Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, \[when he cometh to this Arit\]: "I have
come (7) daily, I have come daily. I have made the way; I have passed
along that which was created by Anubis. I am the lord of the (8)
*urerit* crown . . . . . . . magical words. I, the avenger of right and
truth, have avenged his eye. I have swathed the eye of Osiris, \[I
have\] made the way\]; Osiris Ani hath passed along \[it\] with you . .
. . . . . .

Vignette VII.: The seventh Arit, guarded by three gods; the first with
the head of a hare, the second the head of a lion, and the third the
head of a man. The first and second hold a knife, and the third an ear
of corn (?).

Text: (1) THE SEVENTH ARIT. The name of (2) the doorkeeper is
Sekhem-Matenu-sen;\[5\] the name Of (4) the watcher is
Aa-maa-kheru,\[6\] (5) and the name of the herald is Khesef-khemi.

Saith Osiris, \[the scribe\] Ani, \[when he cometh to this Arit\]: (6)
"I have come

\[1. *I.e.*, "He liveth upon worms."

2\. Var. \#\#\#.

3\. For what follows of this speech Naville gives no equivalent.

4\. Var. Seket-tau-keha-kheru.

5\. Ates-sen.

6 Var. Aa-kheru.\]

{p. 295}

unto thee, O Osiris, who art cleansed of \[thine\] impurities. Thou
goest round about heaven, thou seest Ra, thou seest the beings who have
knowledge. Hail (7) Only One! behold, thou art in the sektet boat,\[1\]
He goeth round the horizon of heaven. I speak what I will unto his\[2\]
body; (8) it waxeth strong and it cometh to life, as he spake. Thou
turnest back his face. Prosper thou for -me all the ways \[which lead\]
unto thee!"

Vignette I.: Ani and his wife Thuthu, with hands raised in adoration,
approaching the first *Sebkhet* or Pylon, which is guarded by a
bird-headed deity wearing a disk on his head, and sitting in a shrine
the cornice of which is decorated with *khakeru* ornaments.

Text: \[CHAPTER CXLVI.\] THE FIRST PYLON. WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN
\[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE FIRST PYLON. Saith Osiris Ani, triumphant: "Lo,
the lady of terrors, with lofty walls, the sovereign lady, the mistress
of destruction, who uttereth the words which drive back the destroyers,
who delivereth from destruction him that travelleth along the way. The
name of the doorkeeper is Neruit."

Vignette II.: The second Pylon, which is guarded by a lion-headed deity
seated in a shrine, upon the top of which is a serpent.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE SECOND PYLON.
Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the lady of heaven, the
mistress of the world, who devoureth with fire, the lady of mortals; how
much greater is she than all men! The name of the doorkeeper is
Mes-Ptah."

Vignette III.: The third Pylon, which is guarded by a man-headed deity
seated in a shrine, the upper part of which is ornamented with the two
*utchats* and the emblems of the orbit of the sun and of water.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE THIRD PYLON OF THE
HOUSE OF OSIRIS. Saith the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the lady of the

\[1. Var. "Thou invokest Ra in the *sektet* boat of heaven."

2 Reading with Naville \#\#\#.\]

{p. 296}

altar, the mighty one to whom offerings are made, the beloved\[1\] (?)
of every god, who saileth up to Abtu. The name of the doorkeeper is
Sebaq."

Vignette IV.: The fourth Pylon, which is guarded by a cow-headed deity
seated in a shrine, the cornice of which is ornamented with uræi wearing
disks.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE FOURTH PYLON.
Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, \[triumphant\]: "Lo, she who prevaileth
with knives, mistress of the world, destroyer of the foes of the
Still-Heart, she who decreeth the escape of the needy from evil hap. The
name of the doorkeeper is Nekau."

Vignette V.: The fifth Pylon, which is guarded by the hippopotamus
deity, with her fore-feet resting upon the buckle, the emblem of
protection, seated in a shrine, the cornice of which is ornamented with
\#\#\#, emblematic of flames of fire.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE FIFTH PYLON. Saith
Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the flame, the lady of breath
(?) for the nostrils; one may not advance to entreat her shall not come
into her presence. The name of the doorkeeper is Hentet-Arqiu."

Vignette VI.: The sixth Pylon, which is guarded by a deity in the form
of a man holding a knife and a besom and seated in a shrine, above which
is a serpent.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE SIXTH PYLON. Saith
Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the lady of light, the mighty
one, to whom men cry aloud; man knoweth neither her breadth nor her
height; there was never found her like from the beginning (?). There is
a serpent thereover whose size is not known; it was born in the presence
of the Still-Heart. The name of the doorkeeper is Semati."

Vignette VII.: The seventh Pylon, which is guarded by a ram-headed deity
holding a besom and seated in a shrine, the cornice of which is
decorated with *khakeru* ornaments.

\[1. The principal variants are "every god uniteth with her"; "the heart
of every god rejoiceth in her." See Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. II., Bl.
371.\]

{p. 297}

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE SEVENTH PYLON.
Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the robe which doth
clothe the feeble one (*i.e.*, the deceased), weeping for what it loveth
and shroudeth. The name of the doorkeeper is Sakti-f."

Vignette VIII.: The eighth Pylon, which is guarded by a hawk wearing the
crowns of the North and South, seated on a sepulchral chest with closed
doors; before him is a besom, and behind him is the *utchat*. Above the
shrine are two human-headed hawks, emblems of the souls of Ra and
Osiris, and two emblems of life.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE EIGHTH PYLON.
Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant: "Lo, the blazing fire, the
flame whereof cannot be quenched, with tongues of flame which reach
afar, the slaughtering one, the irresistible, through which one may not
pass by reason of the hurt which it doeth. The name of the doorkeeper is
Khu-tchet-f."\[1\]

Vignette IX: The ninth Pylon, which is guarded by a lion-headed deity
wearing a disk and holding a besom, seated in a shrine, the cornice of
which is ornamented with uræi wearing disks.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE NINTH PYLON. Saith
Osiris Ani, triumphant: "Lo, she who is chiefest, the lady of strength,
who giveth quiet of heart to her lord. Her girth is three hundred and
fifty measures; she is clothed with mother-of-emerald of the south; and
she raiseth up the godlike form and clotheth the feeble one The name of
the doorkeeper is Ari-su-tchesef."\[2\]

Vignette X.: The tenth Pylon, which is guarded by a ram-headed deity
wearing the *atef* crown and holding a besom, seated in a shrine, upon
the top of which are two serpents.

Text: WORDS TO BE SPOKEN WHEN \[ANI\] COMETH UNTO THE TENTH PYLON. Saith
Osiris Ani, \[triumphant\]: "Lo, she who is loud of voice, she who
causeth those to cry who entreat her, the fearful one who terrifieth,
who feareth none that are therein. The name of the doorkeeper is
Sekhen-ur."

\[1. *I.e.*, "Protecting his body."

2 *I.e.*, "He maketh himself."\]

{p. 298}

Appendix: The several "texts" of the next eleven Pylons are wanting in
this papyrus. Translations of them are here given as they are found in a
papyrus published by Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., 131. 161, 162. It
will be observed that the names of the doorkeepers are wanting, and also
that each text, except in the case of the twenty-first Pylon, ends with
words which refer to the examination of the dead at each gate.

THE ELEVENTH PYLON. "Lo, she who repeateth slaughter, the burner up of
fiends, It she who is terrible at every gateway, who rejoiceth on the
day of darkness. She judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE TWELFTH PYLON. "Lo, the invoker of the two lands, who destroyeth
with flashings and with fire those who come, the lady of splendour, who
obeyeth her lord daily. She judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE THIRTEENTH PYLON. "Lo, Isis, who hath stretched forth her hands and
arms over it, and hath made Hapi to shine in his hidden place. She
judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE FOURTEENTH PYLON. "Lo, the lady of the knife, who danceth in blood;
she maketh \[the festival of\] the god Hak on the day of judgment. She
judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE FIFTEENTH PYLON. "Lo, the Bloody Soul, who searcheth out and putteth
to the test, who maketh inquiry and scrutiny, who cometh forth by night,
and doth fetter the Fiend in his lair; may her hands be given to the
Still-Heart in his hour, and may she make him to advance and come forth
unto her. She judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE SIXTEENTH PYLON. Saith Osiris, when he cometh unto this pylon: "Lo,
the Terrible one, the lady of the rain storm, who planteth ruin in the
souls of men, the devourer of the dead bodies of mankind, the orderer
and creator of slaughters, who cometh forth. She judgeth the feeble
swathed one."

THE SEVENTEENTH PYLON. "Lo, the Hewer-in-pieces in blood, . . . . . .
the lady of flame. She judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE EIGHTEENTH PYLON. "Lo, the Lover of fire, the purifier of sinners
(?), the lover of slaughter, the chief of those who adore, the lady of
the temple, the slaughterer of the fiends in the night. She judgeth the
feeble bandaged one."

THE NINETEENTH PYLON. "Lo, the Dispenser of light while she liveth, the
mistress of flames, the lady of the strength and of the writings of Ptah
himself. She maketh trial of the swathings of Pa-an."

THE TWENTIETH PYLON. "Lo, she who is within the cavern of her lord,
Clother is her name; she hideth what she hath made, she carrieth away
hearts and greedily drinketh water. She judgeth the feeble swathed one."

THE TWENTY-FIRST PYLON. "Lo, the knife which cutteth when \[its name\]
is uttered, and slayeth those who advance towards its flames. It hath
secret plots and counsels."

{p. 299}

In the late recensions of the Book of the Dead,\[1\] the text referring
to the twenty-first Pylon reads:--

\(71\) "Hail," saith Horus, "O twenty-first pylon of the Still-Heart.
(72) I have made the way, I know thee, I know thy name, I know the name
of the goddess who guardeth thee: 'Sword that smiteth at the utterance
of its \[own\] name, the unknown (?) goddess with back-turned face, the
overthrower of those who draw nigh unto her flame' is her name. Thou
keepest the secret things of the avenger of the god whom thou guardest,
and his name is Amem.\[2\] (73) He maketh it to come to pass that the
persea trees grow not, that the acacia trees bring not forth, and that
copper is not begotten in the mountain. The godlike beings of this pylon
are seven gods. (74) Tchen or At is the name of the one at (?) the door;
Hetep-mes\[3\] is the name of the second one; Mes-Sep\[4\] is the name
of the third one Utch-re\[5\] is the name of the fourth one;
"Ap-uat\[6\] is the name of the fifth one; Beq\[7\] is the name of the
sixth one; Anubis is the name of the seventh one."

\(75\) "I have made the way. I am Amsu-Horus, the avenger of his father,
the heir of his father Un-nefer. I have come and I have overthrown all
foes of my father Osiris. I have come day by day with victory, doing
myself the worship of the god, (76) in the house of his father Tmu, lord
of Annu, triumphant in the southern sky. I have done what is right and
true to him that hath made right and truth; I have made the Haker
festival for the lord thereof; I have led the way in the festival; (77)
I have made offerings of cakes to the lords of the altars; and I have
brought offerings and oblations, and cakes and ale, and oxen and ducks,
to my father Osiris Un-nefer. I rise up in order that my soul may be
made one wholly; I cause the bennu bird to come forth at \[my\] words. I
have come daily into the holy house to make offerings of incense. (78) I
have brought garments of byssus. I have set forth on the lake in the
boat. I have made Osiris, the overlord of the netherworld, to be
victorious over his enemies; and I have carried away all his foes to the
place of slaughter in the East; they shall never come forth from the
durance of the god Seb therein. (79) I have made those who stand up
against Ra to be still, and \[I have\] made him to be victorious. I have
come even as a scribe, and I have made all things plain. I have caused
the god to have the power of his legs. I have come into the house of him
that is upon his hill,\[8\] and I have seen him that is ruler in the
sacred hall. (80) I have gone into Re-stau; I have hidden myself, and I
have found out the way; I have travelled unto An-rutf. I have clothed
those who are naked. (81) I have sailed up to Abtu; I have praised the
gods Hu and Sau. (82) 1 have entered into the house of Astes, I have
made supplication to the gods Khati and Sekhet in the house of Neith,"
or, as others say, "the rulers. I have entered into Re-stau; I have
hidden myself,

\[1. See Lepsius, *Todtenbuch*, pl. LXIV.

2\. *I.e.*, "Devourer."

3\. *I.e.*, "Born of peace."

4\. *I.e.*, "Who giveth birth to fire."

5 *I.e.*, "Strong of mouth."

6 *I.e.*, "Opener of ways."

7 *I.e.*, "Olive tree."

8 *I.e.*, Anubis, the god of the dead.\]

{p. 300}

and I have found out the way; I have travelled unto An-rutf. (83) I have
clothed him who was naked. I have sailed up to Abtu; I have glorified Hu
and Sau. (84) I have received my crown at my rising, and I have power to
sit upon my throne, upon the throne of my father and of the great
company of the gods. I have adored the *meskhen* of Ta-sert. (85) My
mouth uttereth words with right and with truth. I have drowned the
serpent Akhekh. I have come into the great hall which giveth strength
unto the limbs; and it hath been granted to me to sail along in the boat
of Hai. The fragrance of *anti* unguent ariseth from the hair of him who
hath knowledge. (86) I have entered into the house of Astes, and I have
made supplication to the gods Khati and Sekhet within the House of the
Prince. (87) I have arrived as a favoured one in Tattu."

Vignette \[1\] \[CHAPTER XVIII.--INTRODUCTION\] (Upper register): The
priest\[2\] An-maut-f, who has on the right side of his head the lock of
Heru-pa-khrat, or Horus the Child, and who wears a leopard's skin,
introducing Ani and his wife to the gods whose names are given in Plates
XIII. and XIV.

Text: An-maut-f saith: "I have come unto you, O mighty and godlike
rulers who are in heaven and in earth and under the earth; (2) and I
have brought unto you Osiris Ani. He hath not sinned against any of the
gods. Grant ye that he may be with you for all time."

\(1\) The adoration of Osiris, lord of Re-stau, and of the great company
of the gods who are in the netherworld beside Osiris, the scribe Ani,
who saith: (2) "Homage to thee, O ruler of Amenta, Unnefer within Abtu!
I have come unto thee, and my heart holdeth right and truth. (3) There
is no sin in my body; nor have I lied wilfully, nor have I done aught
with a false heart. Grant thou to me food in the tomb, (4) and that I
may come into \[thy\] presence at the altar of the lords of right and
truth, and that I may enter into and come forth from the netherworld (my
soul not being turned back), and that I may behold the face of the Sun,
and that I may behold the Moon (5) for ever and ever."

Vignette (Lower register): The priest Se-mer-f\[3\] who has on the right
side of his head the lock of Heru-pa-khrat and wears a leopard's skin,
introducing Ani and his wife to the gods whose names are given in Plates
XIII. and XIV.

\[1. This and its companion vignette and the vignettes of Plates
XIII.-XIV. form one composition.

2\. Osiris is also called An-maut-f; see Lepsius, *Todtenbuch*, chap.
cxlii., 1. 7.

3\. For the functions of this priest see above, p. 268.\]

{p. 301}

Text: Se-mer-f saith (1) I have come unto you, O godlike rulers who are
in Re-stau, and I have brought unto you Osiris Ani. Grant ye \[to him\],
as to the followers of Horus, cakes and water, and air, and a homestead
in Sekhet-Hetep."\[l\]

\(1\) The adoration of Osiris, the lord of everlastingness, and of all
the godlike rulers of Re-stau, by Osiris, \[the scribe Ani\], who (2)
saith: "Homage to thee, O king of Amenta, prince of Akert, I have come
unto thee. I know thy ways, (3) I am furnished with the forms which thou
takest in the underworld. Grant thou to me a place in the underworld
near unto the lords (4) of right and truth. May my homestead be abiding
in Sekhet-hetep, and may I receive cakes in thy presence."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XIII.](ebod20.md)
