[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod04)  [Next](ebod06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE DOCTRINE OF ETERNAL LIFE.

Egyptian belief in a future life.

The doctrine of eternal life in the VIth dynasty.

The ideas and beliefs which the Egyptians held in reference to a future
existence are not readily to be defined, owing to the many difficulties
in translating religious texts and in harmonizing the statements made in
different works of different periods. Some confusion of details also
seems to have existed in the minds of the Egyptians themselves, which
cannot be cleared up until the literature of the subject has been
further studied and until more texts have been published. That the
Egyptians believed in a future life of some kind is certain; and the
doctrine of eternal existence is the leading feature of their religion,
and is enunciated with the utmost clearness in all periods. Whether this
belief had its origin at Annu, the chief city of the worship of the
sun-god, is not certain, but is very probable; for already in the
pyramid texts we find the idea of everlasting life associated with the
sun's existence, and Pepi I. is said to be "the Giver of life,
stability, power, health, and all joy of heart, like the Sun, living for
ever."\[1\] The sun rose each day in renewed strength and vigour, and
the renewal of youth in a future life was the aim and object of every
Egyptian believer. To this end all the religious literature of Egypt was
composed. Let us take the following extracts from texts of the VIth
dynasty as illustrations:--

1\. ha Unas an sem-nek as met-th sem-nek anxet

Hail Unas, not hast thou gone, behold, \[as\] one dead, thou hast gone
\[as\] one living

hems her xent Ausar.

to sit upon the throne of Osiris.\[2\]

\[1. \#\#\# *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 167 (1. 65).

2\. *Recueil Travaux*, t. iii., p. 201 (1. 206). The context runs "Thy
Sceptre is in thy hand, and thou givest commands unto the living ones.
The *Mekes* and *Nehbet* sceptres are in thy hand, and thou givest
commands unto those whose abodes are secret."\]

{p. lvi}

2\. O Ra-Tum i-nek sa-k i-nek Unas . . . . . . sa-k pu en

O Ra-Turn, cometh to thee thy son, cometh to thee Unas . . . . . thy son
is this of

t'et-k en t'etta

thy body for ever.\[1\]

3\. Tem sa-k pu penen Ausar ta-nek set'eb-f anx-f anx-f

O Turn, thy son is this Osiris; thou hast given his sustenance and he
liveth; he liveth,

anx Unas pen an mit-f an mit Unas pen

and liveth Unas this; not dieth he, not dieth Unas this.\[2\]

4\. hetep Unas em anx em Amenta

Setteth Unas in life in Amenta.\[3\]

5\. au am-nef saa en neter neb ahau pa neheh t'er-f

He\[4\] hath eaten the knowledge of god every, \[his\] existence is for
all eternity

pa t'etta em sah-f pen en merer-f ari-f mest'et'-f

and to everlasting in his *sah*\[5\] this; what he willeth he doeth,
\[what\] he hateth

an ari-nef

not doth he do.\[6\]

\[1. *Recueil Travaux*, t. iii., p. 208 (ll. 232, 233).

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iii., p. 209 (l. 240)

3\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 50 (l. 445). The allusion here is to the setting
of the sun.

4\. *I.e.*, Unas.

5\. See page lix.

6\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 61 (ll. 520, 521).\]

{p. lvii}

6\. anx anx an mit-k

Live life, not shalt thou die.\[1\]

The doctrine of eternal life in the XVIIIth dynasty.

In the papyrus of Ani the deceased is represented as having come to a
place remote and far away, where there is neither air to breathe nor
water to drink, but where he holds converse with Tmu. In answer to his
question, "How long have I to live?"\[2\], the great god of Annu
answers:--

auk er heh en heh aha en heh

Thou shalt exist for millions of millions of years, a period of millions
of years.

In the LXXXIVth Chapter, as given in the same papyrus, the infinite
duration of the past and future existence of the soul, as well as its
divine nature, is proclaimed by Ani in the words:--

nuk Su paut ba-a pu neter ba-a pu heh

I am Shu \[the god\] of unformed matter. My soul is God, my soul is
eternity.\[3\]

When the deceased identifies himself with Shu, he makes the period of
his existence coeval with that of Tmu-Ra, *i.e.*, he existed before
Osiris and the other gods of his company. These two passages prove the
identity of the belief in eternal life in the XVIIIth dynasty with that
in the Vth and VIth dynasties.

But while we have this evidence of the Egyptian belief in eternal life,
we are nowhere told that man's corruptible body will rise again; indeed,
the following extracts show that the idea prevailed that the body lay in
the earth while the soul or spirit lived in heaven.

1\. ba ar pet sat ar ta

Soul to heaven, body to earth.\[4\] (Vth dynasty.)

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 170 (Pepi, 1. 85).

2\. \#\#\#. Plate XIX., l. 16 (Book of the Dead, Chapter CLXXV.).

3\. Plate XXVIII., 1. 15.

4 *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 71 (l. 582).\]

{p. lvii}

2\. mu-k er pet xa-k er ta

Thy essence is in heaven, thy body to earth.\[1\] (VIth dynasty.)

3\. pet xer ba-k ta xeri tut-k

Heaven hath thy soul, earth hath thy body.\[2\] (Ptolemaic period.)

Constancy in the belief in the resurrection.

There is, however, no doubt that from first to last the Egyptians firmly
believed that besides the soul there was some other element of the man
that would rise again. The preservation of the corruptible body too was
in some way connected with the life in the world to come, and its
preservation was necessary to ensure eternal life; otherwise the prayers
recited to this end would have been futile, and the time honoured custom
of mummifying the dead would have had no meaning. The never ending
existence of the soul is asserted in a passage quoted above without
reference to Osiris; but the frequent mention of the uniting of his
bones, and of the gathering together of his members,\[3\] and the doing
away with all corruption from his body, seems to show that the pious
Egyptian connected these things with the resurrection of his own body in
some form, and he argued that what had been done for him who was
proclaimed to be giver and source of life must be necessary for mortal
man.

The *khat* or physical body.

The physical body of man considered as a whole was called *khat*, a word
which seems to be connected with the idea of something which is liable
to decay. The word is also applied to the mummified body in the tomb, as
we know from the words "My body (*khat*) is buried."\[4\] Such a body
was attributed to the god Osiris;" in the CLXIInd Chapter of the Book of
the Dead "his great

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 43 (l. 304).

2\. Horrack, *Lamentations d'Isis et de Nephthys*, Paris, 1866, p. 6.

3\. Already in the pyramid texts we have "Rise up, O thou Teta! Thou
hast received thy head, thou hast knitted together thy bones, thou hast
collected thy members." *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 40 (1. 287).

3\. Book of the Dead, Chapter LXXXVI., 1. 11.

4\. Papyrus of Ani, pl. vii., 1. 28, and pl. xix., 1. 8.\]

{p. lix}

divine body rested in Annu."\[1\] In this respect the god and the
deceased were on an equality. As we have seen above, the body neither
leaves the tomb nor reappears on earth; yet its preservation was
necessary. Thus the deceased addresses Tmu\[2\]: "Hail to thee, O my
father Osiris, I have come and I have embalmed this my flesh so that my
body may not decay. I am whole, even as my father Khepera was whole, who
is to me the type of that which passeth not away. Come then, O Form, and
give breath unto me, O lord of breath, O thou who art greater than thy
compeers. Stablish thou me, and form thou me, O thou who art lord of the
grave. Grant thou to me to endure for ever, even as thou didst grant
unto thy father Tmu to endure; and his body neither passed away nor
decayed. I have not done that which is hateful unto thee, nay, I have
spoken that which thy ka loveth: repulse thou me not, and cast thou me
not behind thee, O Tmu, to decay, even as thou doest unto every god and
unto every goddess and unto every beast and creeping thing which
perisheth when his soul hath gone forth from him after his death, and
which falleth in pieces after his decay . . . . . Homage to thee, O my
father Osiris, thy flesh suffered no decay, there were no worms in thee,
thou didst not crumble away, thou didst not wither away, thou didst not
become corruption and worms; and I myself am Khepera, I shall possess my
flesh for ever and ever, I shall not decay, I shall not crumble away, I
shall not wither away, I shall not become corruption."

The *sahu* or spiritual body.

But the body does not lie in the tomb inoperative, for by the prayers
and ceremonies on the day of burial it is endowed with the power of
changing into a *sahu*, or spiritual body. Thus we have such phrases as,
"I germinate like the plants,"\[3\] "My flesh germinateth,"\[4\] "I
exist, I exist, I live, I live, I germinate, I germinate,"\[5\] "thy
soul liveth, thy body germinateth by the command of Ra

\[1. \#\#\#. Lepsius, *Todtenbuch*, Bl. 77,1. 7.

2\. This chapter was found inscribed upon one of the linen wrappings of
the mummy of Thothmes III., and a copy of the text is given by Naville
(Todtenbuch, Bd. L, Bl. 179); for a later version see Lepsius,
Todtenbuch, Bl. 75, where many interesting variants occur.

3\. \#\#\#. Chapter LXXXIII., 3.

4\. \#\#\#. Chapter LXIV., 1. 49. (Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl.
76.)

5\. \#\#\#. Chapter CLIV. (Lepsius, *Todtenbuch*, 75.)\]

{p. lx}

himself without diminution, and without defect, like unto Ra for ever
and ever."\[1\] The word *sahu* though at times written with the
determinative of a mummy lying on a bier like *khat*, "body," indicates
a body which has obtained a degree of knowledge\[2\] and power and glory
whereby it becomes henceforth lasting and incorruptible. The body which
has become a *sahu* has the power of associating with the soul and of
holding converse with it. In this form it can ascend into heaven and
dwell with the gods, and with the sahu of the gods, and with the souls
of the righteous. In the pyramid texts we have these passages:--

1\. Thes-thu Teta pu un-thu aaa peh-tha hems-k

Rise up thou Teti, this. Stand up thou mighty one being strong. Sit thou

xent neteru ari-k ennu ari en Ausar em Het-aa amt Annu

with the gods, do thou that which did Osiris in the great house in Annu.

sesep-nek sah-k an t'er ret-k em pet an

Thou hast received thy *sah*, not shall be fettered thy foot in heaven,
not

xesef-k em ta

shalt thou be turned back upon earth.\[3\]

2\. anet' hra-k Teta em hru-k pen aha tha xeft Ra

Hail to thee, Teta, on this thy day \[when\] thou art standing before Ra
\[as\]

\[1. Brugsch, *Liber Metempsychosis*, p. 22.

2\. Compare Coptic \#\#\#, "magister."

3\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 36 (1. 271). From line 143 of the
same text it would seem that a man had more than one *sahu*, for the
words "all thy *sahu*," occur. This may, however, be only a plural of
majesty.\]

{p. lxi}

per-f em aabt t'eba-tha em sah-k pen am baiu

he cometh from the cast, \[when\] thou art endued with this thy *sah*
among the souls.\[1\]

3\. ahau pa neheh t'er-f pa t'etta em sah-f

\[His\] duration of life is eternity, his limit of life is
everlastingness in his *sah*.\[2\]

4\. nuk sah em ba-f

I am a *sah* with his soul.\[3\]

In the late edition of the Book of the Dead published by Lepsius the
deceased is said to " look upon his body and to rest upon his
*sahu*,"\[4\] and souls are said "to enter into their *sahu*";\[5\] and
a passage extant both in this and the older Theban edition makes the
deceased to receive the *sahu* of the god Osiris.\[6\] But that Egyptian
writers at times confused the *khat* with the sahu is clear from a
passage in the Book of Respirations, where it is said, "Hail Osiris, thy
name endureth, thy body is stablished, thy sahu germinateth";\[7\] in
other texts the word "germinate" is applied only to the natural body.

The ab or heart.

In close connection with the natural and spiritual bodies stood the
heart, or rather that part of it which was the seat of the power of life
and the fountain of good and evil thoughts. And in addition to the
natural and spiritual bodies, man also bad an abstract individuality or
personality endowed with all his characteristic attributes. This
abstract personality had an absolutely independent existence. It could
move freely from place to place, separating itself from, or uniting
itself to,

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 59 (l. 384).

2\. Ibid., t. iv., p. 61 (1. 521).

3\. Book of the Dead, Chapter I.XXVIII., 1. 14.

4\. \#\#\#. Chapter LXXXIX., 1. 6.

5\. Ibid., 1. 5.

6\. \#\#\#. Chapter CXXX., 1. 38 (ed. Naville).

7\. \#\#\#. See Brugsch, *Liber Metempsychosis*, p. 15.\]

{p. lxii}

The ka or double.

the body at will, and also enjoying life with the gods in heaven.This
was the *ka*,\[1\] a word which at times conveys the meanings of its
Coptic equivalent {Coptic *kw*}, and of {Greek *ei?'dwlon*}, image,
genius, double, character, disposition, and mental attributes. The
funeral offerings of meat, cakes, ale, wine, unguents, *etc.*, were
intended for the *ka*; the scent of the burnt incense was grateful to
it. The *ka* dwelt in the man's statue just as the *ka* of a god
inhabited the statue of the god. In this respect the *ka* seems to be
identical with the *sekhem* or image. In the remotest times the tombs
had special chambers wherein the *ka* was worshipped and received
offerings. The priesthood numbered among its body an order of men who
bore the name of "priests of the *ka* and who performed services in
honour of the *ka* in the "*ka* chapel".

In the text of Unas the deceased is said to be "happy with his ka"\[2\]
in the next world, and his ka is joined unto his body in "the great
dwelling"; \[3\] his body

\[1. The first scholar who seriously examined the meaning of the word
was Dr. Birch, who collected several examples of the use and discussed
them in his *Mèmoire sur une Patère Égyptienne du Musée du Louvre*,
Paris, 1858, p. 59 ff. (Extrait du t. xxiv. des *Mémoires de la Société
impériale des Antiquaires de France*). Dr. Birch translated the word by
être, personne, emblème, divin, génie, principe, esprit. In September,
1878, V. Maspero explained to the Members of the Congress of Lyons the
views which he held concerning this word, and which he had for the past
five years been teaching in the Collège de France, and said, "le *ka*
est une sorte de double de la personne humaine d'une matière moins
grossière que la matière dont est formé le corps, mais qu'il fallait
nourrir et entretenir comme le corps lui-même; ce double vivait dans le
tombeau des offrandes qu'on faisait aux fêtes canoniques, et aujourd'hui
encore un grand nombre des génies de la tradition populaire égyptienne
ne sent que des *doubles*, devenus démons au moment de la conversion des
fellahs an christianisme, puis à l'islamisme." These views were repeated
by him at the Sorbonne in February, 1879. See *Comptes Rendus du Congrès
provincial des Orientalistes*, Lyons, 1878, t. i., pp. 235-263; *Revue
Scientifique de la France et de l'Étranger*, 2<sup>e</sup> série,
8<sup>e</sup> année, No. 35, March, 1879, pp. 816-820; *Bulletin de
l'Association Scientifique de France*, No. 594, 1879, t. xxiii., p.
373-384; Maspero, *Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie*, t. i., pp. 1,
35, 126. In March, 1879, Mr. Renouf read a paper entitled "On the true
sense of an important Egyptian word" (*Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch.*, vol.
vi., London, 1979, pp. 494-508), in which he arrived at conclusions
similar to those of M. Maspero; and in September of the same year M.
Maspero again treated the subject in *Recueil de Travaux*, t. i., p. 152
f. The various shades of meaning in the word have been discussed
subsequently by Brugsch, *Wörterbuch* (Suppl.), pp. 997, 1230; Dümichen,
*Der Grabpalast des Patuamenap*, Abt. i., p. 10; Bergmann, *Der
Sarkophag des Panehemisis* (in *Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen
Sammlungen des allerhöchsten Kaiserhauses*, Vienna, 1883, p. 5);
Wiedemann, *Die Religion der alten Aegypter*, p. 126.

2\. \#\#\#, l. 472.

3\. \#\#\#, l. 482.\]

{p. lxiii}

having been buried in the lowest chamber, "his *ka* cometh forth to
him."\[1\] Of Pepi I. it is said:--

ai su ka-k hems ka-k am ta hena-k at ur

Washed is thy *ka*, sitteth thy *ka* \[and\] it eateth bread with thee
unceasingly

en t'et t'etta

forever.'\[2\]

aha uab-k uab ka-k uab ba-k uab sexem-k

Thou art pure, thy *ka* is pure, thy soul is pure, thy form is
pure.\[3\]

The *ka*, as we have seen, could eat food, and it was necessary to
provide food for it. In the XIIth dynasty and in later periods the gods
are entreated to grant meat and drink to the *ka* of the deceased; and
it seems as if the Egyptians thought that the future welfare of the
spiritual body depended upon the maintenance of a constant supply of
sepulchral offerings. When circumstances rendered it impossible to
continue the material supply of food, the *ka* fed upon the offerings
painted on the walls of the tomb, which were transformed into suitable
nourishment by means of the prayers of the living. When there were
neither material offerings nor painted similitudes to feed upon, it
seems as if the *ka* must have perished; but the texts are not definite
on this point.

A prayer of the ka.

The following is a specimen of the *ka's* petition for food written in
the XVIIIth dynasty:--

"May the gods grant that I go into and come forth from my tomb, may the
Majesty refresh its shade, may I drink water from my cistern every day,
may all my limbs grow, may Hapi give unto me bread and flowers of all
kinds in their season, may I pass over my estate every day without,
ceasing, may my soul

\[1. \#\#\#. l. 483.

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. x 66, 1. 67.

3 Ibid., 1. 112.\]

{p. lxiv}

alight upon the branches of the groves which I have planted, may I make
myself cool beneath my sycamores, may I eat the bread which they
provide. May I have my mouth that I may speak therewith like the
followers of Horus, may I come forth to heaven, may I descend to earth,
may I never be shut out upon the road, may there never be done unto me
that which my soul abhorreth, let not my soul be imprisoned, but may I
be among the venerable and favoured ones, may I plough my lands in the
Field of Aaru, may I arrive at the Field of Peace, may one come out to
me with vessels of ale and cakes and bread of the lords of eternity, may
I receive meat from the altars of the great, I the *ka* of the prophet
Amsu."\[1\]

The *ba* or soul.

To that part of man which beyond all doubt was believed to enjoy an
eternal existence in heaven in a state of glory, the Egyptians gave the
name *ba*, a word which means something like "sublime," "noble," and
which has always hitherto been translated by "soul." The *ba* is not
incorporeal, for although it dwells in the *ka*, and is in some
respects, like the heart, the principle of life in man, still it
possesses both substance and form: in form it is depicted as a
human-headed hawk, and in nature and substance it is stated to be
exceedingly refined or ethereal. It revisited the body in the tomb and
re-animated it, and conversed with it; it could take upon itself any
shape that it pleased; and it had the power of passing into heaven and
of dwelling with the perfected souls there. It was eternal. As the ba
was closely associated with the *ka*, it partook of the funeral
offerings, and in one aspect of its existence at least it was liable to
decay if not properly and sufficiently nourished. In the pyramid texts
the permanent dwelling place of the *ba* or soul is heaven with the
gods, whose life it shares

1\. sek Unas per em hru pen em aru maa en

Behold Unas cometh forth on day this in the form exact of

ba anx

a soul living.\[2\]

\[1. See *Trans. Soc. Bib. Arch.*, vol. vi., pp. 307, 308.

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 52 (l. 455).\]

{p. lxv}

2\. ba-sen met Unas

Their soul\[1\] is in Unas.\[2\]

3\. aha ba-k emma neteru

Standeth thy soul among the gods.\[3\]

4\. ha Pepi pu i-nek maat Heru metu-s thu

Hail, Pepi this! cometh to thee the eye of Horus, it speaketh with thee.

i-nek ba-k am neteru

Cometh to thee thy soul which is among the gods.\[4\]

5\. uab ba-k am neteru

Pure is thy soul among the gods.\[5\]

6\. anx Ausar anx ba din Netat anx Pepi pen

As liveth Osiris, and as liveth the soul in Netat, so liveth Pepi
this.\[6\]

7\. ta-s baiu-k Pepi pen xent paut neteru em

It\[7\] placeth thy soul Pepi this among the greater and lesser cycles
of the gods in

tut arat am-tha hat-k

the form of the uræi \[which\] are on thy brow.\[8\]

\[1. *I.e.*, the soul of the gods.

2 *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 61 (l. 522).

3 *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v-, p. 55 (l. 350), and see Pepi I., ll. 19,
20.

4 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 16o (l. 13). 5 *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 175
0. 113).

6 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 183 (l. 166).

7 *I.e.*, the Eye of Horus.

8 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 184 (l. 167).\]

{p. lxvi}

8\. ha Pepi pen ba-k baiu Annu as ba-k baiu

Behold Pepi this, thy soul is the soul of Annu; behold thy soul is the
soul

Nexen as ba-k baiu Pe as ba-k seb anx as

of Nekhen; behold thy soul is the soul of Pe; behold thy soul is a star
living, behold,

xent senu-f

among its brethren.\[1\]

The khaibit or shadow.

In connection with the *ka* and *ba* must be mentioned the *khaibit* or
shadow of the man, which the Egyptians regarded as a part of the human
economy. It may be compared with the {Greek *skia'*} and *umbra* of the
Greeks and Romans. It was supposed to have an entirely independent
existence and to be able to separate itself from the body; it was free
to move wherever it pleased, and, like the *ka* and *ba*, it partook of
the funeral offerings in the tomb, which it visited at will. The mention
of the shade, whether of a god or man, in the pyramid texts is
unfrequent, and it is not easy to ascertain what views were held
concerning it; but from the passage in the text of Unas,\[2\] where it
is mentioned together with the souls and spirits and bones of the gods,
it is evident that already at that early date its position in relation
to man was well defined. From the collection of illustrations which Dr.
Birch appended to his paper *On the Shade or Shadow of the Dead*,\[3\]
it is quite clear that in later times at least the shadow was always
associated with the soul and was believed to be always near it; and this
view is

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 184 (l. 168).

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, p.62 (l. 523).

3\. See *Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch.*, vol. viii., p. 386-97.\]

{p. lxvii}

supported by a passage in the XCIInd Chapter of the Book of the
Dead,\[1\] where it is said:--

em xena ba-a sauti xaibit-a un uat

Let not be shut in my soul, let not be fettered my shadow, let be opened
the way

en ba-d en xaibit-a maa-f neter aa

for my soul and for my shadow, may it see the great god.

And again, in the LXXXIXth Chapter the deceased says:--

maa-a ba-a xaibit-a

May I look upon my soul and my shadow.\[2\]

the *khu* or intelligence.

Another important and apparently eternal part of man was the *khu*,
which, judging from the meaning of the word, may be defined as a
"shining" or translucent, intangible casing or covering of the body,
which is frequently depicted in the form of a mummy. For want of a
better word khu has often been translated "shining one," "glorious,"
"intelligence," and the like, but in certain cases it may be tolerably
well rendered by "spirit." The pyramid texts show us that the *khu's* of
the gods lived in heaven, and thither wended the *khu* of a man as soon
as ever the prayers said over the dead body enabled it to do so. Thus it
is said, "Unas standeth with the *khu's*,"\[3\] and one of the gods is
asked to "give him his sceptre among the *khu's*; "\[4\] when the souls
of the gods enter into Unas, their *khu's* are with and round about
him.\[6\] To king Teta it is said:--

\[1. Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 104, ll. 7, 8.

2\. *Ibid.*, Bd. I., Bl. 101.

3\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iii., p. x 88 (1. 71).

4\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 215 (l. 274).

5\. Ibid., t iv., p. 61 (1. 522).\]

{p. lxviii}

nehem-nef maat-f maf er ta-nef nek seba-k

He\[1\] hath plucked his eye from himself, he hath given it unto thee to
strengthen thee

am-s sexem-k am-s xent xu

therewith, that thou mayest prevail with it among the *khu's*.\[2\]

And again, when the god Khent-mennut-f has transported the king to
heaven, the god Seb, who rejoices to meet him, is said to give him both
hands and welcome him as a brother and to nurse him and to place him
among the imperishable *khu's*.\[1\] In the XCIInd Chapter the deceased
is made to pray for the liberation of his soul, shadow, and *khu* from
the bondage of the tomb, and for deliverance from those "whose dwellings
are hidden, who fetter the souls, who fetter souls and khu's cc and who
shut in the shadows of the dead";\[4\] and in the XC Ist Chapter\[5\] is
a formula specially prepared to enable the *khu* to pass from the tomb
to the domains where Ra and Hathor dwell.

The *sekhem* or form.

Yet another part of a man was supposed to exist in heaven, to which the
Egyptians gave the name sekhem. The word has been rendered by "power,"
"form," and the like, but it is very difficult to find any expression
which will represent the Egyptian conception of the *sekhem*. It is
mentioned in connection with the soul and *khu*, as will be seen from
the following passages from the pyramid texts

1\. i-nek sexem-k am xu

Cometh to thee thy sekhem among the khu's.\[6\]

\[1. *I.e.*, Horus.

2 *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 19 (l. 174).

3\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 41 (l. 289).

4\. See below, p. 117.

5\. See below, p. 115.

6\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 160 (l. 13).\]

{p. lxix}

2\. Uda sexem-k am xu

Pure is thy sekhem among the khu's.\[1\]

3\. aha uab-k uab ka-k uab ba-k uab

Thou art pure, pure is thy *ka*, pure is thy soul, pure is

sexem-k

thy sekhem.\[1\]

A name of Ra was\[3\] *sekhem ur*, the "Great Sekhem," and Unas is
identified with him and called:--

sexem ur sexem em sexemu

Great *sekhem*, *sekhem* among the *sekhemu*.\[4\]

The *ren* or name

Finally, the name, *ren*, of a man was believed to exist in heaven, and.
in the pyramid texts we are told that

nefer en Pepi pen hena ren-f anx Pepi pen hena ka-f

Happy is Pepi this with his name, liveth Pepi this with his *ka*.\[5\]

Thus, as we have seen, the whole man consisted of a natural body, a
spiritual body, a heart, a double, a soul, a shadow, an intangible
ethereal casing or spirit, a form, and a name. All these were, however,
bound together inseparably, and the welfare of any single one of them
concerned the welfare of all. For the well-being of the spiritual parts
it was necessary to preserve from decay the natural body; and

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 175 (l. 113).

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, p. 175, 1. 112.

3\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 44,1. 393.

4\. *Ibid.*, p. 60, ll. 514, 515

5\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 183, l. 169.\]

{p. lxx}

certain passages in the pyramid texts seem to show that a belief in the
resurrection of the natural body existed in the earliest dynasties.\[1\]

The texts are silent as to the time when the immortal part began its
beatified existence; but it is probable that the Osiris\[2\] of a man
only attained to the full enjoyment of spiritual happiness after the
funeral ceremonies had been duly per formed and the ritual recited.
Comparatively few particulars are known of the manner of life of the
soul in heaven, and though a number of interesting facts may be gleaned
from the texts of all periods, it is very difficult to harmonize them.
This result is due partly to the different views held by different
schools of thought in ancient Egypt, and partly to the fact that on some
points the Egyptians them selves seem to have had no decided opinions.
We depend upon the pyramid texts for our knowledge of their earliest
conceptions of a future life.

The existence in heaven.

The life of the Osiris of a man in heaven is at once material and
spiritual and it seems as if the Egyptians never succeeded in breaking
away from their very ancient habit of confusing the things of the body
with the things of the soul. They believed in an incorporeal and
immortal part of man, the constituent elements of which flew to heaven
after death and embalmment; yet the theologians of the VIth dynasty had
decided that there was some part of the deceased which could only mount
to heaven by means of a ladder. In the pyramid of Teta it is said, "When
Teta hath purified himself on the borders of this earth where Ra hath
purified himself, he prayeth and setteth up the ladder, and those who
dwell in the great place press Teta forward with their hands."\[3\] In
the pyramid of Pepi I.

\[1. *E.g.*, "This Pepi goeth forth with his flesh." *Recueil de
Travaux*, t. v., p. 185, l. 169.

2\. The Osiris consisted of all the spiritual parts of a man gathered
together in a form which resembled him exactly. Whatever honour was paid
to the mummified body was received by its Osiris, the offerings made to
it were accepted by its Osiris, and the amulets laid upon it were made
use of by its Osiris for its own protection. The *sahu*, the *ka*, the
*ba*, the *khu*, the *khaibit*, the *sekhem*, and the *ren* were in
primeval times separate and independent parts of man's immortal nature;
but in the pyramid texts they are welded together, and the dead king
Pepi is addressed as "Osiris Pepi." The custom of calling the deceased
Osiris continued until the Roman period. On the Osiris of a man, see
Wiedemann, *Die Osirianische Unsterblichkeitslehre* (in *Die Religion
der alten Aegypter*, p. 128).

3\. \#\#\#. Maspero, *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 7, l. 36.\]

{p. lxxi}

the king is identified with this ladder: "Isis saith, 'Happy are they
who see the 'father,' and Nephthys saith, 'They who see the father have
rest,' speaking unto the father of this Osiris Pepi when he cometh forth
unto heaven among the stars and among the luminaries which never set.
With the uræus on his brow, and his book upon both his sides, and magic
words at his feet, Pepi goeth forward unto his mother Nut, and he
entereth therein in his name Ladder."\[1\] The gods who preside over
this ladder are at one time Ra and Horus, and at another Horus and Set.
In the pyramid of Unas it is said, "Ra setteth upright the ladder for
Osiris, and Horus raiseth up the ladder for his father Osiris, when
Osiris goeth to \[find\] his soul; one standeth on the one side, and the
other standeth on the other, and Unas is betwixt them. Unas standeth up
and is Horus, he sitteth down and is Set."\[2\] And in the pyramid of
Pepi I. we read, "Hail to thee, O Ladder of God, hail to thee, O Ladder
of Set. Stand up, O Ladder of God, stand up, O Ladder of Set, stand up,
O Ladder of Horus, whereon Osiris went forth into heaven . . . . . .
This Pepi is thy son, this Pepi is Horus, thou hast given birth unto
this Pepi even as thou hast given birth unto the god who is the lord of
the Ladder. Thou hast given him the Ladder of God, and thou hast given
him the Ladder of Set, whereon this Pepi hath gone forth into heaven . .
. . . . Every *khu* and every god stretcheth out his hand unto this Pepi
when he cometh forth into heaven by the Ladder of God . . . . that which
he seeth and that which he heareth make him wise, and serve as food for
him when he cometh forth into heaven by the Ladder of God. Pepi riseth
up like the uræus which is on the brow of Set, and every *khu* and every
god stretcheth out his hand unto Pepi on the Ladder. Pepi hath gathered
together his bones, he hath collected his flesh, and Pepi hath gone
straightway into heaven by means of the two fingers of the god who is
the Lord of the Ladder."\[3\] Elsewhere we are told that Khonsu and Set
"carry the Ladder of Pepi, and they set it up."

When the Osiris of a man has entered into heaven as a living soul,\[4\]
he is regarded as one of those who "have eaten the eye of Horus he walks
among

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 190, ll. 181, 182.

2\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 70, l. 579 ff

3.. *Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie*, t. i., p. 344, note 1.

4 \#\#\#. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 52 (1. 456).

5\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 165 (l. 169).\]

{p. lxxii}

The deification of the spiritual body.

living ones,\[1\] he becomes "God, the son of God,"\[2\] and all the
gods of heaven become his brethren.\[3\] His bones are the gods and
goddesses of heaven;\[4\] his right side belongs to Horns, and his left
side to Set;\[5\] the goddess Nut makes him to rise up as a god without
an enemy in his name "God";\[6\] and God calls him by his name.\[7\] His
face is the face of Ap-uat, his eyes are the great ones among the souls
of Annu, his nose is Thoth, his mouth is the great lake, his tongue
belongs to the boat of right and truth, his teeth are the spirits of
Annu, his chin is Khert-khent-Sekhem, his backbone is Sema, his
shoulders are Set, his breast is Beba.\[8\] *etc.*; every one of his
members is identified with a god. Moreover, his body as a whole is
identified with the God of Heaven. For example it is said concerning
Unas:--

t'et-k t'et ent Unas pen af-k af en Unas pen

Thy body is the body of Unas this. Thy flesh is the flesh of Unas this.

kesu-k kesu Unas pen seb-k seb Unas pen

Thy bones are the bones of Unas this. Thy passage is the passage of Unas
this.

seb Unas pen seb-k

The passage of Unas this is thy passage.\[9\]

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 183 (l. 166).

2 \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. viii., p. 89 (t. 574).

3\. \#\#\#. See pyramid of Teta, (Recueil, t. v.), ll. 45, 137, 197,
302.

4\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 202 (1. 209).

5 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 23 (l. 198),

6 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 38, (l. 279).

7\. *Ibid.*, p. 26 (l. 222)

8\. *Ibid.*, t. viii., p. 88 (l. 565 ff.).

9\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 214 (l. 268).\]

{p. lxxiii}

Further, this identification of the deceased with the God of Heaven
places him in the position of supreme ruler. For example, we have the
prayer that Unas "may rule the nine gods and complete the company of the
nine gods,"\[1\] and Pepi I., in his progress through heaven, comes upon
the double company of the gods, who stretch out their hands, entreating
him to come and sit down among them.\[2\]

Identification with Horus.

Again, the deceased is changed into Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis.
It is said of Pepi I., "Behold it is not Pepi who entreateth to see thee
in the form in which thou art \#\#\#, O Osiris, who entreateth to see
thee in the form in which thou art, O Osiris; but it is thy son who
entreateth to see thee in the form in which thou art, O Osiris, it is
Horus who entreateth to see thee in the form in which thou art";\[3\]
and Horus does not place Pepi at the head of the dead, but among the
divine gods.\[4\] Elsewhere we are told that Horus has taken his Eye and
given it to Pepi, and that the odour of Pepi's body is the odour of the
Eye of Horus.\[5\] Throughout the pyramid texts the Osiris of the
deceased is the son of Tmu, or Tmu-Ra, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, and Nut, the
brother of Isis, Nephthys, Set, and Thoth, and the father of Horus;\[6\]
his hands, arms, belly, back, hips and thighs, and legs are the god Tmu,
and his face is Anubis.\[7\] He is the brother of the moon,\[8\] he is
the child of the star Sothis,\[9\] he revolves in heaven like Orion and
Sothis,\[10\] and he rises in his place like a star.\[11\] The gods,
male and

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iii., p. 217 (l. 283).

2\. *Ibid.*, \#\#\#. t. vii., p. 150 (l. 263).

3\. *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. 155 (l. 315 f.)

4\. \#\#\#. t. v., p. 194 (p. 190).

5 *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. 169 (1. 457).

6 *Ibid.*, t. iii., pp. 209-211.

7 *Ibid.*, p. 201 (l. 207).

8\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 198 (l. 203).

9\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 44 (l. 391).

10\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 205 (l. 221).

10\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 44 (l. 391).\]

{p. lxxiv}

female, pay homage to him,\[1\] every being in heaven adores him; and in
one interesting passage it is said of Pepi I. that "when he hath come
forth into heaven he will find Ra standing face to face before him, and,
having seated himself upon the shoulders of Ra, Ra will not let him put
himself down again upon the ground; for he knoweth that Pepi is more
shining than the shining ones, more perfect than the perfect, and more
stable than the stable ones . . . . . When Pepi standeth upon the north
of heaven with Ra, he becometh lord of the universe like unto the king
of the gods."\[2\] To the deceased Horus gives his own *ka*,\[3\] and
also drives away the ka's of the enemies of the deceased from him, and
hamstrings his foes.\[4\] By the divine power thus given to the deceased
he brings into subjection the *ka's* of the gods\[5\] and other
*ka's*,\[6\] and he lays his yoke upon the *ka's* of the triple company
of the gods.\[7\] He also becomes Thoth,\[8\] the intelligence of the
gods, and he judges hearts;\[9\] and the hearts of those who would take
away his food and the breath from his nostrils become the prey of his
hands.\[10\]

The heavenly life of the blessed.

The place of the deceased in heaven is by the side of God\[11\] in the
most holy place,\[12\] and he becomes God and an angel of God;\[13\] he
himself is triumphant,\[14\]

\[1. \#\#\#. Recueil de Travaux, t. v., p. 23, (l. 197).

2\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 17, (l. 91 ff.).

3\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 33 (l. 265).

4 *Ibid.*, t. V., p. 40 (l. 287).

5\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, p. 45 (l. 306).

6\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 51 (l. 451); iii., p. 208 (l. 234).

7\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 460. (l. 307).

8\. *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. 168 (l. 452).

9\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 208 (l. 233), \#\#\#.

10\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 49 (l. 430), \#\#\#.

11\. \#\#\# *un-k ar kes neter*; *ibid.*, t. iii., p. 202 (l. 209).

12\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 89 (l. 178).

13\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 187 (l. 175).

14\. \#\#\# *maa-xeru*; *ibid.*, t. v., p. 186 (l. 172). These words are
in later times always added after the name of the deceased, and seem to
mean something like "he whose voice, or speech, is right and true"; the
expression has been rendered by "disant la vérité," "véridique,"
"juste," "justifié," "vainqueur," "waltend des Wortes," "mächtig der
Rede," "vrai de voix," "juste de voix," "victorious," "triumphant," and
the like. See on this subject Maspero, *Études de Mythologie et
d'Archéologie*, t. i., pp. 93-114; Devéria, *L'Expression Màà-xerou* (in
*Recueil de Travaux*, t. i., p. 10 ff.). A somewhat different view of
the signification of maakheru is given by Virey (Tombeau de Rekhmara,
Paris, 1889, p. 101. Published in *Mémoires publiés par les Membres de
la Miss. Arch. Française au Caire*, t. v., fasc. i.). The offerings
which were painted on the walls of the tomb were actually enjoyed by the
deceased in his new state of being. The Egyptians called them "*per
kheru*," that is to say, "*the things which the word or the demand made
to appear*," or "*per hru kheru*," that is to say, "*the things which
presented themselves at the word*" or "*at the demand*" of the deceased.
The deceased was then called "*maa kheru*," that is to say, "*he who
realizes his word*," or "*he who realizes while he speaks*," or "*whose
voice or demand realizes*," or "*whose voice* or *demand makes true,* or
*makes to be really and actually*" that which only appears in painting
on the walls of the tomb. M. Amélineau combats this interpretation, and
agrees with M. Maspero's rendering of "juste de voix"; see *Un Tombeau
Égyptien* (in *Revue de l'Histoire des Religions*), t. xxiii, pp. 153,
154. It is possible that *maa-kheru* may mean simply "blessed."\]

{p. 1xxv}

and his ka is triumphant.\[1\] He sits on a great throne by the side of
God.\[2\] The throne is of iron ornamented with lions' faces and having
the hoofs of bulls.\[3\] He is clothed in the finest raiment, like unto
the raiment of those who sit on the throne of living right and
truth.\[4\] He receives the *urerit* crown from the gods,\[5\] and from
the great company of the gods of Annu.\[6\] He thirsts not, nor hungers,
nor is sad;\[7\] he eats the bread of Ra and drinks what he drinks
daily,\[8\] and his bread also is that which is spoken by Seb, and that
which comes forth from the mouth of the gods.\[9\] He eats what the gods
eat, he drinks what they drink, he lives as they live, and he dwells
where they dwell;\[10\] all the gods give him their food that he may not
die.\[11\] Not only does he eat and drink of their food, but he wears
the

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 189 (l. 179).

2\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. i,., p. 58 (l. 494).

3 \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. 154 (ll. 309, 310).

4\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 148 (1. 239).

5\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 56 (l. 480).

6\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 176 (1. 117).

7\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 195 (l. 172).

8 *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 52 (l. 335)

9 \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 208 (1. 234).

10\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 198 (1. 191 f.).

11\. Ibid., t. v., p. 164 (1. 56).\]

{p. lxxvi}

apparel which they wear,\[1\] the white linen and sandals;\[2\] he is
clothed in white,\[3\] and "he goeth to the great lake in the midst of
the Field of Peace whereon the great gods sit; and these great and never
failing gods give unto him \[to eat\] of the tree of life of which they
themselves do eat that he likewise may live."\[4\] The bread which he
eats never decays and his beer never grows stale.\[5\] He eats of the
"bread of eternity" and drinks of the "beer of everlastingness" which
the gods eat and drink;\[6\] and he nourishes himself upon that bread
which the Eye of Horus has shed upon the branches of the olive
tree.\[7\] He suffers neither hunger nor thirst like the gods Shu and
Tefnut, for he is filled with the bread of wheat of which Horus himself
has eaten; and the four children of Horus, Hapi, Tuamautef, Qebhsennuf
and Amset, have appeased the hunger of his belly and the thirst of his
lips.\[8\] He abhors the hunger which he cannot satisfy, and he loathes
the thirst which he cannot slake;\[9\] but he is delivered from the
power of those who would steal away his food.\[10\] He is washed clean,
and his *ka* is washed clean, and they eat bread together for
ever.\[11\] He is one of the four children of Horus who live on right
and truth,\[12\] and they give him his portion of the food with which
they have been so abundantly supplied by the god Seb that they have
never yet known what it is to hunger. He goes round about heaven even as
they do, and he partakes of their food of figs and wine.\[13\]

\[1. \#\#\#. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 190 (l. 180).

2\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 163 (l. 408).

3\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 45 (l. 394).

4\. *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. j65 (l. 430).

5\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 412 (l. 288), and t. vii., p. 167 (l.
442).

6\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. vii., p. 160 (l. 390).

7\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 199 (1. 200).

8\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 10 (l. 54 ff.).

9\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 199 (1. 195 f.)

10\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 48 (l. 429).

11\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 167 (l. 66).

12 *Ibid.*, t. viii., p. 106 (l. 673).

13 \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. viii., p 110 (l. 692).\]

{p. lxxvii}

Those who would be hostile to the deceased become thereby foes of the
god Tmu, and all injuries inflicted on him are inflicted on that
god;\[1\] he dwells without fear under the protection of the gods,\[2\]
from whose loins he has come forth.\[3\] To him "the earth is an
abomination, and he will not enter into Seb; for his soul hath burst for
ever the bonds of his sleep in his house which is upon earth. His
calamities are brought to an end, for Unas hath been purified with the
Eye of Horus; the calamities of Unas have been done away by Isis and
Nephthys. Unas is in heaven, Unas is in heaven, in the form of air, in
the form of air; he perisheth not, neither doth anything which is in him
perish.\[4\] He is firmly stablished in heaven, and he taketh his pure
seat in the bows of the bark of Ra. Those who row Ra up into the heavens
row him also, and those who row Ra beneath the horizon row him
also."\[5\] The life which the deceased leads is said to be generally
that of him "who entereth into the west of the sky, and who cometh forth
from the east thereof."\[6\] In brief, the condition of the blessed is
summed up in the following extract from the pyramid of Pepi I.:--

"Hail, Pepi, thou hast come, thou art glorious, and thou hast gotten
might like the god who is seated upon his throne, that is Osiris. Thy
soul is with thee in thy body, thy form of strength is behind thee, thy
crown is upon thy head, thy head-dress is upon thy shoulders, thy face
is before thee, and those who sing songs of joy are upon both sides of
thee; those who follow in the train of God are behind thee, and the
divine forms who make God to come are upon each side of thee. God
cometh, and Pepi hath come upon the throne of Osiris. The shining one
who dwelleth in Netat, the divine form that dwelleth in Teni, hath come.
Isis speaketh unto thee, Nephthys holdeth converse with thee, and the
shining ones come unto thee bowing down even to the ground in adoration
at thy feet, by reason of the writing which thou hast, O Pepi, in the
region of Saa. Thou comest forth to thy mother Nut, and she
strengtheneth thy arm, and she maketh a way for thee through the sky to
the place where Ra abideth. Thou hast opened the gates of the sky, thou
hast opened the doors of the celestial deep; thou hast found Ra and he
watcheth over thee, he hath taken thee by thy hand, he hath led thee
into the two regions of heaven, and he hath placed thee on the throne of
Osiris. Then hail, O Pepi, for the Eye of Horus came to hold converse
with thee; thy soul which was among the gods came unto thee; thy form of
power which was dwelling among the shining ones came unto thee. As a son
fighteth for his father, and as Horus avenged Osiris, even so doth Horus
defend Pepi against his enemies. And thou

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 74 (1. 602).

2\. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iv., p. 46 (l. 405).

3\. *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 202 (1. 209).

4\. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 51 (1. 447 f.).

5\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 53 (l. 340).

6\. \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. 8, p. 104 (l. 665).

7\. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 159, (ll. 1-21).\]

{p. lxxviii}

"standest avenged, endowed with all things like unto a god, and equipped
with all the forms of Osiris upon the throne of Khent-Amenta. Thou doest
that which he doeth among the immortal shining ones; thy soul sitteth
upon its throne being provided with thy form, and it doeth that which
thou doest in the presence of Him that liveth among the living, by the
command of Ra, the great god. It reapeth the wheat, it cutteth the
barley, and it giveth it unto thee. Now, therefore, O Pepi, he that hath
given unto thee life and all power and eternity and the power of speech
and thy body is Ra. Thou hast endued thyself with the forms of God, and
thou hast become magnified thereby before the gods who dwell in the
Lake. Hail, Pepi, thy soul standeth among the gods and among the shining
ones, and the fear of thee striketh into their hearts. Hail, Pepi, thou
placest thyself upon the throne of Him that dwelleth among the living,
and it is the writing which thou hast \[that striketh terror\] into
their hearts. Thy name shall live upon earth, thy name shall flourish
upon earth, thou shalt neither perish nor be destroyed for ever and for
ever."

Corporeal pleasures.

Side by side, however, with the passages which speak of the material and
spiritual enjoyments of the deceased, we have others which seem to imply
that the Egyptians believed in a corporeal existence,\[1\] or at least
in the capacity for corporeal enjoyment, in the future state. This
belief may have rested upon the view that the life in the next world was
but a continuation of the life upon earth, which it resembled closely,
or it may have been due to the survival of semi-savage gross ideas
incorporated into the religious texts of the Egyptians. However this may
be, it is quite certain that in the Vth dynasty the deceased king Unas
eats with his mouth, and exercises other natural functions of the body,
and gratifies his passions.\[2\] But the most remarkable passage in this
connection is one in the

\[1. Compare: "O flesh of Teta, rot not, decay not, stink not." *Recueil
de Travaux*, t. v., p. 55 (l. 347). "Pepi goeth forth with his flesh";
*ibid.*, t. v., p. 185 (1. 169). "thy bones shall not be destroyed, and
thy flesh shall not perish"; *ibid.*, p. 55 (l. 353).

2\. Compare the following passages:--

(*a*) \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. iv., p. 76 (ll. 628, 629).

(*b*) \#\#\#. *Ibid.*, t. v., p. 37 (l. 277).

(*c*) *Ibid.*, t. iii., p. 197 (1. 182 f).

(*d*) Ibid., t. V., p. 40 (1. 286), and see M. Maspero's note on the
same page.\]

{p. lxxix}

Old tradition of hunting and devouring the gods.

pyramid of Unas. Here all creation is represented as being in terror
when they see the deceased king rise up as a soul in the form of a god
who devours "his fathers and mothers"; he feeds upon men and also upon
gods. He hunts the gods in the fields and snares them; and when they are
tied up for slaughter he cuts their throats and disembowels them. He
roasts and eats the best of them, but the old gods and goddesses are
used for fuel. By eating them he imbibes both their magical powers, and
their *khu's*. He becomes the "great Form, the form among forms, and the
god of all the great gods who "exist in visible forms,"\[1\] and he is
at the head of all the *sahu*, or spiritual bodies in heaven. He carries
off the hearts of the gods, and devours the wisdom of every god;
therefore the duration of his life is everlasting and he lives to all
eternity, for the souls of the gods and their *khu's* are in him. The
whole passage reads:--\[2\]

"(496) The heavens drop water, the stars throb, (497) the archers go
round about, the (498) bones of Akeru tremble, and those who are in
bondage to them take to flight when they see (499) Unas rise up as a
soul, in the form of the god who liveth upon his fathers and who maketh
food of his (500) mothers. Unas is the lord of wisdom, and (501) his
mother knoweth not his name. The gifts of Unas are in heaven, and he
hath become mighty in the horizon (502) like unto Tmu, the father that
gave him birth, and after Tmu gave him birth (503) Unas became stronger
than his father. The *ka's* of Unas are behind him, the sole of his foot
is beneath his feet, his gods are over him, his uræi are \[seated\]
(504) upon his brow, the serpent guides of Unas are in front of him, and
the spirit of the flame looketh upon \[his\]

\[1. \#\#\#. Pyramid of Teta, 1. 327; *ibid.*, t. v., p. 50.

2\. See Maspero, *Recueil*, t. iv., p. 59, t. v., p. 50; and *Revue de
l'Histoire des Religions*, t. xii, p. 128.\]

{p. lxxx}

soul. The (505) powers of Unas protect him; Unas is a bull in heaven, he
directeth his steps where he will, he liveth upon the form which (506)
each god taketh upon himself, and be eateth the flesh of those who come
to fill their bellies with the magical charms ill the Lake of Fire. Unas
is (507) equipped with power against the shining spirits thereof, and he
riseth up in the form of the mighty one, the lord of those who dwell in
power (?). Unas hath taken his seat with his side turned towards Seb.
(508) Unas hath weighed his words with the hidden god (?) who hath no
name, on the day of hacking in pieces the firstborn. Unas is the lord of
offerings, the untier of the knot, and he himself maketh abundant the
offerings of meat and drink. (509) Unas devoureth men and liveth upon
the gods, he is the lord to whom offerings are brought, and he counteth
the lists thereof. He that cutteth off hairy scalps and dwelleth in the
fields hath netted the gods in a snare; (510) he that arrangeth his head
hath considered them \[good\] for Unas and hath driven them unto him;
and the cord-master hath bound them for slaughter. Khonsu the slayer of
\[his\] lords hath cut their throats (511) and drawn out their inward
parts, for it was he whom Unas sent to drive them in; and Shesem hath
cut them in pieces and boiled their members in his blazing caldrons.
(512) Unas hath eaten their magical powers, and he hath swallowed their
spirits; the great ones among them serve for his meal at daybreak, the
lesser serve for his meal at eventide, and the least among them serve
for his meal in the night. (513) The old gods and the old goddesses
become fuel for his furnace. The mighty ones in heaven shoot out fire
under the caldrons which are heaped up with the haunches of the
firstborn; and he that maketh those who live (514) in heaven to revolve
round Unas hath shot into the caldrons the haunches of their women; he
hath gone round about the two heavens in their entirety, and he hath
gone round about the two banks of the celestial Nile. Unas is the great
Form, the Form (515) of forms, and Unas is the chief of the gods in
visible forms. Whatever he hath found upon his path he hath eaten
forthwith, and the magical might of Unas is before that of all the (516)
*sahu* who dwell in the horizon. Unas is the firstborn of the first
born. Unas hath gone round thousands and he hath offered oblations unto
hundreds; he hath manifested his might as the Great Form through Sah
(Orion) \[who is greater\] than (517) the gods. Unas repeateth his
rising in heaven and he is the crown of the lord of the horizon. He hath
reckoned up the bandlets and the arm-rings, he hath taken possession of
the hearts of the gods (518). Unas hath eaten the red crown, and he hath
swallowed the white crown; the food of Unas is the inward parts, and his
meat is those who live upon (519) magical charms in their hearts.
Behold, Unas eateth of that which the red crown sendeth forth, he
increaseth, and the magical charms of the gods are in his belly; (520)
that which belongeth to him is not turned back from him. Unas hath eaten
the whole of the knowledge of every god, and the period of his life is
eternity, and the duration of his existence is (521) everlastingness, in
whatsoever he wisheth to take; whatsoever form he hateth he shall not
labour in in the horizon for ever and ever and ever. The soul of the
gods is in Unas, their spirits are with (522) Unas, and the offerings
made unto him are more than those made unto the gods. The fire of Unas
(523) is in their bones, for their soul is with Unas, and their shades
are with those who belong unto them. (524) Unas hath been with the two
hidden (?) Kha (?) gods who are without power (?) . . . . . . . . (525);
the seat of the heart of Unas is among those who live upon this earth
for ever and ever and ever."

{p. lxxxi}

The notion that, by eating the flesh, or particularly by drinking the
blood, of another living being, a man absorbs his nature or life into
his own, is one which appears among primitive peoples in many forms. It
lies at the root of the widespread practice of drinking the fresh blood
of enemies--a practice which was familiar to certain tribes of the Arabs
before Muhammad, and which tradition still ascribes to the wild race of
Cahtâm-and also of the habit practised by many savage huntsmen of eating
some part (*e.g.*, the liver) of dangerous carnivora, in order that the
courage of the animal may pass into them.\[1\] The flesh and blood of
brave men also are, among semi-savage or savage tribes, eaten and drunk
to inspire courage.\[2\] But the idea of hunting, killing, roasting and
eating the gods as described above is not apparently common among
ancient nations; the main object of the dead king in doing this was to
secure the eternal life which was the peculiar attribute of the gods.

\[1. Robertson Smith, *The Religion of the Semites*, p. 295; Fraser,
*Golden Bough*, vol. ii., p. 86.

2\. The Australian blacks kill a man, cut out his caul-fat, and rub
themselves with it, "the belief being that all the qualifications, both
physical and mental of the previous owner of the fat, were communicated
to him who used it"; see Fraser, *Golden Bough*, vol. ii., p. 88.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Egyptians' Ideas Of God.](ebod06)
