[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod27)  [Next](ebod29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE XXI.

"Thou dost place thy disk in the west, and my two hands are \[raised\]
in adoration \[of thee\] when thou settest (30) as a living being.
Behold, thou art the maker of eternity, and thou art adored \[when\]
thou settest in the heavens. I have given my heart unto thee without
wavering, (31) O thou who art mightier than the gods."

Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith: "A hymn of praise to thee, O thou who
risest (32) like unto gold, and who dost flood the world with light on
the day of thy birth. Thy mother giveth thee birth upon \[her\] hand,
and thou dost give light unto the course of the Disk. (33) O thou mighty
Light, who shinest in the heavens, thou dost strengthen the generations
of men with the Nile-flood, and dost cause gladness in all lands, and in
all (34) cities, and in all the temples. Thou art glorious by reason of
thy splendours, and thou makest strong thy *ka* with *hu* and *tchefau*
foods. O thou who art the mighty one of victories, (35) thou who art the
Power of \[all\] Powers, who dost make strong thy throne against the
powers of wickedness, who art glorious in majesty in the *sektet* boat,
and who art exceeding (1-6) mighty in the *atet* boat, make thou
glorious Osiris Ani with victory in the netherworld; grant thou that in
the underworld he may be void of (37) sin. I pray thee to put away
\[his\] faults behind thee; grant that he may be one of thy venerable
(38) servants who are with the shining ones; may he be joined unto the
souls which are in Ta-sertet; and may he journey into the Sekhet-Aaru
(39) by a prosperous and happy path, he the Osiris, the scribe Ani,
triumphant.

"(40) Thou shalt come forth into heaven, thou shalt pass over the sky,
thou shalt be joined unto the starry deities. (41) Praises shall be
offered unto thee in thy boat, thou shalt be hymned in the diet boat,
(42) thou shalt behold Ra within

{p. 327}

his shrine, thou shalt set together with his disk day by day, thou shalt
see (43) the ant fish when it springeth into being in the waters of
turquoise, and thou shalt see (44) the *abtu* fish in his hour. May it
come to pass that the Evil One shall fall when he layeth a snare to
destroy me, (45) and may the joints of his neck and of his back be cut
in sunder."

"Ra \[saileth\] with a fair wind, and the *sektet* boat draweth on (46)
and cometh into port. The mariners of Ra rejoice, and the heart of
Nebt-ankh (47) is glad, for the enemy of her lord hath fallen to the
ground. Thou shalt behold Horus on the watch \[in the Boat\], and Thoth
and Maat upon either side of him. (48) All the gods rejoice when they
behold Ra coming in peace (49) to make the hearts of the shining ones to
live. May Osiris Ani, triumphant, the scribe of the divine offerings of
the lords of Thebes, be with them."

Vignette: Ra, hawk-headed, with the disk upon his head and the emblem of
life upon his knees, seated in the solar bark;\[1\] before him stands
Ani with both hands raised in adoration.

Text \[CHAPTER CXXXIII.\]: (1) TO BE SAID ON THE DAY OF THE MONTH.\[2\]
(2) Osiris Ani, the scribe, triumphant in peace, triumphant, saith: "Ra
riseth (2) in his horizon, and the company of his gods follow after the
god when he appeareth from his secret place, when he showeth strength
and bringeth himself forth (3) from the eastern horizon of heaven at the
word of the goddess Nut. They rejoice at the journeyings of Ra, the
Ancient One; the Great One (4) rolleth along in his course. Thy joints
are knitted together,\[3\] O Ra, within thy shrine. Thou breathest the
winds, thou drawest in the breezes, (5) thou makest thy jaw-bones to cat
in thy dwelling on the day when thou dost scent right and truth. Thou
turnest aside the godlike followers (6) \[who\] sail after the sacred
boat, in order that they may return again unto the mighty ones according
to thy word. Thou numberest thy bones, thou gatherest together thy
members; (7) thou turnest thy face towards the beautiful Amenta; thou
comest thither renewed

\[1. In the Nebseni papyrus the god is seated on a throne, and he holds
the sceptre in his right hand; in the Turin papyrus (Lepsius, Bl. 54)
the god is seated within a shrine.

2\. This chapter is generally entitled "The Book of making perfect (or
strong) the *khu* in the netherworld, in the presence of the great
company of the gods.

3\. Or, "thou art exalted."\]

{p. 328}

day by day. Behold, thou Image of gold, who possessest the splendours
(8) of the Disk of heaven, thou lord of terror; thou rollest along and
art renewed day by day. Hail, there (9) is rejoicing in the heavenly
horizon, and shouts of joy are It raised to the ropes which tow thee
along. May the gods who dwell in (10) heaven ascribe praises unto Osiris
Ani, when they behold him in triumph, as unto Ra. May Osiris, the scribe
Ani, be a prince (11) who is known by the ureret crown; and may the meat
offerings and the drink offerings of Osiris Ani, triumphant, be
apportioned unto him; may he wax exceeding strong in his body; and may
he be the (12) chief of those who are in the presence of Ra. May Osiris,
the scribe Ani, triumphant, be strong upon earth and in the world under
the earth; and (13) O Osiris, scribe Ani, triumphant, mayest thou rise
up strengthened like unto Ra day by day. Osiris Am, triumphant, shall
not tarry, (14) nor shall he rest without motion in the earth for ever.
Clearly, clearly shall he see with his two eyes, and with his two ears
shall be hear what is right and true. (15) Osiris, the scribe Ani,
triumphant, cometh back, cometh back from Annu; Osiris Ani, triumphant,
is as Ra when he rangeth the oars (16) among the followers of Nu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XXII.](ebod29)
