[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod39)  [Next](ebod41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATES XXXV. AND XXXVI.

Vignette: A hall, within which, on the left, Ani stands before two
tables of offerings bearing libation water and lotus-flowers, with hands
raised, adoring Ra, hawk-headed.\[1\] Next are ranged seven cows, each
one couchant before a table of offerings, and each having a *menat*
attached to the neck;\[2\] and a bull standing before a table of
offerings. Behind them are four rudders; and on the extreme right are
four triads of gods, each triad having a table of offerings bearing a
libation vase and a lotus-flower (?).

Text: \[CHAPTER CXLVIII.\]. (i) Saith Osiris Ani, triumphant: "Homage to
thee, (2) O thou lord, thou lord of right and truth, the One, the lord
of eternity and creator (3) of everlastingness, I have come unto thee, O
my lord Ra. I have made (4) meat offerings unto the seven kine and unto
their bull. O ye who give (5) cakes and ale to the shining ones, grant
ye to my soul to be with

\[1. In the Turin papyrus, published by Lepsius, the god wears the
triple or *atef* crown instead of a disk and serpent, and the text
describes him as "Osiris the lord of eternity, the prince, the lord of
everlastingness, the great god, the governor of Akertet." Behind the god
stands a female figure wearing upon her head, emblematic of "the
beautiful Amenta," with both her hands "extended to receive" the
deceased. The address to Osiris and Amenta by the deceased reads:
"Homage to thee, O thou Bull of Amentet, Prince, lord of
everlastingness, the great god, the governor of Akertet, receive thou
the Osiris into the beautiful Amentet in peace, and may it stretch forth
its hands to receive me."

2 In other papyri the names of these animals are given as follows:

het kau nebt tcher, "the dwelling of the has of the lord of the
universe"; (2) *sentet utheset*, "orbit, the raising of the god"; (3)
*amenit xentet auset-s*, "the hidden one dwelling in her place"; (4)
*hatet sahet*, "the divine noble one of the north (?)"; (5) *urt meru
tesert*, "the greatly beloved, red of hair"; (6) *xnemt anxit*, "the
consort of life"; (7) *sexem ren-s em abet-s*, "her name prevaileth in
her dwelling"; (8) *ka t'ai kauit*, "Bull, making the kine to be
fruitful."\]

{p. 367}

you. (6) May Osiris Ani, triumphant, be born upon your thighs; may he be
like unto one (7) Of you for ever and for ever; and may he become a
glorious being (8) in the beautiful Amenta."

\[*Address to the Rudders*\]: "(1) Hail, thou beautiful Power,\[1\] thou
beautiful it rudder of the northern heaven."

"(2) Hail, thou who goest round about heaven, thou pilot of the world,
thou beautiful rudder of the western heaven."

"(3) Hail, thou shining one, who livest\[2\] in the temple wherein are
the gods in visible forms, thou beautiful rudder of the eastern heaven."

"(4) Hail, thou who dwellest in the temple of the bright-faced
ones,\[3\] thou it beautiful rudder\[4\] of the southern heaven."

\[*Address to the four Triads*\[5\]\]: "(5) Hail, ye gods who are above
the earth, ye pilots of the underworld."

"(6) Hail, ye mother-gods who are above the earth, who are in the
underworld, and who are in the House of Osiris."

"(7) Hail, ye gods, ye pilots of Tasert, ye who are above the earth, ye
pilots of the underworld."

"(8) Hail, ye followers of Ra, who are in the train of Osiris."

Vignette: Ani standing before a table of offerings, with both hands
raised in adoration. Behind him is his wife, wearing a lotus-flower and
a cone upon her head, and holding a sistrum. and lotus-flower in her
left hand.

Text: \[CHAPTER CLXXXV. (?)\] (I) A HYMN OF PRAISE TO OSIRIS THE DWELLER
IN AMENTET, UN-NEFER WITHIN ABTU, Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith: Hail, O
my lord, who dost traverse (2) eternity, and whose existence endureth
for ever. Hail, Lord of Lords, King of Kings, Prince, the God of gods
who (3) live with Thee, I have come unto Thee Make thou for me a seat
with those who are in the underworld, and who adore (4) the images of
thy *ka* (5) and who are among those who \[endure\] for (6) millions of
millions of years

\[1. Variant *ka-f nefer* "his beautiful *ka*."

2\. Reading *xenti her ab*.

3\. Reading *her abu het teser*.

4\. In the Turin and the older papyri each rudder is accompanied by an
*utchat*.

5\. In the Turin papyrus the four children of Horus take the place of
these triads.\]

{p. 368}

. . . . . . . . \[1\] (10) May no delay arise for me in Ta-mera. Grant
thou (11) that they all may come unto me, great (12) as well as small.
Mayest thou grant unto the ka of Osiris Ani \[the power\] to go into and
to come forth (13) from the underworld; and suffer him not to be driven
back at the gates of the Tuat."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XXXVII.](ebod41.md)
