[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod24)  [Next](ebod26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE XVIII.

My soul (5) seeth the great god within the boat of Ra on the day of
souls. My soul is (6) in the front among those who tell the years. Come;
the eye of Horus, which stablisheth glories (7) upon the brow of Ra and
rays of light upon the faces of those who are with the limbs of Osiris,
hath delivered my soul. (8) O shut ye not in my soul, fetter ye not my
shade (9) may it behold the great god

\[1. See Plate XVIII.

2 The reading of the Nebseni papyrus is \#\#\#.

3 Adding \#\#\# from the Nebseni papyrus.\]

{p. 320}

within the shrine on the day of the judgment of souls, may it repeat the
words of Osiris. (10) May those beings whose dwelling-places are hidden,
who fetter the limbs of Osiris, who fetter the souls of the khu, who
shut in (11) the shade\[s\] of the dead and can do evil unto me-may they
do no evil unto me, may they turn away their path from me. Thy heart
(12) is with thee; may my soul and my khu be prepared against their
attack. May I sit down among the great rulers who (13) dwell in their
abodes; may my soul not be set in bondage by those who fetter the limbs
of Osiris, and who fetter souls, and who shut in (14) the shade\[s\] of
the dead. The place which thou possessest, is it not Heaven? "

Rubric: If this chapter be known, he shall come forth by day and his
soul shall not be shut in.

Vignette: Ani kneeling, with both hands raised in adoration, by the side
of the Seker\[1\] boat placed upon its sledge.

Text \[CHAPTER LXXIV.\]: (I) THE CHAPTER OF WALKING WITH THE TWO LEGS,
AND OF COMING FORTH UPON EARTH. Saith Osiris Ani: "Thou hast done all
thy work, O Seker, thou hast done all thy work, O Seker, in thy dwelling
place within my legs in the (2) underworld. I shine above the Leg\[2\]
of the Sky, I come forth from heaven; I recline with the glorified (3)
spirits. Alas! I am weak and feeble; alas! I am weak and feeble. I walk.
I am weak and feeble in the (4) presence of those who gnash with the
teeth in the underworld, I Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant in peace."

Vignette: The emblem of Amenta and Ani standing with a staff in his left
hand.

Text \[CHAPTER VIII.\]: (I) THE CHAPTER OF PASSING THROUGH AMENTA, AND
OF COMING FORTH BY DAY. Saith Osiris Ani: "The hour (?) openeth; (2) the
head of Thoth is sealed up; perfect is the eye of Horus. I have
delivered the eye of Horus which shineth with splendours on the forehead
of Ra, (3) the father of the gods. I am the same Osiris, dwelling in
Amenta. Osiris knoweth his day and that he shall not live therein; nor
shall I live therein. (4) I am the Moon among the gods; I shall not come
to an end. Stand up, therefore, O Horus; Osiris hath counted thee among
the gods."

\[1. The god Seker was a form of the night sun, like Ptah, Osiris and
Tanen; see Lanzone, *Dizionario*, P. 1113.

2 The name of a constellation.\]

{p. 321}

Text \[CHAPTER II. (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, AND OF LIVING
AFTER DEATH. Saith Osiris Ani: "Hail, Only One, shining from the Moon!
(2) Hail, Only One, shining from the Moon! Grant that this Osiris Ani
may come forth among the multitudes which are round about thee; (3) let
him be established as a dweller among the shining ones; and let the
underworld be opened unto him. And behold Osiris, (4) Osiris Ani shall
come forth by day to do his will upon earth among the living."

Vignette: Ani, standing with both hands raised in adoration before a ram
crowned with plumes and disk; in front of the ram is a table, upon which
are a libation vase and a lotus flower.

Text \[CHAPTER IX.\]: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, HAVING
PASSED THROUGH THE TOMB. Saith Osiris Ani: "Hail Soul, thou mighty one
of strength! (2) Verily I am here, I have come, I behold thee. I have
passed through the underworld, I have seen \[my\] father (3) Osiris, I
have scattered the gloom of night. I am his beloved one. I have come; I
behold my father (4) Osiris. I have stabbed Set to the heart. I have
done the things \[needed\] by my father Osiris. (5) I have opened every
way in heaven and upon earth. I am the son beloved of his father Osiris
(6). I have become a ruler, I have become glorious, I am furnished
\[with what I need\]. Hail, all ye gods, and all ye shining ones, make
ye a way for me, the Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant."

Vignette: Ani, with a staff in his left hand, standing before a door.

Text \[CHAPTER CXXXII.\]: THE CHAPTER OF MAKING A MAN TO RETURN TO SEE
AGAIN HIS HOME UPON EARTH. Saith Osiris Ani: "I am the Lion-god (2)
coming forth with strides. I have shot forth arrows, I have wounded
\[the prey\], I have wounded the prey. I am the Eye of Horus; I have
opened the (3) eye of Horus in his hour. I am come unto the furrows. Let
Osiris Ani come in peace."

Vignette: Ani piercing a serpent.

Text \[CHAPTER X. \[XLVIII.\]: ANOTHER CHAPTER OF ONE WHO COMETH FORTH
BY DAY AGAINST HIS FOES IN THE UNDERWORLD. Saith Osiris Ani: "I have
divided the heavens, (2) I have passed through the horizon, I have
traversed the earth, \[following\] upon his footsteps. I am borne away
by the mighty and shining ones because, behold, (3) I am furnished with
millions of years which

{p. 322}

have magic virtues. I eat with my mouth, I chew with my jaws; and,
behold, (4) I am the god who is the lord of the underworld: May there be
given unto me, Osiris Ani, that which abideth for ever without
corruption."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XIX.](ebod26.md)
