[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod09)  [Next](ebod11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PRINCIPAL GEOGRAPHICAL AND MYTHOLOGICAL PLACES IN THE BOOK OF THE DEAD.

Abtu, the Abydos of the Greeks (Strabo, XVII., i., 42), the capital of
the eighth nome of Upper Egypt. It was the seat of the worship of
Osiris, and from this fact was called Per-Ausar or Busiris, "the house
of Osiris "; the Copts gave it the name \#\#\#.\[1\] Egyptian tradition
made the sun to end his daily course at Abydos, and to enter into the
Tuat at this place through a "gap" in the mountains called in Egyptian
*peq*.\[2\] These mountains lay near to the town; and in the XIIth
dynasty it was believed that the souls of the dead made their way into
the other world by the valley which led through them to the great Oasis,
where some placed the Elysian Fields.\[3\]

Amenta or **Amentet**, or was originally the place where the sun set,
but subsequently the name was applied to the cemeteries and tombs which
were usually built or hewn in the stony plateaus and mountains on the
western bank of the Nile. Some believe that Amenta was, at first, the
name of a small district, without either funereal or mythological
signification. The Christian Egyptians or Copts used the word Amend to
translate the Greek word Hades, to which they attributed all the ideas
which their heathen ancestors had associated with the Amenta of the Book
of the Dead.

Annu, the Heliopolis of the Greeks (Herodotus, II., 3, 7, 8, 9, 59, 93;
Strabo, XVII., I, 27 ff ), and the capital of the thirteenth nome of
Lower Egypt.

\[1. See Amélineau, *la Géographie de l'Égypte, à l'Époque Copte*, p.
155.

2\. See Brugsch, *Dict. Géog.*, p. 227.

3\. See Maspero, *Études de Mythologie*, t. i., p. 345.\]

{p. cxxxiv}

The Hebrews called it On (Genesis xli., 45, 50; xlvi., 20), Aven
(Ezekiel xxx., 17), and Bêth-Shemesh (Jeremiah xliii., 13); this last
name is an exact translation of the Egyptian *per Ra*, "house of the
sun," which was also a designation of Annu. The Copts have preserved the
oldest name of the city under the form \#\#\#.\[1\] A Coptic bishop of
this place was present at the Council of Ephesus. The city of Annu seems
to have become associated with the worship of the sun in prehistoric
times. Already in the Vth dynasty its priesthood had succeeded in
gaining supremacy for their religious views and beliefs throughout
Egypt, and from first to last it maintained its position as the chief
seat of theological learning in Egypt. The body of the Aged One, a name
of Osiris, reposed in Annu, and there dwelt the Eye of Osiris. The
deceased made his way to Annu, where souls were joined unto bodies in
thousands, and where the blessed dead lived on celestial food for ever.

An-rutf or **Naarutf**, is a section or door of the Tuat which lies to
the north of Re-stau; the meaning of the word is "it never sprouteth."

An-tes(?) (see within, p. 323), an unknown locality where a light tower
(?), was adored.

Apu, the Panopolis of the Greeks ({Greek *Panw^n po'lis*}, Strabo,
XVII., i., 41), the metropolis of the ninth nome of Upper Egypt, and the
seat of the worship of the god \#\#\#, whose name is variously read
Amsu, Khem, and Min. In ancient days it was famous as the centre for
stone cutting and linen weaving, and the latter industry still survives
among the modern Coptic population, who, following their ancestors, call
their city \#\#\#, which the Arabs have rendered by Akhmîm.

Aqert, a common name for the abode of the dead.

Bast, more fully Pa-Bast or Per-Bast, the Bubastis of the Greek writers
(Herodotus, II., 59, 137, 156, 166; Strabo, XVII., 1, 27), the
metropolis of the eighteenth nome of Lower Egypt, and the seat of the
worship of Bast, a goddess who was identified with the soul of Isis, *ba
en Auset*. The city is mentioned in the Bible under the form \#\#\#
(Ezekiel xxx., 17), Pi-beseth,

\[1. See Amélineau, *op. cit.*, p. 287.\]

{p. cxxxv}

which the Copts have preserved in their name for the city, \#\#\#; the
Arabs call the place Tell Basta.

Het-benbent, the name given to many sun-shrines in Egypt, and also to
one of the places in the other world where the deceased dwelt.

Het-Ptah-ka, the sacred name of the city of Memphis, the metropolis of
the first nome of Lower Egypt; it means the "House of the ka of Ptah,"
and was probably in use in the period of the Ist dynasty. Other names
for Memphis were Aneb-het'et, "the city of the white wall", Men-nefer
and Kha-nefert.

Kem-ur a name given to the district of the fourth and fifth nomes of
Upper Egypt.

Khemennu, *i.e.*, the city of the eight great cosmic gods, the
Hermopolis of the Greek writers ({Greek *E?'rmopolitikh\` fulakh\`*},
Strabo, XVII., I, 41), and the metropolis of the fifteenth nome of Upper
Egypt. The old Egyptian name for the city is preserved in its Coptic and
Arabic names, \#\#\# and Eshmûnên.

Kher-aba, a very ancient city which was situated on the right bank of
the Nile, a little to the south of Annu, near the site of which the
"Babylon of Egypt"\[1\] (the {Greek *Babulw'n, frou'rion e?rumno'n*} of
Strabo, XVII., I, 30), was built.

Manu is the name given to the region where the sun sets, which was
believed to be exactly opposite to the district of Bekha, where he rose
in the east; Manu is a synonym of west, just as Bekha is a synonym of
east.\[2\]

Nekhen, the name of the shrine of the goddess Nekhebet, which is
supposed to have been near to Nekheb, the capital of the third nome of
Upper Egypt and the Eileithyiapolis of the Greeks.

Neter-khertet, a common name for the abode of the dead; it means the
"divine subterranean place."

\[1. See Amélineau, op. cit., p. 75.

2 See Brugsch, Diet. Géog., pp. 199, 260; Maspero, *Études de
Mythologie*, t. i., p. 332; and *Aeg. Zeitschrift*, 1864, pp. 73-76.\]

{p. cxxxvi}

Pe, a district of the town of Per-Uatchet, the Buto of the Greeks
({Greek *Bou^tos*}, Strabo, XVII., i., 18), which was situated in the
Delta.

Punt, the tropical district which lay to the south and east of Egypt,
and which included probably a part of the Arabian peninsula and the
eastern coast of Africa along and south of Somali land.

Re-stau, or a name given to the passages in the tomb which lead from
this to the other world; originally it designated the cemetery of Abydos
only, and its god was Osiris.

Sa, the Saïs of the Greeks ({Greek *Sa'ïs*}, Strabo, XVII. i., 23), the
metropolis of the fifth nome of Lower Egypt, and the seat of the worship
of the goddess Neith.

Sekhem, the Letopolis of the Greeks, and capital of the Letopolites nome
(Strabo, XVII., i., 30); it was the seat of the worship of Heru-ur,
"Horus the elder," and one of the most important religious centres in
Egypt.

Sekhet-Aanru, the "Field of the *Aanru* plants," was a name originally
given to the islands in the Delta where the souls of the dead were
supposed to live. Here was the abode of the god Osiris, who bestowed
estates in it upon those who had been his followers, and here the
beatified dead led a new existence and regaled themselves upon food of
every kind, which was given to them in abundance. According to the
vignette of the CXth Chapter of the Book of the Dead, the Sekhet-Aanru
is the third division of the Sekhet-hetepu, or "Fields of Peace," which
have been compared with the Elysian Fields of the Greeks.

Set Amentet, *i.e.*, "the mountain of the underworld," a common name of
the cemetery, which was usually situated in the mountains or desert on
the western bank of the Nile.

Suten-henen, more correctly Henen-su, the metropolis of the twentieth
nome of Upper Egypt, called by the Greeks Heracleopolis Magna (Strabo,
XVI I., i., 35). The Hebrews mention the city (\#\#\#, Isaiah xxx., 4)
Hanes as the representative of Upper Egypt, and in Coptic times it was
still of considerable size and importance; the Copts and Arabs have
preserved the ancient name of the city under the forms \#\#\# and
\#\#\#. *Ahnas*.

Tanenet, a district sacred to the gods Osiris and Ptah; it was probably
situated near Memphis.

Ta-sert, or Ta-tchesertet, a common name for the tomb.

Tep, a district of the town Per-Uatchet, the Buto of the Greeks (Strabo,
XVII., i., 18), which was situated in the Delta.

Tettet, a name given both to the metropolis\[1\] of the ninth nome and
to the chief city\[2\] of the sixteenth nome of Lower Egypt.

Tuat, a common name for the abode of the departed.

\[1. *I.e.*, Pa-Aushr, or Per-Aushr, the Busiris of the Greeks.

2\. *I.e.*, Ba-neb-Tettet, the Mendes of the Greeks.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Funeral Ceremonies.](ebod11.md)
