[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod15)  [Next](ebod17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE IV.

Vignette: Ani, found just, is led into the presence of Osiris. On the
left the hawk-headed god Horus, the son of Isis, wearing the double
crown of the North and the South, takes Ani by the hand and leads him
forward towards "Osiris, the lord of eternity" *Ausar neb t'etta*, who
is enthroned on the right within a shrine in the form of a funereal
chest. The god wears the *atef* crown with plumes; a *menat* (see p.
245, note 2) hangs from the back of his neck; and he holds in his hands
the crook, sceptre, and flail, emblems of sovereignty and dominion. He
is wrapped in bandages ornamented with scale work. The side of his
throne is painted to resemble the doors of the tomb. Behind him stand
Nephthys on his right hand and Isis on his left. Facing him, and
standing on a lotus flower, are the four "children of Horus (*or*
Osiris)," or gods of the cardinal points. The first, Mestha, has the
head of a man; the second, Hapi, the head of an ape; the third,
Tuamautef, the head of a jackal; and the fourth, Qebhsennuf, the head of
a hawk. Suspended near the lotus is an object which is usually called a
panther's skin,\[1\] but is more probably a bullock's hide.

The roof of the shrine is supported on pillars with lotus capitals, and
is surmounted by a figure of Horus-Sept or Horus-Seker and rows of uræi.

In the centre Ani kneels before the god upon a reed mat, raising his
right hand in adoration, and holding in his left hand the *kherp*
sceptre. He wears a whitened wig surmounted by a "cone," the
signification of which is unknown. Round his neck is a deep collar of
precious stones. Near him stands a table of offerings of meat, fruit,
flowers, etc., and in the compartments above are a number of vessels for
wine, beer, oil, wax, etc., together with bread, cakes, ducks, a wreath,
and single flowers.

\[1. On the bullock's hide, in which the deceased, or the person who
represented him, was supposed to wrap himself, see Virey, *Tombeau de
Rekhmara*, p. 50, and plate 26, lower register.\]

{p. 260}

Appendix: The shrine is in some instances represented in the shape of a
pylon, the cornice of which is ornamented either with uræi, or with the
disk of the sun and feathers, emblematic of Maat. It usually rests upon
a base made in the shape of a cubit, The throne upon which Osiris sits
is placed upon reed mats (British Museum papyrus No. 10,471), or upon
the cubit-shaped base, or in a pool of water, from which springs a lotus
flower with buds and having the four gods of the cardinal points (see
British Museum papyrus No. 9901) standing upon it. In some of the

<img src="260.jpg" width="256" height="269" />

oldest papyri the body of Osiris is painted white, and he stands
upright. Isis is described as "great lady, divine mother," and Nephthys
as "the mistress of the underworld." In British Museum papyrus No. 10471
the scene of the presentation of the deceased to Osiris is unusual and
of interest. On the right the scribe Nekht and his wife Thuau stand with
both hands raised in adoration of Osiris. Behind them, upon a
cubit-shaped base, is a house with four windows in its upper half, and
upon the roof two triangular projections similar to those which admit
air into modern houses in the East. Before the door are a sycamore (?)
tree and a palm tree, with clusters of fruit; on the left is the god
Osiris on his throne, and behind him stands "Maat, mistress of the two
countries, daughter of Ra," above whom are two outstretched female arms
proceeding from a mountain and holding a disk between the hands. In the
centre, between Osiris and the deceased, is a pool of water with three
sycamore (?) trees on each side, and at each corner a palm tree bearing
clusters of dates; and from it there springs a vine laden with bunches
of grapes.

In British Museum papyrus No. 10,472 the god seated in the shrine wears
the crown of the god Tanen, and is called "Ptah-Seker-Ausar, within the
hidden place, great god, lord of Ta-sert, king of eternity, prince of
the everlasting."

Text: Saith Horus, the son of Isis: "I have come unto thee, O Unnefer,
and I have brought the Osiris Ani unto thee. His heart is \[found\]
righteous coming forth from the balance, and it hath not sinned against
god or goddess. Thoth hath weighed it according to the decree uttered
unto him by the company {p. 261} of the gods; and it is very true and
righteous. Grant him cakes and ale; and let him enter into the presence
of Osiris; and may he be like unto the followers of Horus for ever."

Behold, Osiris Ani saith: "O Lord of Amentet (the underworld), I am in
thy presence. There is no sin in me, I have not lied wittingly, nor have
I done aught with a false heart. Grant that I may be like unto those
favoured ones who are round about thee, and that I may be an Osiris,
greatly favoured of the beautiful god and beloved of the lord of the
world, \[I\] the royal scribe indeed, who loveth him Ani, triumphant
before the god Osiris."

Appendix: The usual title of this chapter \[XXXB.\] is, "Chapter of not
allowing the heart of \[the deceased\] to be driven away from him in the
underworld."\[1\] it is an address by the deceased to his own heart,
which he calls his *ka* or "double" within his body. It should be
accompanied by a vignette of the trial of the heart in which the heart
is weighed against the dead man himself, as in the ancient Nebseni
papyrus.

<img src="261.jpg" width="256" height="171" />

In the Ani papyrus, however, it will be observed that the heart is being
weighed against the feather of the Law, Maat, a scene which often
accompanies Chapter CXXV.

Interesting variants of the vignettes of Chapter XXXB. are given by
Naville (*Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 43), where we find the deceased
addressing either his heart placed on a stand, or a beetle, or a heart
to which are attached the antennæ of a beetle. In certain papyri this
chapter is followed by a rubric:--"\[This chapter is\] to be said over a
scarab\[2\] of green stone encircled with *smu* metal, and \[having\] a
ring of silver, which is to be placed upon the neck of the dead. This
chapter was found in Khemennu.\[3\]

\[1. \#\#\#

2\. Chapter XXXA. is never found inscribed upon scarabs.

3\. *I.e.*, Hermopolis Magna, the metropolis of Un, the 15th nome of
Upper Egypt, the city

called \#\#\# by the Copts, and Eshmûnên, \#\#\# by the Arabs. It was
the abode of the "eight" (*xemennu*) great primeval gods, and of Thoth,
the scribe of the gods. (See Meyer and Dümichen, *Geschichte des alten
Agyptens*, p. 185.)\]

{p. 262}

written upon a slab of steel of the South, in the writing of the god
himself, under the feet of the majesty of the god, in the time of the
majesty of Men-kau-Ra,\[1\] the king of the North and of the South,
triumphant, by the royal son Heru-tata-f\[2\] who found it while he was
journeying to inspect the temples."\[3\]

The scarabs which are found in the mummies, or lying upon the breast
just above the position of the heart, form an interesting section of
every large Egyptian collection. In the British Museum series every
important type of the funereal scarab is represented. They are made of
green basalt, green granite (Nos. 7894 and 15,497), white limestone
(Nos. 7917, 7927, 15,508), light green marble (No. 7905), black stone
(Nos. 7907, 7909, 7913), blue paste (Nos. 7904, 14,549), blue glass (No.
22,872), and purple, blue, or green glazed *faïence* (Nos. 7868, 7869).
They vary in size from 5 inches to 2 inches in length. On the hard stone
examples the text of the Chapter of the Heart, more or less complete, is
usually cut on the base in outline; but it is sometimes traced in red
ink (No. 7915), or in gold (No. 15,518). Incuse hieroglyphics are
sometimes filled with gold (No. 7881). The name of the person with whom
the scarab was buried usually precedes the text of the Chapter of the
Heart; but in many instances blank spaces are found left without
insertion of the name--a proof that i, these amulets were bought
ready-made. The base however is often quite plan (Nos. 7965, 7966), or
figures of Osiris, Isis, and Nephthys occupy the place of the usual
inscription (Nos. 15,500, 15,507). The backs of scarabs are generally
quite plain, but we find examples inscribed with figures of the boat of
the Sun Osiris, with flail and crook the *bennu* bird, and the *u'tat*
(No. 7883), Ra and Osiris (No. 15,507), and the *bennu* bird with the
inscription *neteri ab en Ra*, "the mighty heart of Ra" (No. 7878). A
finehard, green stone scarab of the Greek or Roman period has upon the
back the figures of four Greek deities (No. 7966). In rare instances,
the beetles have a human face (Nos. 7876, 15,516) or head (No. 7999).
Carefully made scarabs have usually a band of gold across and down the
back where the wings join: an example of the late period (No. 7977) has
the whole of the back gilded. The scarab was set in a gold oval ring, at
one end of which was a smaller ring for suspension from the neck or for
attachment to the bandages of the mummy (No. 15,504). The green glazed
*faïence* scarab of Thothmes III. (No. 18,190) was suspended by a gold
chain from a bronze torque. A thick gold wire to fit the neck is
attached to No. 24,401. The base of the scarab is sometimes in the form
of a heart (Nos. 7917, 7925). A remarkable example of this variety is
No. 7925, in which are

\[1. The fifth king of the IVth dynasty.

2\. This prince is said to have been a very learned man, whose speech
was difficult to be understood (see Wiedemann, *Aeg. Geschichte*., p.
191).

3\. For the hieroglyphic text, see pp. 13-15. This rubric was published
by Birch, *Aeg. Zeitschrift*, p. 54; and by Rosellini, *Breve Notizia
interno un frammento di Papiro funebre Egizio essistente nel ducale
museo di Parma*; Parma, 1839, 8vo.\]

{p. 263}

the emblems of "life," "stability," and "protection," engraved on the
upper part of the base. Across the back of this scarab is --
\#\#\#;\[1\] On the right wing:-- \#\#\# and on the left \#\#\#\[2\]. A
highly polished, fine green basalt scarab with human face (No. 7876) is
set in a gold base, upon the face and edges of which are cut part of the
Chapter of the Heart. At a period subsequent to the XXIInd dynasty
inscribed funereal scarabs in marble, paste, etc., were set in
pylon-shaped pectorals made of Egyptian porcelain, glazed blue, green,
or yellow, which were sewed to the mummy bandages over the heart. On
such pectorals the boat of the Sun is either traced in colours or worked
in relief, and the scarab is placed so as to appear to be carried in the
boat; on the left stands Isis, and on the right Nephthys (Nos. 7857,
7864, 7866).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plates V. and VI.](ebod17)
