[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod25)  [Next](ebod27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE XIX.

Vignette: Ani standing, with both hands raised in adoration, before Ra,
hawk-headed and seated in a boat floating upon the sky. On the bows sits
Heru-pa-khrat (Harpocrates) or, "Horus the child"; and the side is
ornamented with feathers of Maat, and the *utchat*. The handles of the
oars and the tops of the rowlocks are shaped as hawks' heads, and on the
blades of the oars are \#\#\#.

Text \[CHAPTER XV.\]: (I) A HYMN OF PRAISE TO RA WHEN HE RISETH UPON THE
HORIZON, AND WHEN HE SETTETH IN THE \[LAND OF\] LIFE. Saith Osiris, the
scribe Ani: "Homage to thee, O Ra, (2) when thou risest \[as\]
Tmu-Heru-khuti (Harmachis), Thou art adored \[by me\] when thy beauties
are before mine eyes, and when thy shining rays (3) \[fall\] upon my
body. Thou goest forth in peace in the *Sektet* boat with \[fair\]
winds, and thy heart is glad; \[thou goest forth\] in the *Atet* boat,
(4) and its heart is glad. Thou stridest over the heavens in peace, and
thy foes are cast down; the never-resting stars (5) sing hymns of praise
unto thee, and the stars which never set glorify thee as thou (6)
sinkest in the horizon of Manu, O thou who art beautiful in the two
parts of heaven, thou lord who livest and art established, O my lord!
Homage to thee, O thou who art Ra when thou risest, and Tmu (7) when
thou settest in beauty. Thou risest and shinest upon the back of thy
mother \[the sky\], O thou who art crowned king (8) of the gods. Nut
doth homage unto thee, and everlasting and never-changing order
embraceth thee at morn and at eve. Thou stridest over the heaven, being
glad of heart, and the Lake (9) Testes is at peace. The Fiend hath
fallen to the ground; his arms and his hands have been hewn off, and the
knife hath severed the joints of his body. Ra hath a fair wind (10); the
*Sektet* boat goeth forth and sailing along it cometh into port. The
gods of the south and of the north, of the west and of the east praise
thee, (11) from whom all forms of life came into being. Thou sendest
forth the word, and the earth is flooded with silence, O thou only One,
who livedst in heaven before ever the earth and the mountains were made.
(12) O Runner, Lord, only One, thou maker of things which are, thou hast
moulded the tongue of the company of the gods, thou hast drawn forth
whatsoever cometh from the waters, and thou springest up from them over
the flooded land of the Lake of Horus (13). Make me to sniff the air
which cometh forth from thy nostrils, and the north wind which cometh
forth from thy mother \[the Sky\]. Make thou glorious my shining form, O
Osiris, make thou (14) strong my soul. Thou art worshipped in peace, O
lord of the gods, thou art exalted by reason of thy wondrous works.
Shine with thy rays of light upon my body day by day, upon me, (15)
Osiris, the scribe, the teller of the divine offerings it of all the
gods, the overseer of the granary of the lords of Abydos, the royal it
scribe in truth, who loveth him (*i.e.*, Ra); Ani, triumphant in peace."

Vignette: Ani, standing with both hands raised in adoration. Behind him
is his wife:

Ausar nebt per qematet en Amen Thuthu.  
Osiris, the lady of the house, priestess of Amen, Thuthu.

Text \[CHAPTER XV.\]: (1) A HYMN OF PRAISE. "O OSIRIS, lord of eternity,
Un-nefer, Horus of the two horizons, whose forms are manifold, whose
creations are without number, (2) Ptah-Seker-Tem in Annu, the lord of
the tomb, and the creator of Memphis and of the gods, the guide of the
underworld, whom \[the gods\] (3) glorify when thou settest in Nut. Isis
embraceth thee in peace, and she driveth away the fiends from the mouth
of (4) thy paths. Thou turnest thy face upon Amenta, thou makest the
world to shine as with smu metal. The dead rise up to behold thee, they
breathe the (5) air and they look upon thy face when the disk shineth on
its horizon; their hearts are at peace for that they behold thee, O thou
who art eternity and everlastingness."

\[Litany\]: (1) "Homage to thee, \[O lord of\] starry deities in An, and
of heavenly beings in Kher-aba; thou god Unti, who art more glorious
than the gods who are hidden in Annu.

"(2) Homage to thee, O An in Antes (?), Horus, thou dweller in both
horizons, with long strides thou stridest over heaven, O thou who
dwellest in both horizons.

"(3) Homage to thee, O soul of everlastingness, thou Soul who dwellest
in Tattu, Un-nefer, son of Nut; thou art lord of Akert.

"(4) Homage to thee in thy dominion over Tattu; the urerit crown is
established upon thy head; thou art the One whose strength is in
himself, and thou dwellest in peace in Tattu.

"(5) Homage to thee, O lord of the acacia tree, the Seker boat is set
upon its sledge; thou turnest back the Fiend, the worker of evil, and
thou causest the *utchat* to rest upon its seat.

"(6) Homage to thee, O thou who art mighty in thine hour, thou great and
mighty god, dweller in An-rut-f, lord of eternity and creator of
everlastingness; thou art the lord of Suten-henen.

"(7) Homage to thee, O thou who restest upon Right and Truth, thou art
the lord of Abtu, and thy limbs are joined unto Ta-sertet; thou art he
to whom fraud and guile are hateful.

"(8) Homage to thee, O thou who art within thy boat, thou bringest Hapi
(*i.e.*, the Nile) forth from his source; the light shineth upon thy
body, and thou art the dweller in Nekhen.

"(9) Homage to thee, O creator of the gods, thou King of the North and
of the South; O Osiris, victorious, ruler of the world in thy gracious
seasons; thou art the lord of the world.

"O grant thou unto me a path whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just
and true; I have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done aught with
deceit."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XX.](ebod27)
