<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn08)  [Next](dbn10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

# VII    THE WAR OF RACES AT LAND'S END

Primitive man in Africa is found in the interior jungles and down at
Land's End in South Africa. The Pygmy people in the jungles represent
to-day a small survival from the past, but a survival of curious
interest, pushed aside by the torrent of conquest. Also pushed on by
these waves of Bantu conquest, moved the ancient Abatwa or Bushmen. They
are small in stature, yellow in color, with crisp-curled hair. The
traditions of the Bushmen say that they came southward from the regions
of the Great Lakes, and indeed the king and queen of Punt, as depicted
by the Egyptians, were Bushmen or Hottentots.

Their tribes may be divided, in accordance with their noticeable
artistic talents, into the painters and the sculptors. The sculptors
entered South Africa by moving southward through the more central
portions of the country, crossing the Zambesi, and coming down to the
Cape. The painters, on the other hand, came through Damaraland on the
west coast; when they came to the great mountain regions, they turned
eastward and can be traced as far as the mountains opposite Delagoa Bay.
The mass of them settled down in the lower part of the Cape and in the
Kalahari desert. The painters were true cave dwellers, but the sculptors
lived in large communities on the stony hills, which they marked with
their carvings.

These Bushmen believed in an ancient race of people who preceded them in
South Africa. They attributed magic power to these unknown folk, and
said that some of them had been translated as stars to the sky. Before
their groups were dispersed the Bushmen had regular government. Tribes
with their chiefs occupied well-defined tracts of country and were
subdivided into branch tribes under subsidiary chiefs. The great cave
represented the dignity and glory of the entire tribe.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

The Bushmen suffered most cruelly in the succeeding migrations and
conquests of South Africa. They fought desperately in self-defense; they
saw their women and children carried into bondage and they themselves
hunted like wild beasts. Both savage and civilized men appropriated
their land. Still they were brave people. "In this struggle for
existence their bitterest enemies, of whatever shade of color they might
be, were forced to make an unqualified acknowledgement of the courage
and daring they so invariably exhibited." <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)

Here, to a remote corner of the world, where, as one of their number
said, they had supposed that the only beings in the world were Bushmen
and lions, came a series of invaders. It was the outer ripples of
civilization starting far away, the indigenous and external
civilizations of Africa beating with great impulse among the Ethiopians
and the Egyptian mulattoes and Sudanese Negroes and Yorubans, and
driving the Bantu race southward. The Bantus crowded more and more upon
the primitive Bushmen, and probably a mingling of the Bushmen and the
Bantus gave rise to the Hottentots.

The Hottentots, or as they called themselves, Khoi Khoin (Men of Men),
were physically a stronger race than the Abatwa and gave many evidences
of degeneration from a high culture, especially in the "phenomenal
perfection" of a language which "is so highly developed, both in its
rich phonetic system, as represented by a very delicately graduated
series of vowels and diphthongs, and in its varied grammatical
structure, that Lepsius sought for its affinities in the Egyptian at the
other end of the continent."

When South Africa was first discovered there were two distinct types of
Hottentot. The more savage Hottentots were simply large, strong Bushmen,
using weapons superior to the Bushmen, without domestic cattle or sheep.
Other tribes nearer the center of South Africa were handsomer in
appearance and raised an Egyptian breed of cattle which they rode.

In general the Hottentots were yellow, with close-curled hair, high
check bones, and somewhat oblique eyes. Their migration commenced about
the end of the fourteenth century and was, as is usual in such cases, a
scattered, straggling movement. The traditions of the Hottentots point
to the lake country of Central Africa as their place of origin, whence
they were driven by the Bechuana tribes of the Bantu. They fled westward
to the ocean and then turned south

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and came upon the Bushmen, whom they had only partially subdued when the
Dutch arrived as settlers in 1652.

The Dutch "Boers" began by purchasing land from the Hottentots and then,
as they grew more powerful, they dispossessed the dark men and tried to
enslave them. There grew up a large Dutch-Hottentot class. Indeed the
filtration of Negro blood noticeable in modern Boers accounts for much
curious history. Soon after the advent of the Dutch some of the
Hottentots, of whom there were not more than thirty or forty thousand,
led by the Korana clans, began slowly to retreat northward, followed by
the invading Dutch and fighting the Dutch, each other, and the wretched
Bushmen. In the latter part of the eighteenth century the Hottentots had
reached the great interior plain and met the on-coming outposts of the
Bantu nations.

The Bechuana, whom the Hottentots first met, were the most advanced of
the Negro tribes of Central Africa. They had crossed the Zambesi in the
fourteenth or fifteenth century; their government was a sort of feudal
system with hereditary chiefs and vassals; they were careful
agriculturists, laid out large towns with great regularity, and were the
most skilled of smiths. They used stone in building, carved on wood, and
many of them, too, were keen traders. These tribes, coming southward,
occupied the east-central part of South Africa comprising modern
Bechuanaland. Apparently they had started from the central lake country
somewhere late in the fifteenth century, and by the middle of the
eighteenth century one of their great chiefs, Tao, met the on-coming
Hottentots.

The Hottentots compelled Tao to retreat, but the mulatto Gricquas
arrived from the south, and, allying themselves with the Bechuana,
stopped the rout. The Gricquas sprang from and took their name from an
old Hottentot tribe. They were led by Kok and Barends, and by adding
other elements they became, partly through their own efforts and partly
through the efforts of the missionaries, a community of fairly well
civilized people. In Gricqualand West the mulatto Gricquas, under their
chiefs Kok and Waterboer, lived until the discovery of diamonds.

The Griquas and Bechuana tribes were thus gradually checking the
Hottentots when, in the nineteenth century, there came two new
developments: first, the English took possession of Cape Colony, and the
Dutch began to move in larger numbers toward the interior; secondly, a
newer and fiercer element of the Bantu tribes,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the Zulu-Kaffirs, appeared. The Kaffirs, or as they called themselves,
the Amazosas, claimed descent from Zuide, a great chief of the fifteenth
century in the lake country. They are among the tallest people in the
world, averaging five feet ten inches, and are slim, well-proportioned,
and muscular. The more warlike tribes were usually clothed in leopard or
ox skins. Cattle formed their chief wealth, stock breeding and hunting
and fighting their main pursuits. Mentally they were men of tact and
intelligence, with a national religion based upon ancestor worship,
while their government was a patriarchal monarchy limited by an
aristocracy and almost feudal in character. The common law which had
grown up from the decisions of the chiefs made the head of the family
responsible for the conduct of its branches, a village for all its
residents, and the clan for all its villages. Finally there was a
paramount chief, who was the civil and military father of his people.
These people laid waste to the coast regions and in 1779 came in contact
with the Dutch. A series of Dutch-Kaffir wars ensued between 1779 and
1795 in which the Dutch were hard pressed.

In 1806 the English took final possession of Cape Colony. At that time
there were twenty-five thousand Boers, twenty-five thousand pure and
mixed Hottentots, and twenty-five thousand slaves secured from the east
coast. Between 1811 and 1877 there were six Kaffir-English wars. One of
these in 1818 grew out of the ignorant interference of the English with
the Kaffir tribal system; then there came a terrible war between 1834
and 1835, followed by the annexation of all the country as far as the
Kei River. The war of the Axe (1846-48) led to further annexation by the
British.

Hostilities broke out again in 1856 and 1863, In the former year,
despairing of resistance to invading England, a prophet arose who
advised the wholesale destruction of all Kaffir property except weapons,
in order that this faith might bring back their dead heroes. The result
was that almost a third of the nation perished from hunger. Fresh
troubles occurred in 1877, when the Ama-Xosa confederacy was finally
broken up, and to-day gradually these tribes are passing from
independence to a state of mild vassalage to the British.

Meantime the more formidable part of the Zulu-Kaffirs had been united
under the terrible Chief Chaka. He had organized a military system, not
a new one by any means, but one of which we bear rumors back in the lake
regions in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. McDonald says, "There
has probably never been a more

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

perfect system of discipline than that by which Chaka ruled his army and
kingdom. At a review an order might be given in the most unexpected
manner, which meant death to hundreds. If the regiment hesitated or
dared to remonstrate, so perfect was the discipline and so great the
jealousy that another was ready to cut them down. A warrior returning
from battle without his arms was put to death without trial. A general
returning unsuccessful in the main purpose of his expedition shared the
same fate. Whoever displeased the king was immediately executed. The
traditional courts practically ceased to exist so far as the will and
action of the tyrant was concerned." With this army Chaka fell on tribe
after tribe. The Bechuana fled before him and some tribes of them were
entirely destroyed. The Hottentots suffered severely and one of his
rival Zulu tribes under Umsilikatsi fled into Matabililand, pushing back
the Bechuana. By the time the English came to Port Natal, Chaka was
ruling over the whole southeastern seaboard, from the Limpopo River to
Cape Colony, including the Orange and Transvaal states and the whole of
Natal. Chaka was killed in 1828 and was eventually succeeded by his
brother Dingan, who reigned twelve years. It was during Dingan's reign
that England tried to abolish slavery in Cape Colony, but did not pay
promptly for the slaves, as she had promised; the result was the
so-called "Great Trek," about 1834, when thousands of Boers went into
the interior across the Orange and Vaal rivers.

Dingan and these Boers were soon engaged in a death struggle in which
the Zulus were repulsed and Dingan replaced by Panda. Under this chief
there was something like repose for sixteen years, but in 1856 civil war
broke out between his sons, one of whom, Cetewayo, succeeded his father
in 1882. He fell into border disputes with the English, and the result
was one of the fiercest clashes of Europe and Africa in modern days. The
Zulus fought desperately, annihilating at one time a whole detachment
and killing the young prince Napoleon. But after all it was assagais
against machine guns, and the Zulus were finally defeated at Ulundi,
July 4, 1879. Thereupon Zululand was divided among thirteen
semi-independent chiefs and became a British protectorate.

Since then the best lands have been gradually reoccupied by a large
number of tribes--Kaffirs from the south and Zulus from the north. The
tribal organization, without being actually broken up, has been deprived
of its dangerous features by appointing paid village

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

 

<span id="img_05800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Ancient Kingdoms
of Africa](tn/05800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05800.jpg.md)  
Ancient Kingdoms of Africa  
</span>

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

headmen and transforming the hereditary chief into a British government
official. In Natal there are about one hundred and seventy tribal
chiefs, and nearly half of these have been appointed by the governor.

Umsilikatsi, who had been driven into Matabililand by the terrible Chaka
in 1828 and defeated by the Dutch in 1837, had finally reëstablished his
headquarters in Rhodesia in 1838. Here he introduced the Zulu military
system and terrorized the peaceful and industrious Bechuana populations.
Lobengula succeeded Umsilikatsi in 1870 and, realizing that his power
was waning, began to retreat northward toward the Zambesi. He was
finally defeated by the British and native forces in 1893 and the land
was incorporated into South Central Africa.

The result of all these movements was to break the inhabitants of
Bechuanaland into numerous fragments. There were small numbers of
mulatto Gricquas in the southwest and similar Bastaards in the
northwest. The Hottentots and Bushmen were dispersed into groups and
seem doomed to extinction, the last Hottentot chief being deposed in
1810 and replaced by an English magistrate, Partially civilized
Hottentots still live grouped together in their kraals and are members
of Christian churches. The Bechuana hold their own in several centers;
one is in Basutoland, west of Natal, where a number of tribes were
welded together under the far-sighted Moshesh into a modern and fairly
well civilized nation. In the north part of Bechuanaland are the
self-governing Bamangwato and the Batwana, the former ruled by Khama,
one of the canniest of modern rulers in Africa.

Meantime, in Portuguese territory south of the Zambesi, there arose
Gaza, a contemporary and rival of Chaka. His son, Manikus, was deputed
by Dingan, Chaka's successor, to drive out the Portuguese. This Manikus
failed to do, and to escape vengeance he migrated north of the Limpopo.
Here he established his military kraal in a district thirty-six hundred
and fifty feet above the sea and one hundred and twenty miles inland
from Sofala. From this place his soldiery nearly succeeded in driving
the Portuguese out of East Africa. He was succeeded by his son, Umzila,
and Umzila's brother, Guzana (better known as Gungunyana), who exercised
for a time joint authority. Gungunyana was finally overthrown in
November, 1895, captured, and removed to the Azores.

North of the Zambesi, in British territory, the chief role in recent

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

 

<span id="img_06000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Races in
Africa](tn/06000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06000.jpg.md)  
Races in Africa  
</span>

 

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

times has been played by the Bechuana, the first of the Bantu to return
northward after the South African migration. Livingstone found there the
Makolo, who with other tribes had moved northward on account of the
pressure of the Dutch and Zulus below, and by conquering various tribes
in the Zambesi region had established a strong power. This kingdom was
nearly overthrown by the rebellion of the Barotse, and in 1875 the
Barotse kingdom comprised a large territory. To-day their king,
Lewanika, rules directly and indirectly fifty thousand square miles,
with a population between one and two and a half million. They are under
a protectorate of the British.

In Southwest Africa, Hottentot mulattoes crossing from the Cape caused
widespread change. They were strong men and daring fighters and soon
became dominant in what is now German Southwest Africa, where they
fought fiercely with the Bantu Ova-Hereros. Armed with fire arms, these
Namakwa Hottentots threatened Portuguese West Africa, but Germany
intervened, ostensibly to protect missionaries. By spending millions of
dollars and thousands of soldiers Germany has nearly exterminated these
brave men.

Thus we have between the years 1400 and 1900 a great period of migration
up to 1750, when Bushmen, Hottentot, Bantu, and Dutch appeared in
succession at Land's End. In the latter part of the eighteenth century
we have the clash of the Hottentots and Bechuana, followed in the
nineteenth century by the terrible wars of Chaka, the Kaffirs, and
Matabili. Finally, in the latter half of the nineteenth century, we see
the gradual subjection of the Kaffir-Zulus and the Bechuana under the
English and the final conquest of the Dutch. The resulting racial
problem in South Africa is one of great intricacy.

To the racial problem has been added the tremendous problem of modern
capital brought by the discovery of gold and diamond mines, so that the
future of the Negro race is peculiarly bound up in developments here at
Land's End, where the ship of the Flying Dutchman beats back and forth
on its endless quest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[54:1](dbn09.htm#fr_33.md) Stowe: *Native Races of
South Africa*, pp. 115-216.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. African Culture](dbn10.md)

</div>
