<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn02)  [Next](dbn04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

 

<span id="img_00400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![I. The Physical
Geography of Africa](tn/00400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00400.jpg)  
I. The Physical Geography of Africa  
</span>

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# I    AFRICA

Africa is at once the most romantic and the most tragic of continents.
Its very names reveal its mystery and wide-reaching influence. It is the
"Ethiopia" of the Greek, the "Kush" and "Punt" of the Egyptian, and the
Arabian "Land of the Blacks." To modern Europe it is the "Dark
Continent" and "Land of Contrasts"; in literature it is the seat of the
Sphinx and the lotus eaters, the home of the dwarfs, gnomes, and pixies,
and the refuge of the gods; in commerce it is the slave mart and the
source of ivory, ebony, rubber, gold, and diamonds. What other continent
can rival in interest this Ancient of Days?

There are those, nevertheless, who would write universal history and
leave out Africa. But how, asks Ratzel, can one leave out the land of
Egypt and Carthage? and Frobenius declares that in future Africa must
more and more be regarded as an integral part of the great movement of
world history. Yet it is true that the history of Africa is unusual, and
its strangeness is due in no small degree to the physical peculiarities
of the continent. With three times the area of Europe it has a coast
line a fifth shorter. Like Europe it is a peninsula of Asia, curving
southwestward around the Indian Sea. It has few gulfs, bays, capes, or
islands. Even the rivers, though large and long, are not means of
communication with the outer world, because from the central high
plateau they plunge in rapids and cataracts to the narrow coastlands and
the sea.

The general physical contour of Africa has been likened to an inverted
plate with one or more rows of mountains at the edge and a low coastal
belt. In the south the central plateau is three thousand or more feet
above the sea, while in the north it is a little over one thousand feet.
Thus two main divisions of the continent are easily distinguished: the
broad northern rectangle, reaching down as far

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

as the Gulf of Guinea and Cape Guardafui, with seven million square
miles; and the peninsula which tapers toward the south, with five
million square miles.

Four great rivers and many lesser streams water the continent. The
greatest is the Congo in the center, with its vast curving and endless
estuaries; then the Nile, draining the cluster of the Great Lakes and
flowing northward "like some grave, mighty thought, threading a dream";
the Niger in the northwest, watering the Sudan below the Sahara; and,
finally, the Zambesi, with its greater Niagara in the southeast. Even
these waters leave room for deserts both south and north, but the
greater ones are the three million square miles of sand wastes in the
north.

More than any other land, Africa lies in the tropics, with a warm, dry
climate, save in the central Congo region, where rain at all seasons
brings tropical luxuriance. The flora is rich but not wide in variety,
including the gum acacia, ebony, several dye woods, the kola nut, and
probably tobacco and millet. To these many plants have been added in
historic times. The fauna is rich in mammals, and here, too, many from
other continents have been widely introduced and used.

Primarily Africa is the Land of the Blacks. The world has always been
familiar with black men, who represent one of the most ancient of human
stocks. Of the ancient world gathered about the Mediterranean, they
formed a part and were viewed with no surprise or dislike, because this
world saw them come and go and play their part with other men. Was
Clitus the brother-in-law of Alexander the Great less to be honored
because be happened to be black? Was Terence less famous? The medieval
European world, developing under the favorable physical conditions of
the north temperate zone, knew the black man chiefly as a legend or
occasional curiosity, but still as a fellow man--an Othello or a Prester
John or an Antar.

The modern world, in contrast, knows the Negro chiefly as a bond slave
in the West Indies and America. Add to this the fact that the darker
races in other parts of the world have, in the last four centuries,
lagged behind the flying and even feverish footsteps of Europe, and we
face to-day a widespread assumption throughout the dominant world that
color is a mark of inferiority.

The result is that in writing of this, one of the most ancient,
persistent, and widespread stocks of mankind, one faces astounding
prejudice. That which may be assumed as true of white men must be

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

proven beyond peradventure if it relates to Negroes. One who writes of
the development of the Negro race must continually insist that he is
writing of a normal human stock, and that whatever it is fair to
predicate of the mass of human beings may be predicated of the Negro. It
is the silent refusal to do Is which has led to so much false writing on
Africa and of its inhabitants. Take, for instance, the answer to the
apparently simple question "What is a Negro?" We find the most
extraordinary confusion of thought and difference of opinion. There is a
certain type in the minds of most people which, as David Livingstone
said, can be found only in caricature and not in real life. When
scientists have tried to find an extreme type of black, ugly, and
woolly-haired Negro, they have been compelled more and more to limit his
home even in Africa. At least nine-tenths of the African people do not
at all conform to this type, and the typical Negro, after being denied a
dwelling place in the Sudan, along the Nile, in East Central Africa, and
in South Africa, was finally given a very small country between the
Senegal and the Niger, and even there was found to give trace of many
stocks. As Winwood Reade says, "The typical Negro is a rare variety even
among Negroes."

As a matter of fact we cannot take such extreme and largely fanciful
stock as typifying that which we may fairly call the Negro race. In the
case of no other race is so narrow a definition attempted. A "white" man
may be of any color, size, or facial conformation and have endless
variety of cranial measurement and physical characteristics. A "yellow"
man is perhaps an even vaguer conception.

In fact it is generally recognized to-day that no scientific definition
of race is possible. Differences, and striking differences, there are
between men and groups of men, but they fade into each other so
insensibly that we can only indicate the main divisions of men in broad
outlines. As Von Luschan says, "The question of the number of human
races has quite lost its *raison d’être* and has become a subject rather
of philosophic speculation than of scientific research. It is of no more
importance now to know bow many human races there are than to know how
many angels can dance on the point of a needle. Our aim now is to find
out how ancient and primitive races developed from others and how races
changed or evolved through migration and inter-breeding." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

The mulatto (using the term loosely to indicate either an intermediate
type between white and black or a mingling of the two) is as typically
African as the black man and cannot logically be included in the "white"
race, especially when American usage includes the mulatto in the Negro
race.

It is reasonable, according to fact and historic usage, to include under
the word "Negro" the darker peoples of Africa characterized by a brown
skin, curled or "frizzled" hair, full and sometimes everted lips, a
tendency to a development of the maxillary parts of the face, and a
dolichocephalic head. This type is not fixed or definite. The color
varies widely; it is never black or bluish, as some say, and it becomes
often light brown or yellow. The hair varies from curly to a wool-like
mass, and the facial angle and cranial form show wide variation.

It is as impossible in Africa as elsewhere to fix with any certainty the
limits of racial variation due to climate and the variation due to
intermingling. In the past, when scientists assumed one unvarying Negro
type, every variation from that type was interpreted as meaning mixture
of blood. To-day we recognize a broader normal African type which, as
Palgrave says, may best be studied "among the statues of the Egyptian
rooms of the British Museum; the larger gentle eye, the full but not
over-protruding lips, the rounded contour, and the good-natured, easy,
sensuous expression. This is the genuine African model." To this race
Africa in the main and parts of Asia have belonged since prehistoric
times.

The color of this variety of man, as the color of other varieties, is
due to climate. Conditions of heat, cold, and moisture, working for
thousands of years through the skin and other organs, have given men
their differences of color. This color pigment is a protection against
sunlight and consequently varies with the intensity of the sunlight.
Thus in Africa we find the blackest men in the fierce sunlight of the
desert, red pygmies in the forest, and yellow Bushmen on the cooler
southern plateau.

Next to the color, the hair is the most distinguishing characteristic of
the Negro, but the two characteristics do not vary with each other. Some
of the blackest of the Negroes have curly rather than woolly hair, while
the crispest, most closely curled hair is found among the yellow
Hottentots and Bushmen. The difference between the hair of the lighter
and darker races is a difference of degree, not of kind, and can be
easily measured. If the hair follicles of a Chinaman,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

a European, and a Negro are cut across transversely, it will be found
that the diameter of the first is 100 by 77 to 85, the second 100 by 62
to 72, while that of the Negro is 100 by 40 to 60. This elliptical form
of the Negro's hair causes it to curl more or less tightly.

There have been repeated efforts to discover, by measurements of various
kinds, further and more decisive differences which would serve as really
scientific determinants of race. Gradually these efforts have been given
up. To-day we realize that there are no hard and fast racial types among
men. Race is a dynamic and not a static conception, and the typical
races are continually changing and developing, amalgamating and
differentiating. In this little book, then, we are studying the history
of the darker part of the human family, which is separated from the rest
of mankind by no absolute physical line, but which nevertheless forms,
as a mass, a social group distinct in history, appearance, and to some
extent in spiritual gift.

We cannot study Africa without, however, noting some of the other races
concerned in its history, particularly the Asiatic Semites. The
intercourse of Africa with Arabia and other parts of Asia has been so
close and long-continued that it is impossible to-day to disentangle the
blood relationships. Negro blood certainly appears in strong strain
among the Semites, and the obvious mulatto groups in Africa, arising
from ancient and modern mingling of Semite and Negro, has given rise to
the term "Hamite," under cover of which millions of Negroids have been
characteristically transferred to the "white" race by some eager
scientists.

The earliest Semites came to Africa across the Red Sea. The Phœnicians
came along the northern coasts a thousand years before Christ and began
settlements which culminated in Carthage and extended down the Atlantic
shores of North Africa nearly to the Gulf of Guinea.

From the earliest times the Greeks have been in contact with Africa as
visitors, traders, and colonists, and the Persian influence came with
Cambyses and others. Roman Africa was bounded by the desert, but at
times came into contact with the blacks across the Sahara and in the
valley of the Nile. After the breaking up of the Roman Empire the Greek
and Latin Christians filtered through Africa, followed finally by a
Germanic invasion in 429 A.D.

In the seventh century the All-Mother, Asia, claimed Africa again for
her own and blew a cloud of Semitic Mohammedanism all across

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> North Africa,
veiling the dark continent from Europe for a thousand years and
converting vast masses of the blacks to Islam. The Portuguese began to
raise the veil in the fifteenth century, sailing down the Atlantic coast
and initiating the modern slave trade. The Spanish, French, Dutch, and
English followed them, but as traders in men rather than explorers.

The Portuguese explored the coasts of the Gulf of Guinea, visiting the
interior kingdoms, and then passing by the mouth of the Congo proceeded
southward. Eventually they rounded the Cape of Good Hope and pursued
their explorations as far as the mountains of Abyssinia. This began the
modern exploration of Africa, which is a curious fairy tale, and recalls
to us the great names of Livingstone, Burton, Speke, Stanley, Barth,
Schweinfurth, and many others. In this way Africa has been made known to
the modern world.

The difficulty of this modern lifting of the veil of centuries
emphasizes two physical facts that underlie all African history: the
peculiar inaccessibility of the continent to peoples from without, which
made it so easily possible for the great human drama played here to hide
itself from the ears of other worlds; and, on the other hand, the
absence of interior barriers--the great stretch of that central plateau
which placed practically every budding center of culture at the mercy of
barbarism, sweeping a thousand miles, with no Alps or Himalayas or
Appalachians to binder.

With this peculiarly uninviting coast line and the difficulties in
interior segregation must be considered the climate of Africa. While
there is much diversity and many salubrious tracts along with vast
barren wastes, yet, as Sir Harry Johnston well remarks, "Africa is the
chief stronghold of the real Devil--the reactionary forces of Nature
hostile to the uprise of Humanity. Here Beelzebub, King of the Flies,
marshals his vermiform and arthropod hosts-insects, ticks, and nematode
worms--which more than in other continents (excepting Negroid Asia)
convey to the skin, veins, intestines, and spinal marrow of men and
other vertebrates the microorganisms which cause deadly, disfiguring, or
debilitating diseases, or themselves create the morbid condition of the
persecuted human being, beasts, bird, reptile, frog, or fish." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) The inhabitants of this land have had a
sheer fight for physical survival comparable with that in no other great
continent, and this must not be forgotten when we consider their
history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:1](dbn03.htm#fr_0) Von Luschan: in
*Inter-Racial Problems*, p. 16.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[10:1](dbn03.htm#fr_1) Johnston: *Negro in the
New World*, pp. 14-15.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Coming of Black Men](dbn04)

</div>
