<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn06)  [Next](dbn08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# V    GUINEA AND CONGO

One of the great cities of the Sudan was Jenne. The chronicle says "that
its markets are held every day of the week and its populations are very
enormous. Its seven thousand villages are so near to one another that
the chief of Jenne has no need of messengers. If he wishes to send a
note to Lake Dibo, for instance, it is cried from the gate of the town
and repeated from village to village, by which means it reaches its
destination almost instantly." <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)

From the name of this city we get the modern name Guinea, which is used
to-day to designate the country contiguous to the great gulf of that
name--a territory often referred to in general as West Africa. Here,
reaching from the mouth of the Gambia to the mouth of the Niger, is a
coast of six hundred miles, where a marvelous drama of world history has
been enacted. The coast and its hinterland comprehends many well-known
names. First comes ancient Guinea, then, modern Sierra Leone and
Liberia; then follow the various "coasts" of ancient traffic--the grain,
ivory, gold, and slave coasts--with the adjoining territories of
Ashanti, Dahomey, Lagos, and Benin, and farther back such tribal and
territorial names as those of the Mandingoes, Yorubas, the Mossi, Nupe,
Borgu, and others.

Recent investigation makes it certain that an ancient civilization
existed on this coast which may have gone back as far as three thousand
years before Christ. Frobenius, perhaps fancifully, identified this
African coast with the Atlantis of the Greeks and as part of that great
western movement in human culture, "beyond the pillars of Hercules,"
which thirteen centuries before Christ strove with Egypt and the East.
It is, at any rate, clear that ancient commerce reached down the west
coast. The Phœnicians, 600 B.C., and the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Carthaginians, a
century or more later, record voyages, and these may have been attempted
revivals of still more ancient intercourse.

These coasts at some unknown prehistoric period were peopled from the
Niger plateau toward the north and west by the black West African type
of Negro, while along the west end of the desert these Negroes mingled
with the Berbers, forming various Negroid races.

Movement and migration is evident along this coast in ancient and modern
times. The Yoruba-Benin-Dahomey peoples were among the earliest
arrivals, with their remarkable art and industry, which places them in
some lines of technique abreast with the modern world. Behind them came
the Mossi from the north, and many other peoples in recent days have
filtered through, like the Limba and Temni of Sierra Leone and the
Agni-Ashanti, who moved from Borgu some two thousand years ago to the
Gold and Ivory coasts.

We have already noted in the main the history of black men along the
wonderful Niger and seen bow, pushing up from the Gulf of Guinea, a
powerful wedge of ancient culture held back Islam for a thousand years,
now victorious, now stubbornly disputing every inch of retreat. The
center of this culture lay probably, in oldest times, above the Bight of
Benin, along the Slave Coast, and reached east, west, and north. We
trace it to-day not only in the remarkable tradition of the natives, but
in stone monuments, architecture, industrial and social organization,
and works of art in bronze, glass, and terra cotta.

Benin art has been practiced without interruption for centuries, and Von
Luschan says that it is "of extraordinary significance that by the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries a local and monumental art had been
learned in Benin which in many respects equaled European art and
developed a technique of the very highest accomplishment." <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md)

Summing up Yoruban civilization, Frobenius concluded that "the technical
summit of that civilization was reached in the terra-cotta industry, and
that the most important achievements in art were not expressed in stone,
but in fine clay baked in the furnace; that hollow casting was
thoroughly known, too, and practiced by these people; that iron was
mainly used for decoration; that, whatever their purpose, they kept
their glass beads in stoneware urns within their own

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

locality, and that they manufactured both earthen and glass ware; that
the art of weaving was highly developed among them; that the stone
monuments, it is true, show some dexterity in handling and are so far
instructive, but in other respects evidence a cultural condition
insufficiently matured to grasp the utility of stone monumental
material; and, above all, that the then great and significant idea of
the universe as imaged in the Templum was current in those days." <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md)

Effort has naturally been made to ascribe this civilization to white
people. First it was ascribed to Portuguese influence, but much of it is
evidently older than the Portuguese discovery, Egypt and India have been
evoked and Greece and Carthage. But all these explanations are
far-fetched. If ever a people exhibited unanswerable evidence of
indigenous civilization, it is the west-coast Africans. Undoubtedly they
adapted much that came to them, utilized new ideas, and grew from
contact. But their art and culture is Negro through and through.

Yoruba forms one of the three city groups of West Africa; another is
around Timbuktu, and a third in the Hausa states. The Timbuktu cities
have from five to fifteen hundred towns, while the Yoruba cities have
one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants and more. The Hausa cities
are many of them important, but few are as large as the Yoruba cities
and they lie farther apart. All three centers, however, are connected
with the Niger, and the group nearest the coast--that is, the Yoruba
cities--has the greatest numbers of towns, the most developed
architectural styles, and the oldest institutions.

The Yoruba cities are not only different from the Sudanese in
population, but in their social relations. The Sudanese cities were
influenced from the desert and the Mediterranean, and form nuclei of
larger surrounding monarchial states. The Yoruba cities, on the other
hand, remained comparatively autonomous organizations down to modern
times, and their relative importance changed from time to time without
developing an imperialistic idea or subordinating the group to one
overpowering city.

This social and industrial state of the Yorubas formerly spread and
wielded great influence. We find Yoruba reaching out and subduing states
like Nupe toward the northward. But the industrial democracy and city
autonomy of Yoruba lent itself indifferently to conquest, and the state
fell eventually a victim to the fanatical

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fula Mohammedans
and was made a part of the modern sultanate of Gando.

West of Yoruba on the lower courses of the Niger is Benin, an ancient
state which in 1897 traced its twenty-three kings back one thousand
years; some legends even named a line of sixty kings. It seems probable
that Benin developed the imperial idea and once extended its rule into
the Congo valley. Later and also to the west of the Yoruba come two
states showing a fiercer and ruder culture, Dahomey and Ashanti. The
state of Dahomey was founded by Tacondomi early in the seventeenth
century, and developed into a fierce and bloody tyranny with wholesale
murder. The king had a body of two thousand to five thousand Amazons
renowned for their bravery and armed with rifles. The kingdom was
overthrown by the French in 1892-93. Under Sai Tutu, Ashanti arose to
power in the seventeenth century, A military aristocracy with cruel
blood sacrifices was formed. By 1816 the king had at his disposal two
hundred thousand soldiers. The Ashanti power was crushed by the English
in the war of 1873-74.

In these states and in later years in Benin the whole character of
west-coast culture seems to change. In place of the Yoruban culture,
with its city democracy, its elevated religious ideas, its finely
organized industry, and its noble art, came Ashanti and Dahomey. What
was it that changed the character of the west coast from this to the
orgies of war and blood sacrifice which we read of later in these lands?

There can be but one answer: the slave trade. Not simply the sale of
men, but an organized traffic of such proportions and widely organized
ramifications as to turn the attention and energies of men from nearly
all other industries, encourage war and all the cruelest passions of
way, and concentrate this traffic in precisely that part of Africa
farthest from the ancient Mediterranean lines of trade.

We need not assume that the cultural change was sudden or absolute.
Ancient Yoruba had the cruelty of a semi-civilized land, but it was not
dominant or tyrannical. Modern Benin and Dahomey showed traces of skill,
culture, and industry along with inexplicable cruelty and
bloodthirstiness. But it was the slave trade that turned the balance and
set these lands backward. Dahomey was the last word in a series of human
disasters which began with the defeat of the Askias at Tenkadibou. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

From the middle of the fifteenth to the last half of the nineteenth
centuries the American slave trade centered in Guinea and devastated the
coast morally, socially, and physically. European rum and fire arms were
traded for human beings, and it was not until 1787 that any measures
were taken to counteract this terrible scourge. In that year the idea
arose of repatriating stolen Negroes on that coast and establishing
civilized centers to supplant the slave trade. About four hundred
Negroes from England were sent to Sierra Leone, to whom the promoters
considerately added sixty white prostitutes as wives. The climate on the
low coast, however, was so deadly that new recruits were soon needed. An
American Negro, Thomas Peters, who had served as sergeant under Sir
Henry Clinton in the British army in America, went to England seeking an
allotment of land for his fellows. The Sierra Leone Company welcomed him
and offered free passage and land in Sierra Leone to the Negroes of Nova
Scotia. As a result fifteen vessels sailed with eleven hundred and
ninety Negroes in 1792. Arriving in Africa, they found the chief white
man in control there so drunk that he soon died of delirium tremens.
John Clarkson, however, brother of Thomas Clarkson, the abolitionist,
eventually took the lead, founded Freetown, and the colony began its
checkered career. In 1896 the colony was saved from insurrection by the
exiled Maroon Negroes from Jamaica. After 1833, when emancipation in
English colonies took place, severer measures against the slave trade
was possible and the colony began to grow. To-day its imports and
exports amount to fifteen million dollars a year.

Liberia was a similar American experiment. In 1816 American
philanthropists decided that slavery was bound to die out, but that the
problem lay in getting rid of the freed Negroes, of which there were
then two hundred thousand in the United States. Accordingly the American
Colonization Society was proposed this year and founded January 1, 1817,
with Bushrod Washington as President. It was first thought to encourage
migration to Sierra Leone, and eighty-eight Negroes were sent, but they
were not welcomed. As a result territory was bought in the present
confines of Liberia, December 15, 1821, and colonists began to arrive. A
little later an African depot for recaptured slaves taken in the
contraband slave trade, provided for in the Act of 1819, was established
and an agent was sent to Africa to form a settlement. Gradually this
settlement was

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

merged with the settlement of the Colonization Society, and from this
union Liberia was finally evolved.

The last white governor of Liberia died in 1841 and was succeeded by the
first colored governor, Joseph J. Roberts, a Virginian. The total
population in 1843 was about twenty-seven hundred and ninety, and with
this as a beginning in 1847 Governor Roberts declared the independence
of the state. The recognition of Liberian independence by all countries
except the United States followed in 1849. The United States, not
wishing to receive a Negro minister, did not recognize Liberia until
1862.

No sooner was the independence of Liberia announced than England and
France began a long series of aggressions to limit her territory and
sovereignty. Considerable territory was lost by treaty, and in the
effort to get capital to develop the rest, Liberia was saddled with a
debt of four hundred thousand dollars, of which she received less than
one hundred thousand dollars in actual cash. Finally the Liberians
turned to the United States for capital and protection. As a result the
Liberian customs have been put under international control and Major
Charles Young, the ranking Negro officer in the United States army, with
several colored assistants, has been put in charge of the making of
roads and drilling a constabulary to keep order in the interior.

To-day Liberia has an area of forty thousand square miles, about three
hundred and fifty miles of coast line, and an estimated total population
of two million of which fifty thousand are civilized. The revenue
amounted in 1913 to $531,500. The imports in 1912 were $1,667,857 and
the exports $1,199,152. The latter consisted chiefly of rubber, palm oil
and kernels, coffee, piassava fiber, ivory, ginger, camwood, and
arnotto.

Perhaps Liberia's greatest citizen was the late Edward Wilmot Blyden,
who migrated in early life from the Danish West Indies and became a
prophet of the renaissance of the Negro race.

Turning now from Guinea we pass down the west coast. In 1482 Diego Cam
of Portugal, sailing this coast, set a stone at the mouth of a great
river which he called "The Mighty," but which eventually came to be
known by the name of the powerful Negro kingdom through which it
flowed--the Congo.

We must think of the valley of the Congo with its intricate interlacing
of water routes and jungle of forests as a vast caldron shut

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

away at first from the African world by known and unknown physical
hindrances. Then it was penetrated by the tiny red dwarfs and afterward
horde after horde of tall black men swirled into the valley like a
maelstrom, moving usually from north to east and from south to west.

The Congo valley became, therefore, the center of the making of what we
know to-day as the Bantu nations. They are not a unified people, but a
congeries of tribes of considerable physical diversity, united by the
compelling bond of language and other customs imposed on the conquered
by invading conquerors.

The history of these invasions we must to-day largely imagine. Between
two and three thousand years ago the wilder tribes of Negroes began to
move out of the region south or southeast of Lake Chad. This was always
a land of shadows and legends, where fearful cannibals dwelt and where
no Egyptian or Ethiopian or Sudanese armies dared to go. It is possible,
however, that pressure from civilization in the Nile valley and rising
culture around Lake Chad was at this time reënforced by expansion of the
Yoruba-Benin culture on the west coast. Perhaps, too, developing culture
around the Great Lakes in the east beckoned or the riotous fertility of
the Congo valleys became known. At any rate the movement commenced, now
by slow stages, now in wild forays. There may have been a preliminary
movement from east to west to the Gulf of Guinea. The main movement,
however, was eastward, skirting the Congo forests and passing down by
the Victoria Nyanza and Lake Tanganyika. Here two paths beckoned: the
lakes and the sea to the east, the Congo to the west. A great stream of
men swept toward the ocean and, dividing, turned northward and fought
its way down the Nile valley and into the Abyssinian highlands; another
branch turned south and approached the Zambesi, where we shall meet it
again.

Another horde of invaders turned westward and entered the valley of the
Congo in three columns. The northern column moved along the Lualaba and
Congo rivers to the Cameroons; the second column became the industrial
and state-building Luba and Lunda peoples in the southern Congo valley
and Angola; while the third column moved into Damaraland and mingled
with Bushman and Hottentot.

In the Congo valley the invaders settled in village and plain, absorbed
such indigenous inhabitants as they found or drove them deeper into the
forest, and immediately began to develop industry

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

and political organization. They became skilled agriculturists, raising
in some localities a profusion of cereals, fruit, and vegetables such as
manioc, maize, yams, sweet potatoes, ground nuts, sorghum, gourds,
beans, peas, bananas, and plantains. Everywhere they showed skill in
mining and the welding of iron, copper, and other metals. They made
weapons, wire and ingots, cloth, and pottery, and a widespread system of
trade arose. Some tribes extracted rubber from the talamba root; others
had remarkable breeds of fowl and cattle, and still others divided their
people by crafts into farmers, smiths, boat builders, warriors, cabinet
makers, armorers, and speakers. Women here and there took part in public
assemblies and were rulers in some cases. Large towns were built, some
of which required hours to traverse from end to end.

Many tribes developed intelligence of a high order. Wissmann called the
Ba Luba "a nation of thinkers." Bateman found them "thoroughly and
unimpeachably honest, brave to foolhardiness, and faithful to each other
and to their superiors." One of their kings, Calemba, "a really princely
prince," Bateman says would "amongst any people be a remarkable and
indeed in many respects a magnificent man." <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md)

These beginnings of human culture were, however, peculiarly vulnerable
to invading hosts of later comers. There were no natural protecting
barriers like the narrow Nile valley or the Kong mountains or the
forests below Lake Chad. Once the pathways to the valley were open and
for hundreds of years the newcomers kept arriving, especially from the
welter of tribes south of the Sudan and west of the Nile, which rising
culture beyond kept in unrest and turmoil.

Against these intruders there was but one defense, the State. State
building was thus forced on the Congo valley. How early it started we
cannot say, but when the Portuguese arrived in the fifteenth century,
there had existed for centuries a large state among the Ba-Congo, with
its capital at the city now known as San Salvador.

The Negro Mfumu, or emperor, was eventually induced to accept
Christianity. His sons and many young Negroes of high birth were taken
to Portugal to be educated. There several were raised to the Catholic
priesthood and one became bishop; others distinguished themselves at the
universities. Thus suddenly there arose a Catholic kingdom south of the
valley of the Congo, which lasted three centuries,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

but was partially overthrown by invading barbarians from the interior in
the seventeenth century. A king of Congo still reigns as pensioner of
Portugal, and on the coast to-day are the remains of the kingdom in the
civilized blacks and mulattoes, who are intelligent traders and boat
builders.

Meantime the Luba-Lunda people to the eastward founded Kantanga and
other states, and in the sixteenth century the larger and more ambitious
realm of the Mwata Yamvo. The last of the fourteen rulers of this line
was feudal lord of about three hundred chiefs, who paid him tribute in
ivory, skins, corn, cloth, and salt. His territory included about one
hundred thousand square miles and two million or more inhabitants.
Eventually this state became torn by internal strife and revolt,
especially by attacks from the south across the Congo-Zambesi divide.

Farther north, among the Ba-Lolo and the Ba-Songo, the village policy
persisted and the cannibals of the northeast pressed down on the more
settled tribes. The result was a curious blending of war and industry,
artistic tastes and savage customs.

The organized slave trade of the Arabs penetrated the Congo valley in
the sixteenth century and soon was aiding all the forces of unrest and
turmoil. Industry was deranged and many tribes forced to take refuge in
caves and other hiding places.

Here, as on the west coast, disintegration and retrogression followed,
for as the American traffic lessened, the Arabian traffic increased.
When, therefore, Stanley opened the Congo valley to modern knowledge,
Leopold II of Belgium conceived the idea of founding here a free
international state which was to bring civilization to the heart of
Africa. Consequently there was formed in 1878 an international committee
to study the region. Stanley was finally commissioned to inquire as to
the best way of introducing European trade and culture. "I am charged,"
he said, "to open and keep open, if possible, all such districts and
countries as I may explore, for the benefit of the commercial world. The
mission is supported by a philanthropic society, which numbers
nobleminded men of several nations. It is not a religious society, but
my instructions are entirely of that spirit. No violence must be used,
and wherever rejected, the mission must withdraw to seek another
field." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

The Bula Matadi or Stone Breaker, as the natives called Stanley, threw
himself energetically into the work and had by 1881 built a

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

road past the falls to the plateau, where thousands of miles of river
navigation were thus opened. Stations were established, and by 1884
Stanley returned armed with four hundred and fifty "treaties" with the
native chiefs, and the new "State" appealed to the world for
recognition.

The United States first recognized the "Congo Free State," which was at
last made a sovereign power under international guarantees by the
Congress of Berlin in the year 1885, and Leopold II was chosen its king.
The state had an area of about nine hundred thousand square miles, with
a population of about thirty million.

One of the first tasks before the new state was to check the Arab slave
traders. The Arabs had hitherto acted as traders and middlemen along the
upper Congo, and when the English and Congo state overthrew Mzidi, the
reigning king in the Kantanga country, a general revolt of the Arabs and
mulattoes took place. For a time, 1892-93, the whites were driven out,
but in a year or two the Arabs and their allies were subdued.

Humanity and commerce, however, did not replace the Arab slave traders.
Rather European greed and serfdom were substituted. The land was
confiscated by the state and farmed out to private Belgian corporations.
The wilder cannibal tribes were formed into a militia to prey on the
industrious, who were taxed with specific amounts of ivory and rubber,
and scourged and mutilated if they failed to pay. Harris declares that
King Leopold's regime meant the death of twelve million natives.

"Europe was staggered at the Leopoldian atrocities, and they were
terrible indeed; but what we, who were behind the scenes, felt most
keenly was the fact that the real catastrophe in the Congo was the
desolation and murder in the larger sense. The invasion of family life,
the ruthless destruction of every social barrier, the shattering of
every tribal law, the introduction of criminal practices which struck
the chiefs of the people dumb with horror--in a word, a veritable
avalanche of filth and immorality overwhelmed the Congo tribes." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)

So notorious did the exploitation and misrule become that Leopold was
forced to take measures toward reform, and finally in 1909 the Free
State became a Belgian colony. Some reforms have been inaugurated and
others may follow, but the valley of the Congo will long stand as a
monument of shame to Christianity and European civilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[36:1](dbn07.htm#fr_22.md) Quoted in Du Bois:
*Timbuktu*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[37:1](dbn07.htm#fr_23.md) Von Luschan:
*Verhandlungen der berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie*, etc., 1898.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[38:1](dbn07.htm#fr_24.md) Frobenius: *Voice of
Africa*, Vol. I.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[39:1](dbn07.htm#fr_25.md) Cf. [p.
58](dbn09.htm#page_58.md).

<span id="fn_26"></span>[43:1](dbn07.htm#fr_26.md) Keane: *Africa*, II,
117-118.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[44:1](dbn07.htm#fr_27.md) *The Congo*, I, Chap.
III.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[45:1](dbn07.htm#fr_28.md) Harris: *Dawn in
Africa*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Great Lakes and Zymbabwe](dbn08.md)

</div>
