[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim2001)  [Next](bim2003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. II.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1874\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### THE TRIADS OF PRIVILEGE AND USAGE.

1\. The three primary presiding Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd;
Alawn; and Gwron.

2\. For three reasons are Bards called Bards according to the privilege
and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: one reason is, because it
was in the Isle of Britain that Bardism was first understood; the
second, because no other country in the world had ever a just
comprehension of systematic Bardism; the third, because genuine Bardism
cannot be upheld except in virtue of the usages, systems, and voice of
Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. On that account, of
whatever country they may be, they are called Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

3\. There are three kinds of Bards of the Isle of Britain: Primitive
Bards before Christianity; after that, the Bards of Beli; and the
pseudo-Bards, that is, the Poets, who are not regulated by the ancient
privileges and usages of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3)

4\. There are three Bards of equality, namely: the Primitive Bard; the
Druid; and the Ovate; for there should not, and cannot be supremacy to
one over another of those three, though each has a privilege over the
other, according to the privilege and speciality of office and
obligation.

5\. There are three colours, which differ one from the other in the
robes of the three principal kinds of Bards of the Isle of Britain,
namely: blue, <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4) the colour of the sky,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

distinguishes the dress of the Primitive Bard Positive, who is called
Licentiate of Privilege, inasmuch as he has a gratuitous privilege, and
a free license from the day he is dismissed from under the hands of his
teacher before a Gorsedd or Chair of systematic vocal song; the robe of
the Druid-bard is white; <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) and the robe
of an Ovate-bard is green. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) And there
ought not to be two or more colours in the robe of one or other of these
three, for a variety of colours in one or other of them is contrary to
usage and order, and inconsistent with reason.

6\. There are three things symbolized by the three colours of the Bards'
robes. The colour of the Primitive Bard is blue, and the signification
of that colour is peace, tranquillity, and love, it being the colour of
heaven in <span id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7) sunshine and
serenity--accordingly, peace and tranquillity, in respect of kind and
excellence, ought to have the upper hand and supremacy over every other
thing--therefore the Primitive Bard is chief, by privilege and usage, in
respect of every memorial and record of primitive sciences. Green is the
colour of the Ovate, and under the sign of this colour are placed all
the sciences of awen and reason and cogency, as distinct from what
belongs to the principal sciences of Bardism, and all the improvement of
sciences of whatever kind they may be, so that they are good. That is to
say, they are assimilated to the green vegetation of the growth of
earth, woods, and fields, which delights the heart and eye of those who
behold them. In right of an Ovate and his art, or Ovatism, and his
degree of Gorsedd, memorial and record are enjoined until the period of
efficiency, and from that time for ever afterwards they will be distinct
from the memorial and record of a primitive Bard. White is the symbol

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

of truth, and a Druid bears it as the colour of his robe, for truth is
of the same hue as light and the bright colour of day, and it cannot
admit of a variety of colours. Truth is also represented under the sign
of unity of colour in the robes of each of the three kinds of Bards. Nor
will the justice of privilege, or sciences, or improvements consist in
any thing whatsoever other than in the stability of truth. Each of the
Bards, when he shall have been privileged until the period of
efficiency, has the privilege of wearing which ever robe he likes, but
he has not the privilege of following any office and art other than that
which belongs to the robe he may have chosen to wear.

7\. Three scientific offices have been, by special privilege, attached
to the colours of the robe. The function of a Primitive Bard is to hold
a Gorsedd, judgment, and supremacy of testimony, and to maintain the
memorial and record of the primary and original sciences of the Bardism
of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, in two ways, namely: by means of
the voice of Gorsedd, that is, the recitation of every memorial and
record publicly at a Gorsedd and Chair, so that they may be heard by
country and nation, or by all who resort to the Gorsedd or Chair, at
which the Primitive Bard may attend, according to his office and duty,
and what is required of him--and he is entitled, under the sanction of
his hearing, to the authorized recitation of a Primitive Bard, and his
word is a word above all in Chair and Gorsedd; his second memorial is
the memorial of song, that is, vocal poem, warranted by the judgment of
Gorsedd. The function of an Ovate is to amplify and to improve good
sciences in virtue of awen, reason, and circumstance, that is,
inevitable obligation; on this account, the Gorsedd does not enquire
concerning his teacher, when he is privileged a Bard, but merely
concerning his sciences, his art, and his life. Those particulars are
enquired after; and, it is in virtue of what he has of them, that he is
privileged by the judgment and verdict of Chair or Gorsedd of vocal
song. Two memorials and records appertain to him,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

namely, the memorial of vocal song, and the memorial of letters. And
when his memorial and record are imposed upon a Primitive Bard by the
verdict of Gorsedd, then those sciences will depend systematically upon
the voice of Gorsedd, which cannot take place before an efficient
judgment is pronounced upon what is so imposed. The function assigned to
a Druid comes from the grant and privilege of the lord of the territory,
in the comot and town where it may be necessary; and the extent of
country, which is placed under him, is called his office, and in his
office he is to maintain instruction and worship; that is to say, he is
to teach, as it behoves a licensed teacher, all good and methodical
sciences, which are authorized by the voice of an efficient Gorsedd, and
he ought to hold a meeting of worship in the place where it is required,
and in the place which is regular and warranted by the memory and custom
of country and nation. And his privilege is, that no naked weapon be
borne in the approach to the place, where he holds it, because a Druid
is a man under the protection of country and nation, and under the
protection of God and His peace.

8\. Three persons who are to carry neither a sword nor a horn: a Bard; a
metallurgist; and a female.

9\. Three arts that are under the protection of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain: instrumental and vocal song; mensuration; and metallurgy; even
if such men of arts and sciences be strangers, they are so
privileged. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)

10\. The three monarchs of country, namely: a Bard, who is the teacher
of good sciences for the education of country and nation; a judge, who
enacts justice and law, for the sake of order and peace in country and
nation; and a lord, that is, a king or prince of a territory, who is
guardian and protector, for the sake of defending country and
nation:--and from the co-operating union of the three conies every
verdict of country and nation, under the protection of God and His
peace. Others say: a lord; a judge; and a Bard.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

11\. There are three particular and distinct persons, who may be
lawfully privileged, though they be aliens and strangers, in virtue of
the verdict of country and border country, that is, the conventional
verdict of Cymru universally: a lord; a Bard; and a judge. From the time
they are so privileged, they are adjudged to be innate; and neither they
nor their posterity can become disfranchised, because privilege is
privilege, and there can be no lack of privilege from privilege, nor
privilege from lack of privilege.

12\. The three fortunes of a Bard: to make a country inhabitable; to
civilize a nation; and to improve sciences. Others say: to civilize a
nation; and to maintain sciences.

13\. Three things which cannot be dispensed with in a Primitive Bard:
poetical awen; the sciences of Bardism; and the qualities of such as
lead harmless lives.

14\. The three misfortunes of country and nation: a lord without power;
a judge without justice; and a Bard without sciences.

15\. The three special privileges of a Bard: free passport in whatever
country he may travel; that no weapon be borne against him in whatever
place he may be; and that his word be paramount in respect of sciences
in whatever place he may be. Others say: the three privileges of a Bard
wherever he may be, whether in a country or in a border country: free
passport; that his word should be paramount in respect of sciences; and
that no naked weapon be borne in his presence, wherever he may be.

16\. There are three primary laws enjoined upon a Bard: that he should
keep his word; that he should keep his secret; and that he should
maintain peace and tranquillity.

17\. The three institutional laws of a Bard: to maintain peace and
tranquillity wherever he may be; to exhibit instruction in regular and
commendable sciences and usages, improving and amplifying them; and to
keep a regular memorial of what is meritorious in respect of the
sciences and systems of country and nation.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

18\. There are three things forbidden to a Bard: to bear the arms of
war; to bear a wrong pedigree; and to introduce falsehood into his vocal
song.

19\. Three things monstrous in a Bard: immoral usages; inaffability
arising from a morose temper; and ignorance with regard to his art and
office of vocal song.

20\. The three odiums of country and nation: a proud lord; a deceitful
messenger; and a petulant Bard.

21\. The three souls of the art of a Bard: to preserve the memorial and
record of systematic sciences; to improve the usages of courtesy; and to
increase amusement.

22\. Three things unbecoming in a Bard: to preserve the memorial of what
is dishonourable and monstrous; to corrupt the usages of courtesy; and
to impugn amusement.

23\. There are three disusages, for which a Bard will inevitably lose
the privileges and chattels, which he possesses in respect of song:
fighting; falsehood; and adultery--these things being adjudged contrary
to law and right.

24\. There are three disusages, for which a Bard will lose the chattels,
which he possesses in respect of song, to the end of three years: defect
in his memorial and record; habitual drunkenness; and the practising of
irregular employments and trades, such as a Bard or a Poet ought not to
practise--for instance, to maintain himself by instrumental song, and
other things, which are forbidden to a Bard, or to a man of vocal song.

25\. There are three things which cannot be contravened: the memorial of
the voice of Gorsedd; an old song, warranted by a memorial proceeding
from the judgment of Gorsedd; and the warranted usage of Chair and
Gorsedd.

26\. The three memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
memorial of the voice of Gorsedd; the memorial of song, warranted by the
judgment of Gorsedd; and the memorial of Coelbren, that is, the memorial
of letters.

27\. The three columns of the voice of Gorsedd: vocal song;
institutions; and Triads. Others say: song; voice; and institution.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

28\. The three licenses of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. Five free
acres for every Bard in right of his office and art; or where that is
not the case, a plough penny, that is to say, a contribution from every
plough in his official district; and where that cannot be, a spear
penny, namely, a contribution from every land owner--this license, in
whichever of the three ways it may be, is irrespective of the five free
acres, which he is entitled to in right of an innate Cymro. The second
are the remunerations made, to him for his vocal song, and his roll of
pedigrees, that is to say, the memorial of marriages and births, and the
memorial of commendable deeds. The third is his circuit of minstrelsy
every three years to the houses of the natives and other gentry. And
where he does not obtain his provision of five acres, or, in lieu of
those, his plough penny, or spear penny, he is to bring an action at law
in the court of country and lord, in respect of usage, which cannot be
contravened.

29\. Three men who ought not to be made Bards: a natural liar; an
habitual wrangler; and one who is inevitably ignorant: for such persons
can not have Awen from God, or any apprehension of the sciences of
Bardism.

30\. Three things in man, which demonstrate Awen from God, and that he
is competent to become a Bard: natural affection; integrity of life; and
manly reason occupied with honourable sciences.

31\. The three necessities of a Bard and Bardism: to keep the memorial
and record of all that is honourable and good, in respect of truth and
sciences; to teach and explain political sciences; and to impose peace
and tranquillity upon those who are out of the pale of justice and law.
Others say: to instruct in good sciences; to confer memorial and praise
upon all that is excellent and good; and to impose peace and rights of
judicature upon those who are out of the pale of justice and law.

32\. The three repulsive necessities of a Bard: the compulsory
concealment of a secret, for the sake of advantage

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and peace; vituperative complaint, required by justice; and to unsheath
a sword against the unjust and lawless.

33\. The three doctrines required of a Bard: a song according to reason
and wisdom; voice according to the memorial and usage of Gorsedd, and
the resort of worship; and conduct according to good usages and habits.

34\. There are three laws of avoidance incumbent on a Bard: to avoid
idleness and sloth, since he is a man of ambition; to avoid contention
and strife, since he is a man of love and peace; and to avoid folly,
since he is a man of reason, understanding, and Awen from God.

35\. The three columns of privilege and usage: custom before the memory
of country and nation; the memorial and record of letters; and the
judgment of an efficient Gorsedd. Others say: and the authority of an
efficient Gorsedd.

36\. There are three incidental Gorsedds, the day and time of which
cannot be specified, but which are regular and customary as to place,
and also of equal privilege with those which are regular and customary
as to day and time: the marriage day of the king, or the son, brother,
or lineal kinsman of the king, that is, a royal marriage; the day on
which the king wears his crown, or golden torques; and the day of the
horn of peace between country and border country. There will be a feast
for three days on each of those times, and a concert of music and joy by
means of voice and instrument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[25:1](bim2002.htm#fr_2) <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> "The institution is thought to-have originated in Britain, and
to have been thence introduced into Gaul; and even now those who wish to
become more accurately acquainted with it, generally repair thither, for
the sake of learning it." Cæs. De Bel. Gal. lib. vi. c. 13.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[25:2](bim2002.htm#fr_3) William Cynwal
(1560--1600) makes a distinction between a Bard and a poet in the
following lines:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Taeraist yna trwst anhardd  
Y mynwn fod a’m enw ’n *fardd*,  
Ni chleimiais, dodais bob dydd,  
Gwrdd pridwerth and gradd *Prydydd*.

Thou didst assert with unseemly clamour,  
That I would have my name as a *Bard*;  
I did not claim--I appointed every day  
An ardent ransom--save the degree of *poet*.

</div>

<span id="fn_4"></span>[25:3](bim2002.htm#fr_4) <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> Llawdden, at the Eisteddvod, which was held at Caermarthen in
the 15th century, thus describes the costume of a Bard:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Gwn glas oll yn las a’r lliw ’n lân--ysgawn,  
Glas esgid a braccan,  
Gloyw ei sas, a glas hosan  
Glas i gyd glwys yw i gân.

A blue gown, all blue, of pure colour--and light,  
A blue shoe and brogue,  
A bright sash, and a blue stocking,  
Altogether blue--this becomes a song.

</div>

<span id="fn_5"></span>[27:1](bim2002.htm#fr_5) <span id="page_26">p.
26</span> William Cynwal alludes to a distinctive dress of the Druids:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

E’th folant feirddion, *Derwyddon dor*.

Bards and *robed Druids* will praise thee.

</div>

<span id="fn_6"></span>[27:2](bim2002.htm#fr_6)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Fy swydd gyda f’ arglwyddi,  
Hynn fydd, a’u car hen wyf i,  
Darllain mydrwaith rhuglwaith rhaid,  
Syful im cyfneseifiaid,  
*Gwisgaw* o befrlaw bob un  
*Gwyrdd* roddion gwrdd o’r eiddun.

My function with my lords,  
Is this, who am their aged kinsman,--  
To read poetry, which is an easy task,  
Courteously to my relatives, <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>  
And to *wear*, from the fair hands of each,  
*Green* and strong gifts, made by them.  
       Ll. Goch ab Meurig Hen, (1330-1370.)

</div>

<span id="fn_7"></span>[27:3](bim2002.htm#fr_7) Al. "and."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[31:1](bim2002.htm#fr_8) <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> Or, "even if such men of privileged arts and sciences be
strangers."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Triads of the Bards.--The Triads of Privilege and
Usage](bim2003)
