[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim2004)  [Next](bim2006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. II.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1874\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS OF CYMRU,

Extracted from the Old Books by Richard Iorwerth, and exhibited by him
in the Chair of Tir Iarll, and adjudged before it as authoritative;
after that, they obtained a Chair in each of the three provinces.

THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS OF CYMRU.

The following are the Triads which were exhibited before the Chair of
Tir Iarll by Richard Iorwerth, son of Iorwerth the Grey-haired. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) From the Book of Thomas Hopkin <span
id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53) of Llangrallo--one of the Books of Thomas,
son of Evan, <span id="fr_54"></span>[4](#fn_54) of Tre Bryn.

1\. There are three Banded <span id="fr_55"></span>[5](#fn_55) Bards.
The first is the Primitive Bard, or Poet, whose function and art are to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

poetize, and to preserve the memorial of every thing that is commendable
in man or deed--to celebrate in song every thing that is commendable and
good, as would be fitting in respect of what is meritorious and
deserving--to teach in song every thing that is good in respect of
doctrine and usages, and to maintain the memorial and teaching of the
art of song, and all the privileges and usages which have been conferred
upon the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and to teach them in methodical
song, according to the proper art of vocal song of the Bards of the
Ancient Cymry; And it is his duty to arrange and systematize matters,
according to the privileges and usages of the Ancient Cymry, in every
Chair and Eisteddvod, and Gorsedd of vocal song; it is incumbent upon
him also to preserve and maintain the Cymric language free from
degeneracy and corruption, and to teach it correctly, according to its
quality and original and proper arrangement. The second is the
Herald-bard, whose office and art are memorial, instruction, and
history--to symbolize good and laudable deeds, and to record in book and
writing the genealogies and descent of the nation of the Cymry, their
privileges and usages, so that they may be known, lest there should
happen to the nation of the Cymry that degeneracy and ignobleness which
impoverish the descent and privileges of a nation, and hence ensue non
privilege and false privilege, and every lack of system, as has been the
case with those unlearned nations, among which neither Awen from God,
nor Bards, nor Bardism proceeding from that Awen, have been found. It is
his duty to learn to read and to write the Cymric language, and to
commit it to book and song properly and correctly, and to know the
privileges and usages of the Bards of the nation of the Cymry, with
their nature and essence. He ought also to impugn all ignobleness, all
lack of privilege, all false privilege, and all illegality and disusage,
lest the nation of the Cymry, their privileges and laudable usages,
their language, innateness, and celebrated antiquity should suffer
corruption. The third is the Post-bard, whose art is vocal song
according to the inventive

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

instruction and skilful art of the later Bards, and to impart
instruction in every science, wisdom, arts, and good and laudable
usages, and to systematize new sciences according to kind, number, time,
place, occasion, and dignity. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) And
this is the distinction between the Primitive Bard and the Post-bard:
the Primitive Bard ought to bring with him what has been behind him from
old ages, and the Post-bard ought to call to him what he sees before
him; whilst the Herald-bard arranges these things according as the
advantage, requirement, nature, essence, time, and dignity of them may
demand; and to bestow instruction, sciences, wisdom, art, dignity, and
honour out of them upon the nation and country of the Cymry, as befits
what is good and praiseworthy.

2\. There are three supremacies of song: to poetize; to play the harp
and stringed instrument; and to teach history.

3\. There are three kinds of men of vocal song. The first is the Poet,
whose function is to poetize, and to sing methodically, according to the
art of song--being of warranted authority, of learned pursuit, of genial
imagination, of discreet intention, and of regular purpose, to keep the
memorial of privilege, usage, and instruction derived from ancient song,
to pronounce judgment upon vocal song, to keep laudable memorial of
every man and deed that are adjudged to be commendable, to preserve a
record of the genealogies and descent of the nation of the Cymry--their
derivation and condition, and to sing poetically upon a subject in such
a manner as would be easiest to understand, learn, and remember the
song, for the instruction and amusement of those who may learn, recite,
and hear it. The second is the Family Bard, or a minstrel who is a poet
of warranted authority, as becomes a poet according to the privilege and
usage of the Ancient Cymry; and his function is to sing domestically
upon a subject and proposition, to sing with a clear imagination, and
with affectionate meditation, to regulate and teach good, noble, and
moral usages,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

and to sing love without frivolity, praise without flattery, satire
without reproach, instruction in an amusing way, and amusement in an
instructive way, as may be easiest to learn, understand, and remember
the song. Upon him and his song are conferred the system and judgment of
the Chair and Eisteddvod of the territory, in which may be his abode;
but, in conformity with good usages, and such as are meet to be
practised, he must neither sing nor teach in song what is not fitting to
be heard or taught. He is a brother in the faith and companion to a
Poet, who is a Chaired Bard, authorized by, and under the protection and
privilege of his Chair. It is lawful to refer a domestic song to a
Chair, and it ought to be judged according to the kind of system which
is peculiar to it, for its system is not the same as that which belongs
to the extraordinary song of a Chaired Poet, who has to maintain his
Chair against his fellow competitors, but is arranged according to its
Cymraeg, the goodness of its instruction, the lucidity of its meditation
and Cymraeg, and the facility of learning, understanding, and
remembering it, and of clothing it in harmony and music. The third is
the Minstrel, who is authorized to stroll, to censure, to satirize, to
reproach, to mock, to abuse, to supplicate, and to recite lyrics in a
dialogue, for the sake of amusing and rejoicing the mind. Neither he nor
his song is endowed with a system, judgment, or privilege of Chair, nor
is there any usage attached to his office or art, further than that they
are subject to the judgment of country and law, and that he should do
nothing against them. These three persons of vocal song are called Chair
Bard, Family Bard, and Irregular Bard; and to them belong the three
branches of vocal song, namely, Bardism, that is, Poetry, Domesticity,
and Minstrelsy.

4\. There are three occasions for Bards and Bardism: to maintain and
preserve just memorial of what were formerly, whether man, or deed, or
sciences; to teach good usages, and sciences which promote social
inhabitation, whether they be art, or wisdom, or morality; and to amuse,
rejoice,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

and occupy the mind, intellect, and affection, and to while away the
time not unwisely. For they are what make country and district socially
inhabitable, and whereby the arrangement and system of country are
conferred upon nation and tribe, in the way found to be most
practicable, most diverting, and most permanent.

5\. There are three things, which, according to their arrangements, a
Bard, who is a Chaired Poet, ought to know. The first is the system of
vocal song, its art, and appurtenances. The second is the system of the
privileges and usages of men of vocal and instrumental song, and how to
arrange and regulate them, for that is the duty of a poet who is a
primitive Bard. The third is how to arrange Bardic history and sciences,
or the principal features of the wisdom of the Ancient Cymry, and the
genealogies and descent of the nation of the Cymry, their kings,
princes, and innate nobility, with their laudable deeds, and the
excellences of the nation of the Cymry; and to place the whole on the
record of song, and in proper arrangement, according to the usages of
the Bards of the Ancient Cymry.

6\. The three special duties of a Bard according to the privilege and
usage of the Ancient Cymry: to preserve and maintain the privileges of
the nation of the Cymry; to preserve and maintain the Cymric language
free from corruption; and to preserve and maintain good and laudable
usages and sciences--and all this by means of a systematic vocal song,
under the protection and privilege of Chair and Eisteddvod. That is, it
was for the purpose of preserving and maintaining these things that
vocal song, Bards, and Bardism were devised and appointed; and on the
same were conferred privilege and obligation in Chair and Eisteddvod.

7\. There are three things which are forbidden to a Bard, being a
Chaired Teacher: an immoral and wicked art or learning; immoral acts and
usages; and intercourse with immoral men and society; for these things
will spoil the social inhabitation of country and nation. On that
account, immorality, its kind or form, are not becoming to

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

a Poet, since a Bard is the ballustrade of morality and social
inhabitation, according to his office and duty; and it was to confirm
the same that he was invested with the protection of country and border
country, and distinctive privilege, that he might preserve and maintain
social inhabitation and morality, and teach them accurately.

8\. There are three things indispensable in a Bard, namely: that he
should sing properly; that he should teach properly; and that he should
judge properly.

9\. There are three things in right of primary obligation, by special
protection and privilege, to which a Bard according to the privilege and
usage of the Ancient Cymry is entitled: that his land should be free,
namely, his five free acres; that his wassail should be gratuitous,
wherever he may go, in virtue of his office and art of song--the same
being supplied to him by the lord of the territory, which he may visit;
and that his word should be paramount, no person's word being superior,
as long as his degree and Chair remain to him.

10\. There are three disciplinary degrees attached to vocal song and
Bardism, namely: the first is a probationary Disciple; the second is a
pupil Disciple; the third is a master Disciple. A probationary Disciple
ought to know the system of syllables and sentences, according to the
Books of the system of metricities, and how to arrange the metres of
domestic song, for that belongs to the discipline of vocal song, and to
sing in five of those metres poetically according to the opinion of a
master of song, who shall say upon his word and conscience that he is
competent to be a poet; he ought also to know the laws and usages which
relate to his discipleship. A pupil Disciple ought to know, in addition
to what a probationary Disciple knows, the system of metres and
resumptions, and to be able to sing in the nine primary metres, and to
exhibit the same as his own composition, warranted by the word, or under
the hand of his Teacher; he ought to know, and to avoid the fifteen
common faults; he ought also to know the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

usages necessary in holding a Chair and Eisteddvod, and to be skilled in
the genealogies of the nobility, and in history. A master Disciple ought
to know the whole that the pupil Disciple ought to know, and therewith
to sing like a disciple in all the chaired metres, to know the system of
their quality and kinds, to avoid all the faults, to be skilled in
history, as taught by the primitive Bards according to the privilege and
usage of the Ancient Cymry, to trace the pedigrees of the innate princes
and noblemen of the nation of the Cymry, to be acquainted with the
history of all their laudable deeds and usages, to know the privileges
of the nation of the Cymry, their substance and quality, to be able to
record all these things before a Chair, to commit the whole methodically
to book, to regulate and arrange a Chair and Eisteddvod, according to
the judgment of a Bard, who is a chaired master of song, and to know the
articles of the wisdom of the Ancient Cymry, and proper arrangement of
the Cymric language, and all its syllables, words, and sentences, and to
write them properly and systematically; he ought to know in memory and
viva voce all the privileges and usages of the Bards of the Ancient
Cymry, and their proper arrangement, and the memorial and knowledge
respecting the ancient primitive Bards, their songs, and Books, and all
the history which is derived from then. And when, by means of his own
singing, he shall exhibit all the chaired metres, according to their
kinds founded upon primary quality, to be a masterly science of music,
he is entitled to a Chair; and when he shall have obtained three, he
will become a Chaired Teacher, and be entitled to the protection and
privileges conferred upon Bards according to the privilege and usage of
the Ancient Cymry. And before he obtains a Chair, he is deemed as the
companion of a chief of song.

11\. There are three apportionments of the fees of Bards, in respect of
the degrees of their discipleship and quality. The fee of a probationary
Disciple for his song, on each of the three special festivals, is
twenty-four pence, if he be

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

warranted by the word, or under the hand of his Teacher; and courtesy is
free to him, though it is not lawful for him to seek more than the
customary fee. The fee of a pupil Disciple for his song, if warranted,
is forty pence, that is, three shillings and a groat; and he is not, of
claim and requirement, entitled to more, though he is entitled to
courtesy. The fee of a master Disciple is eighty pence, that is, six
shillings and eight pence, warranted, as he must be, by the word or hand
of his Teacher, and he has no claim to any thing beyond that, except the
reception of courtesy. These fees are received from the lord of the
territory, for the song of memorial and instruction which is sung, and
for the history which is analyzed, or for the pedigrees of descent which
are traced, in pursuance of some lawful cause, such as a claim for land,
the privilege of the nation of the Cymry, and nuptial festivity--each
Disciple being authorized under the hand, or by the word, of his
Teacher, and his Teacher being authorized by the judgment, privilege,
and degree of Chair. And if a fee be received for a song or narrative on
one of the festivals, a fee shall not be received on any of the others
for the same exhibition. A fee is due also to a Bard, according to his
degree, from those to whom he may sing, or exhibit a narrative; and
these gifts shall constitute the travelling provisions of Bards during
their discipleship.

12\. There are three provisions for a Bard, according to the privilege
of his office and art: five free acres; a penny from every plough in the
comot assigned to him by the lord of the territory; and his customary
fees in respect of his office and art.

13\. For three things ought fees to be paid to a Bard, according to his
degree: for the vocal song which he shall sing at the bidding and desire
of him who hears it; for the pedigree and information which he shall
supply in every claim for land, and in every claim for the nobility and
privilege of nation and country; and for any required information which
he shall give under his hand, respecting what occurred formerly, and
respecting what is desired to be

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

learned of the Cymric language, as to the reading, writing, and
arranging of it. These things belong to a Bard in virtue of the claim,
justice, and privilege of his office and art of song.

14\. There are three laws incumbent upon a Bard, who is a Chaired
Teacher, relative to his Disciples. The first is, that he take to
himself only one of each degree at once. The second, that he suffer them
not to take disciples, or to make disciples, for it is not fitting that
a disciple should make another disciple. And the third, that the men of
vocal song associate not with men of instrumental song, by playing the
violin or harp, or that they follow and practise no trade or art
whatsoever, except the art of vocal song and its appurtenances.

15\. Three things which a Teacher ought to guard against in his
Disciples, lest they should become irregular, oppressive to country and
family whither they may go, and where they may be, illiterate as to
their art, and consequently unsociable. The first is, that they should
not commit any immoral deeds, or practise any immoral usages, or
frequent any immoral places; that is, that they should not habituate
themselves to theft, treachery, waylaying, fighting, adultery,
fornication, contentions, quarrels, deceit, oppression, blaspheming,
reproaching, scoffing, lampooning, mocking, mimicking, and drunkenness,
that they should tell no falsehood of any man or thing, or repeat it
after another, that they should compose no immoral or indecent rhymes to
displease man and country, to bring corruption into good qualities, and
to corrupt commendable usages, that they should not go to taverns, and
places where there are illegal plays, and which are the resort of
drunkards, perjurers, thieves, traitors, harlots, all kinds of vagrants,
tramps, all evildoers, and those who are disaffected to the government,
such as those who alloy the king's money, and abuse his writs, that they
should not commit or practise any immoral plays, such as cards and dice,
that they should not play such plays for money, or any goods, profit, or
gain

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

whatsoever, that they should not frequent any secret, illegal places,
that they should not make use of immoral and treasonable charms, that
they should form no intimacy with any evil persons, whether male or
female, and that they should show no discourtesy whatsoever to either
wife or maid, wherever they may be. But if they, the Disciples, should
do these things against the will of their Teachers, and contrary to
their advice and system, they shall forfeit their minstrelsy and fees,
and all the goods attached to their song, until the expiration of three
years, and bear the penalty of a fine and imprisonment, being tried by
the judgment of law, and all being officers over them, and divesting
them of the amount of goods, which may be attached to their song in
their respective circuits. For men of song ought to practise good,
sociable, peaceable, and just usages, to use fair, amiable, and pacific
speeches, to be kind, obedient, and neighbourly, and to be at the
necessity and requirement of king, country, lord, and judge, to direct,
support, and guide them in all things that they, and their officers, may
do. The second duty of the Teacher towards his Disciples is to teach
them the art of vocal song, and all that belongs to it, all the
privileges and usages of the Bards according to the privilege and usage
of the Ancient Cymry, as to their arrangement, quality, and substance,
all the privileges of the nation of the Cymry, and the commendable
usages and sciences, which ought to be remembered and known by the Bards
of the Cymry, and which it appertains to Bards to know and to teach
dogmatically; he ought also to teach them the Cymric tongue, as to the
correctness of its arrangement, to write it correctly, to teach the
system and order of history, and to trace the descent of nobility, and
what belongs to such privileges; he ought also to teach them the order
of recording what is known and learned in respect of the system which
appertains to that branch of Bardic art, that is, the mode of recording
in song, speech, usage, and book; and the Teacher ought to judge what
the Disciples do, whether it be vocal song or history, to see that

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

such be regular, and to guarantee it upon his word, and under his hand.
His third duty is to arrange systematically the strolling minstrelsy of
his Disciples, and he ought to confer with them a month at least before
every holiday and festival, on which it is customary for Bards to hold
their visitation and go on circuit, such as the three principal
festivals, the nuptial feast of a gentleman, who is an innate
freeholder, the feast of the patron saint, and the feast of Chair and
Eisteddvod, which is held at the end of every three years, and in which
gifts from the lord of the territory are presented. Before these
holidays and festivals the Teacher ought to judge the song of his
Disciples, to guarantee, upon his word and under his hand, whatever is
right, whether it be vocal song or history, and to show every one where
he is to go, lest too many of them should go to the same place, and that
no more than one should go to the house of a person whose rental is ten
pounds a year, and two to the house of a freeholder, whose property is
twenty pounds a year, and in proportion to the house of a person whose
rental is higher, unless a different number be invited by the
householder, being a proprietary gentleman. It is not becoming that a
Bard should visit an ignoble person, lest he be corrupted, and hence
trace descent unjustly and differently to what it ought to be. None of
these men of vocal song should depart from the house he came to at
first, whilst the said holiday, or feast, or wake, lasted, at the
invitation of another, without the permission of the master of the
house; and if he should do so, he shall forfeit his right of minstrelsy.
Should he go from house to house, he must be apprehended as a vagrant,
and a lawless tramp, without warranty, without authority, be divested of
his right of minstrelsy, and placed in the situation of the poor. If he
get drunk at the feast, or commit any other act of discourtesy, he shall
forfeit his fee and right of minstrelsy. And if the Teacher guard not in
respect of the particulars here shown, he shall lose his privilege and
Chair until the end of three years, nor will it be lawful for him to
have Disciples after such irregularity.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

16\. For three things ought a Bard to be deprived of his degree and
privilege of song, and be rendered incapable of recovering them as long
as he lives. The first, for divulging a secret which he holds, in
respect of his office and privilege of song. The second, for murder and
waylaying, and for enlisting as a soldier, thus exposing himself to
weapons, so that he cannot visit country and border country at the call
and necessity of country and lord, and in pursuance of a treaty between
country and border country, according to his office and privilege of
song and Bardism, and his protection of federate country in right of a
federal treaty between the kings of the Cymry, and the system which
appertains to it. The third, for pertinaciously telling a falsehood in
his song, so that his word cannot become paramount, and cannot avail
between country and border country, or in any investigation between
country and territory. Should he do these three things, he cannot,
whilst he lives, have privilege, protection, and property in right of
song and Bardism.

17\. From three places in a Bard is blood to be drawn, when he is
degraded, namely: from his forehead; from his breast; and from his
groin; that is, from the receptacles of life and the soul, and their
vicinities. It is drawn by the king of the territory with the point of
the sword before an Eisteddvod of Bards, before the court of country and
lord, before the court of judge and law, and before the country and
people, in three churches on the Sundays which occur at the periods of
the three principal festivals, within the territory where he may be,
and, during life, the man so degraded cannot have privilege, or
protection, or any property whatsoever in right of song and Bardism.

18\. For three things will a Bard lose his privilege, protection,
degree, and all the goods which he possesses in right of song, until the
end of seven years, namely: for theft; adultery; and pugnacity; for a
Bard ought not to be guilty of these things.

19\. For three things will a man of song lose his degree

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

until the end of three years: for adultery; for drunkenness; and for
associating with people of an immoral and bad character.

20\. For three things will a Bard, who is a Chaired Teacher, fall to the
rank of primary discipleship, and what befits his illiterateness and
immorality: first, for a fault in his song, which he cannot, and knows
not how to correct; secondly, for immorality in respect of conduct and
life unbecoming a Bard, who is a teacher; thirdly, where he cannot keep
and maintain his Chair against his fellow competitors.

21\. There are three minstrels, who are permitted to stroll in their
lawful circuits within the territory, in which they may be, once a year,
and three times a year through the whole of Cymru universally. The first
is a Bard, who is a chaired chief of song, the fee due for his song, or
any other performance of his office and art, being eighty pence, where
there has been no previous contract, and where it is not lawful for him
to demand more than six score pence in the way of fees or chattels, or
their value in any form, under the pain of forfeiting his right of
minstrelsy, the goods attached to his song, and whatever he possesses;
and the same shall be given up in behalf of the king of the territory,
where the immoral party shall have committed the wrong. The second is a
pupil Disciple, whose fee is four score pence, if he be probationary; if
disciplinary, then forty pence, and if chief of song, four score pence.
It is not lawful to contract before hand for a greater remuneration
without the warranty of his Teacher; and if he does so, he shall forfeit
his right of minstrelsy. The fee of a chief of song Disciple is four
score pence; and in respect of pre-contract the same law stands for him
as for the other Disciples, for the Disciples ought not to judge their
own works, but their Teacher will judge for them, and there can be no
contract without judging what is bound by the contract made. For a
Chaired Teacher is bound by the judgment of his Chair, protection, and
privilege, according to his degree;

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

and a Disciple of every degree by the judgment of his Teacher. The third
is the Minstrel, who may be a maimed person, such as blind or lame; it
will be lawful for him to perform his minstrelsy and to sing standing,
until he be requested to do otherwise. The permission of the lord of the
territory ought not to be given to other than these to go on circuit,
where they have no chaired degrees.

22\. A Bard has three claims, and he is not entitled to his fee or
degree, where he acts not according to them. The first is, to maintain
in a methodical song the memorial of the commendable deeds of princes,
lords, wise men, innate proprietors, and every worthy servant of the
nation of the Cymry, for their own praise, and in order to shew the
present and future generations what is incumbent upon them in respect of
usage, act, conduct, and aim in all that is praiseworthy, for the
instruction, promotion, and maintenance of these things to the nation of
the Cymry, and for the amusement which arises from the knowledge of
them. The second is, to uphold the Cymric language, and to teach it, as
to its substance, quality, and arrangement, to such as may desire, to
teach the proper writing of it, and to teach what in it refers to
Bardism, vocal song, and their appurtenances. The third is, to maintain
the memorial of genealogies, and nuptial feasts, lest any proprietary
and innate family of the nation of the Cymry should happen to suffer
degeneracy. The man's descent should be traced from the ninth
generation, when it cannot be traced from a proprietary lineage, the
derivation of which is known before memory, the same being a princely
tribe or a baronial tribe. This is, lest the privilege and protection,
which are due to no man whatsoever, except to a proprietary Cymro, or an
innate Cymraes, should befal the degenerate, the alien, the foreigner,
and the unprivileged villain. The woman's descent should be traced on
the father's and mother's side, as to posterity and origin, from innate
Cymry, such being a privilege to her, being an innate Cymraes, which
cannot be to a foreign woman, or to the daughter of an alien; for the
latter does

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

not possess the privilege of a proprietary Cymraes, though an alien or a
foreign woman does not corrupt the lineage and descent of her husband
and children. For these reasons the genealogical descent of the nation
of the Cymry ought to be traced, kept in memory, and preserved
accurately, in order to distinguish between noble and mean descent, and
in respect of native and foreigner, and of alien and baron. On this
account, in right of his office, and the art of his song, a Bard is
entitled to his fee by privilege and usage, and a penny from every
plough; and where money cannot be obtained, he should make a seizure,
and submit it to the judgment of twelve men of country. And because of
this system, in every nuptial feast it is right and proper that the Bard
should be under the privilege of a Chair and Gorsedd; and it appertains
to the lord of the territory to make that arrangement, lest the five
free acres should lack privilege. It was, in order that these
particulars should be conducted rightly and duly, that the system of
compiling the lineages of descent was first arranged.

23\. There are three things required in him who says he is a
Herald-bard. One is, that he should know the genealogies of the princes,
kings, and nobles of the Cymry. The second is, the information of the
primitive Bards. The third is, a properly authorized and exhibited
warranty of his degree and Chair. He who says that he is a Herald-bard
without possessing these requisites must be apprehended as a vagrant,
and put in prison until the lord of the territory gives him deliverance.

24\. There are three things required in him who says that he is a
Primitive Bard. One is, the art of song and its relatives, and what
belongs to it according to the system of the Bards of the Ancient Cymry.
The second is, the information of the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
according to the system into which it is reduced. The third are,
commendable usages and irreproachable conduct. Whoever possesses these
qualifications is entitled to his Chair.

25\. There are three things required in him who says

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

that he is a Post-bard. One is, the art of song, according to the
inventive skill of the later Bards. The second is, to be able to read
Cymraeg, and to write it accurately. The third is, to be able to answer
questions put to him according to the sayings of wise men.

26\. There are three things required in him who says that he is a Bard,
in virtue of being a Chaired Teacher. One is, that which is required in
a Primitive Bard. The second is, that which is required in a
Herald-bard. The third is, that which is required in a Post-bard. If he
is possessed of these qualifications, he is entitled to his degree and
privilege as a Chaired Teacher.

27\. In three places ought a Chair and Eisteddvod of Bards and men of
vocal and instrumental song (a Chair in the case of men of instrumental
song, and an Eisteddvod in the case of Bards) to be held. One is, an
open yard, in the light of the sun, that is, whilst the sun is in the
firmament, and in the sight and knowledge of country and nation,
according to usage and law; and unless the place has had the usage of
three years, it must be submitted to the knowledge and hearing of
country and lord by means of a legal notice under the proclamation of a
year and a day, the notice being given under such a proclamation for
three years. The place will then be institutional, having the privilege
of Bards and Chair. The second are, the courts of the lord of the
territory and his judges, for they are deemed open places, in respect of
the privilege which belongs to them. The third are, the sacred
enclosures, or churches, for they are deemed open, and as being in the
light of day, and in the knowledge and hearing of country and nation,
and lord and law. There can be no warranty or authority, or privilege,
or word, in respect of Chair and Eisteddvod, or anything that is done
relative to vocal song as to privilege and security, but for what is
done in the open places, according to the privilege and usage of country
and law.

28\. In three places is notice to be given under the proclamation of a
year and a day. One is, in every court of

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

lord, and judge, and law. The second is, in every llan <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) and church in the territory. The third is,
in every fair and market in the territory. Then what is rendered under
the protection of the said notice after the proclamation of a year and a
day is privileged, and ought to receive no opposition except what may be
offered before the end of the three years, according to the privileges
and usages of the Ancient Cymry, and the privileges and usages of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain. For it was under the protection of such a
notice that the Ancient Cymry began all privileges and usages, every law
and contract, and every order and system according to the privilege, and
under the protection of country and nation, relative to those who
practise and have practised the arrangements of the nation of the Cymry.
And nothing should ever be done either by country or by lord, by claim
or by counter claim, other than according to, and in virtue of, this
order of the systems of country and nation.

29\. There are three guarantees and authorities of Chair of song and
Eisteddvod of Bards, if it be held in one or other, as may be
convenient, of the open and privileged places, and at its open time in
the light of the sun. One is, the counsel and communion of three men of
song who are Chaired Bards according to the privilege and usage of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, for the testimony of their word, wherever
they may be, will be a warrant for vocal song, and Bardism, and whatever
appertains to the same in respect of privileges and usages. The second
is, the protection and privilege of twelve proprietors, being true men
of country and territory, under lawful proclamation and notice, which
protection is given where there are no three Chaired Bards in Chair, as
if where there are only two or one, or only men of song by claim, who
have not been chaired previously. The third is, the protection of the
lord of the territory, or of three of his judges--nevertheless it is
said that the protection of one territorial judge will avail, if given
under lawful notice and proclamation; and the protection of the lord of
the territory will suffice, if warranted under his hand,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

though he himself may not be present. And unless there be one or other
of these three, an institutional and lawful Chair or Eisteddvod,
according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry, cannot be
held.

30\. There are three open times, on which it is lawful to hold a Chair
and Eisteddvod. One is, the three principal periods of the sun, that is,
the days, their festivals, and their third days, on which the sun enters
the point of the equinox of spring, the point of the long day of summer,
the point of the equinox of autumn, and the point of the short day of
winter. The second, the three principal festivals, namely, Easter,
Whitsunday, and Christmas. The third, the days of court and law, in the
places, and at the time of day, where and when those courts are held,
and in no other place. But where there may be need and occasion for
other times, notice of them must be given under the proclamation of a
year and a day, according to usage and law.

31\. In three ways is a Bard graduated. The first is, after
discipleship, under a Teacher who is a Chaired Bard, until he shall have
known the art of song, and what belongs to it in respect of office and
duty, and until he shall have known the privileges and usages of the
Bards, and the other sciences which appertain to Bard and Bardism, and
become capable of answering for himself where he is examined under the
privilege and protection of his Teacher. Being possessed of these
qualifications, he is entitled to a degree and Chair. The second is, in
virtue of sciences, and from being skilled in the art of vocal song, and
its appurtenances, and the privileges and usages of Bards and Bardism,
and what belongs to them, and from having exhibited methodical and
faultless singing of his own composition, and being able to read Cymraeg
accurately, and to write and arrange it properly, because it is from
those things, and not otherwise, that his sciences can accrue without
the teaching of discipleship. It is required of him to exhibit all these
things before a Chair and Eisteddvod, and where there can be no
objection, he is entitled to a degree and Chair in virtue of his
sciences, and

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

they are called the degree and Chair of faculty, or, as it is otherwise
said, a faculty degree, since it is by the judgment and faculty of Chair
and Eisteddvod, and not by means of discipleship and teacher, that he is
graduated. The third is, where no customary Chair and Eisteddvod can be
obtained, and hence there is an impossibility of receiving the judgment
of song and Bardism, through the want of Bards and Chaired men, by
submitting to the judgment of country and nation under the notice and
proclamation of a year and a day; and where there can be no objection,
or just opposition, then a degree ought to be conferred upon the Bard.
The said notice ought to be issued under the proclamation of a year and
a day until the end of three years, when a degree and Chair should be
confirmed to him. And in this crisis, his sciences and art cannot
receive other than the judgment of country and nation and its wise men,
and they can have no system other than judgment according to reason,
nature, and cogency, because other than this cannot be had from the want
of Bards, nor can system arise from the lack of system other than in
virtue of reason, nature, and cogency, the same being submitted to the
firm judgment and verdict of country and nation, under legal notice and
proclamation until the end of the three years. It was after this manner
that the primary Bards were graduated by the nation of the Cymry, and
the system of Bards and Bardism, and of the privileges and usages which
befit them, before there was either a Bard, or Teacher, or Chair, or
arrangement of any thing whatsoever relative to vocal song and Bards and
Bardism. This degree is called the long-established and firm degree and
chair of country and nation, under the primary privilege and protection
of the country and nation of the Cymry. And this arrangement or system,
after notice under the proclamation of a year and a day, is called the
firm verdict of country and nation, for it is the firmest of all
verdicts and systems. There cannot, in any other way, be a beginning
properly of any arrangement and system in respect of country and nation,
as to law and contract, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

privilege and usage; nor can any thing whatsoever be renewed, when it
has once perished. Therefore, firm above all that is firm is this
verdict and system adjudged to be; and it is lawful for every
proprietor, native, and innate man of the nation of the Cymry, to appeal
to it; whether his claim be just or unjust, the country and nation will
judge it.

32\. There are three customary vocations among the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. One consists of the Bards according to the privilege of Chair
and Gorsedd, which includes all Bards that are graduated in Chair and
Eisteddvod, in respect of the systems which are attached to them. The
second are the Bards according to the privilege and usage of the Bards
of the Isle of Britain, and includes such as are graduated in any way
whatsoever, in respect of the system which is attached to those
particulars. The third are the Bards according to the privilege and
usage of the Ancient Cymry, which include none other than a Primitive
Bard, being a Poet, for he existed before the two other degrees of
Bards, namely, the Herald-bards, and Post-bards, and before they had a
system, or order, or degree, or name; and before the arrival of the
Cymry in the Isle of Britain, they had Primitive Bards, being Poets, who
possessed privileges, usages, and a system. It was in the Isle of
Britain that the two other degrees of Bards were appointed, as well as
their system and requirements, and the privileges which appertain to
them. Therefore, a Poet only, or a special primitive Bard, ought to be
designated a Bard according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient
Cymry, though he may be already a Bard according to the privilege of
Chair and Gorsedd; and also according to the privilege and usage of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain. And although Tydain, the father of Awen,
and Rhuawn the Aged, and Madog, son of Alchnoe, and Cadog the Peasant,
and Erddyled the Luminous, and Arianrod, daughter of Mynwar, were Bards
and Bardesses, according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient
Cymry, it is not right to call them according to the privilege and usage
of the Bards of the Isle \[of Britain\],

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

because they did not originate in those times. Nevertheless, others say,
that Bards according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle
of Britain should be called Bards according to the privilege and usage
of the Ancient Cymry, because it was by the Ancient Cymry that they were
first instituted in the Isle of Britain, though there may be Bards now
who are not so appointed, and yet are Bards according to the privilege
and usage of the Ancient Cymry. Of this kind ought to be deemed the
wise, ingenious, and skilful Poets, who are found whilst a Chair and
Eisteddvod are dormant; for at that time they can exhibit no mark or
obligation, except Awen from God, understanding, and the judgment of
country and nation, similarly to what was the case with the primary
Bards of the nation of the Cymry, before they had any other privilege,
usage, or system.

33\. The three primary Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd; Alawn;
and Gwron; who lived in the time of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great. It
was these three persons that first legally arranged and systematized
Bards and Bardism, and conferred on them the privileges and usages of
Chair and Gorsedd, the protection of country and nation, the connecting
protection of federate country, and the protection of lord and
territory. And the reason why this was done was, in order to preserve
the memorial and record of what was formerly most worthy and commendable
in respect of man and deed, law and usage, and of what was good and
praiseworthy, and in order to teach wisdom and all good sciences, and to
encourage the good and subdue the evil. This was effected by the verdict
of country and nation, and under legal proclamation and notice, Prydain,
son of Aedd the Great, being supreme of jury and supreme of princes, at
the time. Thus did originate the class, called Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.

34\. There are three privileged protections to the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. One is, the protection of country and nation, that is, his five
free acres in right of his art and

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

office of song, and every privilege of viaticum. The second is, that
there shall be no weapon against him, and that he shall not bear a
weapon in the march and onset of war. The third is, that his word shall
be a word superior to all, and that the word of nobody shall be superior
to him. The second protection is the connecting privilege of a federate
country, that is, that he shall be permitted to go into country and
border country, opposed by neither weapon nor force, neither word nor
contradiction, whether the countries which he visits shall be at peace
or war. This is done, that he may be enabled to go, as necessity
requires, to introduce peace and justice between the countries which
bring war and ambuscade one against the other. The third protection is
the protection of his Chair; that is, whoever defers to its protection
cannot, except by judgment before it, become unprotected; and should a
bond appeal to its protection, he shall go free; and all are allowed to
be under its protection, in order to obtain instruction and
understanding in sciences. Of him, who is thus circumstanced, nothing
can be asked in the service of country and lord, other than what he
knows, and what befits him in respect of song and Bardism, for it is in
right of a Bardic disciple and vocal song that he stands. And a Bard may
adopt what course he pleases to impart instruction, sciences, justice,
and peace to country and nation, and to country and border country; and
it was for facilitating these things, that what exists, in respect of
the systems of Bard and Bardism, was appointed.

35\. The three literary Bards, being primitive Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Ancient Cymry, who first derived
their essence and quality from them, namely: Taliesin, the Chief of
Bards; Merddin, son of Morvryn; and Merddin Emrys. That is, they are
called the three literary primitive Bards, because they made written
books and arrangements of the art of song, and what appertains to it.
And it is in virtue of their books, and in virtue of the usage, and
memorial of Chair and Eisteddvod, that the Bardism of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain is to be

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

maintained. Nor is a Chair or degree granted to any one who has no
information derived from the said three literary primitive Bards, and
skill in the books which they made, being the first of their kind.

36\. There are three special duties incumbent upon a Family Bard,
wherever he may be: to teach the reading and writing of the Cymric
language; to teach domestic politeness, and good manners, in respect of
justice and love; and to keep a record of what belongs to the families
in which he is tutor.

37\. There are three things required in a Bard or Poet, who is a
supplicant. First, that he should ask neither goods nor any thing else
whatsoever by means of vocal song, without the permission of the owner.
Secondly, that he should not ask for any thing above the value of six
score pence. Thirdly, that he should not send a supplicatory song, nor
any other song whatsoever, with a man of instrumental song, under the
pain of losing the goods attached to his song until the end of three
years; and every fee and provision, to which he is privileged, shall go
to the lord of the territory.

38\. The three relics of adjuration of the Bards of the Isle of Britain:
the ten commandments; the gospel of John; and the affirmation of a Bard
upon his word and conscience.

39\. There are three things for which a Bard will lose his Chair until
the end of three years. One is, defect of memorial and record in respect
of what ought to be remembered. The second is, bearing a weapon in war.
The third is, divulging his secret. Others say: his Chair cannot be
restored to him during life, if he does these things.

40\. The three monarchs of government: Bardism, to which belong
learning, and every doctrine of literature, morality, and godliness;
judicature, which has to distribute and do judgment and justice where
there is occasion, according to the privileges and usages of country and
nation, and according to right and law, to those who may oppose them;
and the office of a king or lord, on which depends the defence

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of country and nation, and the arrangement of the same, according to the
privilege and usage of country and nation, and if there be occasion,
according to the verdict of country under the notice and proclamation of
forty days. Without these three there can be no firm social abode for
country and nation.

41\. The robe of a Bard, being a Chaired Teacher, is of three colours,
and he may adopt whichever he pleases, provided the robe, of whichever
of the colours it is, be entirely unicoloured, for unicolour is the
symbol of truth, that being unicoloured at all times, and under all
circumstances. One is azure, or sky-blue, signifying peace and
tranquillity, which are similar to the sky of summer weather, during
clear and resplendent heat, without mist, without a cloud. The second is
green, the symbol of learning and the wisdom of sciences, which spring
and grow beautifully like the green herbs of the fields, rejoicing the
owner of the eyes that be-hold them. The third is white, the symbol of
godliness and all purity and innocence, and all right and justice; for
these are of the same colour as the sun and light, glitteringly and
splendidly white. White ought to be worn in the resort of worship; azure
in Chair and Gorsedd; and green, when one becomes a domestic tutor. And
each of these colours should be unicoloured, as significative of truth.
Nor is it lawful for other than a Chaired Bard to wear them, and it is
not right for him to mix them, but should he do so, it must be under the
privilege and dignity of a Disciple: because the robe of a Disciple
consists of the three colours mixed, and should not admit of any other
unicolour whatsoever:--and these are called the Bardic colours.

42\. The three primary offices of a Bard: to maintain peace and
tranquillity; to maintain and improve good usages; and to maintain the
memorial of goodness, sciences, and laudable deeds.

43\. There are three primary laws incumbent upon a Bard in respect of
what he does himself: to keep his word; to keep his secret; and to keep
the peace.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

44\. There are three laws of avoidance incumbent upon a Bard: to avoid
idleness and extreme slothfulness, since he is a man of exertion and
experience; to avoid strife and contention, since he is a man of love
and peace; and to avoid folly, immorality, and uncourteousness, since he
is a man of reason, understanding, and Awen from God.

45\. There are three foundations of knowledge, which a Bard ought to
consider and discuss: reason; nature; and impulse.

46\. There are three instructions required of a Bard: a song according
to reason and moral wisdom; oral tradition according to the memorial and
usage of Gorsedd and worship; and demeanour, according to polite and
good usages and habits.

47\. Three things which a Poet, being a Chaired Bard, ought not to bear:
arms; rudeness; and dispraise; for it is his function to promote peace
and tranquillity, to encourage courtesy, and to praise every thing that
is good.

48\. Three things commendable in a Bard: warm affection; gentle
boldness; and energetic reason.

49\. Three things which cannot be dispensed with in a Bard: awen of
song; the sciences of the art of song; and courteous and good qualities.

50\. The three successful objects of a Bard and Bardism: to polish and
civilize a nation; to render a country socially inhabitable; and to
improve sciences.

51\. Three persons who are exempt from sword and horn: a Bard; a
metallurgist; and a female.

52\. The three arts which are under the protection and law of the nation
of the Cymry: instrumental song; literature, that is, reading and
writing Cymraeg; and medicine.

53\. The three penalties of a country: a wicked lord; a rich upstart;
and an ignorant Bard.

54\. Three things monstrous in a Bard: ignorance; incivility; and
immorality.

55\. Three things which ill become a Bardic vocal song:

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

the memorial of what is impious and monstrous; the abuse of law and
courtesy; and resistance to amusement.

56\. Three things which cannot be contravened: the usage of Chair; the
voice and memorial of Chair; and an ancient song according to the
privilege of Chair.

57\. Three men who cannot, and ought not to be made Bards: the proud;
the indolent; and the false.

58\. Three things indispensable in a Bard: Awen from God; the
instruction of a teacher; and individual exertion.

59\. Three things which a songster, being a Chaired Bard, ought not to
reveal: the secret of the Bards; injurious truth; and the disgrace of
his friend.

60\. The three credibilities of a vocal minstrel: the credibility of
song; the credibility of alphabet; and the credibility of consideration.

61\. The three co-equal secrets of song: awen; learning; and good
principles; and without them there can be no perfect song.

62\. The three mutual feelings of a Bard: to feel mutually with truth
and justice; to feel mutually with his heart and affections; and to feel
mutually with his awen and its capabilities.

63\. Three things which ought to be understood and known in a vocal song
and its appurtenances, and in every other thing whatsoever, namely:
points; divisions; and individualities. And when these are not known,
there can be no arrangement or just art in respect of any thing; whilst
by knowing and understanding them, the nature of the art sought after is
understood, and is reduced to order and method, in such a way as it
would be an easy and loving matter to learn, remember, and practise the
same.

64\. Three things indispensable in every art and science: to learn; to
remember; and to practise them.

65\. Three things, without which there can be no vocal song: knowledge;
awen; and impulse.

66\. The three impulses of song: affection towards the beautiful and
good; the consciousness of duty; and remuneration

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

from the contributions and commendation of good and philosophical men.

67\. The three excellences of art, namely: the facility of learning it;
the amusement of learning it; and the benefit and advantage of learning
it.

68\. Three things that will make the art of song what it should be:
perspicuity of learning and arrangement; the excellency of the art and
its arrangement; and the naturalness of the art and its appurtenances.

69\. The three privileges of a Bard: that his word and saying should be
believed; provisions wherever he goes; and that he should not against
his will be made to administer to the necessity, or to fill the office
of country.

70\. Three things which a Bard ought to examine, and watch over: his
passions; his innate judgment; and every novelty.

71\. Three things which a Teacher, being a poetic Bard, ought to do: to
observe accurately the reason of art; to analyze accurately what is
understood; and to show accurately what is learned.

72\. The three primary laws which ought to be incumbent upon a Bard: to
be fond of teaching; to be liberal of judgment and reason; and to be
moral as to conduct.

73\. Three things which a Bard ought to endeavour to improve: his poetic
genius; his art of song; and the principles of his conduct.

74\. Three things will make a learned Poet: to improve learning and
sciences; to promote the sociable inhabitation of country and nation;
and to make his own name immortal. Others say: and to cause his own name
to be ever-lastingly remembered. Others say: and to immortalize his own
name.

75\. In three things is seen the nature of all arts and sciences,
namely: in their principles; in their counterparts; and in their
effects.

76. <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58) The three advantages of art and
sciences: the gain of what is good in respect of abstinence and living;
deliverance

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

from what is bad in regard to contingency, mind, and deed; and regular
beauty to cheer the mind and sight.

77\. The three columns of a Bard's duty: to teach properly; to sing
properly; and to judge properly.

78\. The three effects of just awen: generosity; gentleness; and joy.

79\. The three friends of just awen: understanding; reflection; and
patience.

80\. Three things that will augment awen: to exercise it properly; to
exercise it frequently; and to exercise it successfully.

81\. Three things which a songster ought not to believe: the satire of
an itinerant minstrel, where a poet poetizes; an unpoetic song by a
commended and authorized poet; and the things which, in the estimation
of wise men, cannot be, as when the ignorant say that the hair which is
cut ought not to be placed where the birds can get it, and such vain
superstitions that never came from the head of a wise and intelligent
person. Of the same character is it, to believe that neither Arthur nor
Owain Glyndwr are dead, for such cannot be true.

82\. For three things shall a poet lose his authority: for teaching
wrongly where he ought to teach correctly; for pertinaciously uttering a
falsehood in his song; and for satyrizing where he ought not.

83\. Three things which a minstrel ought not to conceal: innocuous
truth; judgment upon poetry; and the praise due to good men.

84. <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59) Three things that will make a
minstrel to be be-loved: to teach willingly; to sing lovingly; and to
bear a good name.

85\. The three beautiful qualities in a minstrel: economy; concord; and
integrity.

86\. Three things that are amiable in a minstrel: to be poetically
amusing; to be void of pride; and to be given to praise.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

87\. Three things that will corrupt a minstrel's awen excessive
drunkenness; excessive incontinence; and surliness.

88\. Three things that will improve <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)
a minstrel's awen an ancient song; Bardism; and good and amusing
traditions.

89\. The three principal necessaries of a Bard: systematic sciences;
amiable morality; and the privilege of Gorsedd.

90\. Three beautiful qualities in a Bard: obedience learning; and
affectionate disposition.

91\. The three columns of art: reason; nature; and cogency; and it is
from understanding these things properly that ensues the permanence of
sciences.

92\. The three amiable traits which a Bard ought to possess: to direct
the unskilful; to put an end to contention; and to regulate festal
plays. <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61)

93\. All plays ought to tend to three things: to heal the body; to amuse
the mind; and to be innocent.

94\. The three silent reserves of a Bard: in respect of injurious truth;
in respect of unnecessary judgment; and in respect of every thing
uncertain.

95\. Three things respectable for a minstrel: good family; good friends;
and good conduct.

96\. There are three conditions incumbent upon a poet: to maintain the
language of the Cymry; to keep a record of genealogies and nuptial
festivities; and to preserve an instructive memorial of the privileges
and sciences of the nation of the Cymry.

97\. The three ameliorations of song and Bardism: instruction; exertion;
and rewards.

98\. The three rewards of vocal song and all good sciences: tribute and
gain; praise and honour; and contentment of mind and conscience arising
from the benefit and good which they eventually cause.

99\. The three benefactors of the world: a Bard; a metallurgist; and an
agriculturist; they are so called because

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

every living being will benefit by them and their sciences, whilst no
living thing will be the worse. And they are deemed the chief settlers
of the country.

100\. The three faculty Bards of the Isle of Britain. A family Bard, on
whom depends domestic instruction, according to vocal song, and the
system of domestic sciences and usages; and he is to commit to song the
memorial and record of the same. The second is a reciter, whose function
is to recite in Chair and Gorsedd, by means of song and speech: and to
issue cry and proclamation, as notice to country and nation, in the
territory where he resides. The third is a man of instrumental song, on
whom depends the art of playing the harp and violin; and instrumental
song is under the protection of the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
without any other privileges and usages. Therefore they are called the
three faculty ones of Bards and Bardism.

101\. The three primary recitations of the Bards of the Cymry: vocal
song; parable; and custom.

1 02. There are three functions incumbent upon a Bard, according to the
necessity and requirement of country and nation. One is, to maintain
religious worship. The second is, to conduct an embassy between country
and border country. The third is, to introduce peace and concord where
there is contention.

103\. There are three primary laws incumbent upon a Bard in respect of
his obligation as to the necessity and requirement of country and
nation. One is, to search for what is true. The second is, the secret
imposed upon him in respect of his office and privilege of song. The
third is, to conduct himself morally according to peace and justice.

104\. The three distinguished privileges of a Bard. One, gratuitous
provision, wherever he goes, in right of his office of song. The second
is, that he bear not, and there should not be borne in his presence, a
naked weapon of offence. The third is, that his word should be paramount
over all.

105\. The three provisions of a Bard; his five free acres; his
offerings; and his contribution bag.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

106\. The three protections required of the Bards of the nation of the
Cymry: to protect learning, or the art of knowledge; to protect peace
and tranquillity; and to protect truth and justice. For a Bard exists on
account of these things, and he is no Bard who does not act in their
behalf.

107\. The three cares of the Bards of the Cymry: to cultivate good
sciences; to cultivate peace and tranquillity; and to illustrate truth
and justice.

108\. From three things was Bardism obtained: Awen from God; the
intellect of man; and the tendency of nature.

109\. Three things which a Bard ought to do: to listen carefully to
every thing; to look fully at every thing; and to hold his peace soundly
unless there be sound reason for his speech.

110\. Three things which a Bard ought to practise in his song and in his
conduct: to increase sciences; to soften manners and customs; and to
console the mind.

111\. There are three energetic duties incumbent upon a Bard: to
accumulate learning and sciences; to instruct the ignorant; and to make
peace where there are contention and variance.

112\. The three free pursuits which are lawful for a Bard and all who
may desire them: hunting; tillage; and dairy-work; for it is by means of
these things that all persons obtain their maintenance, and they ought
not to be prohibited.

113\. The three licentiates of court: a Bard; a judge; and a worshipper.

114\. The three supports of government: Bardism; judicature; and labour.

115\. Three men who will constitute a social abode wherever they are: a
Bard; a smith; and a harpist.

116\. From three things ensues the firmness of the sciences of Bardism:
the first is, Awen from God moving consideration and intelligence; the
second, memory and

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

knowledge from the age of ages; the third the song of Tydain, son of
Tudnaw, that is, Tydain, the father of Awen.

117\. The three special learnings which the nation \[of the Cymry\]
obtained. The first was, that of the Gwyddoniaid from the age of ages.
The second was, that of the Bards, after the time of Prydain, the son of
Aedd the Great. The third is, the faith in Christ. Out of these three
arise the sciences of the nation of the Cymry.

118\. The three ministers of the sciences of the Bards of the Cymry:
song; symbol; and letter; of which song is adjudged to be the best,
because there is no occasion for any other art for its preservation than
memory and natural sense, that is, art from God.

119\. The three memorials of the Bards of the Cymry: an ancient song;
institute; and letter.

120\. Of three things ought the Bards of the Cymry to maintain the
memorial and record: the first of the Cymric language; the second, of
the genealogies and descent of the Cymry; the third, of the privileges
and usages of the Bards and nation of the Cymry.

121\. Three things which cannot be contravened: an ancient song of the
primitive Bards; the memorial of the Chair of song; and the verdict of
country and nation. That is, from these three are maintained the
memorial and authority of the privileges, usages, and sciences of the
Bards and nation of the Cymry.

122\. The three columns of claim of the Bards of the Cymry: the song of
the primitive Bards; the memorial and usages of Chair; and the verdict
of three hundred men.

123\. There are three places in which it is proper to hold a Chair of
song: an uncovered elevation; a church; and the court of law.

124\. The three times of Chair and Eisteddvod: the four points of the
sun, that is, the two periods of the equinox, one in the spring, and the
other in the autumn; <span id="fr_62"></span>[\*](#fn_62) the holidays
of worship; and the days of court and law.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

125\. There are three places of common sanctuary, in which no weapon may
be used against any person whatsoever: the Chair of Bards; the courts of
country and judge; and the assembly of worship.

126\. Three persons who are free from bond: a Bard; a scholar; and an
artizan.

127\. The three dignified privileges of a Bard: maintenance wherever he
goes; that there should be no naked weapon where he is; and that his
word should be paramount over all.

128\. The three innate privileges of a Bard: that his meaning be vocal
wherever he may be; that he should keep silence where and when he
pleases, for he is a man of secrecy and mystery; and that he should not,
unless willingly, enter upon the service and office of his country,
except in what relates to his office and art of song and Bardic
sciences.

129\. The three avoidances of a Bard: to avoid bearing arms, for there
ought to be no weapon against him either in country or border country;
to avoid rudeness and immorality, for he is a man subject to the law of
morality and correct conduct; and to avoid indolence, for he is a man of
exertion.

130\. The three privileged ones of country and nation: a Bard; a
scholar; and a metallurgist; that is, their land shall be free to them,
and they are entitled to the privilege which ought to arise therefrom,
that is, social rights.

131\. There are three kinds of Bards. The first is the Primitive Bard,
whose instruction consists of song and oral tradition. The second is the
Herald-bard, whose instruction consists of symbol, and the import of
pictures. The third is the Post-bard, whose instruction consists in
reading and writing Cymraeg, memorial and knowledge being thereby
maintained.

132\. Three things which a Bard ought to do: to learn minutely what he
sees and hears; to keep closely what he learns; and to exhibit
accurately what he knows.

133\. The three teachers of man. The first is, instruction

160

161

derived from circumstance, that is, from seeing and hearing. The second
is, natural understanding giving heed. The third is, the grace of God,
that is, Awen. And from these three comes the import of Bardism.

134\. The three prominent features of Bardism: memorial; instruction;
and peace.

135\. Three things which a Bard ought to confirm, and to make supreme
over every thing that is supreme: truth; peace; and the import of
sciences.

136\. Three kinds of things ought to be praised and remembered: every
thing that is pure and good as to quality and custom; every thing that
is beautiful and amiable in form and nature; and every clever device
from which arises a greater amount of advantage than of disadvantage.

137\. There have been three kinds of Triads from the beginning by the
Bards of the Cymry, namely: the Triads of privilege and usage; the
Triads of worship; and the Triads of song.

138\. The three fundamentalities of government: a just judge; a merciful
lord; and a wise and learned Bard.

And thus end the seven score <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) Triads
of the Bards of the Cymry, which were extracted from the ancient Books
of authority by Richard, son of Iorwerth the Grey-haired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[95:2](bim2005.htm#fr_52) See Vol. i. p. 73,
note.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[95:3](bim2005.htm#fr_53) Thomas Hopkin was the
son of Hopkin Thomas, who wrote the *Greal* and other works, about the
year 1350. John Hopkins, the versifier of the Psalms, was descended from
this family.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[95:4](bim2005.htm#fr_54) <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> Thomas ab Evan, or Bevan, was a good poet and critic, who
flourished between 1660 and 1700.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[95:5](bim2005.htm#fr_55)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Cathlau clan cerddau *caw*.

Hymns and incessant songs of the *band*.--Cynddelw.

</div>

<span id="fn_56"></span>[99:1](bim2005.htm#fr_56) <span id="page_98">p.
98</span> These three Bards are mentioned by Edmund Prys:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Prifardd*, *arwyddfardd* raddfawl,  
A *phosfardd* nid anardd dawl.

*Primitive Bard*, *Herald-bard* of honourable degree,  
And *Post-bard*; the selection is not unhandsome.

</div>

<span id="fn_57"></span>[127:1](bim2005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> "Llan" seems to be synonymous with the Latin
*fanum*, and the Greek τεμενος. Its original meaning was simply an
inclosure, but in later times the term was applied exclusively, in its
simple form, to an area enclosed for public worship, or a church.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[147:\*](bim2005.htm#fr_58) In MS. it is 77, and
the following Triads are numbered accordingly down to 84 inclusive.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[149:\*](bim2005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> In MS. it is 86, and the following Triads
are numbered accordingly to the end.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[151:1](bim2005.htm#fr_60) <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> Al. "augment."

<span id="fn_61"></span>[151:2](bim2005.htm#fr_61) Others say: "and to
regulate games and festivities."

<span id="fn_62"></span>[157:\*](bim2005.htm#fr_62) The other points,
which are the summer and winter solstices, have not been explained.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[159:1](bim2005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> It is evident from this statement that there
are two Triads missing, which accounts, moreover, for the numerical
irregularity which we have noticed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Triads of the Bards of the Isle of Britain](bim2006)
