[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal03)  [Next](bal05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter IV.

Let us return to the intercourse between living men and the spirits. All
that was said above on this subject refers to what takes place in dreams
or visions or to what is effected by furtive, short glimpses of spirits,
as seen by men while awake and in a normal state of mind. All this kind
of intercourse may be described as private and accidental. It is not
regulated by customary rules, though, of course, it is subject to a
certain frame of mind, and it has to conform with a certain type of
belief. It is not public: the whole community does not share in it
collectively, and there is no ceremonial associated with it. But there
are occasions on which the *baloma* visit the village or take part in
certain public functions--occasions on which they are received by

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the community collectively, when they obtain certain attentions,
strictly official and regulated by custom, when they act and play their
role in magical activities.

Thus every year, after the garden crops have been harvested and there is
a marked pause in the gardening, because the new gardens cannot be
seriously tackled yet, the natives have a time of dancing, feasting, and
general rejoicing called *milamala*. During the *milamala* the *baloma*
are present in the village. They return in a body from Tuma to their own
village, where preparations are made to receive them, where special
platforms are erected to accommodate them, and where customary gifts are
offered to them, and whence, after the full moon is over, they are
ceremonially but unceremoniously driven away.

Again, the *baloma* play an important part in magic. Names of ancestral
spirits are recited in the magical spells; in fact, these invocations
are perhaps the most prominent and persistent feature of the magical
spells. Moreover, in some magical performances offerings are made to the
*baloma*. There are traces of the belief that the ancestral spirits have
some share in fostering the ends of the given magical performances;
indeed, those offerings to the *baloma* are the only ceremonial element
(in the narrower sense) in magical performances I was able to
detect. [28](bal09.htm#xref_28)

I wish to add in this place that there is no association between the
*baloma* of a dead man and the relics of his body, such as his skull,
jawbone, arm and leg bones, and hair, which are carried about by the
relatives and used as lime pot, necklace, and lime spatulae
respectively, a connection which exists among some other tribes of New
Guinea. [29](bal09.htm#xref_29)

The facts connected with the *milamala* and with the magical role of
spirits must now be considered in detail.

The annual feast, *milamala*, is a very complex social and
magico-religious phenomenon. It may be called a "harvest festival," as
it is held after the yam crops have been harvested and the food houses
are full. But, remarkably enough, there is no direct, or even indirect,
reference to

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

field activities in the *milamala*. There is nothing in this feast, held
after the old gardens have yielded their results and the new ones are
waiting to be made, which would imply any retrospective consideration of
the past year's gardening or a prospect of the future year's husbandry.
The *milamala* is the dancing period. Dancing usually lasts through the
moon of *milamala* only, but it may be extended for another moon, or
even for two. Such an extension is called *usigula*. No dancing proper
takes place at other times of the year. The *milamala* is opened by
certain ceremonial performances connected with dancing and with the
first beating of the drums. This annual period of feasting and dancing
is, of course, also accompanied by a distinct heightening of sexual
life. Again, there are certain ceremonial visits paid by one village
community to another, and return visits associated with gifts and with
such transactions as buying and selling of dances.

Before proceeding to the proper theme of the present section--the
description of the part played by the *baloma* in the *milamala*--it
seems necessary to give a picture of the general aspect of the festive
period, otherwise the detail about the *baloma* would perhaps appear out
of focus.

The *milamala* comes in immediate succession to the harvesting
activities, which themselves present a distinctly festive character,
though they lack the fundamental element of enjoyment for the
Kiriwinian. The native finds, however, an enormous amount of joy and
amusement in bringing borne the harvest. He loves his garden and takes a
genuine pride in his crops. Before they are finally stacked in the
special storehouses, which are by far the most conspicuous and
picturesque buildings in a village, he takes several opportunities of
displaying them. Thus, when the tubers of *taitu* (a species of
yam)--much the most important crop in that part of the world--are taken
out of the ground, they are properly cleaned of all earth, the hair with
which they are covered is shaved off with a shell, and the tubers are
piled in large conical heaps. Special huts or shelters are constructed
in the garden to protect the *taitu* 

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

from the sun, and under these shelters the tubers are displayed--a large
conical heap in the middle, representing the choice of the yield, and
round it several smaller heaps, in which inferior grades of *taitu* are
stacked, as well as the tubers to be used for seed. Days and weeks are
spent in cleaning the tubers and piling them artistically into heaps, so
that the geometrical form may be perfect and none but the very best
tubers be visible on the surface. The work is done by the owner and his
wife, if he has one, but parties from the village walk about the garden,
paying each other visits and admiring the yams. Comparisons and praises
are the theme of conversation.

The yams may remain thus for a couple of weeks in the garden, after
which time they are carried into the village. These proceedings have a
pronouncedly festive character, the carriers decorating themselves with
leaves, scented herbs, facial paint, though not with the "full dress" of
the dancing time. When the *taitu* is brought into the village the party
shout a litany, one man saying the words and the others responding in
one strident scream. Usually they come in running to the villages; then
the whole party busy themselves arranging the *taitu* into conical heaps
exactly similar to those from which it has just been taken in the
garden. These heaps are made in the large circular space being put up in
front of the yam house, where the tubers will be finally stored.

But before that happens the yams will have to spend another fortnight or
so on the ground, and be counted and admired again. They are covered
with palm leaves as a protection against the sun. Finally, there is
another festive day in the village, when all the heaps are put into the
yam houses. This is done in one day, though the bringing of the yams
into the village covers several days. This description may give some
idea of the considerable heightening of the tempo in village life at the
time of the harvest, especially as the *taitu* is often brought in from
other villages, and the harvest is a time when even distant communities
pay each other visits. [30](bal09.htm#xref_30)

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

When the food is finally in the storehouses there is a pause in native
gardening, and this pause is filled by the *milamala*. The ceremony
which inaugurates the whole festive period is at the same time a
"consecration' of the drums. Previous to this no drums may be beaten
publicly. After the inauguration the drums can be used, and the dancing
begins. The ceremony consists, like the majority of ceremonies in
Kiriwina, of a distribution of food (*sagali*). The food is put in
heaps, and in this particular ceremony it is cooked and the heaps placed
on wooden dishes or in baskets. Then a man comes along, and in a loud
voice calls out a name at each heap. [31](bal09.htm#xref_31) The wife or
other female relative of the man named takes the food and carries it to
his house, where it is eaten. Such a ceremony (called distribution of
*sagali*) does not seem to us much of a feast, especially as the
climax--as we understand the climax of a feast, *i.e.*, the eating--is
never reached communally, but only in the family circle. But the festive
element lies in the preparations, in the collection of the prepared
food, in making it all a common property (for each has to contribute his
share to the general stock, which is to be equally divided among all the
participants), and finally in the public distribution. This distribution
is the opening ceremony of the *milamala*, the men dress in the
afternoon and perform the first dance.

Now life in the village changes distinctly. People do not go to the
gardens any more, nor do they perform any other regular work, such as
fishing or canoe building. In the morning the village is alive with all
the inmates who have not gone to work, and often with visitors from
other villages. But the real festivities begin later in the day. When
the hottest hours of the day are over, at about three to four o'clock in
the afternoon, the men put on their headdresses. These consist of a
great number of white cockatoo feathers, stuck into the thick black
hair, from which they protrude in all directions, like the quills of a
porcupine, forming large white haloes around their heads. A certain
accent of color and finish is given to the whole by a plume of red
feathers

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

that overtops the white sphere. In contrast to the gorgeous variety of
feather headdresses found in many other districts of New Guinea, the
Kiriwinians have only this one type of decoration, which is repeated
invariably by all individuals and in all forms of dance. Nevertheless,
in conjunction with the cassowary tufts tipped with red feathers, and
inserted into belt and armlets, the general appearance of the dancer has
a fantastic charm. In the regular rhythmic movement of the dance, the
dress seems to blend with the dancer, the colors of the red-tipped black
tufts toning well with the brown skin. The white headdress and the brown
figure seem to be transformed into a harmonious and fantastic whole,
somewhat savage, but in no way grotesque, rhythmically moving against
the background to a monotonous and melodious chant and the overbearing
beat of the drums.

In some dances a painted dancing shield is used, in others they hold in
their hands streamers of pandanus leaves. These latter dances, always of
much slower rhythm, are disfigured (to the European taste) by the custom
of men wearing women's grass petticoats. The majority of dances are
circular, the drumbeaters and singers standing in the middle, while the
dancers move round them in a ring.

Ceremonial dances in full ornamentation are never held at night. When
the sun goes down, the men disperse and take off their feathers. The
drums stop for a while--it is the time when the natives have their main
repast of the day. When night has fallen the drums are sounded again,
and the performers, now wearing no ornaments, step into the ring.
Sometimes they sing a genuine dancing song, and sound a proper dancing
beat, and then the people perform a regular dance. But usually,
especially later in the night, the singing ceases, the dancing is given
up, and only the continued beat of the drums rings through the night.
The people, men, women and children, now join and walk round the central
group of drumbeaters in twos and threes, women with small children in
arms or at the breast, old

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

men and women leading their grandchildren by the hand, all walking with
an untiring perseverance one after the other, fascinated by the
rhythmical beat of the drums, pursuing the aimless and endless round of
the ring. From time to time the dancers intone a long drawn "Aa . . . a;
Eee . . . e," with a sharp accent at the end; simultaneously the drums
cease to beat, and the indefatigable carousal seems for a moment to be
freed from its spell, without, however, breaking up or ceasing to move.
Soon, however, the drummers take up their interrupted music no doubt to
the delight of the dancers, but to the despair of the ethnographer, who
sees a lugubriously sleepless night before him. This *karibom*, as it is
called, gives the small children the opportunity to play, hopping about
and across the slowly moving chain of grown-ups; it allows the old
people and the women actively to enjoy, at least, a kind of imitation of
dancing; it is also the proper time for amorous advances among the young
people.

The dancing and the *karibom* are repeated day after day and night after
night. As the moon waxes, the festive character, the frequency and care
with which ornamental dances are held, and their duration, increases;
the dances begin earlier, the *karibom* lasts well-nigh throughout the
night. The whole life in the villages is modified and heightened. Large
parties of young people of both sexes visit neighboring villages.
Presents of food are brought from far away, and on the road people may
be met loaded with bananas, coconuts, bunches of areca nut, and of taro.
Some important ceremonial visits are paid, in which a whole village
calls on another officially, under the leadership of the chief. Such
visits are sometimes connected with momentous transactions, such as the
buying of dances, for these are always monopolies, and have to be bought
at a considerable price. Such a transaction is a bit of native history,
and will be spoken of for years and generations. I was fortunate enough
to assist at one visit connected with such a transaction, which always
consists of several visits, on each of which the visiting party (who are
always the sellers) perform

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the dance officially, the onlookers learning the dance in this way, and
some of them joining in the performance.

All big official visits are celebrated with considerable presents, which
are always given to the guests by the hosts. The latter, in their turn,
will visit their former guests and receive the return gifts.

Towards the end of the *milamala*, visits are received almost daily from
quite distant villages. Such visits in olden days had a very compound
character. They were undoubtedly friendly, and were intended to be so,
but there was always danger lurking behind the official friendliness.
The visiting parties were always armed, and it was on such occasions
that the whole array of "ceremonial" arms came into display. Indeed,
even now the carrying of arms is not entirely suppressed, though at
present they are nothing more than articles of decoration and display,
owing to the white man's influence. All the large wooden sword clubs,
some of which are beautifully carved in heavy hardwood; the carved
walking sticks and short, ornamental spears, all so well known from the
New Guinea collections in the museums, belong to this class of weapon.
They serve equally the purposes of vanity and of business. Vanity,
display of wealth, of valuable, finely ornamented objects, is one of the
ruling passions of the Kiriwinian. To "swagger" with a large wooden
sword, murderous looking, yet nicely carved and painted white and red,
is an essential element of the fun to a Kiriwinian youth in festive
paint, with a white nose sticking out of a completely blackened face, or
one "black eye," or some rather complex curves running all across his
face. In olden days he was often called upon to use such weapons, and
even now may resort to them in the white beat of passion. Either he
fancies a girl, or be is fancied by one, and his advances, unless very
skillfully conducted, arc sure to be resented. Women and the suspicion
of magical practices are the main causes of quarrels and village brawls,
which, in accordance with the general quickening of tribal life at the
*milamala*, were, and are, very much in season at these times.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

Towards the time of full moon, when enthusiasm begins to reach its
high-water mark, the villages are decorated with as large a display of
food as possible. The *taitu* is not taken out of the yam houses, though
it is visible there, through the large interstices of the beams, forming
the wells of the storehouses. Bananas, taro, coconuts, etc., are laid
out in a manner which will The described in detail hereafter. There is
also a display of *vaigu'a*, the native articles of value.

The *milamala* ends on the night of the full moon. The drums do not
cease to be used immediately afterwards, but all dancing proper is
absolutely stopped, except when the *milamala* is prolonged into a
special period of extra dancing, called *usigula*. Usually the
monotonous and insipid *karibom* is performed night after night, for
months after the *milamala*.

I have been through the *milamala* season twice: once in Olivilevi, the
"capital" village of Luba, a district in the southern part of the
island, where the *milamala* takes place a month sooner than in Kiriwina
proper. Here I saw only the last five days of the *milamala*, but in
Omarakana, the main village of Kiriwina, I watched the whole proceedings
from beginning to end. There I saw, among other features, one big visit,
when To'uluwa went with all the men from Omarakana to the village of
Liluta, in connection with the purchase of the *rogaiewo* dance by the
latter community from the former.

Let us now pass to that aspect of the *milamala* which really bears upon
the subject treated in this article, namely, to the part played in the
festivities by the *baloma*, who at this time pay their regular yearly
visit to their native villages.

The *baloma* know when the feast approaches, because it is held always
at the same time of the year, in the first half of the moon, which is
also called *milamala*. This moon is determined--as their calendar in
general--by the position of the stars. And in Kiriwina proper, the full
moon of

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

milamala falls in the second half of August or first half of
September. [32](bal09.htm#xref_32)

When the time approaches, the *baloma*, taking advantage of any spell of
fair wind that may occur, sail from Tuma to their native villages. It is
not quite clear to the natives where the *baloma* live during the
*milamala*. They probably stay in the houses of their *veiola*, that is
their maternal relatives. Possibly they, or some of them, camp on the
beach near their canoes, if the beach is not too far, exactly as a party
of near kinsmen from another village or from another island would do.

At any rate, preparations for them are made in the village. Thus, in
villages belonging to chiefs, special rather high, though small,
platforms, called *tokaikaya*, are erected for the *baloma* of the
*guya'u* (chiefs). The chief is always supposed to be in a physically
higher position than the commoners. Why the platforms for the spirit
*guya'u* are so very high (they measure some 5 to 7 meters in height) I
could not ascertain. [33](bal09.htm#xref_33) Besides these platforms
several other arrangements are made in connection with the display of
valuables and of food, with the professed intention of pleasing the
*baloma*. [34](bal09.htm#xref_34)

The display of valuables is called *ioiova*. The headman of each
village, or the headmen, as there are at times more than one, have
usually a smaller covered platform in the neighborhood of their houses.
This is called *buneiova*, and here the man's valuables, such articles
of wealth as fall under the native name of *vaigu'a*, are displayed.
Large polished axe blades, strings of red shell discs, large arm shells
made of the conus shell, circular pigs' teeth or their imitation, these,
and these only, form the proper *vaigu'a*. They are all placed on the
platform, the strings of *kaboma* (red shell discs) being bung under the
roof of the *buneiova*, so as to be readily accessible to view. When
there are no *buneiova*, I saw temporary roofed platforms erected in the
village, on which the valuables were displayed. This display takes place
during the last three days of the full moon, the articles being put up
in the morning and removed

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

at night. The proper thing, when visiting a village during the *ioiova*,
is to look at the things, even handle them, ask their names (every
individual piece of *vaigu'a* has a proper name), and, of course,
express great admiration.

Besides the exhibition of valuables, there is a great display of food,
and this gives a much more "showy' and festive aspect to the villages.
For this, long scaffoldings of wood, called *lalogua*, are erected,
consisting of vertical stakes, about 2 to 3 meters high, planted in the
ground, with one or two rows of horizontals running along the verticals.
To the horizontals are attached bunches of bananas, taro, yams of
exceptional size, and coconuts. Such structures run round the central
place (*baku*), which is the dancing ground and center of all ceremonial
and festive life in every village. The year I was in Bwoiowa was an
exceptionally poor one, and the *lalogua* did not reach more than 30 to
60 meters, encircling only one third or less of a *baku*. I was told by
several informants, however, that in a good year they might extend not
only all round the central place, but also round the circular street
which runs concentrically with the *baku*, and even outside the village
into the "high road," that is the path leading to another village. The
*lalogua* are supposed to please the *baloma*, who get angry whenever
there is little display of food.

All this is merely a show which must afford the *baloma* a purely
aesthetic pleasure, But they receive also more substantial tokens of
affection, in the form of direct offerings of food. The first repast
which is given to them takes place at the *katukuala*, the opening feast
of the *milamala*, with which the festive period really begins. The
*katukuala* consists of a distribution of cooked food, which takes place
on the *baku*, and for which the food is supplied by all the members of
the village and redistributed among them. [35](bal09.htm#xref_35) This
food is exposed to the spirits by being placed on the *baku*. They
partake of the "spirit substance" of the food exactly in the same way as
they take away to Tuma the *baloma* of the valuables with which men are
adorned at

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

death. From the moment of the *katukuala* (which is connected with the
inauguration of the dancing) the festive period begins for the *baloma*
as well. Their platform is, or ought to be, placed on the *baku*, and
they are stated to admire the dance and enjoy it, though, in fact,
mighty little notice is taken of their presence.

Food is cooked early every day, and exposed in big, fine wooden dishes
(*kaboma*) in each man's house, for the *baloma*. After an hour or so
the food is taken away and is presented to some friend or relative, who
in turn will present the donor with an equivalent dish. The chiefs have
the privilege of giving to the *tokay* (commoners) betel nut and pig,
and of receiving in return fish and fruits. [36](bal09.htm#xref_36) Such
food, offered to the *baloma*, and subsequently given away to a friend,
is called *bubualu'a*. It is usually put on the bedstead in the house,
and the man, laying down the *kaboma*, says: "*Balom' kam bubualua*." It
is a universal feature of all offerings and gifts in Kiriwina that they
are accompanied by an oral declaration.

Silakutuva is the name for a dish of scraped coconut exposed to the
*baloma* (with the words "*Balom' kam silakutuva*"), and then presented
also to some man.

It is characteristic that this *baloma* food is never eaten by the man
who offers it, but always presented after the *baloma* has finished with
it.

Finally, in the afternoon before the departure of the *baloma*, some
food is prepared, and some coconuts, bananas, taro, and yams are put
handy, and the *vaigu'a* (valuables) are placed in a basket. When the
man hears the characteristic beat of the drums, which constitutes the
*ioba*, or chasing away of the spirits, he may put these things outside,
the idea being that the spirit might take away their *baloma* as a
parting present (*taloi*). This custom is called *katubukoni*. The
putting of these things in front of the house (*okaukueda*) is not quite
essential, because the *baloma* can take them out of the house equally
well. This was the explanation given to me when I was looking for the
*baloma* gifts in front of the houses, and saw only in

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

one place (in front of the chief's house) a few stone tomahawks.

As said above, the presence of the *baloma* in the village is not a
matter of great importance in the mind of the native, if compared with
such all-absorbing and fascinating things as dancing and feasting and
sexual licence, which go on with great intensity during the *milamala*.
But their existence is not altogether ignored, nor is their role by any
means purely passive-consisting in the mere admiring of what goes on, or
in the satisfaction of eating the food they receive. The *baloma* show
their presence in many ways. Thus, while they are in the village it is
remarkable bow many coconuts will fall down, not by themselves, but
plucked by the *baloma*. Whilst the *milamala* was on in Omarakana, two
enormous bunches of coconuts fell down quite close to my tent. And it is
a very pleasant feature of this spirit activity that such nuts are
considered public property, so that even I enjoyed a coconut drink, free
of charge, thanks to the *baloma*.

Even the small unripe coconuts that fall down prematurely do it much
more often during the *milamala*. And this is one form in which the
*baloma* show their displeasure, which is invariably caused by scarcity
of food. The *baloma* get hungry (*kasi molu*, their hunger), and they
show it. Thunder, rain, bad weather during the *milamala*, interfering
with the dancing and feasting, is another and more effective form in
which the spirits show their temper. As a matter of fact, during my
stay, the full moon, both in August and September, fell on wet, rainy
and stormy days. And my informants were able to demonstrate to me by
actual experience the connection between scarcity of food and a bad
*milamala*, on the one hand, and the anger of the spirits and bad
weather on the other. The spirits may even go further and cause drought,
and thus spoil the next year's crops. This is the reason why very often
several bad years follow each other, because a bad year and poor crops
make it impossible for the men to arrange a good *milamala*,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

which again angers the *baloma*, who spoil next year's crops, and so on
in a *circulus vitiosus*.

Again, at times, the *baloma* appear to men in dreams during the
*milamala*. Very often people's relatives, especially such as are
recently deceased, come in a dream. They usually ask for food, and their
wish is satisfied by gifts of bubualu'a or silakutuva. At times they
have some message to impart. In the village of Olivilevi, the main
village of Luba, the district south of Kiriwina, the *milamala* (at
which I was present) was very poor, there being hardly any food display
at all. The chief, Vanoi Kiriwina, had a dream. He went to the beach
(about half an hour from the village), and saw a big canoe with spirits,
sailing towards the beach from Tuma. They were angry, and spoke to him:
"What are you doing at Olivilevi? Why don't you give us food to eat, and
coconut water to drink? We send this constant rain for we are angry.
Tomorrow, prepare much food; we will eat it and there will be fine
weather; then you will dance." This dream was quite true. Next day
anybody could see a handful of white sand on the threshold
(*okaukueda*), of Vanoi's *lisiga* (chief's house). How this sand was
connected with the dream, whether it had been brought there by the
spirits or by Vanoi in his dream existence and dream walk, none of these
details was clear to my informants, among whom was Vanoi himself. But it
was certain that the sand was a proof of the anger of the *baloma* and
the reality of the dream. Unfortunately, the prophecy of the fine
weather failed entirely, and there was no dancing that day, as the rain
was pouring. Perhaps the spirits were not quite satisfied with the
amount of food offered that morning!

But the *baloma* are not entirely materialistic. They not only resent
scarcity of food and poor offerings, but they also keep strict watch
over the maintenance of custom, and they punish with their displeasure
any infraction of the traditional customary rules which ought to be
observed during the *milamala*. Thus I was told that the spirits
strongly disapproved of the general laxity and slowness with which

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

the *milamala* was at present observed. Formerly, nobody would work in
the fields or do any kind of labor during the festive period. Everybody
had to be bound on pleasure, dancing and sexual licence, in order to
please the *baloma*. Nowadays, people will go to their gardens and
potter about, or go on preparing wood for house building or canoe
making, and the spirits do not like it. Therefore their anger, which
results in rain and storm, spoils the *milamala*. This was the case at
Olivilevi, and later on at Omarakana. At Omarakana there was still
another cause for their anger, connected with the ethnographer's
presence in that place, and I had to hear several times reproachful
allusions and remarks from the elders and from To'uluwa, the chief,
himself. The fact was that I had bought from various villages some
twenty dancing shields (*kaidebu*); I wanted to see what the *kaidebu*
dances were like. Now, in Omarakana there was only one dance in
progress, the *rogaiewo*, a dance performed with *bisila* (pandanus
streamers). I distributed the *kaidebu* among the *jeunesse dorée* of
Omarakana, and the charm of novelty being too strong (they had not had
sufficient *kaidebu* to dance with properly for the last five years at
least), they at once began to dance the *gumagabu*, a dance performed
with the dancing shields. This was a serious breach of the customary
rules (though I did not know it at the time), for every new form of
dance has to be ceremonially inaugurated. [37](bal09.htm#xref_37) The
omission was very much resented by the *baloma*, hence bad weather,
falling coconuts, etc. This was brought up against me several times.

After the *baloma* have enjoyed their reception for two or four weeks
(the *milamala* has a fixed end, the second day after the full moon, but
it may begin any time between the previous full moon and the new moon),
they have to leave their native village and return to
Tuma. [38](bal09.htm#xref_38) This return is compulsory, and is induced
by the *ioba*, or ceremonial bunting away of the spirits. The second
night after the full moon, about one hour before sunrise, when the
leatherhead (*saka'u*) sings out, and the morning star (*kubuana*)
appears in the heavens, the dancing, which has been going on

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

the whole night, ceases, and the drums intone a peculiar beat, that of
the *ioba*. [39](bal09.htm#xref_39) The spirits know the beat, and they
prepare for their return journey. Such is the power of this beat that if
somebody struck it a couple of nights earlier, all the *baloma* would
leave the village, and go to their home in the nether world. The *ioba*
beat is therefore strictly tabooed whilst spirits are in the village,
and I could not prevail upon the boys in Olivilevi to give me a sample
of this beat during the *milamala*, whereas, at a time when there were
no spirits in the village (a couple of months before the *milamala*), I
was able to obtain quite a performance of the *ioba* in Omarakana.
Whilst the *ioba* beat is sounded on the drums, the *baloma* are
addressed, entreated to go, and bidden farewell:

"*Baloma, O!  
Bukulousi, O!  
Bakalosi ga  
Yuhuhuhu* . . . . . "

"O spirits, go away, we shall not go (we'll remain)." The last sound
seems to be just a kind of scream, to rouse up the sluggish *baloma* and
to spur them to go.

This *ioba*, which takes place as stated above, before sunrise on the
night of *Woulo*, is the main one. It is meant to drive away the strong
spirits, those that can walk. The next day, before noon, there is
another *ioba*, called *pem ioba*, or chasing away the lame. It purports
to rid the village of the spirits of women and children, the weak and
the crippled. It is performed in the same manner, by the same beat and
with the same words.

In both cases the cortège starts at the end of the village farthest from
where the road to Tuma strikes the village grove (*weika*), so that no
part of the village remains "unswept" They go through the village,
stopping for a time on the *baku* (central place) and then they walk up
the place, where the road to Tuma leaves the village. There they finish
the *ioba*, and always end up with a beat of a peculiar form of dance,
the *kasawaga*. [40](bal09.htm#xref_40)

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

This concludes the *milamala*.

This information, as it stands here, was collected and written down
before I had an opportunity of witnessing the *ioba* in Olivilevi. It is
correct in all points, it is complete and detailed. I was even told by
my informants that the drums are beaten by the young boys only, and that
the elder men do not take much part in the *ioba*. Yet, in no instance
perhaps, of my field work, have I had such a striking demonstration of
the necessity of witnessing things myself, as I had when I made the
sacrifice of getting up at three in the morning to see this ceremony. I
was prepared to witness one of the most important and serious moments in
the whole customary cycle of annual events, and I definitely anticipated
the psychological attitude of the natives towards the spirits, their
awe, piety, etc. I thought that such a crisis, associated with a
well-defined belief, would, in one way or another, express itself in
outward form, that there would be a "moment" passing over the village.
When I arrived at the *baku* (central place), half an hour before
sunrise, the drums were still going on and there were still a few of the
dancers sleepily moving round the drummers, not in regular dance, but in
the rhythmic walk of the *karibom*. When the *saka'u* was heard,
everybody went quietly away -the young people in pairs, and there
remained to farewell the *baloma* only five or six urchins with the
drums, myself and my informant. We went to the *kadumalagala valu*--the
point where the path for the next village leaves the settlement, and we
started to chase the *baloma*. A more undignified performance I cannot
imagine, bearing in mind that ancestral spirits were addressed! I kept
at a distance so as not to influence the *ioba*--but there was little to
be influenced or marred by an ethnographer's presence! The boys from six
to twelve years of age sounded the beat, and then the smaller ones began
to address the spirits in the words I had been previously given by my
informants. They spoke with the same characteristic mixture of arrogance
and shyness, with which they used to approach me, begging for tobacco,
or making some facetious remark, in fact, with the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

typical demeanor of boys in the street, who perform some nuisance
sanctioned by custom, like the proceedings on Guy Fawkes' day or similar
occasions. And so they went through the village, and hardly any grown-up
man was to be seen. The only other sign of the *ioba* was some wailing
in a house where a death had recently occurred. I was told it was the
right thing to wail at the *ioba* as the *baloma* of the kindred were
just leaving the village. Next day, the *Pem ioba* was a still more
paltry affair: the boys doing their part with laughter and jokes, and
the old men looking on with smiles, and making fun of the poor lame
spirits, which have to hobble away. Yet there is no doubt that the
*ioba*, as an event, as a critical point in tribal life, is a matter of
importance. It would never on any account be
omitted. [41](bal09.htm#xref_41) As already noted, it would not be
performed except at the proper moment, and the *ioba* drum beat must not
be trifled with. But in its performance it has no traces of sanctity or
even seriousness.

There is one fact in connection with the *ioba* which must be mentioned
in this place, as in a way it may seem to qualify the general statement
made at the beginning of this article, that there is no connection
between the mortuary ceremonies and the lot of the spirit that has
departed. The fact in point is, that the final casting off of mourning
(called "washing of the skin," *iwini wowoula*, literally "he or she
washes her skin") always takes place after a *milamala* on the day
following the *ioba*. The underlying idea would seem to be that the
mourning is still kept during the *milamala*, as the spirit is there to
see it, and as soon as this spirit departs, the "skin is washed." But
strangely enough I never found the natives either volunteering this
explanation or even endorsing it. Of course, when you ask the question,
"Why do you perform washing of the skin just after the *ioba*?" you
receive the invariable answer, "*Tokua bogwa bubunemasi*--\[our old
custom\]." You then have to beat about the bush, and finally ask the
leading question. And to this (as to all leading questions which contain
an untrue or doubtful statement) the natives always answer

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

in the negative, or else they consider your view as a new one, and
throwing some light on the problem, but such consideration and
acquiescence is at once distinguishable from a direct endorsement of a
statement. There was never the slightest difficulty in deciding whether
an opinion obtained was a customary, well-established, orthodox native
view, or whether it was an idea new to the native
mind. [42](bal09.htm#xref_42)

Some general remarks about the natives' attitude towards the *baloma*
during *milamala* may follow this account of details. This attitude is
characterized by the manner in which the natives speak about them, or
behave during the ceremonial performances; it is less tangible than
customary items, and more difficult to describe, but it is a fact, and
as such must be stated.

The *baloma*, during their stay, never frighten the natives, and there
is not the slightest uneasiness felt about them. The small tricks they
play in showing their anger, etc. (see above), are done in broad
daylight and there is nothing at all "uncanny" about them.

At night the natives are not in the least afraid to walk about alone
from village to village, whereas they are distinctly afraid of doing so
for some time after a man's death (see above). Indeed, this is the
period of amorous intrigues, which entail lonely walks, and walks in
couples. The most intense period of *milamala* coincides with full moon,
where the superstitious fear of night is naturally reduced to its
minimum. The whole country is gay with the light of the moon, with the
loud beat of drums, and with the songs which resound all over the place.
By the time a man is out of the radius of one village, he bears the
music from the next. There is nothing of any oppressive atmosphere of
ghosts, of any haunting presence, quite the reverse. The mood of the
natives is gay and rather frivolous, the atmosphere in which they live
pleasant and bright.

Again, it is to be noted that, though there is a certain amount of
communion between the living and the spirits by dreams, etc., the latter
are never supposed to influence in any serious way the course of tribal
affairs. No trace of

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

divination, taking counsel with the spirits, or any other form of
customary communion in matters of any importance, is to be detected.

Apart from the lack of superstitious fear, there are no taboos connected
with the behavior of the living towards the spirits. It can be even
safely asserted that not too much respect is paid to them. There is no
shyness whatever in speaking about the *baloma*, or mentioning the
personal names of such as are presumably present in the village. As
mentioned above, the natives make fun of the lame spirits, and in fact
all kinds of jokes are passed about the *baloma* and their behavior.

Again, except in the cases of people recently dead, there is little
personal feeling about the spirits. There are no provisions for singling
out individual *baloma* and preparing a special reception for them,
excepting perhaps the gifts of food solicited in dreams by individual
*baloma*.

To sum up: the *baloma* return to their native village, like visitors
from another place. They are left to a great extent to themselves.
Valuables and food are displayed to them. Their presence is by no means
a fact constantly in the native's mind, or foremost in his anticipations
of, and views about, the *milamala*. There is not the slightest
scepticism to be discovered in the mind of the most civilized natives as
to the real presence of the *baloma* at the *milamala*. But there is
little emotional reaction with reference to their presence.

So much about the annual visit of the *baloma* during the *milamala*.
The other form in which they influence tribal life is through the part
they take in magic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](bal05)
