[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal00)  [Next](bal02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter I.

Among the natives of Kiriwina, death is the starting point of two series
of events which run almost independently of each other. Death affects
the deceased individual; his soul (*baloma* or *balom*) leaves the body
and goes to another world, there to lead a shadowy existence. His
passing is also a matter of concern to the bereft community. Its members
wail for him, mourn for him, and celebrate an endless series of feasts.
These festivities consist, as a rule, in the distribution of uncooked
food; while less frequently they are actual feasts in which cooked food
is eaten on the spot. They center around the dead man's body, and are
closely connected with the duties of mourning, wailing and sorrowing for
the dead individual. But--and this is the important point for the
present description--these social activities and ceremonies have no
connection with the spirit. They are not performed, either to send a
message of love and regret to the *baloma* (spirit), or to deter him
from returning; they do not influence his welfare, nor do they affect
his relation to the survivors.

It is possible, therefore, to discuss the native beliefs in

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

afterlife without touching the subject of mourning and mortuary
ceremonies. The latter are extremely complex, and, in order to be
properly described, a thorough knowledge of the native social system
would be required. [2](bal09.htm#xref_2) In this article the beliefs
concerning the spirits of the dead and afterlife will be described.

A remarkable thing happens to the spirit immediately after its exodus
from the body. Broadly speaking, it may be described as a kind of
splitting up. In fact, there are two beliefs, which, being obviously
incompatible, yet exist side by side. One of them is, that the *baloma*
(which is the main form of the dead man's spirit) goes "to Tuma, a small
island lying some ten miles to the northwest of the
Trobriands." [3](bal09.htm#xref_3) This island is inhabited by living
man as well, who dwell in one large village, also called Tuma; and it is
often visited by natives from the main island. The other belief affirms
that the spirit leads a short and precarious existence after death near
the village, and about the usual haunts of the dead man, such as his
garden, or the seabeach, or the waterhole. In this form, the spirit is
called *kosi* (sometimes pronounced *kos*). The connection between the
*kosi* and the *Baloma* is not very clear, and the natives do not
trouble to reconcile any inconsistencies with regard to this matter. The
more intelligent informants are able to explain away the
inconsistencies, but such "theological" attempts do not agree with each
other, and there does not seem to be any predominantly orthodox
version. [4](bal09.htm#xref_4) The two beliefs, however, exist side by
side in dogmatic strength; they are known to be true, and they influence
the actions of men and regulate their behavior; thus the people are
genuinely, though not very deeply, frightened of the *kosi*, and some of
the actions observed in mourning, and the disposal of the dead, imply
belief in the spirit's journey to Tuma, with some of its details.

The dead man's body is adorned with all his valuable ornaments, and all
the articles of native wealth he possessed are laid beside it. This is
done in order that be may carry the "essence" or "spirit part" of his
riches to the other

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

world. These proceedings imply the belief in Topileta, the native
Charon, who receives his "fare" from the spirit (see below).

The *kosi*, the ghost of the dead man, may be met on a road near the
village, or be seen in his garden, or beard knocking at the houses of
his friends and relatives, for a few days after death. People are
distinctly afraid of meeting the *kosi*, and are always on the lookout
for him, but they are not in really deep terror of him. The *kosi* seems
always to be in the mood of a frivolous, yet harmless, hobgoblin,
playing small tricks, making himself a nuisance, and frightening people,
as one man might frighten another in the darkness for a practical joke.
He may throw small stones or gravel at anyone passing his haunt of an
evening; or call out his name; or laughter may be heard coming out of
the night. But he will never do any actual harm. Nobody has ever been
hurt, still less killed, by a *kosi*. Nor do the *kosi* ever employ any
of those ghastly, hair-raising methods of frightening people, so well
known from our own ghost stories.

I remember well the first time I heard the *kosi* mentioned. It was a
dark night, and I, in the company of three natives, was returning from a
neighboring village, where a man had died that afternoon and been buried
in our presence. We were marching in Indian file, when suddenly one of
the natives stopped, and they all began to talk, looking around with
evident curiosity and interest, but without a trace of terror. My
interpreter explained that the *kosi* was heard in the yam garden which
we were just crossing. I was struck by the frivolous way in which the
natives treated this gruesome incident, and tried to make out how far
they were serious about the alleged appearance, and in what manner they
reacted to it emotionally. There seemed to be not the slightest doubt
about the reality of the occurrence, and I afterwards learned that
although the *kosi* is quite commonly seen or beard, no one is afraid to
go alone into the darkness of the garden where the *kosi* has just been
heard, nor is anyone in the least under the influence of the

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

heavy, oppressing, almost paralyzing fear so well known to all those who
have experienced or studied the fear of ghosts, as these are conceived
by us in Europe. The natives have absolutely no "ghost stories" to
relate about the *kosi* beyond insignificant pranks, and even little
children do not seem to be afraid of him.

In general, there is a remarkable absence of superstitious fear of
darkness, and no reluctance to go about alone at night. I have sent out
boys, of certainly not more than ten years of age, a good distance alone
at night, to fetch some object left on purpose, and I found that they
were remarkably fearless, and for a small bit of tobacco quite ready to
go. Men and youths will walk alone at night from one village to another,
often a couple of miles, without the chance of meeting anyone. In fact,
as such excursions are usually carried out in connection with some love
adventure, often illicit, the man would avoid meeting anybody by
stepping aside into the bush. I well remember having met on the road in
the dusk solitary women, though only old ones. The road from Omarakana
(and a whole series of other villages lying not far from the eastern
shore) to the beach passes through the *raiboag*, a well-wooded coral
ridge, where the path winds through boulders and rocks, over crevasses
and near caves, at night a very uncanny type of surrounding; but the
natives often go there and back at night, quite alone; of course,
individuals differ, some being more afraid than others, but in general
there is very little of the universally reported native's dread of
darkness among the Kiriwinians. [5](bal09.htm#xref_5)

Nevertheless, when death occurs in a village, there is an enormous
increase of superstitious fear. This fear is not, however, aroused by
the *kosi* but by much less "supernatural' beings, *i.e.*, by invisible
sorceresses called *mulukuausi*. These are actual living women who may
be known and talked with in ordinary life, but who are supposed to
possess the power of making themselves invisible, or of despatching a
"sending" from their bodies, or of traveling vast distances through the
air. In this disembodied form they are extremely virulent, powerful, and
also ubiquitous. [6](bal09.htm#xref_6)

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Anyone who chances to be exposed to them is sure
to be attacked.

They are especially dangerous at sea, and whenever there is a storm, and
a canoe is threatened, the *mulukuausi* are there looking out for prey.
Nobody, there fore, would dream of going on any more distant voyage such
as south to the D'Entrecasteaux group, or east to the Marshall Bennets,
or still further, to Woodlark Island, without knowing the *kaiga'u*, a
powerful magic, designed to ward off and bewilder the *mulukuausi*. Even
when building a sea-going *waga* (canoe) of the large type, called
*masawa*, spells must be uttered to reduce the danger from these
terrible women.

They are also dangerous on land, where they attack people and eat away
tongues, eyes, and lungs (*lopoulo*, translated 'lungs,' also denotes
the "insides' in general). But all these data really belong to the
chapter about sorcery and evil magic, and have only been mentioned here,
where the *mulukuausi* interest us, as especially connected with the
dead. For they are possessed of truly ghoulish instincts. Whenever a man
dies, they simply swarm and feed on his insides. They eat away his
*lopoulo*, his tongue, his eyes, and, in fact, all his body, after which
they become more than ever dangerous to the living. They assemble all
round the house where the dead man lived and try to enter it. In the old
days, when the corpse was exposed in the middle of the village in a
half-covered grave, the *mulukuausi* used to congregate on the trees in
and around the village. [7](bal09.htm#xref_7) When the body is carried
into the grave to be buried, magic is used to ward off the *mulukuausi*.

The *mulukuausi* are intimately connected with the smell of carrion, and
I have heard many natives affirm that at sea, when in danger, they were
distinctly conscious of the smell of *burapuase* (carrion), which was a
sign that the evil women were there.

The *mulukuausi* are objects of real terror. Thus the immediate
neighborhood of the grave is absolutely deserted when night approaches.
I owe my first acquaintance with the *mulukuausi* to an actual
experience. Quite at the beginning

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

of my stay in Kiriwina, I had been watching the wailing round a freshly
made grave. After sunset, all the mourners retired into the village, and
when they tried to beckon me away, I insisted on remaining behind,
thinking that there might be some ceremony which they wanted to perform
in my absence. After I had maintained my vigil for some ten minutes, a
few men returned with my interpreter, who had previously gone to the
village. He explained the matter to me, and was very serious about the
danger from the *mulukuausi*, though, knowing white men and their ways,
he was not so much concerned for me. [8](bal09.htm#xref_8)

Even in and around the village where a death has occurred there is the
greatest fear of the *mulukuausi*, and at night the natives refuse to go
about the village or to enter the surrounding grove and gardens. I have
often questioned natives as to the real danger of walking about alone at
night soon after a man had died, and there was never the slightest doubt
that the only beings to be dreaded were the *mulukuausi*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](bal02)
