[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal05)  [Next](bal07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VI.

All these data bearing upon the relations between the *baloma* and the
living, are, in a way, a digression from the story of the afterlife of
the *baloma* in Tuma, and to this let us now return.

We left the *baloma* settled to his new life in the nether world, more
or less comforted concerning those left behind; having, very likely,
married again and formed new ties and connections. If the man died
young, his *baloma* is also young, but with time he will age, and
finally his life in Tuma will also come to an end. If the man was old at
his death, his *baloma* is old, and after a period his life in Tuma

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

will also cease. [59](bal09.htm#xref_59) In all cases the end of the
life of the *baloma* in Tuma brings with it a very important crisis in
the cycle of his existence. This is the reason why I have avoided the
use of the term death in describing the end of the *baloma*.

I shall give a simple version of these events and discuss the details
subsequently. When the *baloma* has grown old, his teeth fall out, his
skin gets loose and wrinkled; he goes to the beach and bathes in the
salt water; then he throws off his skin just as a snake would do, and
becomes a young child again; really an embryo, a *waiwaia*--a term
applied to children *in utero* and immediately after birth. A *baloma*
woman sees this *waiwaia*; she takes it up, and puts it in a basket or a
plaited and folded coconut leaf (*puatai*). She carries the small being
to Kiriwina, and places it in the womb of some woman, inserting it *per
vaginam*. Then that woman becomes pregnant
(*nasusuma*). [60](bal09.htm#xref_60)

This is the story as I obtained it from the first informant who
mentioned the subject to me. It implies two important psychological
facts: the belief in reincarnation, and the ignorance of the
physiological causes of pregnancy. I shall now discuss both these
subjects in the light of the details obtained on further inquiry.

First of all, everybody in Kiriwina knows, and has not the slightest
doubt about, the following propositions. The real cause of pregnancy is
always a *baloma*, who is inserted into or enters the body of a woman,
and without whose existence a woman could not become pregnant; all
babies are made or come into existence (*ibubulisi*) in Tuma. These
tenets form the main stratum of what can be termed popular or universal
belief. If you question any man, woman, or even an intelligent child,
you will obtain from him or her this information. But any further
details are much less universally known; one obtains a fact here and a
detail there, and some of them contradict the others, and none of them
seems to loom particularly clear in the native mind, though here and
there it is obvious that some of these beliefs influence behavior, and
are connected with some customs.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

First, as to the nature of these "spirit children,"
*waiwaia*." [61](bal09.htm#xref_61) It must be kept in mind that, as is
usual in dogmatic assertions, the natives take very much for granted, do
not trouble to give clear definitions or to imagine details very
concretely and vividly. The most natural assumption--namely, that, of
the "spirit child" being a small undeveloped child, an embryo--is the
most frequently met with. The term *waiwaia*, which means embryo, child
in the womb, and also infant immediately after birth, is also applied to
the non-incarnated spirit children. Again, in a discussion on this
subject, in which several men took part, some asserted that the man,
after his transformation in Tuma, becomes just some sort of "blood,"
*buia'i*. In what manner he could be subsequently transported in such
liquid form was not certain. But the term *buia'i* seems to have a
slightly wider connotation than fluid blood merely, and it may mean
something like flesh in this case.

Another cycle of beliefs and ideas about reincarnation implies a
pronounced association between the sea and the spirit children. Thus I
was told by several informants that after his transformation into a
*waiwaia*, the spirit goes into the sea. The first version obtained
(quoted above) implied that the spirit, after having washed on the
seabeach and become rejuvenated, is taken up immediately by a female
*baloma* and carried to Kiriwina. Other accounts state that the spirit,
after being transformed, goes into the sea and dwells there for a time.
There are several corollaries to this version. Thus in all the coastal
villages on the western shore (where this information was collected)
mature unmarried girls observe certain precautions when bathing. The
spirit children are supposed to be concealed in the *popewo*, the
floating sea scum; also in some stones called *dukupi*. They come along
on large tree trunks (*kaibilabala*), and they may be attached to dead
leaves (*libulibu*) floating on the surface. Thus when at certain times
the wind and tide blow plenty of this stuff towards the shore, the girls
are afraid of bathing in the sea, especially at high tide. Again, if a
married woman wants to conceive, she may hit the *dukupi* 

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

stones in order to induce a concealed *waiwaia* to enter her womb. But
this is not a ceremonial action. [62](bal09.htm#xref_62)

In the inland villages the association between conception and bathing is
also known. To receive the *waiwaia* whilst in the water seems to be the
most usual way of becoming pregnant. Often whilst bathing a woman will
feel that something has touched her, or even hurt her. She will say, "A
fish has bitten me." In fact, it was the *waiwaia* entering or being
inserted into her.

Another rather important connection between the belief of the *waiwaia*
dwelling in the sea and conception is expressed in the only important
ceremony connected with pregnancy. About four to five months after the
first symptoms of pregnancy the woman begins to observe certain taboos,
and at the same time a large and long *dobe* (grass petticoat) is made
(called *saikeulo*), which she will wear after the birth of the child.
This is made by certain female relatives, who also perform magic over
it, in order to benefit the child. On the same day the woman is taken to
the sea, where relatives of the same class as those that made the
*saikeulo* bathe her in the salt water. A *sagali* (ceremonial
distribution of food) follows the proceedings.

The usual explanation of the *u'ula* (reason) for this ceremony is that
it makes the "skin of the woman white," and that it makes the birth of
the baby easier. [63](bal09.htm#xref_63) But in the coastal village of
Kavataria a very definite statement was volunteered, to the effect that
the *kokuwa* ceremony is connected with incarnation of the spirit
children. The view taken by one of my informants was that during the
first stage of pregnancy the *waiwaia* has not really entered the
woman's body, but that there is merely a kind of preparation made for
its reception. Then, during the ceremonial bathing, the spirit child
enters the body of the woman. Whether this volunteered interpretation
was only his opinion or whether it is a universal belief in the coastal
villages, is not known to me, but I am inclined to believe that it does
represent an aspect of the coastal natives' belief. But it must be
emphatically stated that this interpretation

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

was absolutely pooh-poohed by my informants of the inland villages, who
also pointed out the contradiction that this ceremony is performed later
on, during pregnancy, and that the *waiwaia* has been established long
ago in the mother's womb. It is characteristic that any inconsistency is
noted in a view which is not the informant's own standpoint, while
similar contradictions are most blandly overlooked in his own theories.
The natives are, remarkably enough, not a whit more consistent on this
point or intellectually honest than civilized people.

Besides the belief in reincarnation by action of the sea, the view that
the *waiwaia* is inserted by a *baloma* is prevalent. These two ideas
blend in the version that the *baloma* who inserts the *waiwaia* does it
under water. The *baloma* often appears in a dream to the prospective
mother, who will tell her husband: "I dreamed that my mother (or
maternal aunt, or my elder sister or grandmother) inserted a child into
me; my breasts are swelling." As a rule, it is a female *baloma* that
appears in the dream and brings the *waiwaia*, though it may be a man,
but the *baloma* must always be of the *veiola* (maternal kindred) of
the woman. Many know who brought them to their mother. Thus To'uluwa,
the chief of Omarakana, was given to his mother (Bomakata) by
Buguabuaga, one of her *tabula* ("grandfathers"--in this case her
mother's mother's brother). [64](bal09.htm#xref_64) Again, Bwoilagesi,
the woman mentioned on page 162, who goes to Tuma, ha-d her son,
Tukulubakiki, given her by Tomnavabu, her *kadala* (mother's brother).
Tukulubakiki's wife, Kuwo'igu, knows that her mother came to her, and
gave her the baby, a girl now about twelve months old. Such knowledge is
possible only in the cases when the *baloma* actually appears in a dream
to the woman and tells her that he will insert a *waiwaia* into her. Of
course, such annunciations are not absolutely in the program; indeed,
the majority of people do not know who it is to whom they owe their
existence.

There is one extremely important feature of the beliefs about
reincarnation,, and however opinions differ about the

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

other details, this feature is stated and affirmed by all the
informants; namely, that the social division, the clan and subclan of
the individual, is preserved through all his transformations. The
*baloma*, in the nether world, belongs to the same subclan as the man
before death; and the reincarnation moves also strictly within the
boundaries of the subclan. The *waiwaia* is conveyed by a *baloma*
belonging to the same subclan as the woman, as just stated, the carrier
is even as a rule some near *veiola*. And it was considered absolutely
impossible that any exception to this rule could happen, or that an
individual could change his or her subclan in the cycle of
reincarnation. [65](bal09.htm#xref_65)

So much about the belief in reincarnation. Though it is a universal and
popular belief, *i.e.*, though it is known to everybody, it does not
play an important role in social life. The last mentioned detail only
about the persistence of kinship ties throughout the cycle is decidedly
a belief illustrating the strength of the social division, the finality
of belonging to a social group. Conversely, this belief must strengthen
those ties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](bal07)
