[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal07)  [Next](bal09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VIII.

Besides the concrete data about native beliefs which have been given
above, there is another set of facts of no less importance which must be
discussed before the present subject can be considered exhausted. I mean
the general sociological laws that have to be grasped and framed in the
field, in order that the material, which observation brings in a chaotic
and unintelligible form, may be understood by the observer and recorded
in a scientifically useful form. I have found the lack of philosophical
clearness on matters connected with ethnographical and sociological
field work a great setback in my first attempts to observe and describe
native institutions, and I consider it quite essential to state the
difficulties I encountered in my work and the manner in which I tried to
cope with them.

Thus one of the main rules with which I set out on my field work was "to
gather pure facts, to keep the facts and interpretations apart." This
rule is quite correct if under "interpretations" be understood all
hypothetical speculations about origins, etc., and all hasty
generalizations. But there is a form of interpretation of facts without
which no scientific observation can possibly be carried on--I mean the
interpretation which sees in the endless diversity of facts general
laws; which severs the essential from the irrelevant; which classifies
and orders phenomena, and puts them into mutual relationship. Without
such interpretation all scientific work in the field must degenerate
into pure "collectioneering" of data; at its best it may give odds and
ends without inner connection. But it never will be able to lay bare the
sociological structure of a people, or to

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

give an organic account of their beliefs, or to render the picture of
the world from the native perspective. The often fragmentary,
incoherent, non-organic nature of much of the present ethnological
material is due to the cult of "pure fact." As if it were possible to
wrap up in a blanket a certain number of "facts as you find them" and
bring them all back for the home student to generalize upon and to build
up his theoretical constructions upon.

But the fact is that such a proceeding is quite impossible. Even if you
spoil a district of all its material objects, and bring them home
without much bothering about a careful description of their use--a
method which has been carried out systematically in certain non-British
possessions in the Pacific--such a museum collection will have little
scientific value, simply because the ordering, the classifying, and
interpreting should be done in the field with reference to the organic
whole of native social life. What is impossible with the most
"crystallized" phenomena--the material objects--is still less possible
with those which float on the surface of native behavior, or lie in the
depths of the native mind, or are only partially consolidated into
native institutions and ceremonies. In the field one has to face a chaos
of facts, some of which are so small that they seem insignificant;
others loom so large that they are hard to encompass with one synthetic
glance. But in this crude form they are not scientific facts at all;
they are absolutely elusive, and can be fixed only by interpretation, by
seeing them *sub specie aeternitatis*, by grasping what is essential in
them and fixing this. *Only laws and generalizations are scientific
facts*, and field work consists only and exclusively in the
interpretation of the chaotic social reality, in subordinating it to
general rules.

All statistics, every plan of a village or of grounds, every genealogy,
every description of a ceremony--in fact, every ethnological
document--is in itself a generalization, at times quite a difficult one,
because in every case one has first to discover and formulate the rules:
what to count and bow to count; every plan must be drawn to express
certain

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

economic or sociological arrangements; every genealogy has to express
kinship connections between people, and it is only valuable if all the
relevant data about the people arc collected as well. In every ceremony
the accidental has to be sifted from the essential, the minor elements
from the essential features, those that vary with every performance from
those that are customary. All this may appear almost a truism, yet the
unfortunate stress on keeping to "pure fact only" is constantly being
used as the guiding principle in all instructions for field work.

Returning from this digression to the main subject, I want to adduce
some general sociological rules which I had to formulate in order to
deal with certain difficulties and discrepancies in the information, and
in order to do justice to the complexity of facts, at the same time
simplifying them in order to present a clear outline. What will be said
in this place applies to Kiriwina, but not necessarily to any other or
wider area. And, again, only those sociological generalizations will be
discussed here which bear directly on belief, or even, more specially,
on the beliefs described in this article.

The most important general principle concerning belief that I have been
forced to respect and consider in the course of my field studies is
this: Any belief or any item of folklore is not a simple piece of
information to be picked up from any haphazard source, from any chance
informant, and to be laid down as an axiom to be drawn with one single
contour. On the contrary, every belief is reflected in all the minds of
a given society, and it is expressed in many social phenomena. It is
therefore complex, and, in fact, it is present in the social reality in
overwhelming variety, very often puzzling, chaotic and elusive. In other
words, there is a "social dimension" to a belief, and this must be
carefully studied; the belief must be studied as it moves along this
social dimension; it must be examined in the light of diverse types of
minds and of the diverse institutions in which it cart be traced. To
ignore this social dimension, to pass over the variety in which any
given item of folklore is

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

found in a social group, is unscientific. It is equally unscientific to
acknowledge this difficulty and to solve it by simply assuming the
variations as non-essential, because that only is non-essential in
science which cannot be formulated into general laws.

The manner in which ethnological information about beliefs is usually
formulated is somewhat like this: "The natives believe in the existence
of seven souls"; or else, "In this tribe we find that the evil spirit
kills people in the bush," etc. Yet such statements are undoubtedly
false, or at the best incomplete, because no "natives" (in the plural)
have ever any belief or any idea; each one has his own ideas and his own
beliefs. Moreover, the beliefs and ideas exist not only in the conscious
and formulated opinions of the members of a community. They are embodied
in social institutions and expressed by native behavior, from both of
which they must be, so to speak, extricated. At any rate, it appears
clearly that the matter is not as simple as the ethnological usage of
"one-dimensional" accounts would imply. The ethnographer gets hold of an
informant, and from conversation with him is able to formulate the
native's opinion, say, about afterlife. This opinion is written down,
the grammatical subject of the sentence put into the plural, and we
learn about the "natives believing so-and-so." This is what I call a
"one-dimensional" account, as it ignores the social dimensions, along
which belief must be studied, just as it ignores its essential
complexity and multiplicity. [76](bal09.htm#xref_76)

Of course, very often, though by no means always, this multiplicity may
be ignored, and the variations in detail overlooked as unessential, in
view of the uniformity which obtains in all essential and main features
of a belief. But the matter must be studied, and methodical rules
applied to the simplification of the variety, and unification of the
multiplicity of facts. Any haphazard proceeding must, obviously, be
discarded as unscientific. Yet, as far as I am aware, no attempt has
been made by any inquirer in the field, even the most illustrious, to
discover and lay down

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

such methodical rules. The following remarks ought, therefore, to be
treated indulgently, being only an unaided attempt to suggest certain
important connections. They deserve indulgence also on account of being
the result of actual experiences and difficulties encountered in the
field. If, in the account of beliefs given above, there is a certain
lack of uniformity and smoothness; if, further, the observer's own
difficulties are somewhat brought into relief, this must be excused on
the same account. I attempted to show as plainly as possible the "social
dimension" in the domain of belief, not to conceal the difficulties
which result from the variety of native opinions, and also from the
necessity of constantly holding in view both social institutions and
native interpretation, as well as the behavior of the natives; of
checking social fact by psychological data, and vice versa.

Now let us proceed to lay down the rules which allow us to reduce the
multiplicity of the manifestations of a belief to simpler data. Let us
start with the statement made several times, namely, that the crude data
present almost a chaos of diversity and multiplicity. Examples may be
easily found among the material presented in this article, and they will
allow the argument to be clear and concrete. Thus, let us take the
beliefs corresponding to the question, "How do the natives imagine the
return of the *baloma*?" I have actually put this question, adequately
formulated, to a series of informants. The answers were, in the first
place, always fragmentary--a native will just tell you one aspect, very
often an irrelevant one, according to what your question has suggested
in his mind at the moment. Nor would an untrained "civilized man" do
anything else. Besides being fragmentary, which could be partially
remedied by repeating the question and using each informant to fill up
the gaps, the answers were at times hopelessly inadequate and
contradictory. Inadequate because some informants were unable even to
grasp the question, at any rate unable to describe such a complex fact
as their own mental attitude, though others were astonishingly clever,
and almost

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

able to understand what the ethnological inquirer was driving at.

What was I to do? To concoct a kind of "average" opinion? The degree of
arbitrariness seemed much too great. Moreover, it was obvious that the
opinions were only a small part of the information available. All the
people, even those who were unable to state what they thought about the
returning *baloma* and how they felt towards them, none the less behaved
in a certain manner towards those *baloma*, conforming to certain
customary rules and obeying certain canons of emotional reaction.

Thus, in searching for an answer to the above question -or to any other
question of belief and behavior--I was moved to look for the answer in
the corresponding customs. The distinction between private opinion,
information gathered by asking the informants, and public ceremonial
practices, had to be laid down as a first principle. As the reader will
remember, a number of dogmatic tenets have been enumerated above, which
I have found expressed in customary traditional acts. Thus the general
belief that the *baloma* return is embodied in the broad fact of the
*milamala* itself. Again, the display of valuables (*ioiova*), the
erection of special platforms (tokaikaya), the display of food on the
*lalogua*--all this expresses the presence of the *baloma* in the
village, the efforts to please them, to do something for them. The food
presents (*silakutuva* and *bubualu'a*) show an even more intimate
participation in village life by the *baloma*.

The dreams, which often preceded such offerings, are also customary
features, just because they are associated with, and sanctioned by, such
customary offerings. They make the communion between the *baloma* and
the living, in a way, personal, and certainly more distinct. The reader
will be able easily to multiply these examples (connection between
belief in Topileta and his fee, and the valuables laid round the body
before burial; beliefs embodied in the *ioba*, etc.)

Besides the beliefs expressed in the traditional ceremonies,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

there are those embodied in magical formulae.

These formulae are as definitely fixed by tradition as the customs. If
anything, they are more precise as documents than the customs can be,
since they do not allow of any variations. Only small fragments of
magical formulae have been given above, yet even these serve to
exemplify the fact that beliefs can be unmistakably expressed by spells,
in which they are embedded. Any formula accompanied by a rite expresses
certain concrete, detailed, particular beliefs. Thus, when, in one of
the above-named garden rites, the magician puts a tuber on the stone in
order to promote the growth of the crops, and the formula which he
recites comments on this action and describes it, there are certain
beliefs unmistakably documented by it: the belief in the sacredness of
the particular grove (here our information is corroborated by the taboos
surrounding that grove); the belief in the connection between the tuber
put on the sacred stone and the tubers in the garden, etc. There are
other, more general, beliefs embodied and expressed in some of the
above-mentioned formulae. Thus the general belief in the assistance of
ancestral *baloma* is standardized, so to speak, by the spells by which
those *baloma* are invoked, and the accompanying rites in which they
receive their *ula'ula*.

As mentioned above, some magical spells are based upon certain myths,
details of which appear in the formulae. Such myths, and myth in
general, must be put side by side with the magical spells as
traditional, fixed expressions of belief. As an empirical definition of
a myth (again only claiming a validity for the Kiriwinian material) the
following criteria can be accepted: it is a tradition explaining
essential sociological features (*e.g.*, myths about the division in
clans and subclans), referring to persons who performed notable feats,
and whose past existence is implicitly believed in. Traces of such
existence in various memorial spots are still shown: a dog petrified,
some food transformed into stone, a grotto with bones, where the ogre
Dokonikan lived, etc. The reality of mythical persons and

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

mythical occurrences stands in vivid contrast to the unreality of
ordinary fables, many of which are told.

All beliefs embodied in mythological tradition can be assumed to be
almost as invariable as those embodied in magical formulae. In fact, the
mythical tradition is extremely well fixed, and accounts given by
natives of different places in Kiriwina--natives of Luba and natives of
Sinaketa--agreed in all details. Moreover, I obtained an account of
certain myths of the Tudava cycle during a short visit to Woodlark
Island, which lies some sixty miles to the east of the Trobriands but
belongs to the same ethnological group, called by Prof. Seligman the
Northern Massim, which agrees in all essential features with the facts
obtained in Kiriwina.

Summing up all these considerations, we may say that all beliefs as
implied in native customs and tradition must be treated as invariably
fixed items. They are believed and acted upon by all, and, as customary
actions do not allow of any individual varieties, this class of belief
is standardized by its social embodiments. They may be called the dogmas
of native belief, or the social ideas of a community, as opposed to
individual ideas. [77](bal09.htm#xref_77) One important addition has to
be made, however, to complete this statement: only such items of belief
can be considered as "social ideas" as are not only embodied in native
institutions, but are also explicitly formulated by the natives and
acknowledged to exist therein. Thus all the natives will acknowledge the
presence of the *baloma* during the *milamala*, their expulsion at the
*ioba*, etc. And all the competent ones will give unanimous answers in
the interpretation of magical rites, etc. On the other hand, the
observer can never safely venture to read his own interpretations into
the native customs. Thus, for instance, in the above-mentioned fact,
that mourning is always finally discarded immediately after an *ioba*,
there seems to be unmistakably expressed the belief that the person
waits till the *baloma* of the deceased has gone before giving up the
mourning. But the natives do not endorse this interpretation, and
therefore it cannot possibly

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

be considered as a social idea, as a standardized belief. The question
whether this belief was not originally the reason for the practice
belongs to quite a different class of problem, but it is obvious that
the two cases must not be confounded; one, where a belief is formulated
in a society universally, besides being embodied in institutions; the
other, where the belief is ignored, though apparently expressed in an
institution.

This allows us to formulate a definition of a "social idea": It is a
tenet of belief embodied in institutions or traditional texts, and
formulated by the unanimous opinion of all competent informants. The
word "competent" simply excludes small children and hopelessly
unintelligent individuals. Such social ideas can be treated as the
"invariants" of native belief.

Besides the social institutions and traditions, both of which embody and
standardize belief, there is another important factor, which stands in a
somewhat similar relation to belief--I mean the general behavior of the
natives towards the object of a belief. Such behavior has been described
above as illuminating important aspects of native belief about the
*baloma*, the *kosi*, the *mulukuausi*, and as expressing the natives'
emotional attitude towards them. This aspect of the question is beyond
doubt of extreme importance. To describe the ideas of the natives
concerning a ghost or spirit is absolutely insufficient. Such objects of
belief arouse pronounced emotional reactions, and one ought to look, in
the first place, for the objective facts corresponding to these
emotional reactions. The above data concerning this aspect of native
belief, insufficient as they are, show clearly that with more experience
in method a systematic inquiry could be carried out into the emotional
side of belief on lines as strict as ethnological observations admit.

The behavior can be described by putting the natives to certain tests
concerning their fear of ghosts, or their respect for spirits, etc. I
have to admit that, though realizing the importance of the subject, I
did not quite see, whilst in the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

field, the proper manner to deal with this difficult and new subject.
But I now clearly see that, had I been better on the look out for
relevant data in this line, I should have been able to present much more
convincing and objectively valid data. Thus in the problem of fear my
tests were not sufficiently elaborate, and even as they were made, not
sufficiently minutely recorded in my notes. Again, though I will
remember the tone in which I heard them speaking--rather
irreverently--about the *baloma*, I also remember that a few
characteristic expressions struck me at the time, which I ought to have
noted at once, and did not. Again, watching the behavior of the
performers and spectators in a magical ceremony, certain small facts
characterizing the general "tone" of the natives' attitude are to be
found. Such facts I have observed partly, though, I think,
insufficiently (they were only just mentioned in this article when
speaking about the *kamkokola* ceremony, as they really do not bear on
the subject of spirits or afterlife). The fact is, however, that until
this aspect is more generally taken under observation and some
comparative material exists, the full development of the method of
observation is very difficult.

The emotional attitude expressed in behavior, and characterizing a
belief, is not an invariable element: it varies with individuals, and it
has no objective "seat" (such as the beliefs embodied in institutions
have). Nevertheless, it is expressed by objective facts, which can be
almost quantitatively stated, as in measuring the amount of inducement
needed and the length of an expedition on which a native will venture
alone under fear-inspiring conditions. Now, in each society there are
braver and more cowardly individuals, emotional people and callous ones,
etc. But divers types of behavior are characteristic for different
societies, and it seems enough to state the type, since the variations
are well-nigh the same in all societies. Of course, if it be possible to
state the variations, so much the better.

To illustrate the matter concretely, by the simplest example, that of
fear, I have experimented with this element

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

in another district in Papua--in Mailu, on the south coast--and found
that no normal inducement, no offering of even an excessive payment in
tobacco, would prevail upon any native to cover at night and alone any
distance out of sight and earshot of the village. Even here, however,
there were variations, some men and boys being unwilling to run the risk
even at dusk, others being ready to go out at night to some
inconsiderable distance for a payment of a stick of tobacco. In
Kiriwina, as described above, the type of behavior is absolutely
different. But here again some people are much more timorous than
others. Perhaps these variations could be expressed more exactly, but I
am not in the position to do it, and at any rate the type of behavior
characterizes the corresponding beliefs, when compared with the Mailu
type, for instance.

It seems feasible, therefore, as the first approach to exactness, to
treat elements of belief expressed by behavior as types; that is, not to
trouble about the individual variation. In fact, the types of behavior
seem to vary considerably with the society, whereas the individual
differences seem to cover the same range. This does not mean that they
ought to be ignored, but that, in the first approach, they may be
ignored without making the information incorrect through incompleteness.

Let us pass now to the last class of material which must be studied in
order to grasp the beliefs of a certain community--the individual
opinions or interpretations of facts. These cannot be considered as
invariable, nor are they sufficiently described by indicating their
"type." Behavior, referring to the emotional aspect of belief, can be
described by showing its type, because the variations move within
certain well-described limits, the emotional and instinctive nature of
man being as far as one can judge, very uniform, and the individual
variations remaining practically the same in any human society. In the
domain of the purely intellectual aspect of belief, in the ideas and
opinions explaining belief, there is room for the greatest range of
variations. Belief, of course, does not obey the laws of logic, and

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

the contradictions, divergencies, and all the general chaos pertaining
to belief must be acknowledged as a fundamental fact.

One important simplification in this chaos is obtained by referring the
variety of individual opinions to the social structure. In almost every
domain of belief there is a class of men whose social position entitles
them to a special knowledge of the beliefs in question. In a given
community they are generally and officially considered to be the
possessors of the orthodox version, and their opinion is considered the
correct one. Their opinion, moreover, is to a considerable extent based
on a traditional view which they have received from their ancestors.

This state of things is, in Kiriwina, very well exemplified in the
tradition of magic and of the connected myths. Although there is as
little esoteric lore and tradition, and as little taboo and secrecy, as
in any native society which I know from experience or literature,
nevertheless there is complete respect for a man's right to his own
domain. If you ask in any village any question referring to more
detailed magical proceedings in the gardening department, your
interlocutor will immediately refer you to the *towosi* (garden
magician). And then on further inquiry you learn, as often as not, that
your first informant knew all the facts absolutely well and was perhaps
able to explain them better than the specialist himself. None the less,
native etiquette, and the feeling of what is right, compelled him to
refer you to the "proper person." If this proper person be present, you
will not be able to induce anyone else to talk on the matter, even if
you announce that you do not want to hear the specialist's opinion. And,
again, I have several times obtained information from one of my usual
instructors and subsequently the "specialist" has told me that it is not
correct. When, later, I referred this correction to my original
informant, he would, as a rule, withdraw his opinion saying, "Well, if
he says so, it must be correct." Special caution ought of course to be
exercised when the specialist is naturally inclined to lie, as is often
the case with the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

sorcerers (those who possess the power to kill people by magic).

Again, if the magic and corresponding tradition belong to another
village, the same discretion and reserve is observed. You are advised to
go to that village for information. When pressed, your native friends
may perhaps tell you what they know about the matter, but they will
always wind up the report by saying: "You must go there and gather the
right knowledge at the right source." In the case of magic formulae,
this is absolutely necessary. Thus I had to go to Laba'i in order to get
the *kalala*-fishing magic, and to Kuaibola to record the shark-fishing
charms. I obtained the canoe-building magic from men of Lu'ebila, and I
went to Buaitalu to get the tradition and spell of the *toginivaiu*, the
most powerful form of sorcery, though I was unable to procure the
*silami* or evil spell and was only partially successful in getting the
*vivisa* or healing spell. Even if the knowledge to be obtained is not
spells, but mere traditional lore, one is often sorely disappointed.
Thus, for instance, the proper seat of the Tudava myth is Laba'i. Before
I went there I had gathered all that my informants in Omarakana could
tell me and expected to reap an enormous harvest of additional
information, but as a matter of fact, it was I who impressed the natives
of Laba'i, by quoting details which were hailed by them as quite true,
but which had escaped their memory. In fact, no one there was half as
good on the Tudava cyclus as my friend Bagido'u of Omarakana. Again, the
village of Ialaka is the historic spot where once a tree was erected up
to heaven. And this was the origin of thunder. If you ask about the
nature of thunder, everybody will tell you straight off: "Go to Ialaka
and ask the *tolivalu* (the headman)," although practically everybody is
able to tell you all about the origin and nature of thunder, and your
pilgrimage to Ialaka, if you undertake it, will prove a great
disappointment.

Nevertheless, these facts show that the idea of specialization in
traditional lore is strongly developed; that in many items of belief,
and in many opinions about belief, the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

natives recognize a class of specialist. Some of these are associated
with a certain locality; in such cases it is always the headman of the
village who represents the orthodox doctrine, or else the most
intelligent of his *veiola* (maternal kinsmen). In other cases the
specialization goes within the village community. In this place we are
not concerned with this specialization, in so far as it determines the
right to obtain magical formulae, or the correct reciting of certain
myths, but only in so far as it refers to the interpretation of all
beliefs connected with such formulae or myths. Because, besides the
traditional text, the "specialists" are always in possession of the
traditional interpretations or commentaries. It is characteristic that,
when talking with such specialists, you always get clearer answers and
opinions. You clearly see that the man does not speculate or give you
his own views, but that he is fully aware of being asked about the
orthodox view, about the traditional interpretation. Thus when I asked
certain informants about the meaning of the "*si buala baloma*," the
miniature hut made of dry twigs during one of the garden rites (see
above, V), they tried to give me a kind of explanation, which I saw at
once, was their own private view of the matter. When I asked Bagido'u,
the *towosi* (garden magician) himself, he simply waved away all
explanations and said, "This is merely an old traditional thing, no one
knows its meaning."

Thus in the diversity of opinions there is one important line of
demarcation to be drawn: that between the opinions of competent
specialists and the views of the profane public. The opinions of the
specialists have a traditional basis: they are clearly and categorically
formulated and, in the eyes of the native, they represent the orthodox
version of the belief. And, since on each subject there is a small group
of people, in the last instance one man, to be considered, it is easy to
see that the most important interpretation of belief does not present
any great difficulties in handling.

But in the first place, this most important interpretation does not
represent all the views, it cannot be taken even

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

as typical, at times. Thus for instance, in sorcery (evil, homicidal
magic), it is of absolute importance to distinguish between the views of
the specialist and those of the outsider, because both represent equally
important and naturally different aspects of the same problem. Again,
there are certain classes of belief where one would in vain look for
departmental specialists. Thus about the nature of the *baloma* and
their relation to the *kosi*, there were some statements more
trustworthy and detailed than others, but there was no one who would be
a naturally and generally acknowledged authority.

In all matters where there are no specialists, and again in matters in
which the opinion of non-specialists is of intrinsic interest, it is
necessary to have certain rules for fixing the fluctuating opinion of
the community. Here I see only one clear and important distinction:
namely, between what can be called public opinion, or more
correctly--since public opinion has a specific meaning--the general
opinion of a given community on the one hand, and the private
speculations of individuals on the other. This distinction is, as far as
I can see, sufficient.

If you examine the "broad masses" of the community, the women and
children included (a proceeding which is easy enough when you speak the
language well and have lived for months in the same village, but which
otherwise is impossible), you will find that, whenever they grasp your
question, their answers will not vary: they will never venture into
private speculations. I have had most valuable information on several
points from boys and even girls of seven to twelve years of age. Very
often, on my long afternoon walks, I was accompanied by the children of
the village and then, without the constraint of being obliged to sit and
be attentive, they would talk and explain things with a surprising
lucidity and knowledge of tribal matters. In fact, I was often able to
unravel sociological difficulties with the help of children, which old
men could not explain to me. The mental volubility, lack of the
slightest suspicion and sophistication, and, possibly a certain amount
of training

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

received in the Mission School, made of them incomparable informants in
many matters. As to the danger of their views; being modified by
missionary teaching, well, I can only say that I was amazed at the
absolute impermeability of the native mind to those things. The very
small amount of our creed and ideas they acquire remains in a watertight
compartment of their mind. Thus the general tribal opinion in which
practically no variety is to be found can be ascertained even from the
humblest informants.

When dealing with intelligent grown-up informants, things are quite
different. And as they are the class with whom an ethnographer has to do
most of his work, the variety of their opinion comes very much to the
fore, unless the inquirer is satisfied in taking one version of each
subject and sticking to it through thick and thin. Such opinions of
intelligent, mentally enterprising informants, as far as I can see,
cannot be reduced or simplified according to any principles: they are
important documents, illustrating the mental faculties of a community.
Further on, they very often represent certain typical ways of conceiving
a belief, or of: solving a difficulty. But it must be clearly borne in
mind that such opinions are sociologically quite different from what we
called above dogmas or social ideas. They are also different from
generally accepted or popular ideas. They form a class of interpretation
of belief, which closely corresponds to our free speculation on belief.
They are characterized by their variety, by not being expressed in
customary or traditional formulae, by being neither the orthodox expert
opinion, nor the popular view.

These theoretical considerations about the sociology of belief may be
summarized in the following table, in which the various groups of belief
are classified in a manner which seems to express their natural
affinities and distinctions, as far, at least, as the Kiriwinian
material requires:--

I. *Social ideas or dogmas*.--Beliefs embodied in institutions, in
customs, in magico-religious formulae and rites and in myths.
Essentially connected with and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

characterized by emotional elements, expressed in behavior.

2\. *Theology or interpretation of the dogmas*.--

(*a*) Orthodox explanations, consisting of opinions of specialists.

(*b*) Popular, general views, formulated by the majority of the members
of a community.

(*c*) Individual speculations.

Examples for each group can be easily found in this article, where the
degree and quality of social depth, the "social dimension" of every item
of belief, has been given, at least approximately. It must be remembered
that this theoretical scheme, though dimly recognized at the beginning,
has been only imperfectly applied, because the technique of its
applicability in field work had to be elaborated bit by bit, through
actual experience. It is, therefore, with reference to my Kiriwinian
material, rather a conclusion *ex post facto* than a basis of method
adopted at the outset and systematically carried out throughout the
work.

Examples of dogma or social ideas are to be found in all the beliefs,
which have been described as embodied in the customs of the *milamala*
and in the magical rites and formulae. Also in corresponding myths, as
well as in the mythological tradition, referring to afterlife. The
emotional aspect has been treated, as far as my knowledge allows, in
describing the behavior of the natives towards magical performances
during the *milamala*, their behavior towards the *baloma*, the *kosi*,
and the *mulukuausi*.

Of the theological views, several orthodox interpretations have been
given in the explanations by a magician of his magic. As popular views
(barring such as are dogmas at the same time) I may note the belief
concerning spiritism: everybody, even the children, knew well that
certain people went to Tuma and brought back songs and messages to the
living. This, however, was in no way a dogma, since it was even open to
scepticism on the part of some exceptionally

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

sophisticated informants, and since it was connected with no customary
institution.

The speculations about the nature of the *baloma* are the best example
illustrating the purely individual class of theology, consisting of
private opinions.

I wish to remind the reader that local differences, that is the
variation of belief according to district, have not been considered at
all in this theoretical section. Such differences belong to the domain
of anthropogeography rather than sociology. Moreover, they affect only
to a very small extent the data presented in this paper, as practically
all of my material has been collected within a small district, where
local variations hardly exist at all. Only as regards the reincarnation,
local differences may account for some divergencies in belief (see
above, VI).

From such district variations the above-mentioned localized
specialization in certain departments (thunder in Ialaka, shark in
Kuaibuola, etc.) must be carefully distinguished, because this is a
factor connected with the structure of society and not merely an example
of the broad anthropological fact, that everything changes as we move
over the surface of the earth.

All these theoretical remarks, it is plain, are the outcome of
experience in the field, and it was considered well to print them here
in connection with the data already given, because they are also
ethnological facts, only of a much more general nature. This, however,
makes them, if anything, more important than the details of custom and
belief. Only the two aspects, the general law and the detailed
documentation, make information really complete, as far as it goes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Endnotes](bal09)
