[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs06)  [Next](lrs08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

CHAPTER V:  
THE PALMERIN ROMANCES

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="497">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Let <em>Palmerin of England</em> be preserved as a singular relic of antiquity.</p>
<p>CERVANTES</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

IT would seem to have been a foible with the early critics of Spanish
romance to seek to discover a Portuguese origin for practically all of
its manifestations. They appear to have argued from the analogy of
*Amadis* that all romantic effort hailed from the Lusitanian kingdom,
yet they are never weary of descanting upon the Provençal and Moorish
influences which moulded Spanish romance! It is precisely as if one said
: "Yes, the Arthurian story displays every sign of Norman French
influence, but all the same, it was first cast into literary form in
Wales. England? Oh, England merely accepted it, that's all."

The *Palmerin* series ran almost side by side with *Amadis* in a
chronological sense, and tradition ascribed its first book to an
anonymous lady of Augustobriga. But there is reason to believe, from a
passage in *Primaleón,* one of its sections, that it was the work of
Francisco Vasquez de Ciudad Rodrigo. No early Portuguese version is
known, and the Spanish edition of the first romance of the series,
*Palmerin de Oliva,* printed at Seville in 1525, was certainly not the
earliest impression of that work. The English translation, by Anthony
Munday, was published in black letter in 1588.

Palmerin de Oliva

No sooner did *Palmerin de Oliva* appear than it scored a success only
second to that of *Amadis,* its resemblance to which can scarcely be
called fortuitous, and, as in the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

case of that romance, translations and continuations were multiplied
with surprising rapidity.

The commencement of *Palmerin* de *Oliva* carries us once more to the
enchanted shores of the Golden Horn. Reymicio, the Emperor of
Constantinople, had a daughter named Griana, whom he had resolved to
give in marriage to Tarisius, son of the King of Hungary, and nephew to
the Empress. But Griana had given her heart to Florendos of Macedon, to
whom she had a son. Dreading the wrath of her father, she permitted an
attendant to carry the infant to a deserted spot, where it was found by
a peasant, who took it to his cottage, and brought it up as his own son,
calling the child Palmerin de Oliva because he had been found on a hill
which was covered with a luxuriant growth of palm and olive trees.

When the boy grew up he accepted his humble lot with equanimity. But on
learning that he was not the son of a peasant he longed for a life of
martial excitement. Adventure soon afforded him a taste of its dazzling
possibilities. While traversing a gloomy forest in search of game he
encountered a merchant beset by a ferocious lion. He slew the beast, and
learned that the traveller was returning to his own country from
Constantinople. Attaching himself to the man of commerce, Palmerin
accompanied him to the city of Hermide, where his grateful companion
furnished him with arms and a horse. Thus accoutred for the life
chivalric, he betook himself to the Court of Macedon, where he received
the honour of knighthood from Florendes, the son of the king of that
country, and his own father.

A quest soon presented itself to him. Primaleón, King of Macedon, had
long been a sufferer from a grievous sickness. His physicians assured
him that could he

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

obtain water from a certain fountain his malady would disappear. But the
spring in question was guarded by an immense serpent of such ferocity
that to approach its lair meant certain death. Knight after knight had
essayed the adventure, only to be crushed in the monster's venomous
folds, so that the life-giving waters the ailing King so sorely required
continued to be withheld from him. This condition of affairs seemed to
Palmerin to present him with an opportunity for distinguishing himself,
and without realizing the strenuous nature of the task before him he
leapt into the saddle and cantered off in the direction of the
serpent-guarded fountain.

The Faery Damsels

Very conscious of the honour of knighthood which but so lately had been
conferred upon him, and inordinately proud of the gilded spurs which
glittered on his mailed heels, Palmerin was not a little pleased that he
had succeeded in attracting the attention of a bevy of young and
beautiful ladies, who stood where field and forest met, watching his
rather haughty progress with laughing eyes. Had he been less occupied
with himself and his horse, which he forced to curvet and caracole in
the most outrageous fashion, he would have seen that the damsels before
whom he wished to cut such a fine figure were of a beauty far too
ethereal to be human, for the ladies who watched him with such amusement
were princesses of the race of Faery, and had waylaid the young knight
with the intention of giving him such aid as fairies have in their
power.

Palmerin greeted them with all the distinction of which he was capable.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

"God save you, fair damsels," he said, bowing almost to his horse's
mane. "Can you tell me if I am near the serpent-guarded fountain?"

"Fair sir," replied one of the sylphs, "you are within a league of it.
But let us entreat you to turn back from such a neighbourhood as this.
Many famous knights have we seen pass this way to do battle with the
monster who guards its waters, but none have we seen return."

"It is not my custom to turn my back upon an enterprise," said Palmerin
loftily. " Did I understand you to say the fountain lies within a league
of this place?"

"Within a short league, Sir Knight," replied the fairy. Then, turning to
her companions, she said "Sisters, this would seem to be the youth we
have awaited so long. He appears bold and resolute. Shall we confer upon
him the gift?"

Her companions having given their assent to this proposal, the fairy
then enlightened Palmerin regarding the true character of herself and
her attendant maidens, and assured him that wherever he went, or
whatever adventure he undertook, neither monster nor magician would have
the power to cast enchantment upon him. Then, directing him more
particularly to the lair of the serpent, they disappeared in the
recesses of the forest.

Riding on, he speedily came within view of the fountain but had scarcely
beheld its silver waters bubbling from a green hill-side when a horrible
hissing warned him of the proximity of its loathly guardian. All
unafraid, however, he spurred his terrified horse forward, A blast of
fire, belched from the monster's mouth, surged over him, but he bent low
in the saddle and avoided it. Then, dashing at the bristling head,
poised on a neck thick as a pillar, and armoured with dazzling scales,
he

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

struck fiercely at it with his falchion. The serpent tried to envelop
horse and man in its folds, but ere it could bring its grisly coils to
bear upon them Palmerin had smitten off its head.

Returning to Macedon, the young hero was at once overwhelmed by the
applications of importunate monarchs that he should assist them in one
enterprise or another. All of these Palmerin achieved with such
consummate address that his fame spread into all parts of Europe, and we
find him as far afield as Belgium, where he delivered the Emperor of
Germany from certain traitor knights who besieged him in the town of
Ghent. It was during this adventure that he met and became enamoured of
the Emperor's daughter, the beauteous Polinarda, who had on one occasion
appeared to him in a dream. But the young paladin felt that if he were
to render himself worthy of such a peerless lady he must subdue many
knights in her name, and undertake adventures even more onerous than
those through which he had already come scathless. Learning, therefore,
of a great tournament in the land of France, he journeyed thither, and
bore off the prize.

Returning to Germany, Palmerin found the Emperor engaged in a war with
the King of England, at the instance of the King of Norway, who had
requested his assistance against the British monarch. This partisanship
did not, however, appeal to Trineus, the Emperor's son, who, enamoured
of the princess Agriola, daughter of the English king, privately
departed with Palmerin, his object being to aid the father of his
lady-love. After undergoing many adventures, the companions succeeded in
carrying off the English princess, but while voyaging homeward were
attacked by a furious

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

tempest and were driven on the shores of the Morea. When the elements
subsided Palmerin landed on neighbouring island of Calpa, to engage in
the sport of hawking, and during his absence the vessel in which he had
left his friends was seized by Turkish pirates who carried Agriola as a
present to the Grand Turk. Trineus was even less happily situated, for
being marooned upon an island, which we must surely regard as that of
Circe, he was immediately transformed into a dog. To add to this
indignity, his transformation did not take the shape of any of the more
noble varieties the canine race, but that of a tiny lap-dog, such as are
found in ladies' boudoirs.

In the meantime Palmerin, all unconscious of the fate of his friends,
was discovered in the island of Calpa by Archidiana, daughter of the
Soldan of Babylon, who at once pressed him into her service, refusing to
allow him to depart. Archidiana had from the first conceived violent
passion for the handsome young adventurer whose embarrassment was
heightened by the knowledge that her cousin, Ardemira, had likewise
fallen in love with him. The knight, however, stoutly repelled the fair
advances, and Ardemira took her repulse so much to heart that she burst
a blood-vessel and expired, shortly after the party had arrived at the
Babylonian Court. Hearing of her demise, Amaran, son of the King of
Phrygia, to whom she had been affianced, hastened to Babylon, and
precipitately accused Archidiana of he death, offering to make good his
assertion by an appeal to arms. Palmerin, as in duty bound, espoused the
princess's quarrel, slew Amaran in single combat, and by doing so won
the good graces of the Soldan, whom he assisted in the war with Phrygia
which followed.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

The Soldan, elated by his military successes, resolved to extend his
empire, and with this object in view fitted out a great expedition
against Constantinople, which Palmerin was forced to accompany. But
during a tempest which the Babylonian fleet encountered he commanded the
seamen of his own vessel to steer for the German coast. On reaching it
he made his way to the capital, and made himself known in secret to
Polinarda, with whom he spent some time.

But his heart misgave him regarding the fate of his friend Trineus, and
he resolved to set out in quest of that unhappy prince. Journeying
across Europe, he arrived at the city of Buda, where he learned that
Florendos, Prince of Macedon, had recently slain Tarisius, who, it will
be remembered, was his rival for the hand of the Princess Griana, and
whom she had been forced to marry by her tyrannous father, the Emperor
of Constantinople. Florendos had, however, been taken captive by the
kinsmen of Tarisius, and had been sent to Constantinople, where he was
condemned to be burnt at the stake, along with Griana, who was believed
to be his accomplice. On hearing of the impending fate of those who,
unknown to him, were his parents, Palmerin at once repaired to
Constantinople, where he maintained their innocence, defeated their
accusers, the nephews of Tarisius, in a combat *à* *outrance,* and
succeeded in saving them from the terrible fate which had awaited them.
While he lay in bed recovering from his wounds he was visited by the
grateful Griana, who, from a mark upon his face and the account of his
exposure as an infant, knew that he must be her son. On hearing her
story the Emperor joyfully received Palmerin and acknowledged him as his
successor.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

The Quest for Trineus

But his new accession to power did not render Palmerin unmindful of his
vow to search for his lost friend Trineus. Sailing over the
Mediterranean in quest him, he fell in with an overwhelming force of
Turks and was taken prisoner. Brought to the palace of the Grand Turk,
he succeeded in liberating the princess Agriola from the power of that
tyrant. Effecting his own escape, he came to the palace of a princess to
whom Trineus in his shape of a lap-dog had bee presented by those who
had found him. This lady had contracted a severe inflammation in the
nose (an romantic detail!), and requested Palmerin to accompany her to
Mussabelin, a Persian magician, whom she believed to be able to remove
the distressing complaint. But the sage informed her that only by means
of the flowers of a tree which grew near the Castle of the Ten Steps
could she be cured.

Now the castle of which the magician spoke was guarded by enchantment.
But that dread power was harmless to Palmerin, ever since the fairy
sisters had provided him with an antidote against it. Making his way to
the magic castle, he secured the flowers of the healing tree, and also
took captive an enchanted bird, which was destined to announce the hour
of his death by an unearthly shriek. He further ended the enchantments
of the castle, and when they finally dissolved, Trineus, who had
accompanied him in canine shape, was restored to his original form.

The subsequent adventures of Palmerin bear such a strong likeness to
those already related of him as to render their recital a work of
supererogation. From

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the Court of one soldan he proceeds to that of another, enchantment
follows enchantment, as combat treads upon the heels of combat. Finally
Palmerin and Trineus return to Europe, and wed their respective ladies.

Cervantes' curate is perhaps too hard upon *Palmerin de Oliva*. "Then,
opening another volume, he found it to be *Palmerin de Oliva*. ‘Ha !
have I found you?' cried the curate; ‘here, take this *Oliva*; let it be
hewn in pieces and burnt, and the ashes scattered in the air.’ "

This notwithstanding, there are some brilliant passages in the romance
we have just outlined—grains of gold-dust in a desert of unrestrained
and undisciplined narrative—such flashes of genius as we find here and
there in Shelley's *Zastrozze* , *St* . *Irvyne* , and the other
hysterical outpourings of his Oxford days.

Primaleón

There is no doubt regarding the thoroughly Spanish character and origin
of *Primaleón,* son and successor to *Palmerin de Oliva,* although,
owing to the prejudice of the time for mystery and Orientalism, its
author, Francisco Delicado, saw fit to announce it as a translation from
the Greek. The first edition was printed in 1516, and several
translations shortly followed, that in English, by Anthony Munday, being
dedicated to Sir Francis Drake, and published in 1589. This translation,
however, dealt only with that portion of the romance which related to
the exploits of Polendos, but Munday completed the whole in editions
published in 1595 and 1619. The adventures of Polendos constitute,
however, by far the best part of the work.

Polendos was the son of the Queen of Tharsus.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Returning one day from the chase, he beheld a little woman sitting on
the steps of the palace, from which he removed her by a most ungallant
but forceful kick. "It was not in this manner that your father Palmerin
succoured the unfortunate," cried the crone, on picking herself up.
Polendos thus learned the secret of his birth for he was indeed the son
of Palmerin and the Queen of Tharsus, and, exalted by the intelligence,
he burned to distinguish himself by feats of arms worthy of his sire.
Departing for Constantinople to make himself known to his father, he
encountered many adventures on the way. Arrived at the imperial city, he
did long remain there, but set out to rescue the Princess Francelina
from the power of a giant and a dwarf, who held her in bondage in an
enchanted castle. Returning to Constantinople, he greatly distinguished
himself at a tournament held on the occasion of the marriage of one of
the Emperor's daughters, and Primaleón, the real hero of the story, son
of Palmerin and Polinarda, desirous of emulating the exploits of his
half-brother was duly knighted, and took part in the *mêlée.* The rest
of the romance is occupied with the adventures of this young hero and
those of Duardos (Edward) of England. In the course of his adventures
Palmerin had slain the son of the Duchess of Armedos, who vowed that she
would only give her daughter in marriage to the man who could bring her
the head of Primaleón. One by one Primaleón slew the lovers of Gridoina,
the Duchess's daughter, so that in time she came to detest the mere
mention of his name. But one evening Primaleón arrived at her castle,
and, not knowing who he was, she fell deeply in love with him. The child
of their affections was Platir, whose exploits were

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

recounted by the same author, and published at Valladolid in 1533. We
may well pass over this very indifferent romance, and bestow our
attention and interest upon its more entertaining successor.

Palmerin of England

This is perhaps the best of the series. The first Spanish edition was
believed to be lost; but a French translation from it was published at
Lyons in 1553, and an Italian one at Venice in 1555. Southey maintained
that there never was a Spanish original of this story, and that it was
first written in Portuguese. But this hypothesis was upset by Salva's
discovery of a copy of the lost Spanish original, written by Luis
Kuxtado  <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) and published at Toledo in
two parts, in 1547 and 1548. Southey attempted to show in his English
translation of *Palmerin of England* that a consideration of its *mise
en scène* would afford irrefragable proof of its Lusitanian
origin—surely a good illustration of the dangers and fallacies connected
with this species of reasoning. An argument of equal cogency could be
advanced for its original English authorship, as most of its action
takes place within the borders of the 'perilous isle' of Britain, in
which respect it follows *Amadis,* its model.

In *Palmerin of England* we are provided with a biographical sketch of
the hero's parents. Don Duardos, or Edward, son of the King of England,
was wedded to Flerida, daughter of Palmerin de Oliva. While engaged in
the chase, he lost his way in the depths of an English forest, and
sought shelter in a mysterious

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

castle, where he was detained by a giantess, Eutropa, whose brother he
had slain. But Dramuziando, her nephew, son of the giant whom Duardos
had sent his death, was of milder mood than his terrible aunt and
conceived a strange friendship for the captive Duardos.

In the meantime Flerida, alarmed at Duardos' absence, set out to search
for him, accompanied by a train of attendants, and while traversing the
forest in the hope of tracing him gave birth to twin sons, who were
baptized in the greenwood by her chaplain. The ceremony had scarcely
come to an end when a wild man, an inhabitant of the forest recesses,
burst from the undergrowth, and, seizing upon the infant princes,
carried them off. None might stay him, for he was accompanied by two
lions of such size and ferocity that their appearance struck terror into
the hearts of the stoutest of Flerida's retainers. The savage conveyed
the infants, who had been named Palmerin and Florian, to his den, where
he resolved to give them to the lions. Flerida returned disconsolately
to the palace, and dispatched a messenger to Constantinople with news of
her losses. On receiving this intelligence, Primaleón and a number of
the Grecian knights took ship for England, and, learning of the
imprisonment of Duardos in the castle of the giantess, they essayed his
deliverance. But they made the mistake, common to errantry, of
attempting to do so singly and not in a body, and so, one by one, fell a
rather easy prey to the giant Dramuziando, who forced them to combat
each new enemy who approached.

The sylvan savage who had destined the royal twins as food for his lions
had reckoned without his wife,

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

whose motherly instincts prompted her to save the children from a fate
so dire. Having prevailed upon her uncouth mate to spare them, she
brought them up along with her own son Selvian. In course of time they
became expert in the chase and woodcraft, and on one of his excursions
in the forest while following the slot of a red deer Florian encountered
Sir Pridos, son of the Duke of Wales, who took him to the English Court,
where he was brought before his mother, Flerida. Attracted to the savage
youth, she adopted him, and trained him in the usages of civilization,
calling him 'the Child of the Desert.'

Florian had not long been lost to the sylvan family when Palmerin and
Selvian, wandering one day by the sea-coast, observed a galley cast upon
the shore by the violence of a tempest. From this vessel Polendos (whose
prior adventures were recited in the romance of *Primaleón)*
disembarked, having come to England with other Greek knights in search
of Duardos. Palmerin and Selvian requested him to take them on board his
vessel, which put to sea once more, and shortly afterward arrived at
Constantinople, where they were brought before the Emperor, who, of
course, was in ignorance of the extraction of Palmerin, but knew of his
high rank from letters he had received from a certain Lady of the Bath,
who seems to have acted as the hero's good genius. The Emperor,
impressed by such an introduction, knighted Palmerin, whose sword was
girded to his side by Polinarda, the daughter of Primaleón. During
Palmerin's residence at Constantinople a tournament was held, in which
he and a stranger knight, who bore for his device a savage leading two
lions, greatly distinguished themselves. The stranger

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

departed still *incognito,* but was afterward discovered to be Florian,
who was thenceforth known as 'the Knight of the Savage.'

Palmerin fell an easy victim to the charms princess Polinarda, but the
precipitate nature wooing, prompted, probably, by his sylvan upbringing
offended the courtly damsel, and she forbade him her presence. In
despair at her coldness, he quitted the Grecian capital, and journeyed
toward England, under the name of 'the Knight of Fortune,' taking
Selvian as his squire. On the way he encountered a wealth of adventure,
in which he was uniformly successful, and at last arrived in the
dominions of his grandfather. But while passing through the forest
inhabited by his savage foster-father he came face to face with him, and
recounted is adventures. Pressing on, he came to a castle in the
neighbourhood of London, the castellan of which begged of him to do
battle with the Knight of the Savage, who had slain his son. Arriving in
London, he defied Florian, but the Princess Flerida intervened and
forbade the combat, which was not resumed, for Palmerin having at last
overcome Dramuziando and set Duardos at liberty, the birth of the twin
brothers was revealed by Doliarte, a magician, and confirmed by their
savage foster-father.

The Castle of Almaurol

Spurred on by the love of adventure, Florian and Palmerin disdained to
lead a life of ease at Court, and set out on their travels. We cannot
follow them here through the maze of exploit into which they are
plunged, but many of their trials, especially those undergone by
Palmerin in the Perilous Isle, are among the most

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

interesting and attractive in the series which bears his name. In
several of the passages the amiable giant Dramuziando figures to
advantage, but his aunt, the vindictive Eutropa, still retains her
ill-will to the family of the Palmerins, and is constant in the exercise
of her machinations against them. These are, however, challenged and
countered by the skill of the magician Doliarte. The chief scene of
adventure is the castle of Almaurol, where, under the care of a giant,
dwelt the beautiful but haughty Miraguarda, whose lineaments were
pictured on a shield which was suspended over the gate of the castle. It
was guarded by a body of knights, who had become enamoured of the
original, and when other paladins arrived vaunting the charms of their
ladies these gave them battle. Among these victims of the fair
Miraguarda was the giant Dramuziando, but during his custody of the
picture it was purloined by Alhayzar, the Soldan of Babylon, whose lady,
Targiana, daughter of the Grand Turk, had commanded him to bring it to
her as a trophy of his prowess.

The writer of the romance appeared to think it necessary at this point
to recall his heroes to Constantinople in order to espouse them to their
respective ladies. Palmerin was united to Polinarda, and his brother
Florian to Leonarda, Queen of Thrace, so that the lovers were made
happy. These espousals, however, by no means bring the romance to a
conclusion, for we learn that matters had become complicated by the
passion of the daughter of the Grand Turk for the newly wedded Florian.
That gay young prince, while residing at the Court of the lady's father,
had taken the liberty of eloping with her, and although she was now
safely married to Alhayzar, Soldan of Babylon and picture-thief, she

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

still retained a strong affection for her former lover, which was
mingled with resentment that he should have deserted her charms for
those of the Queen of Thrace. To ease the clamours of her jealous heart,
she employed a magician to work woe upon the Thracian queen, who, while
she took the air in the gardens of her palace, was pounced upon by two
enormous griffins, and conveyed to a magic castle, where she was
transformed into huge serpent. Her disconsolate husband found in her
deliverance an adventure quite to his taste, and, having consulted the
wise Doliarte, succeeded in discovering the place where his wife was
imprisoned and in freeing her from the enchantment which had been laid
upon her.

In accomplishing this, however, he seriously offended the proud
Alhayzar, who determined to avenge the affront placed upon his queen,
and demanded the person of Florian from the Emperor of Constantinople.
On receiving the imperial refusal which naturally followed his request,
he invaded the Greek territories, with an army of two hundred thousand
men, recruited from al the kingdoms and satrapies of the Orient, real
and imaginary. Three sanguinary battles occurred, in one of which
Alhayzar was slain and the pagan army totally annihilated.

Cervantes' Eulogy

Cervantes launches into an extravagant eulogy of this romance. "This
*Palmerin of England,"* he says, "let it be kept and preserved as a
thing unique, and let another casket be made for it such as Alexander
found among the spoils of Darius…. his book, Sir Comrade, is of
authority, for two reasons: the one because it is

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

right good one in itself, and the other because the report is that a
wise king of Portugal composed it. All the adventures at the Castle of
Miraguarda are excellent, and managed with great skill; the discourses
are courtly and clear, observing with much propriety and judgment the
decorum of the speaker. I say then, saving your good pleasure, Master
Nicholas, this and *Amadis de Gaul* should be saved from the fire, and
all the rest be, without further search, destroyed."

Saving *your* good pleasure, Master Cervantes, I would come to an issue
with you regarding this. For though *Palmerin of England* is the best
romance of those which recount the adventures of that line, still it
does not bear away the bell quite so easily as you say. Indeed, its
merits are not transcendently above those of its kind, and its faults
are of the same character. Again, true Spaniard as you are, do you not
praise it so greatly because you believe it to be the work of a king?
And do you not demean yourself to the level of a newspaper critic when
you doom to extinction those romances which you have not read? Further,
as a Castilian gentleman, do you agree with the author's most despiteful
entreatment of that sweet sex for whose sake all romances were written?
No good knight, no good man, could have penned so many stupidities
concerning their envy, their fickleness, their lack of reason, as he has
done; and still worse, he has made them mere puppets, moving as the
strings are pulled. For one thing I thank him, however—his character of
the magician Doliarte, a wise sage dwelling in the Valley of Perdition,
lost in contemplation of mysterious things. Nay, for a greater thing I
have to thank him also, the colours of the marvellous, the intoxicating
magic with

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

which he has suffused his story; and if the rush of it, the spell of it,
transported you to the forests of Faery and blinded you to the book's
demerits, you are perhaps to be excused if your enchanted eyes refused
to behold them and saw only the outward glamours of that rainbow world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[179:1](lrs07.htm#fr_48) For a brief account of
this Toledan poet, who translated Ovid's *Metamorphoses,* see Antonio,
*Bib. Nov.,* t. ii, p. 44.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Catalonian Romances](lrs08)
