[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Buddhism](../../bud/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ioe11) 
[Next](ioe13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### THE KAMAKURA PERIOD

1200-1400 A.D.

WITH the establishment of the Shogunate, or military vice-royalty by
Yoritomo of the Minamoto family at Kamakura, in 1186 A.D., begins a new
phase of Japanese life, whose main features continued till the Meiji
restoration of the present day.

This Kamakura epoch is important as the connecting-link between the
Fujiwara on the one hand and the Ashikaga and Tokugawa epochs on the
other. It is characterised by the development in full form of the notion
of feudal rights and individual consciousness. And it is interesting,
like all transition periods, by the fact that it contains, in solution
as it were, those developments whose complete self-display had to await
a later era.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Here we find the idea of individualism
struggling to express itself among the decaying débris of an
aristocratic rule, inaugurating an age of hero-worship and heroic
romance akin to the spirit of European individualism in the time of
chivalry, its woman-worship restricted by Oriental notions of decorum,
and its religion--by reason of the freedom and ease of the Jodo
sect--lacking the severe asceticism of that over-awing popedom which
held the Western conscience in iron fetters. The division of the country
into feudal tenures, headed by the noble and powerful family of Minamoto
at Kamakura, led each province to find amongst its own lords and knights
some central figure who represented for it the highest personification
of manhood. The influx upon the people who lived in the trans-Hakone
region of the so-called Eastern Barbarians with their simple bravery and
unsophisticated ideas, broke down the effeminate complexity left by the
over-refined

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

formalism of the Fujiwaras. Each local knight strove hard as against all
others, not only in martial prowess, but in the power of self-conquest,
courtesy, and charity, which were qualities considered above muscular
might, as the marks of true courage.

"To know the sadness of things" was the motto of the time, so bringing
to birth the great ideal of the Samurai, whose *raison d’être* was to
suffer for the sake of others, Indeed, the very etiquette of this
knightly class during the Kamakura period points as unmistakably to the
conception of the monk, as the life of any Indian woman to that of the
nun. Some of the Samurai, or military officers, grouped around their
chiefs or daimyos, and followed in turn by their own clansmen, wore a
priestly garment over their armour, and many even went the length of
shaving the head. There was nothing incongruous with religion in the art
of war, and the noble who renounced the world

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

became one of the militant monks of his new order. The Indian idea of
the Guru, or giver of spiritual life, was here projected upon the
Samurai's war-lord, whoever he might be, and a surging passion of
loyalty to "the banner-chief," became the motive of a career. Men would
devote their lives to the avenging of his death, as in other countries
women have died for their husbands, or the worshipper for his gods.

It is possible that this fire of monasticism has been the great
influence in robbing Japanese chivalry of its romantic element. The
idealising of women would seem to have been an instinctive note of early
Japanese life. Were we not of the race of the Sun-goddess? Only after
the Fujiwara epoch, with its exploration of the realm of religious
emotion, the devotion of man to woman amongst us assumes its true
Eastern form, of a worship the more powerful because the shrine is
secret, an inspiration the stronger because

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

its source is hidden. A reserve as of religion seals the lips of
Kamakura poets, but it must not be thought on that account that the
Japanese woman was not adored. For the seclusion of Oriental zenanas is
a veiled sainthood. It may have been in the Crusades that the
troubadours learnt this secret of the strength of mystery. It will be
remembered that their most binding tradition was the obscurity in which
the name of "my lady" was involved. Dante, at any rate, as a singer of
love, is entirely an Eastern poet singing of Beatrice, the Oriental
woman.

This was an age, then, of silence as to love, but it was also an age of
epic heroism, in the midst of which looms large the romantic figure of
Yoshitsune, of the house of Minamoto, whose life recalls the tales of
the round table, and is lost, like that of the knight of Pendragon, in
poetic mist, so as to furnish the imagination of a later day with

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

plausible grounds for identifying him with Genghis Khan in Mongolia,
whose wonderful career begins about fifteen years after the
disappearance of Yoshitsune in Yezo. His name is also pronounced Ghengi
Khei, and some of the names of the generals of the great Mogol conqueror
bear resemblance to those of the knights of Yoshitsune. We have also
Tokiyorie, the regent of the Shoguns, who, like Haroun-al-Raschid,
travelled through the Empire alone as a simple monk, inquiring into the
state of the country. These episodes give rise to a literature of
adventure, which, centring on some heroic character, is rigorous in its
rude simplicity, in contrast to the elegant effeminacy of preceding
Fujiwara writings.

Buddhism had to be simplified in order to meet the requirements of this
new age. The Jodo ideal now appeals to the public mind, through grosser
representations of retribution. Pictures of purgatory

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

and the horrors of hell are for the first time presented, in order to
over-awe the rising populace, who under this new régime were becoming
more prominent than before. At the same time, the Samurai, or knightly
class, adopted as its ideal the teaching of the Zen sect (perfected
under the Sung dynasty, by the Southern Chinese mind), that salvation
was to be looked for in self-control and strength of will. Thus the art
of this period lacks both the idealised perfection of the Nara and the
refined delicacy of the Fujiwara, epochs, but is characterised by the
vigour of its return to the line, and by the virility and strength of
its delineation.

Portrait statues, so significant a production of the heroic age, now
claim the foremost place in sculpture. Among these may be mentioned the
statues of monks of the Kegon sect in Kofukuji in Nara, and several
others. Even the Buddhas and devas assume personal

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

characteristics, as may be seen from the great Nioo of Nandaimon in
Nara. The fine bronze Buddha of Kamakura is not exempt from the human
tenderness which is absent from the more abstract bronzes of Nara and
Fujiwara.

Painting lent itself, besides portraiture, to the illustration of the
heroic legends, generally in the form of makimonos, or rolls, in which
the pictures are interspersed with the written text. No subjects were
too high or too low for the artists of the day to illustrate, as the
formalist canons of aristocratic distinction were discarded in the
new-born enthusiasm of individual consciousness; but what they most
delighted to paint was the spirit of motion. Nothing is more
illustrative of this than the wonderful street scenes, depicted in the
makimono owned by Prince Tokugawa, of Bandainagon, or the three
battle-scenes of the Heiji stories, owned by the Emperor, Baron Iwasaki,
and the Boston

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Museum. These are falsely attributed to Keion, an artist whose very
existence is without foundation.

The gorgeous succession of depictments of the terrors of hell in the
makimonos of Jigokusoshi and Tenjinengi of Kitano--where the warlike
spirit of the time seems to delight in the awful spectacle of
destruction and sublime horror--suggests the imagery of Dante's Inferno.

NOTES

*Shogunate*.--Shogun is an abbreviation of *Seyi tai Shogun*, or
Commander-in-Chief of the Armies that fight the Barbarians. This title
was first conferred on Yoritomo of the Minamoto family, who destroyed
the Tairas. The long succession of military regents of Japan, after this
date, were called Shoguns, and of them, the Minamotos reigned in
Kamakura, the Ashikagas in Kyoto, and the Tokugawas in Yedo (Tokio).

Sakti.--A Sanscrit word meaning force or power, the cosmic energy. It is
always symbolised by the feminine, as Durga, Kali, and others. All women
are supposed to be its embodiment.

Sûtras.--Sûtra, in Sanscrit, means *thread*, and is

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

a term applied to certain of the ancient texts, which consist of
aphorisms or part-aphorisms, and are necessarily obscure by reason of
their conciseness. They belong to the old system of memorising, and are
really a series of suggestions covering the whole ground of an argument,
in which catch sentence is intended to revive the memory of certain
steps. The corresponding word in Chinese is *warp*, that which is to be
woven upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ashikaga Period: 1400-1600 A.D.](ioe13)
