[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Excerpts from the Gospel of Mary

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[The Coptic papyrus, from which the first six pages have been lost,
begins in the middle of this gospel.\]

"...will, then, matter be saved or not?"

The Savior said, "All natures, all formed things, all creatures exist in
and with one another and will again be resolved into their own roots,
because the nature of matter is dissolved into the roots of its nature
alone. He who has ears to hear, let him hear." \[cf. Matt. 11:15,
etc.\].

Peter said to him, "Since you have now explained all things to us, tell
us this: what is the sin of the world?" \[cf. John 1:29\]. The Savior
said, "Sin as such does not exist, but you make sin when you do what is
of the nature of fornication, which is called 'sin.' For this reason the
Good came into your midst, to the essence of each nature, to restore it
to its root." He went on to say, "For this reason you come into
existence and die \[...\] whoever knows may know \[...\] a suffering
which has nothing like itself, which has arisen out of what is contrary
to nature. Then there arises a disturbance in the whole body. For this
reason I said to you, Be of good courage \[cf. Matt. 28:9\], and if you
are discouraged, still take courage over against the various forms of
nature. He who has ears to hear, let him hear." When the Blessed One
said this, he greeted all of them, saying "Peace be with you \[cf. John
14:27\]. Receive my peace for yourselves. Take heed lest anyone lead you
astray with the words, 'Lo, here!' or 'Lo, there!' \[cf. Matt. 24:5, 23;
Luke 17:21\] for the Son of Man is within you \[cf. Luke 17:21\]. Follow
him; those who seek him will find him \[cf. Matt. 7:7\]. Go, therefore,
and preach the Gospel of the Kingdom \[cf. Matt. 4:23; 9:15; Mark
16:15\]. I have left no commandment but what I have commanded you, and I
have given you no law, as the lawgiver did, lest you be bound by it."

They grieved and mourned greatly, saying, "How shall we go to the
Gentiles and preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of the Son of Man? If even
he was not spared, how shall we be spared?"

Then Mary stood up and greeted all of them and said to her brethren, "Do
not mourn or grieve or be irresolute, for his grace will be with you all
and will defend you. Let us rather praise his greatness, for he prepared
us and made us into men." When Mary said this, their hearts changed for
the better, and they began to discuss the words of the \[Savior\].

Peter said to Mary, "Sister, we know that the Savior loved you more than
other women \[cf. John 11:5, Luke 10:38-42\]. Tell us the words of the
Savior which you have in mind since you know them; and we do not, nor
have we heard of them."

Mary answered and said, "What is hidden from you I will impart to you."
And she began to say the following words to them. "I," she said, "I saw
the Lord in a vision and I said to him, 'Lord, I saw you today in a
vision.' He answered and said to me, 'Blessed are you, since you did not
waver at the sight of me. For where the mind is, there is your
countenance' \[cf. Matt. 6:21\]. I said to him, 'Lord, the mind which
sees the vision, does it see it through the soul or through the spirit?'
The Savior answered and said, 'It sees neither through the soul nor
through the spirit, but the mind, which is between the two, which sees
the vision, and it is...'"

"...and Desire said, 'I did not see you descend; but now I see you
rising. Why do you speak falsely, when you belong to me?' The soul
answered and said, 'I saw you, but you did not see me or recognize me; I
served you as a garment and you did not recognize me.' After it had said
this, it went joyfully and gladly away. Again it came to the third
power, Ignorance. This power questioned the soul: 'Whither are you
going? You were bound in wickedness, you were bound indeed. Judge not'
\[cf. Matt. 7:1\]. And the soul said, 'Why do you judge me, when I
judged not? I was bound, though I did not bind. I was not recognized,
but I recognized that all will go free, things both earthly and
heavenly.' After the soul had left the third power behind, it rose
upward, and saw the fourth power, which had seven forms. The first form
is darkness, the second desire, the third ignorance, the fourth the
arousing of death, the fifth is the kingdom of the flesh, the sixth is
the wisdom of the folly of the flesh, the seventh is wrathful wisdom.
These are the seven participants in wrath. They ask the soul, 'Whence do
you come, killer of men, or where are you going, conqueror of space?'
The soul answered and said, 'What seizes me is killed; what turns me
about is overcome; my desire has come to an end and ignorance is dead.
In a world I was saved from a world, and in a "type," from a higher
"type" and from the fetter of the impotence of knowledge, the existence
of which is temporal. From this time I will reach rest in the time of
the moment of the Aeon in silence.'"

When Mary had said this, she was silent, since the Savior had spoken
thus far with her. But Andrew answered and said to the brethren, 'Say
what you think concerning what she said. For I do not believe that the
Savior said this. For certainly these teachings are of other ideas."

Peter also opposed her in regard to these matters and asked them about
the Savior. "Did he then speak secretly with a woman \[cf. John 4:27\],
in preference to us, and not openly? Are we to turn back and all listen
to her? Did he prefer her to us?" Then Mary grieved and said to Peter,
"My brother Peter, what do you think? Do you think that I thought this
up myself in my heart or that I am lying concerning the Savior?"

Levi answered and said to Peter, "Peter, you are always irate. Now I see
that you are contending against the woman like the adversaries. But if
the Savior made her worthy, who are you to reject her? Surely the Savior
knew her very well \[cf. Luke 10:38- 42\]. For this reason he loved her
more than us \[cf. John 11:5\]. And we should rather be ashamed and put
on the Perfect Man, to form us \[?\] as he commanded us, and proclaim
the gospel, without publishing a further commandment or a further law
than the one which the Savior spoke." When Levi had said this, they
began to go out in order to proclaim him and preach him.
