<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das22)  [Next](das24) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### Sapelo Island

Sapelo Island is one of the chain of "Golden Isles" lying along the
Georgia Coast. The word Sapelo was derived from "Zapala," the name used
by the Indians when the island was a favorite hunting ground for the
tribes that had given up much of the mainland to the Spaniards and later
to the English. Among the landmarks that recall colorful historical
episodes are Indian mounds, tabby ruins of colonial days, and the
remains of a house built by Jean Berard Mocquet, Marquis de Montalet, a
French Royalist who immigrated to Georgia from Santo Domingo about 1797.

Plantation life flourished on Sapelo in the early nineteenth century.
Here Thomas Spalding conducted one of the most extensive agricultural
enterprises in the coastal section. The "big house" on the south end of
the island was a spacious tabby mansion, so strongly constructed that
the original walls are still standing and form the nucleus of the
present dwelling. The island, with the exception of a number of Negro
homesteads, is now the property of Richard Reynolds of Winston-Salem,
North Carolina, but, although many improvements and changes have been
made, much of the atmosphere of the early days has been preserved.

Industrial activity is concentrated in the central portion of Sapelo,
where there is a sawmill that gives employment to many of the islanders.
Nearby are the company houses, a Post office, and a store. Several Negro
churches and a dance hall are located elsewhere on the island.

Small Negro settlements are scattered at the north end of

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sapelo and are
reached by winding roads that cut through the tropical woodlands and
brush. The Negroes are descendants of the slaves of the plantation era.
Many lead an easy, carefree life which consists chiefly of fishing,
crabbing, and cultivating a small patch of garden, while others engage
in regular employment at the sawmill or in the company offices.

Living an isolated island existence, these Negroes have preserved many
customs and beliefs of their ancestors, as well as the dialect of the
older coastal Negro. An old oxcart jogging along a tree shaded road is a
familiar sight, and under the guidance of a Negro boy named Julius we
discovered instances of crude wooden implements in common usage. The
many Negroes interviewed gave a graphic picture of survival elements
that have persisted since the days when slave ships brought their
ancestors to the new country.

One of the oldest inhabitants is Katie Brown, <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141) whose grandmother, Margaret, was a
daughter of Belali Mohomet, the Mohammedan slave driver of Thomas
Spalding. Katie, sunning herself on the back steps of her small house,
was disposed to be gracious to us. Shaking her head at the size of the
shoes brought to her as an incentive to conversation, she relented at
the sight of some pipe tobacco and began to talk:

"I dunno bout drums at chuches. Use tuh hab um long time ago, but not
now on duh ilun,--leas I ain heah um. Hahves time wuz time fuh drums.
Den dey hab big times. [38](das26.htm#xref_38) Wen hahves in, dey hab
big gadderin. Dey beat drum, rattle dry goad wid seed in um, an beat big
flat tin plates. [23](das26.htm#xref_23),  [25](das26.htm#xref_25) Dey
shout an moob roun in succle an look lak mahch goin tuh heabm. Hahves
festival, dey call it."

In response to our query about "set-ups" Katie replied, "Yes'm, we hab
set-ups wid duh dead, but I ain know bout killin chicken. At duh fewnul,
dey kills hawg an hab [40](das26.htm#xref_40) plenty tuh
eat. [37b](das26.htm#xref_37b),  [37c](das26.htm#xref_37c) Duh reason
fuh dis is so dat sperrit hab plenty at duh las. Wen fewnul pruhcession
gits tuh grabeyahd, dey stops. I ain know wy dey do it but dey stops at
duh gate, and dey ax leab tuh come in. Deah ain nobody at

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

duh gate, but dey alluz ax jis duh same. Dey say, 'Fambly, we come tuh
put our brudduh away in mudduh dus. Please leh us go tru
gate.'" [60](das26.htm#xref_60)

About conjure, however, the old woman was not very communicative. "I ain
know bout cunjuh," she said. "I heahs bout spells on people, but I ain
see um. Now shadduhs, I see um. One night comin down duh road, I git tuh
place weah road tun, an I heah sumpin behine me runnin long close tuh
groun. He got big long tus, dis long, an he tongue hangin out. He pas
close tuh me, an he look a me. I see um good. He got long tick haiah lak
Noofounlan. Deah ain nebuh bin dog lak um on ilun. He mus be
shadduh. [54](das26.htm#xref_54)

"Den one night, I come frum clinch wid huzbun. We gits tuh tun, I heahs
sumpm agen. I looks, an deah is sumpm look lak man. Huzbun he ain see
um. Den I heahs a stompin, an sumpm come by so close tuh me I kin mos
tech um, an he tun tuh spotted ox. 'Budge,' I calls um wen dey changes
lak dat. Dat spotted ox go gallopin off, an I say tuh huzbun, 'Yuh ain
see um?' He say, 'Wut?' I say, 'Da spotted ox wut go pas down duh road
an out in da fiel?' He say, 'I ain see nuttn.' Das wen I luns dat wen
yuh see um, yuh musn talk bout um.

"No'm, I dunno no animal stories. I heah um, but I fuhgits. I know bout
lizzud an rabbit, dough. Yuh ain know bout lizzud an rabbit? Well,
lizzud, he wuk hahd. He hab sode wut he cut crop wid, an it wuk by itsef
an it cut so fine, nuttn lef. [39](das26.htm#xref_39) Lizzud he speak
wuds tuh it--it do all duh wuk. Now, rabbit, he smaht. He ain got no
sode lak lizzud got an he wahn one. He hide behine bush, an he watch da
sode wuk fuh lizzud, an he wahn it bad. One day wen lizzud not at home,
rabbit, he sneak up, an he steal lizzud sode. He laf tuh hesef cuz he
got da sode. He take da sode tuh he fiel an he staht it tuh wuk. He tink
he know duh wuds dat lizzud say tuh sode, an he call, 'Go-ee-tell.' Sode
staht wukin. Pretty soon, sode finish duh crop, an rabbit wahn um tuh
stop. Sode comin too close tuh noo wintuh crop wut rabbit got tuh hab
fuh lib on. So rabbit he yell, 'Go-ee-tell' in loud voice, and sode he
wuk all duh fastuh. He cut down ebryting rabbit hab an ain leab nuttn.
Lizzud who bin hidin in bush, he laf an he laf tuh he sef at rabbit, cuz
rabbit tink hesef so smaht

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

wen he steal sode an now he ain got nuttn tuh eat all wintuh. Rabbit he
see lizzud, an he call, 'Stop dis sode.' Lizzud he say, 'it my sode.'
Rabbit he say, 'Dasso. It yuh sode, 'but stop it. It cut down ebryting
uh got.' Lizzud say, 'Sode wuk fastuh ebry time he heah 'Go-ee-tell.'"
Den lizzud he staht laffin an he calls out loud, 'Go-ee-pom,' an sode
stop. Lizzud den go out an pick up sode an tak um home."

Knowing that Katie was a descendant of Belali, we asked her if she knew
anything of him. She nodded and answered, "Belali Mohomet? Yes'm, I
knows bout Belali. He wife Phoebe. He hab plenty daughtuhs, Magret,
Bentoo, Chaalut, Medina, Yaruba, Fatima, an Hestuh.

"Magret an uh daughtuh Cotto use tuh say dat Belali an he wife Phoebe
pray on duh bead. Dey wuz bery puhticluh bout duh time dey pray an dey
bery regluh bout duh hour. Wen duh sun come up, wen it straight obuh
head an wen it set, das duh time dey pray. Dey bow tuh duh sun an hab
lill mat tuh kneel on. Duh beads is on a long string. Belali he pull
bead an he say, 'Belambi, Hakabara, Mahamadu.' Phoebe she say, 'Ameen,
Ameen.'

"Magret she say Phoebe he wife, but maybe he hab mone one wife. I spects
das bery possible. He come obuh wid all he daughtuhs grown. He whole
fambly wuz mos grown up. Hestuh she Shad's gran. Yuh knows Shad? Bentoo
she duh younges. Magret she my gran."

We asked if Belali Mohomet had been related to Belali Sullivan on St.
Simons.

"I ain know bout St. Simon but Cotto use tuh talk bout cousin Belali
Sullivan.

"Yes'm, I membuh muh gran too. Belali he frum Africa but muh gran she
come by Bahamas. She speak funny wuds we didn know. She say 'mosojo' an
sometime 'sojo' wen she mean pot. Fuh watuh she say 'deloe' an fuh fyuh
she say 'diffy.' She tell us, Tak sojo off diffy.'

"Wen sumpm done she say, 'Bim-boga-rum.' Yuh tell uh sumpm wut is a
subprise lak somebody die, den she say, 'Ma-foo-bey, ma-foo-bey.'

"She am tie uh head up lak I does, but she weah a loose wite clawt da
she trow obuh uh head lak veil an it hang loose

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

on uh shoulduh. I ain know wy she weah it dataway, but I tink she ain
lak a tight ting roun uh head.

"She make funny flat cake she call 'saraka.' She make um same day ebry
yeah, an it big day. Wen dey finish, she call us in, all duh chillun, an
put in hans in flat cake an we eats it. Yes'm, I membuh how she make it.
She wash rice, an po off all duh watuh. She let wet rice sit all night,
an in mawnin rice is all swell. She tak dat rice an put it in wooden
mawtuh, an beat it tuh paste wid wooden pestle. She add honey, sometime
shuguh, an make it in flat cake wid uh hans. 'Saraka' she call un."

Before the cabin stood a crudely constructed wooden mortar made many
years before by Katie's husband and used originally for the pounding of
rice. A deep basin-like aperture had been hewn out of the center of a
log which was about three feet long and from eighteen to twenty inches
wide. [43](das26.htm#xref_43)

Across the dusty road from Katie Brown's another narrow wooden gate
opened into a field where a winding path led to the small cabin of Julia
Grovernor, <span id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) called Juno by the
island Negroes. Julia, very black, tall and gaunt, was slightly hostile
and suspicious and disinclined to talk. Even the pipe tobacco, potent in
most cases, she indifferently dropped.

"No'm, I ain know nuttn. Ise feeble-minded. I bin weak in head sence I
small chile. No'm, I ain know nuttn bout witches. I ain know nuttn bout
root doctuhs. No'm, I ain nebuh heah uh cunjuh. No'm, I ain know nuttn
bout spells. No'm, I ain kin tuh Katie Brown."

This refusal to answer except in the negative seemed to continue
indefinitely. Finally, however, after innumerable Slow, quiet,
good-humored questions that showed no resentment at her hostility, she
became friendly in a reserved and superior way. It was soon evident that
this sullen, reticent woman, though hostile to outside invasion, was not
feeble-minded, but on the contrary sharp-witted, with a dry sense of
humor.

"Muh gran, she Hannah. Uncle Calina muh gran too; dey bote Ibos. Yes'm,
I membuh muh gran Hannah. She marry

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Calina an hab twenny-one chillun. Yes'm, she tell us how she brung yuh.

"Hannah, she wid huh ahnt who wuz diggin peanuts in duh fiel, wid uh
baby strop on uh back. Out uh duh brush two wite mens come an spit in
huh abut eye. She blinded an wen she wipe uh eye, duh wite mens done
loose duh baby frum huh back, an took Hannah too. Dey led um intuh duh
woods, weah deah wuz udduh chillun dey done ketched an tie up in sacks.
Duh baby an Hannah wuz tie up in sacks lak duh udduhs an Hannah nebuh
saw huh ahnt agen an nebuh saw duh baby agen. Wen she wuz let out uh duh
sack, she wuz on boat an nebuh saw Africa agen."

A back path from Julia's house led to the house of her sister,
Katie, <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) who had a regal and
impressive bearing. She, too, had a hostile and taciturn manner.

"No'm, Ise younguh dan Juno. I dohn membuh nuttn uh doze times. No'm, I
ain heah tell uh cunjuh. I dohn know bout witch doctuhs. I dohn know
spells. No'm, I dohn know none uh dis yuh askin. Yes'm, I nuss Hannah an
Calina wen deys ole, but I young chile, an I dohn membuh nuttn bout um.
No'm, I cahn unnuhstan um; dey talks a funny talk. I cahn unnuhstan um."

In the afternoon we went to see Phoebe Gilbert, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) another descendant of the Ibos, Calina
and Hannah. Phoebe, black, buxom, and comely, lived in a comfortable
cottage in Shell Hammock. Obviously embarrassed at being the center of a
rapidly increasing crowd of Negro listeners, she evaded most questions.
Our visit did not prove entirely unsatisfactory, however, for after
considerable humorous chatting Phoebe rewarded our efforts by giving a
vivid description of how her grandfather, Calina, was captured and
brought here from Africa.

"Belali Smith muh gran. I ain know bout Belali Mohomet. Yes'm, I membuh
muh gran. She Hannah. Yes'm, muh gran Calina, too. Dey's Ibos. Muh gran
Calina tell me how be got heah. He say he playin on beach in Africa, an
big boat neah duh beach. He say, duh mens on boat take down

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

flag, an put up big piece uh red flannel, an all chillun dey git close
tuh watuh edge tuh see flannel an see wut doin. Den duh mens comes off
boat an ketch um, an wen duh ole folks come in frum duh fiels dey ain no
chillun in village. Dey's all on boat. Den dey brings um yuh."

Cuffy [20a](das26.htm#xref_20a) Wilson, <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) sitting in the clean-swept yard which
surrounded his whitewashed house, told us about the much discussed
experience of a neighbor of his. This dealt with the current belief
concerning the necessity of asking leave to enter the graveyard.

"Grant Johnson, he wannuh cut some wood an he git obuh duh fence uh duh
cimiterry," he explained to us. "He didn ax leab uh
nobody. [60](das26.htm#xref_60) He wuz a cuttin duh wood down as fas as
he could wen all ub a sudden he see a big black dog
wut [54](das26.htm#xref_54) come attuh im. Dat wuz a shadduh an he ain
lose no time in jumpin obuh duh fence.

"Wen yuh hab a fewnul eben today, yuh hab tuh ax leab tuh entuh duh
cimiterry gate. Duh spirit ain gonuh let yuh in lessn yuh ask leab ub
it."

We visited Nero Jones, <span id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_146) an elderly
Negro who lived on his sixty-five-acre tract of land with a daughter,
Henrietta. Sitting beneath the protecting shade of an arbor which
overlooked a peanut field, the old man was busily engaged in shucking a
large basket of the nuts.

He, too, remembered having seen harvest dances. "We use tuh hab big time
at hahves," [38](das26.htm#xref_38) he began. "We pray an sing duh night
tru. Wen duh sun riz we go out an dance. We hab big beatin uh drums an
sometimes we dry duh goads an leab duh seed in um. Dey make good
rattle. [23](das26.htm#xref_23),  [25](das26.htm#xref_25)

"I membuh Uncle Calina an An Hannah well. Dey mighty Ole an dey bun up
in duh house. Dey talk lot uh funny talk tuh each udduh an dey is mighty
puhticuluh bout prayin. Dey pray on duh bead. Duh ole man he say
'Ameela' and An Hannah she say 'Hakabara.'"

Later we drove slowly over the flat grass-lands to Hog Hammock, another
Negro community at the south end of Sapelo. The red-legged herons
winging their way against the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

vivid blue of the sky, the dense foliage rimming the edges of the inland
marshes, clumps of feathery bush, all contributed to the tropical beauty
of the island.

At Hog Hammock we visited Shad Hall, <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) another Belali Mohomet descendant, who
came to the door of his neat cottage clad in blue denim. Delighted to
have visitors, Shad was eager for conversation. With a few polite words
of thanks for the pipe tobacco, he began to talk of the old days.

"Muh gran wuz Hestuh, Belali's daughtuh. She tell me Belali wuz coal
black, wid duh small feechuhs we hab, an he wuz bery tall. She say
Belali an all he fambly come on same boat frum Africa. Belali hab plenty
daughtuhs, Medina, Yaruba, Fatima, Bentoo, Hestuh, Magret, and Chaalut.

"Ole Belali Smith wuz muh uncle. His son wuz George Smith's gran. He wuz
muh gran Hestuh's son an muh mudduh Sally's brudduh. Hestuh an all ub um
sho pray on duh bead. Dey weah duh string uh beads on duh wais. Sometime
duh string on duh neck. Dey pray at sun-up and face duh sun on duh knees
an bow tuh it tree times, kneelin on a lill mat."

We asked Shad if he had ever heard his grandmother say anything about
Africa. Had she ever mentioned what sort of house they lived in or what
food was generally eaten? Shad nodded eagerly, and from the steady flow
of talk that followed it was evident that he had heard much of the land
of his ancestors.

"Muh gran Hestuh say she kin membuh duh house she lib in in Africa. She
say it wuz cubbuh wid palmettuh an grass fuh roof, an duh walls wuz made
uh mud. Dey make duh walls by takin up hanfuls uh mud an puttin it on
sumpm firm, sticks put crossways so. I membuh some pots and cups dat she
hab made uh clay. She brung deze frum Africa. She membuh wut dey eat in
Africa too. Dey eat yam an shuguh cane an peanut an bananas. Dey eat
okra too. Yes'm, das right, dey calls it gumbo. Dey dohn hab tuh wuk
hahd wid plantin deah. Jis go in woods an dig, an git big yam. Dey eat
udduh roots too. Dey ain no flo tuh house. Dey sleep on hahd

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

groun inside house. House wuz neah lill ilun weah dey ketch parrot and
sell um."

"Do you remember any special kinds of food that your grandmother used to
prepare?" we asked.

Shad, after pondering briefly, said, "She make strange cake, fus ub ebry
munt. She call it 'saraka.' She make it out uh meal an honey. She put
meal in bilin watuh an take it right out. Den she mix it wid honey, and
make it in flat cakes. Sometime she make it out uh rice. Duh cake made,
she call us all in an deah she hab great big fannuh full an she gib us
each cake. Den we all stands roun table, and she says, 'Ameen, Ameen,
Ameen,' an we all eats cake."

We asked Shad what sort of animals his grandmother remembered seeing in
Africa, and be said, "She say lion is duh mos powful uh beas. She say
lion git up tree jis lak cat. Yuh come long unduh tree, an lion he reach
down wid great paws an grab yuh--so. Snakes, dey big, too. Dey wrap deah
tail roun tree an lean obuh an reach yuh, too."

Shad furnished us additional information regarding "setups." "Yes'm,
Gran Hestuh tell me uh set-ups. Dey kill a wite chicken wen dey hab
set-ups tuh keep duh spirits way. She say a wite chicken is duh only
ting dat will keep duh spirits way an she alluz keep wite chicken fuh
dat in yahd. [35](das26.htm#xref_35) Lak dis. Hestuh, she hab frien an
frien die. Ebry ebenin friens spirit come back an call tuh
Hestuh. [56](das26.htm#xref_56) Hestuh knowd ef she keep it up, she die
too. Hestuh den kills wite chicken, tro it out uh doze, an shut doe
quick. Wen she tro it out, she say, 'Heah, spirit, moob away--dohn come
back no mo.' I dunno wut she do wid duh blood an fedduhs.

"Yes'm, I heah tell uh witches, but I ain see um. I know eel skin tie
roun neck bring good luck an cuo yuh ef Yuh sick. Yes'm, I see um bury
sack unduh doe step tuh [11](das26.htm#xref_11) pruhtec house; I see um
tie rag tuh gate tuh pruhtec too. [11b](das26.htm#xref_11b),
 [11c](das26.htm#xref_11c) I ain know snake-skin bring good luck, but
eel-skin, yes'm.

"Yuh ain heah so much bout cunjuh on dis ilun, but deah's a few wut does
a mighty lot uh talkin. Nellie Dixon, she lib right obuh deah in dem
trees, she alluz talkin bout roots. She say somebody go tru duh yahd an
drap a root fuhrum. She tote a sack roun uh neck tuh gahd
um." [8](das26.htm#xref_8), [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a),
 [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),  [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d)

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

When asked to whom he had belonged during slavery he answered, "Muh fus
massuh Montally. He ole massuh. Young massuh wuz Massuh Tom Spalding.
Den I belongs tuh Mike Spalding; dat befo freedom. Sometime duh ole
folks call duh missus 'maduba' an duh massuh 'mahaba.' Yes'm I bin big
man wen freedom come."

Shad remembered that during his childhood he had often witnessed harvest
festivals and dances.

"Hahves time dey hab big time. It come once a yeah an dey pray an dey
sing all night long till duh fus cock crow. Den dey staht tuh dance an
tuh bow tuh duh sun as it riz in duh sky. Dey dance roun in a succle an
sing an shout. Sho is a big time. [38](das26.htm#xref_38)

"Wen yuh hab a buryin, yuh alluz hab tuh ask leab tuh duh grabeyahd. Dey
do dat tuh dis day. Yuh say, 'Fambly, please let us lay yuh brudduh in
mudduh dus.'" [60](das26.htm#xref_60)

The story which Cuffy Wilson had already told us about Grant Johnson's
having been chased from the grave-yard by a shadow was also verified
from this source. Shad told us, "Grant Johnson he go deah one time tuh
cut wood widout askin leab. He busy cuttin wood wen all ub a sudden he
see big black dog comin tuh um wid one paw raise an red eye an big
grinnin teet. [54](das26.htm#xref_54) Grant he ain lose no time in
gittin way. Dat dog wuz shadduh wut come attuh um.

"Duh ole folks use tuh tell dat story bout duh hoe wut could wuk by
itsef. It stan right up in duh fiel widout nobody holdin tuh
it. [39](das26.htm#xref_39) Das ef yuh knowd how tuh wuk it. Doze
Africans knowd how tuh make dat hoe wuk an dey knowd how tuh wuk roots.

"Doze folks could fly too. Dey tell me deah's a lot ub un, wut wuz bring
heah an dey ain much good. Duh massuh wuz fixin tuh tie um up tuh whip
um. Dey say, 'Massuh, yuh ain gwine lick me,' and wid dat dey runs down
tuh duh ribbuh. Duh obuhseeuh he sho tought he ketch um wen dey git tuh
duh ribbuh. But fo he could git tuh um, dey riz up in duh eah an fly
way. Dey fly right back tuh Africa. I tink dat happen on Butler Ilun.

"I use tuh heah lots ub animal stories, but it bin so long I mos fuhgit
bout um. I ain heah much bout duh spiduh cep he is bery wicked an he
shahp. He kin spin he tread an riz

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

right up in duh eah widout nuttn tuh hep um. He see a fly an begin tuh
spin roun an roun um till he ketch um in he web. Den he caahn git way
an An Nancy got um. Das wut duh chillun say tuh dis day wen dey see a
spiduh ketch a fly--An Nancy got um.'" [51](das26.htm#xref_51)

On Sunday evening Julius drove us through black swamp and bush to the
church at Silver Bluff. The little white frame building with yellow
light from oil lamps shining through the windows made the night suddenly
come alive. Negro men and boys were moving about outside in the darkness
and a few were gathered on the steps. All the women and children were
inside.

Escorted by Julius and a deacon we went into the church and took our
places on the second from the front middle bench. The pulpit stood on
the raised platform on which most of the light was concentrated. The men
and boys came in. The church was filled with a tense quietness.

The preacher came from behind the platform and stood silently behind the
pulpit desk, looking dramatically over his congregation. He was tall and
spare, with brown skin, narrow face, and a thin pointed beard, a
Mohammedan looking Negro. He wore a black skull cap, which we learned
later was not ritualistic but was worn to protect his head from the
draught. This was Preacher Little who, we were afterwards told, was an
itinerant preacher, not a native to the island but a type native to the
district.

His text, read in a loud, commanding voice, was "You ah the salt of the
earth; but if the salt has lost its savory, wherewith shall it be salt;
it is then no good and should be trompled intuh earth." The exposition
of this pronouncement was awaited with breathless interest.

The sermon that followed, however, was in no way connected with the
text. Preacher Little divided his sermon into three parts and lectured
his congregation on "straying frum duh paat." What he said was not
really coherent. Words stood out, phrases rang in our ears, quotations
from the Bible resounded at random but that was the beginning and the
end. The impelling element was the sound of Preacher Little's voice.

In each part he began slowly, quietly, persuading and reasoning

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

with his congregation. His voice would carry a pleading question to them
and they would answer, "Huh." [29](das26.htm#xref_29) As he progressed,
the quiet reasoning diminished; he shouted to his listeners. The
"Huh-Huh's" became loud, guttural, vibrating grunts that echoed through
the little building. Regular stamping of the feet began; the vibration
penetrated into every corner. It was impossible not to think of the
beating of the drum. The regular rhythmic, swelling noise was deafening.
It meant agreement with Preacher Little. It urged him on to greater
heights until his shouting voice not only seemed to fill the church but
to reverberate from wall to wall. This climax was reached three times,
at the end of each of the three parts of the sermon. Each time it seemed
to act as a great emotional purge to the listeners and leave them
happily exhausted.

When the sermon ended, spirituals were sung under the able direction of
a young Negro named George Smith. <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148)
The singing was enhanced by the fervor and the earnest simplicity with
which it was presented. Shining countenances raised heavenward, voices
lifted exultantly, and feet beating rhythmically in accompaniment, the
congregation entered wholeheartedly into the singing and seemed
oblivious of everything else.

The next day on the boat returning to the mainland, Smith, young and
well educated, tried to remember some of the tales told him when he was
a boy. They were mostly the better known ones, except the Fox and the
Rabbit, which concerned the Fox thriftily planting sweet potatoes and
the Rabbit digging them up.

Prevalent beliefs covered wider ground. If an owl hoots on top of the
house or near the house, it is supposed to be a sign of
death. [44](das26.htm#xref_44) A counteractive is to throw salt on the
fire, burn an old shoe, or turn pockets wrong side out. If a rooster
comes upon the porch and starts crowing, it is a sign of death in the
house. [13b](das26.htm#xref_13b) It is also considered bad luck to start
on a journey and have to turn back. The method employed to ward off
disaster is to draw a cross where you turned back and spit on it. We
were told that most of the island Negroes believed

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

in root doctors, but that they imported them from the mainland. There
were none on the island.

Smith admitted that he knew very little about the Negroes' belief in
spirits. He did know that if a person had something that the spirit
wanted very badly that person would be haunted by the spirit.

A frizzled chicken is known as a wise chicken and is used to find lost
articles. If something has been buried and its place forgotten, a
frizzled chicken can, according to the islanders, find the place and
scratch up the lost article. [13a](das26.htm#xref_13a)

Smith remembered hearing the older Negroes tell of having watches on
certain definite occasions when they sat up all night waiting for
sunrise. When the sun at last appeared over the horizon, they would
start a sun-dance and bow to the sun.

Death watches he knew nothing about, except present-day customs.
However, he did say that the snake known as the coach-whip was sometimes
wrapped around the neck of a person supposedly dead and its tail put in
the person's mouth to see if he were still breathing.

We questioned young Smith about the festivals that the other Negroes had
described and he told us that during the harvesting season various
celebrations are still held. [38](das26.htm#xref_38)

The boat neared the mainland. Our trip was over. As we bade goodbye to
our guide, we cast a look of farewell at the dim outline of the tropical
island. On the journey homeward impressions received during our stay on
Sapelo crowded against one another in disturbing sequence. Innumerable
memories assailed us. Faintly the echo of shouting rose and fell in the
distance. The measured chanting of voices and the pounding of feet
seemed to follow us across the water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[152:1](das23.htm#fr_141) Katie Brown, Sapelo
Island.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[155:1](das23.htm#fr_142) Julia Grovernor,
Sapelo Island. Deceased winter, 1938.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[156:1](das23.htm#fr_143) Katie Grovernor,
Sapelo Island.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[156:2](das23.htm#fr_144) Phoebe Gilbert,
Sapelo Island.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[157:1](das23.htm#fr_145) Cuffy Wilson, Sapelo
Island.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[157:2](das23.htm#fr_146) Nero Jones, Sapelo
Island.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[158:1](das23.htm#fr_147) Shad Hall, Sapelo
Island.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[162:1](das23.htm#fr_148) George Smith, Sapelo
Island and Brunswick.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Simons Island](das24)

</div>
