[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim11)  [Next](anim13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# X

### THE CONTINUED EXISTENCE OF THE SOUL

WHILE according to the facts adduced in the last chapter it is clear
that a belief has existed that man might, were it not for accident or
the like, continue to live on as a duality in this present life, the
fact of death stared men in the face, and with equal intensity the
belief was held that in death man did not cease to exist, but that the
soul lived on. That the appearance of the deceased in dreams had no
small part in the foundation of this belief seems almost certain. We
have already seen I that dreams were regarded not as phantasies but as
realities, and so the dead who were seen in the dream state were
regarded as souls of the deceased appearing to the living. And other
lines of evidence no doubt seemed to open to primitive man. At any rate,
the fact of this belief, at least as far back as neolithic times, is
evinced by the

\[1. Above, pp. 23 ff.\]

burial with the dead of utensils evidently meant for the service of the
deceased in the land where he found himself after death. This faith is
shown also by the acts of devotion or worship to the departed spirit,
and by material provision of food and other comforts for the soul either
at the grave or elsewhere.\[2\] Similarly evidential are the means taken
to facilitate the soul's exit by door, window, or roof, even through
holes made in the wall of house or tent; and the same value attaches to
the evident effort to prevent the soul's return by carrying the corpse,
to which it is supposed fondly to cling, by devious ways to its last
resting place. Like conclusions are forced by the feasts and
celebrations on anniversaries of death or burial, which attest not only
affectionate remembrance, but first and principally belief in the soul's
continuance. This belief in the soul's continuance is perhaps

\[1. Graves of Greeks and Romans have been found where permanent
conduits in the grave mounds permitted the passage of liquids and viands
to the corpse--cf. Frazer's *Pausanias*, X. 4:7, and the editor's
comment on the passage; and the same is true of graves in Mongolia,
though in this case the evident purpose was not the entry of food but
the exit of the ghost, as the openings are at the side of the
tomb--*cf*. *Geographical Magazine*, May, 1913, p. 651.\]

the most momentous and the choicest, as well as the oldest, that
animistic races have left to us. The clear beginning of the doctrine so
prized in all religions save Gautama's, viz., that concerning the
immortality of the soul, is here in its embryonic stage. We have already
noted that one means, perhaps the chief one, to the acquisition of this
idea was the appearance of the dead in dreams. The deceased, so the
conclusion ran, was not dead, he still existed, and in his own form. It
may be remarked, en passant, that if religion inheres at all in this
belief, then religion is everywhere existent; for no race has yet been
discovered which bad not faith in the continuance of life beyond the
grave. Once more, if religion inheres not in belief but in the practices
to which belief gives rise, then in the care for the well-being of the
soul of one that has passed, so widely prevalent, religion is no less
shown to be universal.

To suppose, however, that the content of the primitive idea is that of
full-fledged immortality or unending existence would be a serious
misunderstanding. The conception of deathlessness in its absolute sense
is probably never present among savages. Primitive philosophy does not
sound so profound depths. Hence, because "immortality" says more than is
contained in the savage's concepts of future life, the word
"continuance" has been employed to express the notion found among the
uncivilized. On the other hand, one must be on his guard when it is
affirmed that savages have no idea of immortality. In the strict sense
this is true, but only in so far as uncultured peoples have not reached
any conception which at all approaches that of endlessness. They have no
enduring records. Oral tradition, which may easily become confused and
dim, carries them back only a few generations--four or five, say. So the
notion of the soul life may be either indefinite--or rather,
undefined--or may be regarded as limited to a certain number, greater or
less, of lives like that already passed. Indeed, the life may have
degrees, so to speak. Thus the African Etoi and Bakongo believe that
"though ghosts have died once, they can die a second time, and so become
more dead than before."' Among the Haida a war party is always
accompanied by a shaman, among

\[1. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, pp. 8, 24, etc.; Weeks,
*Primitive Bakongo*, pp. 223-224, 243-244.\]

whose duties is to kill the souls of the enemy.\[4\] In Fiji the natives
believe that there is a certain Samu Yalo ("killer of souls") who haunts
the path to the realm of the dead, and when a ghost comes along rushes
out to kill it with an ax unless it succeeds in escaping. Another Fijian
monster lies in wait and kills the souls of bachelors, so that they
never reach heaven. In the same islands a ghost that is troublesome to
the living may have his case settled by his unconditional demise.\[5\]
That mortals may die again seems reasonable if only it be remembered
that even gods grow old and die, according to "the cultured Egyptians."
"Very aged was Ra, and the saliva ran down from his mouth and fell upon
the earth"--a perfect picture of senility.\[6\] Heiti-eibib, a Hottentot
hero-god, had the habit of dying.\[7\] In Polynesia Maui's wife used
also to kill the gods.\[8\]

\[4. Swanton, *Jesup North Pacific Expedition*, i. 40-51, cited by
Halliday, *Greek Divination*, p. 95.

5\. Williams, *Fiji*, i. 244 ff.; Wilkes, *U.S. Exploring Expedition*,
85.

6\. Murray, *Ancient Egyptian Legends*, p. 81; cf. Wiedemann, *Religion
of the Ancient Egyptians*, pp. 54 ff.

7\. Hahn, *Tsuni-Goam*, pp. 56 ff.

8 Westervelt, *Legends of Maui*, p. 127.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Modifications of the Idea of Continuance](anim13.md)
