[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim15)  [Next](anim17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIV

### DESCENSUS AVERNI

THE notion of the underworld as a prison place in which the dead are
confined has given rise in many different centers to the thought of some
daring mortal who breaks the law separating the two worlds, and visits
the home of the dead, winning through by power of love, or sheer bravado
and physical might or challenge, or by favor of the gods. The *Descensus
Averni* is a widespread myth. Its earliest literary form meets us in
pre-Semitic Babylonia in the story of Tammuz and Ishtar--now so well
known that no extended narrative is here necessary.\[1\] A fairly close
parallel to the Ishtar episode is found in far-away Japan, where the
goddess Izanami died and her spouse Izanagi descended after her, broke
the taboo concerning preservation of darkness (which is an element in so
many cycles of folklore unconnected with the *Descensus*),

\[1. For the story, see most conveniently Rogers, Cuneiform Parallels,
pp. 121-131.\]

and with difficulty escaped to the upper air, pursued by the revengeful
goddess and her minions.\[2\] The retirement of the love-goddess Ishtar
in Babylonia to the underworld is also paralleled by that of the
sun-goddess in Japan, though it is "the rock-cave of heaven" in which
the latter hides herself, and so brings darkness, as the absence of
Ishtar brings lack of desire, on earth.\[3\] Hercules' famous exploit of
descending and baling Cerberus, the snake-haired dog guardian of the
shades who would fain return, to the upper air is in keeping with the
hero's hardy and daring nature. The Babylonians having conceived so
early the notion, it is not to be wondered at that the Mandaeans, who
took over so much of Babylonian custom and mythology, should take over
in the *descensus Averni* the exploit of Manda-da hayye.\[4\] Of course
the Vergilian story of Æneas' descent at once recurs to the mind, as
well as that of Vergil's imitator and disciple Dante.

But the idea is not confined to peoples so far along in culture. Maui,
the culture hero of New Zealand and the South Sea, made the dread
journey to meet his great ancestress -

\[2. Aston, *Shinto*, p. 93.

3 Ib., p. 100.

4\. *NSH*., vii. 147.\]

the lure here was merely material, a fish hook and to get fire.\[5\] The
Etoi, a people of Africa, know of the same venturous enterprise with the
taboo of eating ghost food, which connects the story in thought, though
hardly in origin, with the Greek myth of the ravished Persephone, and
with a story of quite different purport in Babylonia.\[6\] Among some
New Guinean peoples there are chosen mortals that make the journey and
return in safety.\[7\] Omaha Indians regard it as possible for the
living, in a swoon, to visit the dread regions of the dead and return
unscathed.\[8\] But these are the exceptions, and only heroes and gods,
and even they under specially favoring auspices, like the command,
behest, or permission of the chief god, visit the dead and are able to
reascend from "The Land of No-Return."

\[6. Westervelt, *Legends of Maui*, pp. 23, 48, 68 ff.

7\. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, pp. 240, 336.

7\. Seligmann, *Melanesians*, pp. 655 ff.

8\. Fletcher and La Flesche, *27th Report*, etc., p. 589.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Worship](anim17)
