[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim09)  [Next](anim11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII

### LOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF PARITY OF BEING

MANY and wide-branched are the results that flow from the
anthropomorphizing by man of other objects in nature, from the
transference to them, in thought, of personality with all its qualities,
and from the conception that unseen and intangible, yet in effect
substantial, beings exist "free" in the universe. Among the most
interesting results are those that issue as almost a necessary
consequence of this estimate of things interchange of form and mode of
being. Indeed, this lies on the very surface of the conception, although
its logical relationship does not seem to have been pointed out.

If man, stones, trees, plants, animals, spirits, and gods are all in the
same scale of existence, why should they not exchange forms, undergo
metamorphosis? Why should not the soul of a man enter the body of a
being in what we regard as a different scale of existence and animate it
either in play or in earnest, voluntarily or under stress of superior
power exerted by some other superior in the necessary amount or quality
of force, and do this either temporarily or permanently? What is to
hinder, for example, man's becoming an animal, especially if he does not
distinguish between his own being and that of an animal?\[1\] Or, on the
contrary, why should not animals become men? And why should not
countless changes take place among other grades of existence? In fact,
according to savage man's account of things, all this does occur. Body
and soul, we have seen, constitute a duality, in which, in the stage of
thought we are examining, the soul is, so to speak, a free partner, able
to take its flight and often to return and resume its normal activities
in its own abode. It is the "separable" factor, with a life all its own,
the seat of impulse, will, passion, and desire. We have, therefore, now
to develop the fact of the easy passage from what modern man would
regard as one grade of existence to another, either lower or higher,

\[1. See above, p. 8, and cf Rivers, *Melanesian Society*, i. 151 ff.,
where persons in Banks Islands are believed to be plants, animals, etc.,
with appropriate taboos.\]

or the possession of qualities by one class of beings which in a more
sophisticated stage of culture is considered the exclusive possession of
a different class.

Supernatural or semi-human beings are conceived as having or assuming
the form of birds, animals, serpents, etc., in what we might call their
normal state, but by putting off their covering of skin, feather, or
scale may assume the human form divine. Among illustrations of this
occur with greatest frequency the mouse, jackal, monkey, dove, and
tortoise.\[2\] Obassi Osaw, one of the two great beings worshipped by
the Etoi of Africa, was originally a man and a chief.\[3\] In the
Oceanican mythology the firemaking gods appear to have the form of
birds.\[4\] Maui, the Polynesian hero, was able to assume the form of
animal, bird, or insect, and Rupe, another being in the same cycle of
stories, changes himself into a bird.\[5\] Among the Ainus a goddess may

\[2. Parker, *Village Folk Tales*, pp. 308ff.; Frere, *Old Deccan Days*,
pp. 183, 193; Stokes, *Indian Fairy Tales*, pp. 41 ff.; Swynnerton,
*Indian Nights Entertainment*, p. 344; Natesu Sestri, *Madana Kama
Raja*, pp. 56, 57.

3\. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, pp. 183, 184.

4\. Westervelt, *Legends of Maui*, passim.

5\. Ib., pp. 11, 20, 24, 38, 114, 125-126.\]

become a flower, a woman, or a frog.\[6\] Reference may be made in
passing to the gods of Egypt, with their composite make-up of bird,
reptile, or beast and man. There seems to be good reason for holding
that this composite form is not original, and that the partly human form
is the result of the refining influence of culture. Originally, it
seems, the forms were those of birds, beasts, etc. Certainly the
explanation given that the gods were once in human form and that, hard
pressed by their enemies, they took the form of beasts in order to
deceive or elude their oppressors, is purely animistic and in accord
with the principle under exposition.

The cases where superhuman beings take human form are innumerable, apart
altogether from the usual course of anthropomorphization of the gods. In
the Old Testament the appearances to Adam, Abram, Lot, Gideon, and
Manoah occur to the mind at once.\[7\] In "Hordedef's Tale" four female
deities and one male god assume human shape.\[8\]

This being so, it is not at all wonderful

\[6. Batchelor, *Ainu*, pp. 26, 262-263.

7\. Gen. 3:8; 18:2 ff.; 19:1 ff.; Judges 6:12; 13:3, 9, etc.

8\. Petrie, *Egyptian Tales*, i. 33 ff.\]

that mating takes place between these different orders and that
offspring partaking of the qualities of both are produced.\[9\]
Especially do superhuman beings mate with humans, earth- and heaven-born
beings marry. Outside the mythology of classical Greece detailing the
amours of the Olympians of both sexes from Zeus down, one may recall the
union of the "sons of God" and the daughters of men; the numerous cases
in the poems of Homer, Pindar, and Vergil where the heroes boast a
mingled ancestry partly divine; the many tribes whose eponym is a being
semi-divine, such as the Koyis of India, who trace their origin to the
union of Bhima and a wild woman; and the beautiful story of Ono (which
is typical of several cycles of tales), who greatly longed for his ideal
of feminine beauty. She finally appeared and became his wife. With the
birth of their son there appeared also in the neighborhood a dog which
became intensely hostile to Ono's wife. One day the animal attacked her
with unusual fury; then in uncontrollable fear she resumed her former
shape as a fox, leaped the fence, and disappeared. In this case the myth
has

\[9. Rivers, *Melanesian Society*, i. 25-26.\]

a rather uncertain meaning: some construe it as indicating that a fox
had assumed the form of a woman; another and more probable reading is
that we have to do here with a sort of genie in animal shape; a third
interpretation is that the fox shape was assumed for escape. The second
rendering or the first accords with the hostility of the dog, which
recognized his enemy though in another (human) form.\[10\]

With the prevalence of such views as these it is not strange that the
origin of children is often sought not in the sexual act but in some
chance affair, and that "miraculous" conception or even the virgin birth
is no stranger in popular beliefs.\[11\] It must be remembered, in
considering this particularly errant idea, that nine months elapse
between conception and birth, and a considerable number of weeks between
conception and the knowledge that a new life has begun. The idea is
therefore not surprising to one who realizes how aberrant is savage
reasoning in tracing cause and effect. And when to this added the
conservatism

\[10. Gen. 6:1-4; Thurston, *Omens and Superstitions*, p. 78; Talbot,
*In the Shadow of The Bush*, p. 340; J. C. Berry, in Blakeslee, *Japan
and Japanese-American Relations*, p. 139.

11 Milloué, in *Revue de 1'histoire de la religion*, xlix (1904),
34-47.\]

of the primitive thinker, the tenacity with which he holds to notions
that have once gained entrance, the fear of letting go of these notions
and of admitting that what has been his faith is mistaken, we may begin
to realize how such beliefs, once entertained, persist. Thus, in the New
Hebrides "women sometimes have a notion that the origin, the beginning,
of one of their children is a cocoanut, or a breadfruit."\[12\] Mr.
Frazer points out what is indicated above, that the connection between
sexual intercourse and conception is unknown.\[13\] To the more
sophisticated, indeed, this error seems not only impossible but
literally ridiculous. Mr. Frazer goes on to show that at the moment when
life is first perceived the mother may be intensely observant of some
natural object, and \[through the ideas of interpenetration of spirit to
be dealt with later\] she supposes being or power to have passed from
the object, entered her body, and produced the effect she feels.
Consequently "she might imagine that the spirit of a kangaroo, of
grass-seed, of water, or of a gum-tree (or of any other object) had
passed into her, and accordingly that her child . . .

\[12. Codrington, *JAI*, xviii. 310-311.

13\. *FR*, Sept. 1905.\]

was really a kangaroo . . . though to the bodily eye it presented the
outward form of a human being." Mr. Todd has also registered the
fact\[14\] that conception is ascribed to various objects, animate and
inanimate. Among American Indians rain falling on a maiden's navel
induces conception.\[15\] And among the Nigerian peoples a child may
come into being through incarnation of a human spirit or by the entrance
into the mother of tree-spirits.\[16\]

If human beings can arise from sources such as these, it will not come
as a surprise if we find that whole tribes trace descent from animals or
plants, or make alliances with them. This, however, raises the large
question of totemism, which can not be treated here. Mention is made of
the subject in order to avoid the appearance of overlooking this very
important phase or consequence of animistic thinking. The single example
may be noted here of the Etoi of Africa, who hold the crab to have been
grandfather to a tribe.\[17\]

One of the important results of this mode of thought is the belief that
men, either voluntarily

\[14. Todd, *Primitive Family*, pp. 70ff.

15\. Fewkes, *American Ethnology, 28th Report*, pp. 44, 48, 65, etc.

16\. Thomas, *Anthropological Report*, p. 31.

17\. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, p. 196.\]

or under *force majeure* exercised by sorcerer or witch, pass from the
human to the brute form of life. Among the concomitants of the belief in
witches existent as late as in the eighteenth century and so balefully
dominant during the Middle Ages, in Europe, were the notion of
were-wolves and the idea that witches took the forms of cats, bares, or
bats. Many are the tales of deadly destruction wrought by fiendish
humans who, to sate a gluttony for blood or for revenge, transformed
themselves into wolves and performed wolfish deeds. Equally well-known
are the tales, not told as mere fiction but held as truth, of the
conversion, as by Circe in the Odyssey, of men into beasts, or, as in
the Arabian Nights, into stones or other forms of non-human being. A few
cases only will be cited here of the persistence of such beliefs among
primitive races of the present. Particularly in Africa is this idea
widely diffused. The leopard-man is as real to the people of West Africa
as was the were-wolf to the European peasant of the fifteenth century.
This leopard-man assumes at pleasure the form of the animal from which
be takes his name, preying on strangers or on his own people." The Fangs
hold that under the magic of an enemy they may be changed into
monkeys.\[19\] In Oceanica Maui transforms an enemy into a dog.\[20\]
Among the Dyaks a man may be suspected of changing himself into a tiger,
and is immune to ordinary methods of punishment. Only strong medicine is
equal to the task of discipline.\[21\] In other parts of Malaysia also
men transform themselves into tigers or into fishes, and a woman becomes
an ape.\[22\] In India it would seem as if there were hardly any animal
shape which may not become the refuge of man or the means of his working
evil deeds.\[23\] In other words, as the gods of Egypt were regarded as
abandoning in part their own shape and taking that of animals, birds, or
reptiles, so human beings could put on the forms or grades of life of
lower animals (as we regard them and primitive peoples did not).\[24\]

\[18. Milligan, *Fetish Folk*, p. 53; Talbot, *In the Shadow of the
Bush*, pp. 71, 82, 191-195, 247-254, and chap. VII.

19\. Milligan, pp.123-I24.

20\. Westervelt, *Legends of Maui*, p. 80.

21\. Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, pp. 265-278

22\. Skeat, *Malay Magic*, p. 162; Cox, Folk-lore, chap. II.

23 Thurston, *Omens and Superstitions*, p. 260, *et passim*.

24 Interesting reading on this whole subject of metamorphosis will be
found in Lang's *Myth, Ritual and Religion*, chap. IV.\]

One may go still farther and find humans transforming themselves into
inanimate objects. So the Basques have a story of a witch who determined
to drown the crew of a fishing boat, The boat was to meet three waves,
the first and second of which the boat might ride, but the third, which
would be the witch herself, would overwhelm the boat and its crew. But
the cabin boy overheard the plot and the means of foiling it also came
to him, so he launched a harpoon into the heart of the third wave, which
divided and dashed on the shore, a mass of bloody foam. On the captain's
return, he found his wife dying of her wound.\[25\]

Sometimes, before power can be obtained to effect these transformations,
either on self or on another, some magical rite or process must be
performed or undergone, or some chance happening must have been
encountered. In the Far East a common belief is that an animal that has
drunk water which has lain for twenty years in a human skull acquires
power to assume the human form at will.\[26\] This is alleged to have
been the case of a vixen

\[25. Vinson, *Le Folk-lore du Pays Basque*, p. 20.

26\. C. T. Collyer, in *Baltimore Christian Advocate*, Oct. 23, 1913.\]

in China, who became a woman, the "Cleopatra of the East," and this
transformation led to the founding of the first kingdom in Korea.

If the higher ranks of life might be changed into lower grades, the
reverse process was equally possible. It is established that in Egypt
the practice was prevalent which until recent times was current
throughout Africa of sacrificing attendants upon the death of a chief
that their souls might serve his in the spirit world. But the softening
effects of culture in the Nile land refined away in early historic times
this cruel custom. The problem remained--how provide service for the
dead nobles and chiefs? The difficulty was surmounted by magic. Images
of clay and pottery were created and placed in the tomb, and these, by
utterance of the magic formula, were animated in the spirit world as
attendants of the deceased. These little figures, called *ushabtiu*, are
found literally by hundreds in the tombs of Egypt. There is reason to
believe that the same principle was employed in Korea, Japan, China, and
Mongolia. There at the tombs are often found, in clay, wood, and stone,
effigies of attendants and of various animals. The most reasonable
explanation of these, which is borne out by explanations given to the
writer by Koreans, is that these were supposed to be animated in the
spirit world to do the will of the deceased nobles or rulers at whose
tombs they were placed. Confirmation of this is found in the Nihongi
(one of the books of Japan coming nearest in estimation to that we
render to our Scriptures), where the book professes to give an account
of events occurring 2 B.C.-3 A.D. The story narrates the burial up to
the neck of the personal attendants of a deceased brother of the mikado,
this being the method of execution in such cases. But the laments of the
victims so affected the mikado that when the empress died, clay figures
were substituted. The dating of this event is probably wrong, since at
the funeral of an empress in 247 A.D., sacrifice of attendants was still
in vogue.\[27\]

\[27 Aston, *Shinto*, pp. 56-58; Underwood, *Religions of Eastern Asia*,
pp. 89-90.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Death Not Always Regarded As Inevitable](anim11.md)
