[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim00)  [Next](anim02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

THE result of recent historical studies, whether on anthropological,
sociological, archeological, or religious lines, has brought into ever
clearer vision as the substratum of all civilizations that stage of
culture from which this book takes its title. One consequence is:
general recognition of animism as a life factor, the power of which is
not yet exhausted, the study of which fascinates because of its almost
infinite variety and its persistent force. The words "animism,"
"animistic," have come to fall ever so lightly from tongue and pen and
meet us at every turn. Yet what animism is few who use the term
adequately realize. Though Sir E. B. Tylor in his imperishable monograph
on *Primitive Culture* exhibited many of its phenomena and blocked out
the main lines of investigation over forty years ago, comparatively few
understand its significance or are acquainted with its manifestations
even yet. Fewer still comprehend the doings and beliefs as actual or
realize the state of mind--operations of perception and reason--of those
whose acts and beliefs we call animistic.

There seemed to be room, then, for a small volume which should exhibit
the phenomena and the related and inferred beliefs of this complex stage
in a simple manner, with sufficiently numerous citations to illustrate
clearly, yet without the overlay of too abundant references. The
references here given have been drawn almost entirely from very recent
and authoritative sources gathered in the writer's own reading, easily
accessible in the current of books on travel now pouring from the press.
Most of the volumes to which reference has been made in this discussion
belong to the twentieth century. Moreover these sources are primary.
Recourse has seldom been had even to so valuable a collection of facts
as Fraser's quite exhaustive Golden Bough in its third edition. The
facts there adduced were employed by the talented author for quite
another end than the present writer's, and this might easily have led to
confusion.

What value a knowledge of the features of this agglomerate of facts and
beliefs has becomes evident when it is remembered that over half the
population of the globe is animistic in its main features of faith and
action, that a large part of humanity entertains beliefs only one remove
away from this and regards as fundamental a philosophy of life grounded
in animistic thought, and that at least three basal tenets of
Christianity itself are common to Christians and animists. Japanese,
Koreans, Chinese, the larger part of the population of India, the North
Asiatic tribes, Oceanicans, Africans, and American Indians are, or were
recently, animists. No stage of culture, no great religion, has ever
been able to disown some of the commonest heirlooms left by primitive
modes of thinking. From the standpoints both of culture and of religion
animism may be described (not defined) as the taproot which sinks
deepest in racial human experience and continues its cellular and
fibrous structure in the tree trunk of modern conviction. It is not less
important than the surface roots of accrued beliefs that branch out on
all sides, drawing a wide-sourced sustenance, while the taproot
penetrates the subsoil of man's most intimate soul-substance.

Hardly less interesting is the fact that in some fundamentals--religious
and social--the advanced thought of the day is returning to some
convictions essential to animistic culture. One would not be drawing the
long bow were he to affirm that in that stage every act in life had a
religious aspect. Nothing a man could do but might be regarded as either
pleasing to spirits or the reverse. One might say that animists went far
beyond Matthew Arnold's dictum that conduct is three-fourths of
life--for them it embraced the whole of life. That is precisely what
advanced thinkers are maintaining today, and in that tenet is the best
promise for improvement in modern conditions among all classes.

In another aspect, too, the social, we are returning to early
conceptions. Under totemism, the foundation of which is an animistic
view of things non-human, the individualism that became so marked a
feature in some philosophies of the last centuries and gave impetus even
to revolutions was unknown. The characteristic of totemic and derived
society was much nearer that slogan which has now advanced beyond the
circle of purely socialistic propaganda: "Each for all and all for
each."

Theologically also we find ourselves returning to old, old views of
man's relation to the supernatural. The comparatively recent doctrine of
sin is being discarded. The implacability of Deity, the notion of that
Deity's infinity as the measure of offence, making of sin an enormity
that clouds eternally the face of God and requires an infinite and
exactly equivalent penalty, no longer holds the entire field. On the
other hand, the act itself, its effect on the doer and his kind, its
indelibility of effect on the one side, and the propitiability of the
offended Spirit, his desire to have man reinstate himself in divine
favor--the willingness to come more than half way (to state the matter
in the language of every-day life)--are now standing out in relief.

It seems hardly necessary to remark that, of course, in all these cases
the effect is not that of the return of a circle's circumference into
itself. There has been marked, if spiral, progress, progress comparable
to that of the earth in the solar system toward its distant goal in the
constellation of Hercules. The one encouraging result of this study is
that from the beginning the heart of man was essentially sound, though
his vagaries were many during the centuries in which he was feeling his
way. To use a significant term, man has ever been essentially
theotropic, though he was not always conscious of the direction of his
tropism.

In studying this subject, then, we are engaged in discovering the paths
our own ancestors have trodden, and our gratitude is due them for
leading us with increasing certitude to a nobler way of thought, so that
we see in the heavens not deities, but the work of One; and in the earth
the effects of that same One's immanence, his gift to his sons and
daughters.

The author takes this opportunity to acknowledge with gratitude the
kindness of Mr. Francis Medhurst who has read all the proofs and offered
many valuable suggestions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](anim02)
