[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim04)  [Next](anim06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# III

### THE SOUL'S NATURE

AN important inquiry meets us at this point: How did man think of this
second something that usually inhabited his body but sometimes left it
for a time and at death left it permanently? For it would soon have been
borne in upon him (even though he did not consciously recognize the
soul's presence and operations) that the permanent absence of soul meant
death, and that therefore while he lived it was present. What did he
think concerning the nature of this all-important part of him? It is
very clear from a number of circumstances that the notion of the soul
was governed by the phenomenon of death. Decisive upon this point is the
wonderful accord of meaning in so many languages of the word which
expresses this inner elusive reality. In the developed languages we may
note the root idea of such words as the Latin *spiritus*, *anima*,
*animus*, Irish *anam*, Sanskrit atman, Greek *psyche*, *pneuma*,
*thumos*, German *Geist*, Dutch *geest*, English *ghost*, Hebrew
*nephesh*, *ruah*, Sumerian *zid*, Babylonian *napishtu*, Egyptian
*kneph*, all of which go back to the notion of breath, or of a gentle
movement of air or wind. One may forage at large and observe the same
root notion and a similar usage in many other different regions,
discovering the Australian *wang*, Mohawk *atonritz*,
Californian-Oregonian *wkrisha*, *piuts*, Dakotan *niya*, Javanese
*nawa*, Aztec *ehecatl*, Nicaraguan *julio*, Gypsy *duk*, and Finnish
*far*. This line of thought is fortified by the conception of the
insubstantiality of the soul, expressed in such words as *skia*,
*umbra*, and "shade," used to denote the disembodied spirit. Terms of
similar content were used not only by the cultured Greeks and Romans,
but are known to be employed among North American Indians, Zulus and
Basutos in Africa, among the Calabars, and elsewhere. One recalls the
Hebrew *rephaim*. The survival of the belief in the insubstantiality of
the disembodied spirit till the Middle Ages is shown by Dante, for
according to him the souls in purgatory knew that the poet had not
passed through death by the fact that his figure cast a shadow. Indeed,
the idea of communication by a disembodied spirit with the living in
dreams was entrenched by the reflection that its very immateriality
enabled it to hold communication with sleeping persons without arousing
them from sleep.

How early man came to realize that this part which is designated by
breath or puff of air is his real self is impossible to say. But what is
significant is that in many languages the word meaning spirit, life, or
breath has also the connotation "self," as has, e.g., the Hebrew
*nephesh*. And how natural such a signification is can be illustrated by
the concrete fact that Laura Bridgman, the blind-deaf-mute, is said to
have expressed the thought of death in a dream by the statement that
"God took away my breath to heaven." Among the Ekoi of Nigeria ghost and
soul and breath are connected as phases of the same thing or as
equivalents. One must not forget that the phenomenon of death which is
most obvious is the expiring sigh or last breath, after the departure of
which life ceases to exist. What more natural than that the breath thus
finally exhaled should be associated with the soul or spirit, or, as in
some cases, be thought to carry the soul with it? Since in dreams a
person deceased has been seen and addressed while the body was known to
have dissolved, the way is direct and the step short to the conclusion
that the self, the real person, is that same breath or soul.\[1\]

But did primitive peoples endow the soul with form? The testimony to
this is abundant and cogent.\[2\] The most natural and perhaps most
common idea of the soul's shape is that it is a: miniature of the
possessor's form. Among those who have held this belief are American
Indians such as the Hurons, the natives of British Columbia, Alaska, and
the Esquimaux of the districts adjacent to Behring Straits, islanders
such as the Niassians near Sumatra and the Fijians, and continental
dwellers such as the Malays and West Africans. To give a single example,
Nigerian Etoi believe that "when a man's body decays a new form comes
out of it, in every way like the man himself when be was above ground

\[1. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, p. 230.

2\. It has been collected not only by Tyler in his *Primitive Culture*,
but also by Frazer, Taboo, chap. II.

3\. Talbot, *In the Shadow of the Bush*, pp. 17, 230; cf. Frazer,
*Taboo*, p. 39.\]

For the Egyptians abundant testimony is available as to the belief in
the double, existing indeed from birth.\[4\] There is a picture in the
Roman catacombs portraying the death of a Christian, in which the soul
is represented as leaving the mouth of the dying in a cloud-like shape
that takes his own form. What is practically a replica of this is found
on the walls of the Campo Santo at Pisa; and in the east transept of
Salisbury Cathedral on the sculptured monument over the tomb of Bishop
Giles de Bridgport the soul appears as a naked figure carried by an
angel.\[5\] The usual notion is that the soul is invisible. But as in
other respects shamans or medicine men are credited with extraordinary
powers, so they are supposed to be able to discern the spirits or souls
moving about or endeavoring to escape from the body. Sometimes the organ
of detection is the ear, which can note the motion of the soul's wings.
Or, the soul being of human shape, it leaves faint footmarks as
indications of its presence, and light

\[4. A notable case among many is the bas-relief in the temple at Luxor,
exhibiting the presentation at birth to Ra of the royal child Amenhotep
III and his double. Cf. Budge, Osiris, etc., p. 119.

5\. Clodd, Animism, p. 40.\]

ashes strewn on the ground may betray its presence to the keen-sighted
medicine man.

Mention has been made of the return of the soul of one deceased to the
haunts of the body as evidenced by dreams. The form appearing in the
dream was recognized as that of a friend, again testifying to the
assumed fact that the soul has the shape of the body. Further testimony
to this belief is found in the faith that the soul is held to suffer in
some degree the fate of the body. Brazilian Indians, for example,
believe that the soul arrives in the other world hacked and torn, or
uninjured, exactly as was the condition of the body at death.\[6\]
Australians tie together the toes and bind together the thumbs behind
the back, or mutilate the body and fill it with stones, or, again, they
lop off the thumb of a slain enemy, that the ghost may not hurl shadowy
spear or pull the bowstring in the land of spirits.\[7\] Chinese and
Africans abhor mutilation, especially decapitation, as a punishment, for
the latter produces headless ghosts.\[8\] And Shakespeare makes Macbeth
cry out:

\[6. Im Thum, *Among the Indians of Guiana*, passim.

7\. Cases of the kind are cited in Frazer, *The Dying God*, pp. 10-11;
and Howitt, *Native Tribes*, pp. 449, 474.

8\. Cf. Roscoe, *The Baganda*, pp. 281-282.\]

"Shake not thy GORY locks at me." The ghost retains the bloody form in
which the body was left at its departure. From classical Greece and Rome
the evidence for this same idea of the soul's form is abundant and
cogent; and it would not be difficult to show, since so much has been
revealed in the frescoes and vase paintings recovered in the
Mediterranean region, that this idea comes down from very primitive
times. In the paintings which represent Hermes Psychopompus directing
the issue and return of souls, the latter are figured as winged
mannikins, coming from or returning to burial jars.\[9\] The form of
Patroklos' shade was that of the living hero.\[11\]

A notion closely akin to the foregoing is that which connects the soul
with the shadow. While many curious ideas which gather around the
latter--such as the Brahman belief that the shadow of a pariah falling
on food defiles it--do not involve the identity of the two, in many
cases there can be little doubt that soul and shadow are not only
closely related but are regarded as identical. Some believe that an
assault upon the shadow may be fatal

\[9. Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 43, and Themis, p. 205.

10\. Iliad, xxiii. 65 ff.\]

to its possessor, or at least extremely harmful. The Indians of the
lower Frazer River hold that man has four souls, of which one is the
shadow. The Euahlayi of Australia believe that man has a dream spirit, a
shadow spirit, perhaps an animal spirit, and one that leaves only at
death.\[11\] Other Australians consider that each individual has a
*choi*, a sort of disembodied soul, and a *ngai*, which lives in the
heart. The *choi* awaits reincarnation after death, the *ngai* passes
immediately after death into the children of the deceased. It is the
latter that sometimes leaves a person temporarily in his lifetime, e.g.,
when he faints. The *choi* has some sort of vague relationship with the
shadow.\[12\] The Kai of New Guinea also believe that man has two
souls,\[13\] as do some of the Fijians, one of these being light (as a
reflection in the water), the other dark, like the shadow.\[14\] Dyaks
assert the possession of three or even of seven, souls; one may leave
the body temporarily, the man dies only when all leave."

\[11. Mrs. Parker, *Euahlayi Tribe*, p. 35.

12\. Frazer, *Belief in Immortality*, i. 129.

13\. Neuhass, *Deutsch Neu-Guinea*, iii. 112.

14\. Williams, *Fiji*, i. 242.

15\. Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, p. 177; cf. Hastings, *ERE*, vi.
226.\]

Gilyaks may have three souls. The Balong of the Cameroon think that one
may have several souls, one in his own body and others in different
animals. The death of one of these animals, say, at the hand of a hunter
causes the man's death.\[16\] The equivalence of the shadow to the man
himself is proved by its use (or that of its-dimensions, in a later
stage of culture) in the same manner as the body in foundation
sacrifice--to give stability to the structure. After an exactly similar
manner of thought the reflection of a body in water or a mirror is
regarded as the soul. Injury to reflection or shadow may result in
injury to the corresponding member of the body. Among the Congo people
shadow or picture or reflection is the equivalent of soul.\[17\] This
whole manner of thought explains why in so many regions the natives do
not willingly submit to being photographed or represented on
canvas.\[18\]

While the usual mode of thought represents

\[16. Globus, lxix (1896), 277, cited in Hastings, *ERE*, iv. 412-13.

17\. Weeks, *Among Congo Cannibals*, p. 162; cf. Talbot, *In the Shadow
of The Bush*, p. 230.

18\. Cases cited in Frazer, *Golden Bough*, Part II; *Taboo*, ii.
77-100.\]

the human soul as a mannikin, other ideas are found. Among the ancient
Egyptians, in Brazil, in Melanesia, in Bohemia, Malaysia, Java, Sumatra,
Borneo, and elsewhere the shape of the spirit may be that of a
bird;\[19\] in British Columbia the bird is enclosed in an egg in the
nape of the neck. Or the soul may take the form of a mouse (Brunswick,
Transylvania, Swabia, Saxony), which may differ in color in different
regions; or of a fly (Transylvania), a lizard (India), or an indistinct
cloudy form (Scotland ).\[20\] Greeks and Serbs thought of the soul also
as a butterfly, and the Greek name for one species of this insect is
Psyche.

As to the constitution of this part of man's duality there is a wide
consensus along the lines already indicated. Primitive peoples
throughout the world describe it as a vapor, a shadowy, filmy substance,
related to the body as the perfume to the flower. It is pale and
yielding to the touch, without flesh and bone, thin, impalpable,
discerned as the figure in the human eye. Its movements may be

\[19. Bros, *La Religion des peuples non-civilisis*, p. 54.

20\. Miller, *My Schools and Schoolmasters*, pp. 106-107, cited by
Frazer, *Taboo*, pp. 40-41; Brown, *Melanesians*, pp. 141 ff.--here
bird, rat, lizard, etc., are forms the soul takes.\]

as swift as the wind, and so it is sometimes regarded as winged. Yet it
has a certain materiality, and consequently has necessities. After
death, for instance, it needs nourishment and partakes of the spirit,
the essential part, of the material things sometimes provided for it.
Egyptians, carrying the idea still further, provided pictures or models
of food, furniture, and the like, which in a similar way became
available to the spirit. The semi-materiality of the soul is illustrated
by the fact of the return to his temple being known by marks alleged to
be found in maize flour strewed on the threshold of his
temple-pyramid.\[21\]

\[21 Spence, Civilization of Ancient Mexico, p. 47\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The External or Separable Soul](anim06.md)
