[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim08)  [Next](anim10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VII

### "FREE SPIRITS"--THEIR CONSTITUTION AND ACTIVITIES

THE existence and great numbers of spirits which are, so to speak,
"free" in the universe have just been shown and discussed.\[1\] We have
noted, too, how readily enters here all that we are accustomed to call
miraculous. Only we have constantly to remember that what we call by
that name is to primitive people in full accordance with nature as they
understand it. The very conception of miracle implies arrival at the
thought of a certain uniformity of nature, invariability of cause and
effect outside of which the unexpected may happen - and does. It now
remains to consider the constitution and activities of the "free"
spirits referred to above. A poetical description, having its origin in
Babylonia, may here be quoted and serve as a starting point.

\[1. Above, pp. 97 ff.\]

Great storms sent from heaven, are they,  
The owl that hoots in the city, are they,  
Of Anu's creation,\[2\] children born of earth, are they,  
The highest walls, the broadest walls, like a flood, they pass,  
From house to house they break through,  
No door can shut them out,  
No bolt can turn them back,  
Through the door like a snake, they glide,  
Through the hinge like a wind, they blow.\[2a\]

Indeed their substance is even more subtle than this account indicates.
They can invade a body already possessed by its own spirit and dominate
that body for good or evil, or even drive out the native spirit and
autocratically rule the captured body. The capture may be temporary or
permanent. The words "demoniac" in English, and; \[3\] in Greek, express
the two facts of "possession" for evil or for good. Similarly

\[2. Assyr. lit. "outpouring," i.e., of *semen*.

2a. From cuneiform tablet V, lines 18-35, in the *Utukki Limnuti* series
(Cuneiform Texts XVI. plate 2); translation kindly furnished by the Rev.
Professor Robert W. Rogers, D.D., LL.D., of Drew Theological Seminary,
Madison, N. J.

3\. Plato, *Phædrus*, 238, 241.\]

the word "ecstasy" (Greek )\[4\] sets forth the belief in the temporary
departure from the body of its own spirit, sometimes for communion apart
from the body with other spirits; and another Greek word, , denotes the
entrance into the human organism of a superhuman spirit and the
consequent elevation of feeling and surge of emotion. Though the
examples thus far cited register the conceptions of peoples advanced in
culture, like Greeks, Romans, and Babylonians, they are not the
possession exclusively of such; indeed they are survivals from a cruder
age. Primitive peoples low in the scale of culture entertain them. Such
folk think of the spirits as pervasive and subtle, to whom no doors are
closed; as entering with equal facility portals barred with the grosser
materials--wood, iron, or stone--or with the living flesh.\[5\]

While thus in a manner insubstantial and ethereal in constitution, like
discarnated human spirits, they have needs, wants, and preferences to
which the material may minister. If the gods in the Babylonian epic of
the

\[4. *New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia*, iv. 71-72.

5\. *Murray, Ancient Egyptian Legends*, pp. ii ff.\]

deluge could smell the savor of the postdiluvian offering and "hover
like flies over the sacrifice,"\[6\] not less susceptible to appeals
offered by material substance are the spirits now under consideration.
They have the enjoyments and repulsions of the senses - smell, taste,
even grosser physical passions,\[7\] and so are propitiable or
susceptible of anger. While free to roam, they have chosen homes and
haunts all their own,\[8\] though they may become localized in objects
of nature, as in India,\[9\] where so often a stone is the seat of
deity, and among the Fang and Mpongwe, so that it seems as if nature is
lawless and hostile.\[10\]

As for disposition, since primitive man measures all things by himself,
only intensifying the idea of power--through the use of his imagination,
where the element of mystery enters--it would be expected that spirits
would be good, evil, or neutral except when

\[6. Rogers, *Cuneiform Parallels*, p. 98.

7 Frazer, *Scapegoat*, pp. 112-113; Gen. 6: 1-4; Tobit 8:1-3; Skeat,
*Malay Magic*, p. 213; Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, pp. 194-204;
Thomas, Anthropological Report, p. 127.

8\. Keller, *Madagascar*, p. 98.

9\. *Methodist Recorder* (London), July 10, 1913.

10 Milligan, *Fetish Folk*, p. 279.\]

conciliated or offended,\[11\] that good spirits could be aroused to
wrath by neglect or affront, while evil spirits could be appeased,
mollified, or at least rendered harmless by right measures. Some of
these spirits are portrayed as jealous and envious, particularly hostile
to strangers, and disliking to hear praise of those mortals or their
progeny who inhabit the land where these spirits live.\[12\] New
Guineans, however proud of wife, children, or possessions, never praise
them but always speak in deprecatory terms. They also dislike to go into
the region of another tribe, even for medical treatment, lest the
spirits there resident be offended and work them harm.\[13\] It will be
seen at once how these beliefs affect habits of travel and social
intercourse.

The varied names of different kinds of spirits are probably a legacy
from very early times. We may gather something from our own folk-lore,
which mentions fairies and pixies, gnomes, trolls, fauns, satyrs, and
dwarfs, elves, vampires, and goblins, sirens, mermaids,

\[11. Cox, *Folk-lore*, chap. III.

12 Parker, *Village Folk Tales of Ceylon*, i. 16,

et passim.

12\. Newton, *In Far New Guinea*, pp. 86, 120.\]

and kelpies, nymphs, dryads, and naiads, and all their ilk, whose
existence and habits are better known to nurses and nursery children
than to the unimaginative scientist. While these creatures are not
indeed the free spirits of whom we are speaking, they illustrate the
belief in such spirits. For these familiars of childhood are no modern
creation, they are survivals of pre-Christian faith, and like the free
spirits have all the variety that wild imagination could conjure.\[14\]

It must not be forgotten, moreover, that the same fate may overtake them
as could threaten gods themselves in ancient Egypt-they were not above
the hap of death. In Ceylon the Yaka (a sort of evil spirit) is
mortal.\[15\] It may be that out of this thought grew some of the
notions respecting the mentality of spirits. We have seen that they are
placable and conciliable; they are also compellable and beguilable--by
bluff, magic, or threat or use of means productive of results pleasant
or repugnant to them.\[16\]

\[14 Thomas, Anthropological Report, p. 27.

15\. Parker, *Village Folk Tales*, pp. 143, 265, 274.

16\. Tobit, 8:1-3; D'Alviella, *Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 87 ff.;
Batchelor, *Ainu*, pp. 42-43; Furness, *Head-hunters*, pp. 16-17; Weeks,
*Congo Cannibals*, pp. 267 ff.; Kloss, *In the Andamans*, pp. 230 ff.\]

It will at once appear how fruitful this idea is in connection with
shamanism. Sometimes the only control of spirits and salvation of the
people is through shamans.\[17\] The Wollunqua of Central Australia, a
snake spirit, can be either pacified or coerced by magical ceremonies
into doing no harm to celebrants of certain rites.\[18\] The Narrinyeri
often have a mock fight in pretense of avenging a death accredited to
sorcery.\[19\] Some Australians are particularly assured that these
spirits may be outwitted.\[20\] The Ceylonese are convinced that a Yaka
(the man-eating demon referred to above).\[21\] may be bluffed into good
behavior. The Ainu of Japan also regard spirits as beguilable.\[22\]

If spirits are compellable, submissive to control by mortals such as
medicine men and the like, the way is open for a whole series of attacks
in which not only the wills of the spirits but those of mortals,
friends, and

\[17. Carruthers, *Unknown Mongolia*, i. 150 ff.

18\. Spencer and Gillen, *Northern Tribes*, p. 238.

19 Taplin, *Narrinyeri*, p. 21.

20\. Curr, *Australian Race*, i. 87; Howitt, *Native Tribes*, pp. 463,
473, 481.

21 Parker, *Village Folk Tales*, p. 149.

22 Batchelor, *Ainu*, pp. 42-43.\]

enemies combine to the resultant weal or woe of human beings. Wizardry
and sorcery, with their awful fears and dread results, enter by this as
by other doors. And this is by no means always sheer imposture, as the
following shows.

"The sorcerer believes in his own power, and the people believe in it
too. Certainly the New Guinea philosophy of life is that nothing happens
to man without some cause; no man dies a natural death, all suffering
and sickness is due to evil spirits which people this world, and as,
like many of his white brethren, he is quite prepared to take the good
things of life unquestioning, and only to look for causes when evil
comes, there is no place in his philosophy for good spirits; the good is
but the normal state undisturbed by the machinations of evil spirits,
and the evil spirits are usually set to work by some human agent. Though
it seems that while the sorcerer may use charms, working through the
hair that has been mislaid when the head was shaven, or through the
footprints, he is powerful enough to work at times more directly. He is
probably a man of stronger character than his fellows--like other
trades, it runs in certain families -and the very fact that he believes
in his power, and others believe in it, tends to make him independent
and strong in character. He thrives on his reputation, and levies
blackmail on all and sundry till some evil day when patience has been
exhausted, and an opportunity offers to put him out of the way.
Ordinarily he is safe, for no one will touch him or interfere with him
unless he can be taken by surprise, and there are always sufferers ready
to take the first chance of doing that. How they used to terrorize the
neighborhood and take toll! One old ruffian, whose reputation had spread
far and wide, could go to villages far from home, and walk off with
anything he fancied, the people sitting mum not daring to say a word, or
hiding and skulking away as he passed through the village. One of the
strongest characters: in a village miles away from where this villain
lived said, 'Give me a guaranty that I shall not be called to account,
and a gun so that I can shoot him when he is not looking, and I will get
rid of him, but I dare not touch him if his eyes are on me.'"\[23\] But
apart from action by these beings

\[23. Newton, *In Far New Guinea*, p. 78.\]

which is determined by human will, desire, vengeance, and other
passions, man is an object of interest to the spirits themselves, and
they show activity in one way or another, for good or for ill effect
upon his fortunes and his person. It is, however, for ill that their
principal activity is directed, as estimated by primitives. They work
mainly against man and his welfare. In Ceylon, for instance, where
innumerable evil spirits are to be found, they are charged with every
untoward happening, either as themselves purposing it or as controlled
or instigated by inimical magicians, or even because opportunity offers
and their essential nature prompts to its seizure.\[24\] They
interpenetrate the bodies of living men and cause illness; they may be
expelled by divine power, and still, notwithstanding that they have done
assault and damage, may demand and be accorded offerings, sacrifices,
and libations.\[25\] In fact, among rude peoples, diseases are nearly
universally attributed to evil spirits through the medium of
possession.\[26\] Not seldom control is by a witch, in whose

\[24. Parker, *Village Folk Tales*, p. 16; cf. Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of
Borneo*, pp. 194 ff.

25\. Murray, *Ancient Egyptian Legends*, pp. 11 ff.

26\. Batchelor, *Ainu*, pp. 42-43.\]

body the spirit of mischief takes up its residence. Thence she sends it
forth on its mission of evil, and thither it returns when its work is
done. As she can thus by proxy effect evil, so can she cause it to
cease.\[27\] Naturally this notion lingers on into advanced stages of
culture, as is witnessed by the frequent mention of demoniacs in the New
Testament, to say nothing of the witchcraft delusion which came on down
through the Middle Ages into comparatively modern times.\[28\] In these
advanced stages it is not unusual for these demons to specialize, so to
speak, in diseases; so that in China, India, and elsewhere there may be
a cholera devil, a dog-god who sends whooping cough, etc.\[29\] Infants
are particularly liable to attack.\[30\] The normal result is that in
some regions drugs and simples are little resorted to in sickness,
medicine men and wizards are the main reliance or the only
recourse.\[31\] These spirits

\[27. Newton, In Far New Guinea, p. 83.

28\. Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, pp. 164 ff.; Thurston, *Omens and
Superstitions*, pp. 176, 196; Williamson, *South Sea Savage*, p. 286.

29\. Cf. Grimm, *Teutonic Mythology*, iii. 148 ff., 1181.

30\. Thomas, *Anthropological Report*, p. 71.

31\. Gomes, *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, p. 183; IAE, vi. 85 ff.\]

sometimes work in a way different from possession; for example, causing
fever by enticing the soul from the body.\[32\] We may not forget that
the madness of frenzy, whether as insanity or as prophetic mania, is
regarded, as we have already had occasion to notice, as the result of
possession.\[33\]

The damaging activities of these spirits may be directed not only
against the persons, but against the possessions and all the various
operations and pursuits of humans.\[34\] And such evils may at times be
prevented or remedied by means as weird as the alleged or supposed
disease or hurt. For example, damage by spirits to a plot of
agricultural ground may be prevented by killing, boiling, and burying a
black cat by night under a tree in the field.\[35\] All along the line
of these conceptions, the promptings to magical operations are the
nearly universal accompaniment.

\[32. Seligmann, *Melanesians*, pp. 185 ff.

33\. Additional cases are cited in Thurston, *Omens and Superstitions*,
pp. 254, 278, 279, 285.

34\. Carruthers, *Unknown Mongolia*, i. 245

35\. Jahn, *Opfergrbräuche*, p. 267.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Logical Consequences of Parity of Being](anim10.md)
