[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim17)  [Next](anim19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVI

### RESIDUA OF ANIMISM

FINALLY, we may register--no more than that--a few of the beliefs and
practices which, enduring through ages, were the direct legacy or
proximate product of the animistic stage.

First, of course, is the precious discovery of the existence of soul in
man, an inheritance whose value has been ever more clearly recognized as
the centuries rolled by, until the supreme expression of that value was
given by Jesus of Nazareth: What shall it profit a man if he gain the
whole world and lose his own soul? The growing perception of the soul's
worth is measured in part by the development of the ideas of heaven and
hell as that soul's reward or punishment. Anticipated bliss or sorrow
was magnified in proportion to the enlarging estimates of the soul's
worth. The Greek idea of a shadowy existence after death in a
featureless place that almost voids the idea of locality could not abide
with a higher (Christian) estimate of soul values. Even the Egyptians
had a nobler realization of those values, though it was nourished at
great loss--it cost them a really noble conception of the being and
nature of the gods.

Second, this conception of the soul thus recognized involves another
noteworthy bequest of animism, the notion of the continued life of the
soul beyond the grave. Primitive races are quite logical in their
deduction of continued existence as an attribute or quality of soul. It
has incidentally been noted in the preceding pages that whatever was
conceived as possessing soul was also believed to exist beyond the
grave. There the hunter, note, was conceived to pursue shade of deer or
whatever animal had been the gain of his bow or spear in this life. So
that it was not man in himself, apart from soul, that gained
immortality--or whatever proportion of immortality the primitive had
acquired the power to conceive--immortality belonged to soul itself.

If practical universality of belief and of desire for the thing itself
proves a doctrine, no tenet of our faith has surer basis than this in
existence after death. We have already seen that the idea of
continuance, which is the seed out of which the idea of real immortality
germinated, is found among all primitive peoples. Moreover, all great
religions but one have taken the idea into their bosoms and made it
central. The exception is classic Buddhism. And the vigor and tenacity
of the doctrine of conscious life beyond the grave has been too great
for the later followers of even the Buddha. For later Buddhism too has
its doctrine of heaven and hell in the forms of belief current for many
centuries. Not even the doctrine of *karma*, in its most absolute form,
could withstand the ardent longing of man and his invincible faith that
he is more than a bundle of consequences to fall apart and cease to
exist as an entity when once he had persuaded himself that such an
effect was possible. Elsewhere than in Buddhism only sporadic agnostics
have ventured a doubt or a denial of the doctrine. How insistent is the
cry of humanity for the boon of a continued conscious endurance is
evinced by this. In spite of the firm faith of Christians in
immortality, the assurance of it (as it is sometimes expressed), this
longing and this faith compel even them to look with desire upon results
of investigations like those of the Society for Psychical Research, if
perchance scientific demonstration can be made to confirm what is now
the product of belief.

The third legacy of animism is belief in superhuman powers. Whether we
regard this from the standpoint of anthropology or culture, or from that
of ethics or of religion, it is difficult to estimate, impossible to
overestimate, its importance. How vast a power of restraint this belief
has exerted as an inhibition upon the lower passions of man, and how
great an impulse it has ever been to the growth and unfolding of his
higher nature! While it is probably true that altruism has never in the
history of the race been absent in at least germinal force--remember
that it is not absent in even brute creation--even yet its greatest
force as a determinative factor is manifested only in the highly
cultured. The impression of the existence of higher powers, of
superhuman or supernal forces, was necessary during the disciplinary or
elementary stages of culture to control and to direct to beneficent ends
human thinking and action. Moreover, as has already been suggested,
angelology and demonology are traceable in direct line to the set of
conceptions we have been following in their manifestations in thought
and action.

For these three greatest conceptions entertained by humanity the race
has to thank the stage of culture we have been studying.

Besides the currents represented by the dominant ideas just
particularized other thought channels exist in which flow streams so
strong as to warrant the use of the term "instinctive." "I'm afraid. to
go home in the dark," for instance, is the voicing of a dread from which
few are free. Granted that in many or most cases this fear is implanted
in the young by tales of bogies or spirits told by injudicious parents
or other associates, the psychologist can but note how readily the idea
is assimilated and how difficult it is, even for the mature scientist
(if he be frank with himself), to rise superior to the fear and to
banish it utterly. The reason is, probably, that the mind is in this
matter super-receptive. The channel has been worn in the thinking or
emotions of hundreds of ancestors, and the grooves are transmitted. Open
the sluice gates to the idea, and it flows a muddy stream through life.

The savage of the stone age, cowering over his campfire, casting fearful
looks into the jungle all about him, hearing in "the thousand noises of
the night the movements of myriads of spirits whose existence is to him
a reality," transmitted a frightful heritage of terror to his far-off
descendants. Against the effects of this heritage in the clear light of
day and the illumination of science and knowledge men count themselves
victors. But curiously the shades of night banish self-acquired
knowledge, and the unknown and unseen open the gates of emotion to
unspoken and unconfessed fears. In vain does the victim appeal to his
own "common sense." He knows the "superstition" is "foolish,"
"unscientific." But the subconscious habit of thought, prenatally
transmitted, smothers his knowledge, and, given the occasion and
stimulus, dominates him in spite of himself.

From the standpoint of pedagogics not yet has sufficient allowance been
made for this heritage of fear. Parents, nurses, and companions,
mistakenly and often innocently, sow and cultivate these weeds in a soil
all too well prepared by heritage. And the result is that instead of a
beautiful garden spot of trust and confidence and belief in the good, a
jungle or morass of noxious fears and dreads mars for many the beauty of
life.

Other residua less worthy, for the most part now happily matters of
history, at least in the civilized world, have been hinted at in the
preceding pages. Most of these may be classed under the head of
superstitions, though we are to bear in mind that these too have, at
least some of them, contributed to the advance of mankind.\[1\] They
include the development and practice of totemism and taboo, of magic and
divination with their nobler brother prophecy, of mythology and
witchcraft, and of sacrifice in the ritual sense. When we have shown the
nature of animism, we have laid at least one firm platform for the
treatment of these, so far at least as their objective side is
concerned. Then, too, the relative order or the contemporaneity of magic
and religion--that vexed question--may receive illumination in pursuit
of the consequences of the fads here exhibited. But to trace these
developments is another task. Whether such phenomena as those of
fetishism are primary

\[1. Cf. Frazer, *Psyche's Task*; and *NSH*., article "Superstition."\]

or secondary may also be possible of solution in the light we have
gained; and the varieties of sacrifice fall easily into order as we
start from its foundation in animism as shown in the facts here passed
in review.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper XVII. Literature to Which Reference is Made in This
Volume](anim19.md)
