[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eog00)  [Next](eog02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Epic of Gilgamish*, tr. by R. Campbell Thompson \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### PREFACE.

THE Epic of Gilgamish, written in cuneiform on Assyrian and Babylonian
clay tablets, is one of the most interesting poems in the world. It is
of great antiquity, and, inasmuch as a fragment of a Sumerian Deluge
text is extant, it would appear to have had its origin with the
Sumerians at a remote period, perhaps the fourth millennium, or even
earlier. Three tablets of it exist written in Semitic (Akkadian), which
cannot be much later than 2,000 B.C.: half a millennium later come the
remains of editions from Boghaz Keui, the Hittite capital in the heart
of Asia Minor, written not only in Akkadian, but also in Hittite and
another dialect. After these comes the tablet found at Ashur, the old
Assyrian capital, which is anterior in date to the great editions now
preserved in the British Museum, which were made in the seventh century
B.C., for the Royal Library at Nineveh, one Sin-liqi-unni(n)ni being one
of the editors. Finally there are small neo-Babylonian fragments
representing still later editions.

In the seventh century edition, which forms the main base of our
knowledge of the poem, it was divided into twelve tablets, each
containing about three hundred lines in metre. Its subject was the
Legend of Gilgamish, a composite story made up probably of different
myths which had grown up at various times round the hero's
[name](errata.htm#0). He was one of the earliest Kings of Erech in the
South of Babylonia, and his name is found written on a tablet giving the
rulers of Erech, following in order after that of Tammuz (the god of
vegetation and one of the husbands of Ishtar) who in his turn follows
Lugal-banda, the tutelary god of the House of Gilgamish. The mother of
Gilgamish was Nin-sun. According to the Epic, long ago in the old days
of Babylonia (perhaps 5,000 B.C.), when all the cities had their own
kings, and each state rose and fell according to the ability of its
ruler, Gilgamish is holding Erech in thrall, and the inhabitants appeal
to the Gods to be relieved from his tyranny. To aid them the wild man
Enkidu is created, and he, seduced by the wiles of one of the dancing
girls of the Temple of Ishtar, is enticed into the great city, where at
once (it would appear) by ancient right Gilgamish attempts to rob him of
his love. A tremendous fight ensues, and mutual admiration of each
other's prowess follows, to so great an extent that the two heroes
become firm friends, and determine to make an expedition together to the
Forest of Cedars which is guarded by an Ogre, Humbaba, to carry off the
cedar wood for  the adornment of the city. They encounter Humbaba, and
by the help of the Sun-god who sends the winds to their aid, capture him
and cut off his head; and then, with this exploit, the goddess Ishtar,
letting her eye rest on the handsome Gilgamish, falls in love with him.
But he rebuffs her proposal to wed him with contumely, and she,
indignant at the insult, begs her father Anu to make a divine bull to
destroy the two heroes. This bull, capable of killing three hundred men
at one blast of his fiery breath, is overcome by Enkidu, who thus incurs
the punishment of hybris at the hands of the gods, who decide that,
although Gilgamish may be spared, Enkidu must die. With the death of his
friend, Gilgamish in horror at the thought of similar extinction goes in
search of eternal life, and after much adventuring, meets first with
Siduri, a goddess who makes wine, whose philosophy of life, as she gives
it him, however sensible, is evidently intended to smack of the hedonism
of the bacchante. Then he meets with Ur-Shanabi (the boatman of
Uta-Napishtim) who may perhaps have been introduced as a second
philosopher to give his advice to the hero, which is now lost;
conceivably he has been brought into the story because of the sails(?)
which would have carried them over the waters of Death (by means of the
winds, the Breath of Life?), if Gilgamish had not previously destroyed
them with his own hand. Finally comes the meeting with Uta-Napishtim
(Noah) who tells Gilgamish the story of the Flood, and how the gods gave
him, the one man saved, the gift of eternal life. But who can do this
for Gilgamish, who is so human as to be overcome by sleep? No, all
Uta-Napishtim can do is to tell him of a plant at the bottom of the sea
which will make him young again, and to obtain

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

this plant Gilgamish, tying stones on his feet in the manner of Bahrein
pearl-divers, dives into the water. Successful, he sets off home with
his plant, but, while he is washing at a chance pool, a snake snatches
it from him, and he is again frustrated of his quest, and nothing now is
left him save to seek a way of summoning Enkidu back from Hades, which
he tries to do by transgressing every tabu known to those who mourn for
the dead. Ultimately, at the bidding of the God of the Underworld Enkidu
comes forth and pictures the sad fate of the dead in the Underworld to
his friend: and on this sombre note the tragedy ends.

Of the poetic beauty of the Epic there is no need to speak. Expressed in
a language which has perhaps the simplicity, not devoid of cumbrousness,
of Hebrew rather than the flexibility of Greek, it can nevertheless
describe the whole range of human emotions in the aptest language, from
the love of a mother for her son to the fear of death in the primitive
mind of one who has just seen his friend die; or from the anger of a
woman scorned to the humour of an editor laughing in his sleeve at the
ignorance of a savage. Whether there is justification for taking the
risk of turning it into ponderous English hexameter metre is an open
question, but in so doing I have done my utmost to preserve an
absolutely literal translation, duly enclosing in a round bracket, (),
every amplification of the original phrasing which either sense or metre
or particularly an appreciation of unproven Assyrian particles has
demanded. Restorations, either probable from the context or certain from
parallels, have been enclosed in square brackets \[\].

To George Smith, one of the greatest geniuses Assyriology has produced,
science owes much for the first arrangement and translations of the text
of this extraordinary poem: indeed, it was for this Epic that he
sacrificed his life, for actually it was the discovery of the Deluge
Tablet in the British Museum Collections which led the *Daily Telegraph*
to subscribe so generously for the re-opening of the diggings in the
hope of further finds at Kouyunjik (Nineveh), in conducting which he
died all too early in 1876. Sir Henry Rawlinson and Professor Pinches
played no small part in the reconstruction and publication of at least
two of the tablets, and to their labours in this field must be added the
ingenuity of Professor Sayce, and the solid acumen of Dr. L. W King. In
America to Professor Haupt is owed the first complete edition of the
texts, very accurately copied, and later on the editions of two early
Babylonian texts were edited by Langdon, Clay and Jastrow: among German
publications must be mentioned the translations of Jensen and Ungnad,
with the edition of an Old Babylonian tablet by Meissner. The Boghaz
Keui texts have been edited by Weidner, Friedrich, and Ungnad. It would
be superfluous to say how much I am indebted to the labours of all these
scholars.

The present version is based on a fresh collation of the original
tablets in the British Museum, the results of which I propose to publish
shortly in a critical edition of both text and translation. It will be
seen that I have departed from the accepted order of several of the
fragments of which the position in the Epic is problematical. An
examination of numerous fragments of tablets of a religious nature has
naturally led to the discovery of duplicates and joins, some of which
will be apparent in the present text. For their great liberality in
granting me facilities to copy and collate these valuable tablets I have
to express my heartiest thanks to the Trustees of the British Museum,
and the Director, Sir Frederick Kenyon. To my friends Dr. H. R. Hall,
and Messrs. Sidney Smith and C. J. Gadd of the British Museum, I am
greatly indebted for much help in forwarding the work: and to Sir John
Miles, Fellow of Merton College, Oxford, I owe many shrewd suggestions.

R. CAMPBELL THOMPSON.

<span class="small">NINEVEH,  
      CHRISTMAS, 1927.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addenda et Corrigenda](eog02)
