[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt202)  [Next](pt204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### XIX.

### THE INHERITANCE.

From Donald Macintyre, Benbecula.

THERE was once a farmer, and he was well off. He had three sons. When he
was on the bed of death he called them to him, and he said, "My sons, I
am going to leave you: let there be no disputing when I am gone. In a
certain drawer, in a dresser in the inner chamber, you will find a sum
of gold; divide it fairly and honestly amongst you, work the farm, and
live together as you have done with me;" and shortly after the old man
went away. The sons buried him; and when all was over, they went to the
drawer, and when they drew it out there was nothing in it.

They stood for a while without speaking a word. Then the youngest spoke,
and he said--"There is no knowing if there ever was any money at all;"
the second said--"There was money surely, wherever it is now;" and the
eldest said--"Our father never told a lie, There was money certainly,
though I cannot understand the matter." "Come," said the eldest, "let us
go to such an old man; he was our father's friend; he knew him well; he
was at school with him; and no man knew so much of his affairs. Let us
go to consult him."

So the brothers went to the house of the old man, and they told him all
that had happened. "Stay with

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

me," said the old man, "and I will think over this matter. I cannot
understand it; but, as you know, your father and I were very great with
each other. When he had children I had sponsorship, and when I had
children he had gostji. I know that your father never told a lie." And
he kept them there, and he gave them meat and drink for ten days.

Then he sent for the three young lads, and he made them sit down beside
him, and he said--

"There was once a young lad, and he was poor; and he took love for the
daughter of a rich neighbour, and she took love for him; but because he
was so poor there could be no wedding. So at last they pledged
themselves to each other, and the young man went away, and stayed in his
own house. After a time there came another suitor, and because he was
well off, the girl's father made her promise to marry him, and after a
time they were married. But when the bridegroom came to her, he found
her weeping and bewailing; and he said, 'What ails thee?' The bride
would say nothing for a long time; but at last she told him all about
it, and how she was pledged to another man. 'Dress thyself,' said the
man, 'and follow me.' So she dressed herself in the wedding clothes, and
he took the horse, and put her behind him, and rode to the house of the
other man, and when he got there, he struck in the door, and he called
out, 'Is there man within?' and when the other answered, he left the
bride there within the door, and he said nothing, but he returned home.
Then the man got up, and got a light, and who was there but the bride in
her wedding dress.

"'What brought thee here?" said he. 'Such a man,' said the bride. 'I was
married to him to-day,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and when I told him of the promise we had made, he brought me here
himself and left me.'

"'Sit thou there,' said the man; 'art thou not married?' So he took the
horse, and he rode to the priest, and he brought him to the house, and
before the priest he loosed the woman from the pledge she had given, and
he gave her a line of writing that she was free, and he set her on the
horse, and said, 'Now return to thy husband.'

"So the bride rode away in the darkness in her wedding dress. She had
not gone far when she came to a thick wood where three robbers stopped
and seized her. 'Aha!' said one, 'we have waited long, and we have got
nothing, but now we have got the bride herself.' 'Oh,' said she, 'let me
go: let me go to my husband; the man that I was pledged to has let me
go. Here are ten pounds in gold--take them, and let me go on my
journey.' And so she begged and prayed for a long time, and told what
had happened to her. At last one of the robbers, who was of a better
nature than the rest, said, 'Come, as the others have done this, I will
take you home myself.' 'Take thou the money,' said she. 'I will not take
a penny,' said the robber; but the other two said, 'Give us the money,'
and they took the ten pounds. The woman rode home, and the robber left
her at her husband's door, and she went in, and showed him the line--the
writing that the other had given her before the priest, and they were
well pleased."

"Now," said the old man, "which of all these do you think did best? So
the eldest son said, "I think the man that sent the woman to him to whom
she was pledged, was the honest, generous man: he did well." The second
said, "Yes, but the man to whom she was

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

pledged did still better, when he sent her to her husband." "Then," said
the youngest, "I don't know myself; but perhaps the wisest of all were
the robbers who got the money." Then the old man rose up, and he said,
"Thou hast thy father's gold and silver. I have kept you here for ten
days; I have watched you well. I know your father never told a lie, and
thou hast stolen the money." And so the youngest son had to confess the
fact, and the money was got and divided.

I know nothing like No. 19. No. 20 begins like a German story in Grimm;
but the rest is unlike anything I have read or heard. The first part has
come to me in another shape, from Ross-shire; and some men whom I met in
South Uist seemed to know these incidents.

The two belong to the class referred to in the Introduction, page xxxv.
as fourth. Many of the novels in Boccaccio might be ranked with the same
class; they are embryo three-volume novels, which only require nursing
by a good writer to become full-grown books. There are plenty of the
kind throughout the Highlands, and, as it seems to me, they are genuine
popular traditions, *human* stories, whose incidents would suit a king
or a peasant equally well. Without a wide knowledge of books, it is
impossible to say whence these stories came; or whether they are
invented by the people. MacIntyre said he had learned those which he
told me from old men like himself, in his native island; and all others
whom I have questioned say the same of their stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. The Three Wise Men](pt204)
