[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt210)  [Next](pt212.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

### XXVII.

### CAILLIACH MHOR CHLIBHRICH.

From W. Ross, stalker.

THIS celebrated witch was accused of having [enchanted](errata.htm#0.md)
the deer of the Reay forest, so that they avoided pursuit. Lord Reay was
exceedingly angry, but at a loss how to remedy the evil. His man,
William (the same who braved the witch and sat down in her hut) promised
to find out if this was the case. He watched her for a whole night, and
by some counter enchantments managed to be present when in the early
morning she was busy milking the hinds. They were standing all about the
door of the hut till one of them ate a hank of blue worsted hanging from
a nail in it. The witch struck the animal, and said, "The spell is off
you; and Lord Reay's bullet will be your death to-day." William repeated
this to his master to confirm the tale of his having passed the night in
the hut of the great hag, which no one would believe. And the event
justified it, for a fine yellow hind was killed that day, and the hank
of blue yarn was found in its stomach.

This is one of nearly a hundred stories, gathered amongst the people of
Sutherland by a very talented collector, whose numerous accomplishments
unfortunately do not include Gaelic. This resembles an account of a Lapp
camp (see Introduction). It also bears some affinity to a story
published by Grant Stewart, in which a ghost uses a herd of deer to
carry her furniture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. The Smith and the Fairies](pt212.md)
