[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt222)  [Next](pt224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### XXXI.

### OSEAN AFTER THE FEEN.

From Barra.

OISEAN was an old man after the (time of the) Feen, and he (was)
dwelling in the house of his daughter. He was blind, deaf, and limping,
and there were nine oaken skewers in his belly, and he ate the tribute
that Padraig had over Eirinn. They were then writing the old histories
that he was telling them.

They killed a right big stag; they stripped the shank, and brought him
the bone. "Didst thou ever see a shank that was thicker than that in the
Feen?" "I saw a bone of the black bird's chick in which it would go
round about."--"In that there are but lies." When he heard this, he
caught hold of the books with rage, and he set them in the fire. His
daughter took them out and quenched them, and she kept them. Ossian
asked, with wailing, that the worst lad and dog in the Feen should lay
weight on his chest. He felt a weight on his chest. "What's this?"--"I
MacRuaghadh" (son of the red, or auburn one). "What is that weight which
I feel at my feet?" "There is MacBuidheig" (the son of the little
yellow). They stayed as they were till the day came. They arose. He
asked the lad to take him to such a glen. The lad reached the glen with
him. He took out a whistle from his pocket, and he played it. "Seest

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

thou anything going past on yonder mountain?"--"I see deer on
it."--"What sort dost thou see on it "I see some slender and grey on
it."--"Those are the seed of the Lon Luath, swift elk; let them
pass."--"What kind seest thou now?"--"I see some gaunt and
grizzled."--"Those are the seed of Dearg dasdanach, the red Fierce: let
them pass."--"What kind seest thou now?"--"I see some heavy and
sleek."--"Let the dog at them Vic Vuiaig!" MacBhuieig went. "Is he
dragging down plenty?"--"He is."--"Now, when thou seest that he has a
dozen thou shalt check him." When he thought he had them, he played the
whistle, and he checked the dog. "Now if the pup is sated with chase, he
will come quietly, gently; if not, he will come with his gape open." He
was coming with his gape open, and his tongue out of his mouth. "Bad is
the thing which thou hast done to cheek the pup unsated with
chase."--"When he comes, catch my hand, and try to put it in his gape,
or he will have us." He put the hand of Oisean in his gape, and he shook
his throat out. "Come, gather the stags to that knoll of rushes." He
went, and that is done; and it was nine stags that were there, and that
was but enough for Oisean alone; the lad's share was lost. "Put my two
hands about the rushy knoll that is here;" he did that, and the great
caldron that the Feen used to have was in it. "Now, make ready, and put
the stags in the caldron, and set fire under it." The lad did that. When
they were here ready to take it, Oisean said to him, "Touch thou them
not till I take my fill first." Oisean began upon them, and as he ate
each one, he took one of the skewers out of his belly. When Oisean had
six eaten, the lad had three taken from him. "Hast thou done this to
me?" said Oisean. "I did it," said he I would need

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

a few when thou thyself hadst so many of them."--"Try if thou wilt take
me to such a rock." He went down there, and he brought out the chick of
a blackbird out of the rock. "Let us come to be going home." The lad
caught him under the arm, and they went away. When be thought that they
were nearing the house, he said, "Are we very near the house?" "We are,"
said the lad. "Would the shout of a man reach the house where we are
just now?" <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)--"It would reach it."--"Set
my front straight on the house." The lad did thus. When he was coming on
the house, he caught the lad, and he put his hand in his throat, and he
killed him. "Now," said he, "neither thou nor another will tell tales of
me." He went home with his hands on the wall, and he left the
blackbird's chick within. They were asking him where he had been since
the day came; he said he had been where he had often passed pleasant
happy days. "How didst thou go there when thou art blind?"--"I got a
chance to go there this day at all events. There is a little pet yonder
that I brought home, and bring it in." They went out to look, and if
they went, there did not go out so many as could bring it home. He
himself arose, and he brought it in. He asked for a knife. He caught the
shank, he stripped it, and then took the flesh off it. He broke the two
ends of the bone. "Get now the shank of the dun deer that you said I
never saw the like of in the Feen." They got this for him, and be threw
it out through the marrow hole. Now he was made truthful. They began to
ask more tales from him, but it beat them ever to make him begin at them
any more.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

...

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

...

 

2\. A version of this was told to me by an old tinker at Inverary,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

but, according to him, the books were destroyed. I took it to be the
popular account of the Ossian controversy. Ossian, MacPherson, Dr.
Smith, and their party, fused into "Ossian," Dr. Johnson, and his
followers, condensed into "Padraig." The famous Red Book of Clanrannald
has also become mythical. Its true history will be found in the book by
the Highland Society. I was told in Benbecula how a man had found a
book, containing the history of the Feen, in a moss; and how he had
parted with it to a blind beggar, who had sold part to a clergyman, the
rest was in America. "The book was not dug up; it was on the moss. It
seemed as if the ancestors had sent it."

 

3\. This story of the Blackbird's bone is common. I heard it myself from
several men in South Uist, with variations. According to one, the deer's
bone was to turn round on end in the blackbird's shank. Another version
has been sent to me from Sutherland. According to J. H. Simpson, a
similar tale is now told by the peasantry of Mayo. (Poems of Ossin, Bard
of Erin, from the Irish, 1857, page 191.) Mr. MACLEAN very ingeniously
suggests that the word which now means Blackbird (Londubh) may
originally have meant Black-ELK. Armstrong's Dictionary gives LÒN, a
meadow; LÒN, a diet, a dinner, a store, provision, food; LON, an ousel,
a blackbird, an *Elk*; LON, greed, prattle, hunger; also, a rope of raw
hides used by the people of St. Kilda. The word, then, may mean almost
anything that can be eaten by man or beast in general; and an elk in
particular.

There are plenty of elks still living in Scandinavia. Their gigantic
fossil bones are found in Irish bogs, and in the Isle of Man; a whole
skeleton is to be seen in the British Museum; and it is supposed that
men and elks existed together in Ireland. (See Wilson's Pre-historic
Annals of Scotland, page 22: 1851.) The story probably rests on a
foundation of fact--namely, the discovery of fossil bones-mixed up with
the floating traditions about the Feen which pervade both Ireland and
Scotland, and which have been woven into poems for centuries in both
countries. These may date from the days when men hunted elks in Erin, as
they now do in Scandinavia. "Padraig" probably slipped in when that
curious dialogue was composed, of which several versions are still
extant in old manuscripts.

 

4\. The Sutherland version is as follows:--

The last of the giants lived among the Fearn Hills (Ross-shire,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and within sight of the windows of Skibo); he had an only daughter,
married not to a giant, but to a common man.

His son-in-law did not always treat him well, for he was sometimes very
hungry, and had to wear a hunger-belt.

One day at dinner his son-in-law said to him, "Did you ever, amongst the
giants, eat such good beef, or from so large an ox?"

"Amongst us," said the last of the giants, "the legs of the birds were
heavier than the hind quarters of your ox."

They laughed him to scorn, and said, that it was because he was blind
that he made such mistakes; so he called to a servant and bid him bring
his bow and three arrows, and lead him by the hand to a corrie which he
named in the Balnagowan forest.

"Now," said he, "do you see such and such a rock?"

"Yes," said the servant.

"And is there a step in the face of it?"

"Yes," said the servant.

"Are there rushes at the foot of it?"

"Yes," said the servant.

"Then, take me to the steps, and put me on the first of them."

The servant did so.

"Look now, and tell me what comes."

"I see birds," said the fellow.

"Are they bigger than common?"

"No bigger than in Fearn," said the servant.

A little after, "What do you see?"

"Birds still," said the servant.

"And are they no bigger than usual?"

"They are three times bigger than eagles."

A little later, "Do you see any more birds?" said the giant.

"Yes, birds that the air is black with them, and the biggest is three
times as big as an ox."

"Then guide my hand to the bow," said the blind giant; and the boy
guided him so well that the biggest bird fell at the foot of the rock
amongst the rushes.

"Take home a hind quarter," said the giant, and they carried. it home
between them.

When they came to the house of his son-in-law, he walked in with it, and
aimed a tremendous blow at the place where his son-in-law usually sat.
Being blind he did not see that the chair was empty; it was broken to
pieces; but the son-in-law lived to repent, and treat the blind giant
better.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

I have another version written in English by Mr. Hugh MacColl, gardener
at Ardkinglass, from which it appears that the blind old giant was
Ossian, and that his father-in-law was Paul na nooi clerach, Paul of the
nine clerks (whom I strongly suspect to be St. Patrick). They questioned
him about deer; and this shows how stories alter, for DAMH means ox and
stag, and in Sutherland it has become ox.

 

5\. They would not believe that Ossian's black birds were so large. He
got a boy and went to a hill, and pulled a tuft of rushes, and here
again is another change in the translation from Gaelic to English; for
TOM means a *knoll* and a *bush*. Under the tuft they find a yellow dog,
and under another, firelocks and spades; which is another curious change
from the bow and arrows. Then they go to a *hill* covered with wood,
which suits the country about Stirling; and the lad is made to dig a
hole with the spade, and put his head into it. The old giant whistles,
and nearly splits the boy's head; and he does this thrice. The first
time the boy sees deer as big as peat-stacks; the second, as large as
house; the third, as large as hills; and they slip "cue baie mac kill e
buiach," the yellow dog after them.

Then they kindle a fire and roast the deer. Here the bettle has dropped
out, and the boy eats some, and old giant is furious; for if he had
eaten all he could have recovered his sight. Then he took the boy to a
wood, and made him shoot a blackbird on its nest, and he took home a
leg, which was so heavy that it broke the table.

Then they tried to get the old man to tell them more about the Faen, but
he would not, because they would not believe him; and the next day they
went with the boy to a well, and wrung his neck, to keep him silent
also.

Here, as in all the versions which I have got, the blackbird seems to be
hauled in to account for the Gaelic word, which is but rarely used, and
whose meaning is forgotten. LON DUBH means black*bird* or black *Elk*;
and surely deer as big as hills might have done to prove the wonders of
the olden time. These three versions of the same story show, as well as
any which I have, how the same tale changes in various localities, and
why.

In Stirling and in Sutherland Gaelic is fading rapidly. Elks have ceased
to exist in Scotland; and the tradition has changed with the times, and
shapes itself to suit the ideas of the narrators, and the country about
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[115:1](pt223.htm#fr_1) A Lapp measure of
distance is "a dog's bark."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. The Barra Widow's Son](pt224)
