[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt232)  [Next](pt234.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

### XLI.

### THE WIDOW AND HER DAUGHTERS.

From Mrs. MacGeachy, Farmer's Wife, Islay.

THERE was formerly a poor widow, and she had three daughters, and all
she had to feed them was a kailyard. There was a great gray horse who
was coming every day to the yard to eat the kail. Said the eldest of the
daughters to her mother, "I will go to the yard to-day, and I will take
the spinning-wheel with me, and I will keep the horse out of the kail."
"Do," said her mother. She went out. The horse came; she took the
distaff from the wheel and she struck him. The distaff stuck to the
horse, and her hand stuck to the distaff. Away went the horse till, they
reached a green hill, and he called out, "Open, open, oh green hill, and
let in the king's son; open, open, oh green hill, and let in the widow's
daughter." The hill opened, and they went in. He warmed water for her
feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and she lay down that night.
Early on the morrow, when he rose, he was going to hunt. He gave her the
keys of the whole house, and he said to her that she might open every
chamber inside but the one. "By all she ever saw not to open that one."
That she should have his dinner ready when he should come back, and that
if she would be a good woman that he would marry her. When he went away
she began to open the chambers.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Every one, as she opened it, was getting finer
and finer, till she came to the one that was forbidden. It seemed to
her, "What might be in it that she might not open it too." She opened
it, and it was full of dead gentle women, and she went down to the knee
in blood. Then she came out, and she was cleansing her foot; and though
she were cleaning it, still she could not take a bit of the blood off
it. A tiny cat came where she was, and she said to her, "If she would
give a little drop of milk that she would clean her foot as well as it
was before. "Thou! ugly beast! be off before thee. Dost thou suppose
that I won't clean them better than thou?" "Yes, yes, take thine own
away. Thou wilt see what will happen to thee when himself comes home."
He came home, and she set the dinner on the board, and they sat down at
it. Before they ate a bit he said to her, "Wert thou a good woman to-day
was," said she. "Let me see thy foot, and I will tell thee whether thou
wert or wert not." She let him see the one that was clean. "Let me see
the other one," said he. When he saw the blood, "Oh! ho!" said he. He
rose and took the axe and took her head off, and he threw her into the
chamber with the other dead people. He laid down that night, and early
on the morrow he went to the widow's yard again. Said the second one of
the widow's daughters to her mother--"I will go out to-day, and I will
keep the gray horse out of the yard." She went out sewing. She struck
the thing she was sewing on the horse. The cloth stuck to the horse, and
her hand stuck to the cloth. They reached the hill. He called as usual
to the hill; the hill opened, and they went in. He warmed water for her
feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and they lay down that night.
Early in the morning he

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

was going to hunt, and he said to her that she should open every chamber
inside but one, and "by all she ever saw" not to open that one. She
opened every chamber till she came to the little one, and because she
thought "What might be in that one more than the rest that she might not
open it?" She opened it, and it was full of dead gentlewomen, and her
own sister amongst them. She went down to the knee in blood. She came
out, and as she was cleaning herself, and the little cat came round
about, and she said to her, "If thou wilt give me a tiny drop of milk I
will clean thy foot is well as it ever was." "Thou! ugly beast! begone.
Dost thou think that I will not clean it myself better than thou?" "Thou
wilt see," said the cat, "what will happen to thee when himself comes
home." When he came she set down the dinner, and they sat at it. Said
he--"Wert thou a good woman to-day?" "I was," said she. "Let me see thy
foot, and I will tell thee whether thou wert or wert not." She let him
see the foot that was clean. "Let me see the other one," said he. She
let him see it. "Oh! ho said he, and he took the axe and took her head
off. He lay down that night. Early on the morrow, said the youngest one
to her mother, as she wove a stocking--"I will go out with my stocking
to-day, and I will watch the gray horse. I will see what happened to my
two sisters, and I will return to tell you." "Do," said her mother, "and
see thou dost not stay away. She went out, and the horse came. She
struck the stocking on the horse. The stocking stuck to the horse, and
the hand stuck to the stocking. They went away, and they reached the
green hill. He called out as usual, and they got in. He warmed water for
her feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and they lay down that
night. On the morrow

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

he was going to hunt, and he said to her--"If she would behave herself
as a good woman till he returned, that they would be married in a few
days." He gave her the keys, and he said to her that she might open
every chamber that was within but that little one, "but see that she
should not open that one." She opened every one, and when she came to
this one, because she thought "what might be in it that she might not
open it more than the rest?" she opened it, and she saw her two sisters
there dead, and she went down to the two knees in blood. She came out,
and she was cleaning her feet, and she could not take a bit of the blood
off them. The tiny cat came where she was, and she said to her--"Give me
a tiny drop of milk, and I will clean thy feet as well as they were
before." "I will give it thou creature; I will give thee thy desire of
milk if thou will clean my feet." The cat licked her feet as well as
they were before. Then the king came home, and they set down his dinner,
and they sat at it. Before they ate a bit, he said to her, "Wert *thou*
a good woman to-day?" "I was middlin," said she; "I have no boasting to
make of myself." "Let me see thy feet," said he. She let him see her
feet. "Thou wert a good woman," said he; "and if thou holdest on thus
till the end of a few days, thyself and I will be married." On the
morrow he went away to hunt. When he went away the little cat came where
she was. "Now, I will tell thee in what way thou wilt be quickest
married to him," said the cat. "There are," said she, "a lot of old
chests within. Thou shalt take out three of them; thou shalt clean them.
Thou shalt say to him next night, that he must leave these three chests,
one about of them, in thy mother's house, as they are of no use here;
that there are plenty here without them; thou

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

shalt say to him that he must not open any of them on the road, or else,
if he opens, that thou wilt leave him; that thou wilt go up into a tree
top, and that thou wilt be looking, and that if he opens any of them
that thou wilt see. Then when he goes hunting, thou shalt open the
chamber, thou shalt bring out thy two sisters; thou shalt draw on them
the magic club, and they will be as lively and whole as they were
before; thou shalt clean them then, and thou shalt put one in each chest
of them, and thou shalt go thyself into the third one. Thou shalt put of
silver and of gold, as much in the chests as will keep thy mother and
thy sisters right for their lives. When he leaves the chests in thy
mother's house, and when he returns he will fly in a wild rage: he will
then go to thy mother's house in this fury, and he will break in the
door; be thou behind the door, and take off his head with the bar; and
then he will be a king's son, as precious as he was before, and he will
marry thee. Say to thy sisters, if he attempts the chests to open them
by the way, to call out, 'I see thee, I see thee,' and that he wilt
think that thou wilt be calling out in the tree." When he came home he
went away with the chests, one after one, till he left them in her
mother's house. When he came to a glen, where he thought she in the tree
could not see him, he began to let the chest down to see what was in it;
she that was in the chest called out, "I see thee, I see thee!"

"Good luck be on thy pretty little head," said he, "if thou canst not
see a long way!"

This was the way with him each journey, till he left the chests
altogether in her mother's house.

When he returned home on the last journey, and saw that she was not
before him, he flew in a wild rage; he went back to the widow's house,
and when he

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

reached the door he drove it in before him. She was standing behind the
door, and she took his head off with the bar. Then he grew a king's son,
as precious as ever came; there he was within and they were in great
gladness, She and himself married, and they left with her mother and
sisters, of gold and silver, as much as left them well for life.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

...

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

...

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

...

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

...

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

...

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

From Catherine Milloy, Kilmeny, Islay, March 1859.

An old woman of the name of *Hutton*, in Cowal, told this to *Catherine
Milloy*, a Cowal woman, married to a farmer at Kilmeny, *Angus
MacGeachy*, a Campbelltown man. Written down from her dictation by
*Hector MacLean*, Islay, May 1859.

This story is something like The Hoodie and The Daughter of the King of
the Skies; it has a bit like The Mermaid.

I have another version, told by Hugh Mac-in-deor, an old man at Bowmore,
in Islay, who can recite a great many more stories; he borders upon
eighty, is very poor, and has had but little education. He tells MacLean
that he learnt his stories long ago from one Angus Brown, who was known
by the soubriquet of Aonghas Gruama frowning Angus, of whom very queer
anecdotes are told. Mac-in-deor was able to play the pipes in his day.
His father was considered an excellent piper; and his son Dugald is
allowed to be one of the best pipers in the island.

 

2d. A poor woman had three daughters and a kail-yard, and a horse used
to come every day to eat the kail. The daughters went, one after the
other, to drive him away with the distaff and the distaff stuck to the
horse and to their hands, and he dragged them in turn to a castle. (*It
is not said that the horse became a man*.) The first was the eldest who
slept in the castle; on the morrow she got a key, and was told to look
at all the rooms but one; and to milk the "Three Red-brown Hornless
Cows." She looked into the room of course, and sank to her knee in
blood; and "a grey great cat" came about and asked for a drop milk, and
was refused.

When the "giant" came home he asked to see her foot, and it was red with
blood; and he smote her with the "White Glave of Light," and killed her.

The very same thing happened to the second. The youngest milked the
three Red-brown Hornless Cows; but peeped, and sank to her knee in
blood, and saw her two dead sisters. The great grey cat asked for milk,
and got it and drank it, and became a splendid woman, and told her that
she was a king's daughter under spells; and she told her to take some of
the milk and to clean her foot with it, and that it would not leave a
speck of the blood on her; and so she did.

"Now," said the king's daughter, "when he comes in and sees that thy
foot is clean, he will marry thee; but thou wilt not

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

be long alive if thou art with him. When he goes to the hunting hill,
thou shalt take with thee AM BALLAN IOC, vessel of balsam (*ballan is a
teat*), and rub it against the mouth of thy big sister; and thou shalt
put her into a sack, and gold and silver with her, and thou shalt stuff
the sack with hay; and when he comes home tell him that there is a whisp
for the cow, and to leave it with thy mother; and the next day do the
same with thy second sister; and on the third day, I will put thyself
and the white glave of light into the sack. When he knows that thou art
not with him, he will go after thee; and when he is coming in at the
door, "SGAP" the head off him with the sword, and hold the sword on the
SMIOR CHAILLEACH (spinal marrow) till it cools, before the head goes on
again."

The girl did as she was told; and he took the three sisters alive, and
his gold and his sword, in the sacks with the hay on his back to the
mother, and said each time, "SO A CHAILLEACH SIN AGUD SOP DO'N BHO,"
"Here carlin, there thou hast a whisp for the cow."

On the third day he went home, and when he lay down and found that she
was not there, he went to the poor woman's house, and the youngest
daughter chopped his head off as he went in it the door; and then she
went back to the castle and stayed in it with the king's daughter.

 

3d. This is manifestly the same story as "The history of Mr. Greenwood,"
in Mr. Peter Buchan's unpublished MS. The scene of that story is laid in
the Western Isles; it is brought down to a much later period than the
Gaelic story; and the language is not that of peasants.

It is the same as the Old Dame and her Hen, Norse Tales, No. III.,
published. 1859, and it resembles bits of other tales in the same
collection. It is the same as Fitcher's Vogel, Grimm, No. 46, and Old
Rink Rank, 196. It is in French as Barbe Bleu; in English as Bluebeard;
and according to the notes in Grimm's third volume, it is very old and
very widely spread. Of all these the Norse and Gaelic resemble each
other most.

The same idea pervades a number of other Gaelic stories, namely, that of
a people living underground, who assumed the shape of various creatures,
and lived by hunting; possessed gold and silver, and swords; carried off
women and children; ate some, murdered others, and kept a larder of dead
gentlewomen, whom it appears that they carried off, married, and
murdered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII. The Tale of the Soldier](pt234.md)
