[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Sappho](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sap01)  [Next](sap03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419146114/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sappho and Phaon*, by Mary Robinson, \[1796\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Account of Sappho</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Sappho</span>, whom the ancients distinguished
by the title of the <span class="smallcaps">Tenth Muse</span>, was born
at Mytilene in the island of Lesbos, six hundred years before the
Christian era. As no particulars have been transmitted to posterity,
respecting the origin of her family, it is most likely she derived by
little consequence from birth of connection. At an early period of her
life she was wedded to Cercolus, a native of the isle of Andros; he was
possessed of considerable wealth, and though the Lesbian Muse is said to
have been sparingly gifted with beauty, he became enamoured of her, more
perhaps on account of mental, than personal charms. By this union she is
said to have given birth to a daughter; but Cercolus leaving her, while
young, in a state of widowhood, she never after could be prevailed on to
marry. The Fame which her genius spread even to the remotest parts of
the earth, excited the envy of some writers who endeavoured to throw
over her private character, a shade, which shrunk before the brilliancy
of her poetical talents. Her soul was replete with harmony, that harmony
which neither art nor study can acquire; she felt the intuitive
superiority, and to the Muses she paid unbounded adoration. The
Mytilenians held her poetry in such high veneration, and were so
sensible of the hour conferred on the country which gave her birth, that
they coined money with the impression of her head; and at the time of
her death, paid tribute to their memory, such as was offered to
sovereigns only. The story of Antiochus has been related as an
unequivocal proof of Sappho's skill in discovering, and powers of
describing the passions of the human mind. That prince is said to have
entertained a fatal affection for his mother-in-law Stratonice; which,
though he endeavoured to subdue it's influence, preyed upon his frame,
and after many ineffectual struggles, at length reduced him to extreme
danger. His physicians marked the symptoms attending his malady, and
found them so exactly correspond with Sappho's delineation of the tender
passion, that they did not hesitate to form a decisive opinion of the
cause, which had produced so perilous an effect. That Sappho was not
insensible to the feelings she so well described , is evident in her
writings but it was scarcely possible, that a mind so exquisitely
tender, so sublimely gifted, should escape those fascinations which even
apathy itself has been awakened to acknowledge. The scarce specimens now
extant, from the pen of the Grecian Muse, have by the most competent
judges been esteemed as the standard for the pathetic, the glowing, and
the amatory. The ode, which has been so highly estimated, is written in
a measure distinguished by the title of the Sapphic. <span
class="smallcaps">Pope</span> made it his model in his juvenile
production, beginning—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Happy the man—whose wish and care"—</span>

</div>

Addison was of opinion, that the writings of Sappho were replete with
such fascinating beauties, and adorned with such a vivid glow of
sensibility, that, probably, had they been preserved entire, it would
have been dangerous to have perused them. They possessed none of the
artificial decorations of a feigned passion; they were the genuine
effusions of a supremely enlightened soul, laboring to subdue a fatal
enchantment; and vainly opposing the conscious pride of illustrious
fame, against the warm susceptibility of a generous bosom. Though few
stanzas from the pen of the Lesbian poetess have darted through the
shades of oblivion: yet, those that remain are so exquisitely touching
and beautiful, that they prove beyond dispute the taste, feeling, and
inspiration of the mind which produced them. In examining the
curiosities of antiquity, we look to the perfections, and not the
magnitude of those relics, which have been preserved amidst the wrecks
of time: as the smallest gem that bears the fine touches of a master,
surpasses the loftiest fabric reared by the labours of false taste, so
the precious fragments of the immortal Sappho, will be admired, when the
voluminous productions of inferior poets are mouldered into dust. When
it is considered, that the few specimens we have of the poems of the
Grecian Muse, have passed through three and twenty centuries, and
consequently through the hands of innumerable translators: and when it
is known that Envy frequently delights in the base occupation of
depreciating merit which it cannot aspire to emulate; it may be
conjectured, that some passages are erroneously given to posterity,
either by ignorance or design. Sappho, whose fame beamed round her with
the superior effulgence which her works had created, knew that she was
writing for future ages; it is not therefore natural that she should
produce any composition which might tend to tarnish her reputation, or
lessen that celebrity which it was the labour of her life to consecrate.
The delicacy of her sentiments cannot find a more eloquent advocate than
in her own effusions; she is said to have commended in the most animated
panegyric, the virtues of her brother Lanychus; and with the most
pointed and severe censure, to have contemned the passion which her
brother Charaxus entertained for the beautiful Rhodope. If her writings
were, in some instances, too glowing for the fastidious refinement of
modern times; let it be her excuse, and the honour of her country, that
the liberal education of the Greeks was such, as inspired them with an
unprejudiced enthusiasm for the works of genius: and that when they paid
adoration to Sappho, they idolized the <span
class="smallcaps">Muse</span>, and not the <span
class="smallcaps">Woman</span>. I shall conclude this account with an
extract from the works of the learned and enlightened Abbé Barthelemi;
at once the vindication and eulogy of the Grecian Poetess. "Sappho
undertook to inspire the Lesbian women with a taste for literature; many
of them received instructions from her, and foreign women increased the
number of her disciples. She loved them to excess, because it was
impossible for her to love otherwise; and she expressed her tenderness
in all the violence of passion: your surprize at this will cease, when
you are acquainted with the extreme sensibility of the Greeks; and
discover, that amongst them the most innocent connections often borrow
the impassioned language of love." A certain facility of manners, she
possessed; and the warmth of her expressions were but too well
calculated to expose her to the hatred of some women of distinction,
humbled by her superiority; and the jealousy of some of her disciples,
who happened to be the objects of her preference. To this hatred she
replied by truths and irony, which completely exasperated her enemies.
She repaired to Sicily, where a statue was erected to her; it was
sculptured by <span class="smallcaps">Silanion</span>, one of the most
celebrated staturists of his time. The sensibility of <span
class="smallcaps">Sappho</span> was extreme! she loved <span
class="smallcaps">Phaon</span>, who forsook her; after various efforts
to bring him back, she took the leap of Leucata, and perished in the
waves!

"Death has not obliterated the stain imprinted on her character; for
<span class="smallcaps">Envy</span>, which fastens on <span
class="smallcaps">Illustrious Names</span>, does not expire; but
bequeaths her aspersions to that calumny which <span
class="smallcaps">Never Dies</span>. "Several Grecian women have
cultivated <span class="smallcaps">Poetry</span>, with success, but none
have hitherto attained to the excellence of <span
class="smallcaps">Sappho</span>. And among other poets, there are few,
indeed, who have surpassed her."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Subject of Each Sonnet](sap03)
