<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/028) 
[Pickthall](../pick/028)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/02801)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq028)  [Rodwell](../qr/028)   
[Previous](027)  [Next](029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE STORY.

### (XXVIII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

*T*. S. M. Those are the signs of the perspicuous Book; we recite to
thee from the history of Moses and Pharaoh in truth unto a people who
believe.

Verily, Pharaoh was lofty in the land and made the people thereof sects;
one party of them he weakened, slaughtering their sons and letting their
women live. Verily, he was of the despoilers.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

And we wished to be gracious to those who were weakened in the earth,
and to make them models, and to make them the heirs; \[5\] and to
establish for them in the earth; and to show Pharaoh and Hâmân <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) and their hosts what they had to beware
of from them.

And we inspired the mother of Moses, 'Suckle him; and when thou art
afraid for him then throw him into the river, and fear not and grieve
not; verily, we are going to restore him to thee, and to make him of the
apostles!'

And Pharaoh's family picked him up that he might be for them a foe and a
grief; verily, Pharaoh and Hâmân and their hosts were sinners.

And Pharaoh's wife said, 'He is a cheering of the eye to me, and to
thee. Kill him not; it may be that he will profit us, or that we may
take him for a son;' for they did not perceive.

And the heart of Moses' mother was void on the morrow <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149); she well-nigh disclosed him, had it not
been that we bound up her heart that she might be of the believers.

\[10\] And she said to his sister, 'Follow him up.' And she looked after
him from afar, and they did not perceive. And we made unlawful for him
the wet-nurses <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_150). And she said,
'Shall I guide you to

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the people of a house who will take care of him for you, and who will be
sincere respecting him?'

So we restored him to his mother that her eye might be cheered, and that
she might not grieve, and that she might know that the promise of God is
true, though most of them know not.'

And when he reached puberty, and was settled, we gave him judgment and
knowledge; for thus do we reward those who do well. And he entered into
the city at the time the people thereof were heedless, and he found
therein two men fighting; the one of his sect and the other of his foes.
And he who was of his sect asked his aid against him who was of his
foes; and Moses smote him with his fist and finished him. Said he, 'This
is of the work of Satan, verily, he is a misleading obvious foe.'

\[15\] Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I have wronged my soul, but forgive
me.' So He forgave him; for He is forgiving and merciful.

Said he, 'My Lord! for that Thou hast been gracious to me, I will surely
not back up the sinners.'

And on the morrow he was afraid in the city, expectant. And behold, he
whom he had helped the day before cried (again) to him for aid. Said
Moses to him, 'Verily, thou art obviously quarrelsome.' And when he
wished to assault him who was the enemy to them both, he said, 'O Moses!
dost thou desire to kill me as thou didst kill a person yesterday? thou
dost only desire to be a tyrant in the earth; and thou dost not desire
to be of those who do right!' And a man came from the remote parts of
the city running, said he, 'O Moses!' verily, the chiefs are
deliberating concerning thee to kill

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

thee; go then forth; verily, I am to you a sincere adviser!'

\[20\] So he went forth therefrom, afraid and expectant. Said he, 'Lord,
save me from the unjust people!'

And when he turned his face in the direction of Midian, he said, 'It may
be that my Lord will guide me to a level path!' And when he went down to
the water of Midian he found thereat a nation of people watering their
flocks.

And he found beside them two women keeping back their flocks. Said he,
'What is your design?' They said, 'We cannot water our flocks until the
herdsmen have finished; for our father is a very old man.' So he watered
for them; then he turned back towards the shade and said, 'My Lord!
verily, I stand in need of what Thou sendest down to me of good.'

\[25\] And one of the two came to him walking modestly; said she,
'Verily; my father calls thee, to reward thee with hire for having
watered our flocks for us.' And when he came to him and related to him
the story, said he, 'Fear not, thou art safe from the unjust people.'
Said one of them, 'O my sire! hire him; verily, the best of those whom
thou canst hire is the strong and faithful.'

Said he, 'Verily, I desire to marry thee to one of these daughters of
mine, on condition that thou dost serve me for hire eight years; and if
thou shalt fulfil ten it is of thyself; for I do not wish to make it
wretched for thee; thou wilt find me, if it please God, of the
righteous!'

Said he, 'That is between you and me; whichever of the two terms I
fulfil, let there be no enmity against me, for God over what we say
keeps guard.'

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

And when Moses had fulfilled the appointed time, and was journeying with
his people, he perceived from the side of the mountain a fire; said he
to his people, 'Tarry ye here; verily, I have perceived a fire, haply I
may bring you good news therefrom, or a brand of fire that haply ye may
be warmed <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151).'

\[30\] And when he came to it he was called to, from the right side of
the wady, in the blessed valley, out of the tree, 'O Moses! verily, I am
God the Lord of the worlds; so throw down thy rod;' and when he saw it
quivering as though it were a snake, he turned away and fled and did not
return. 'O Moses! approach and fear not, verily, thou art amongst the
safe. Thrust thy hand into thy bosom, it shall come out white, without
hurt; and then fold again thy wing, that thou dost now stretch out
through dread; for those are two signs from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his
chiefs; verily, they are a people who work abomination!'

Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I have killed a person amongst them, and I
fear that they will kill me: and my brother Aaron, he is more eloquent
of tongue than I; send him then with me as a support, to verify me;
verily, I fear that they will call me liar!'

\[35\] Said He, 'We will strengthen thine arm with thy brother; and we
will make for you both authority, and they shall not reach you in our
signs; ye two and those who follow you shall gain the upper hand.'

And when Moses came to them with our manifest signs, they said, 'This is
only sorcery devised;

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and we have not heard of this amongst our fathers of yore.'

Moses said, 'My Lord knows best who comes with guidance from Him, and
whose shall be the issue of the abode. Verily, the unjust shall not
prosper!'

And Pharaoh said, 'O ye chiefs! I do not know any god for you except me;
then set fire, O Hâmân! to some clay and make for me a tower, haply I
may mount up to the God of Moses; for, verily, I think he is of those
who lie!'

And he grew big with pride, he and his armies in the land, without
right; and they thought that they to us should not return. \[40\] And we
overtook him and his army, and we flung them into the sea; behold, then,
how was the end of the unjust!

But we made them models calling to the fire; and on the resurrection day
they shall not be helped; and we followed them up in this world with a
curse; and on the resurrection day they shall be abhorred!

And we gave Moses the Book, after that we had destroyed the former
generations, as an insight to men and a guidance and a mercy; haply they
may be mindful!

Thou wast not upon the western side when we decided for Moses, but afar
off; nor wast thou of the witnesses. \[45\] But we raised up (other)
generations, and life was prolonged for them; and thou wast not staying
amidst the people of Midian, reciting to them our signs; but we were
sending our apostles.

Nor wast thou by the side of the mountain when we called; but it is a
mercy from thy Lord, that

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner has come before thee; haply
they may be mindful! And lest there should befall them a mishap for what
their hands have sent before, and they should say, 'Our Lord! why didst
thou not send to us an apostle? for we would have followed thy signs and
been of the believers.'

And when the truth comes to them from us they say, 'We are given the
like of what Moses was given.' Did they not disbelieve in what Moses was
given before?--they say, 'Two works of sorcery <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) back up each other;' and they say,
'Verily, we do disbelieve in all.'

Say, 'Bring, then, a book from God which shall be a better guide than
both, and I will follow it, if ye do tell the truth!'

\[50\] And if they cannot answer thee, then know that they follow their
own lusts; and who is more in error than he who follows his own lust
without guidance from God? verily, God guides not an unjust people!

And we caused the word to reach them, haply they may be mindful!

Those to whom we gave the Book before it, they believe therein; and when
it is recited to them they say, 'We believe in it as truth from our
Lord; verily, we were resigned before it came!' These shall be given
their hire twice over, for that they were patient, and repelled evil
with good, and of what we have bestowed upon them give alms.

\[55\] And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it and say, 'We
have our works, and ye

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

have your works. Peace be upon you! we do not seek the ignorant!'

Verily, thou canst not guide whom thou dost like, but God guides whom He
pleases; for He knows best who are to be guided.

And they say, 'If we follow the guidance we shall be snatched away from
the land.' Have we not established for them a safe sanctuary, to which
are imported the fruits of everything as a provision from us? but most
of them do not know.

How many a city have we destroyed that exulted in its means of
subsistence? These are their dwellings, never dwelt in after them,
except a little; for we were the heirs.

But thy Lord would never destroy cities until He sent to the metropolis
thereof an apostle, to recite to them our signs; nor would we destroy
cities unless their people were unjust. \[60\] Whatever thing ye may be
given, it is a provision for this world's life and the adornment
thereof; but what is with God is better and more enduring; have ye then
no sense?

Is He to whom we have promised a goodly promise, which he shall meet
with, like him to whom we have given the enjoyment of the life of this
world, and who upon the resurrection day shall be of the arraigned?

And on the day when He will call them and will say, Where are those
associates which ye did pre-tend?' And those against whom the sentence
is due shall say, 'Our Lord! these are those whom we have seduced; we
seduced them as we were seduced ourselves: but we clear ourselves to
thee;--they did not worship us!'

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

And it will be said, 'Call upon your partners;' and they will call upon
them, but they will not answer them, and they shall see the torment;
would that they had been guided.

\[65\] And the day when He shall call them and shall say, 'What was it
ye answered the apostles?' and the history shall be blindly confusing to
them on that day, and they shall not ask each other.

But, as for him who turns again and believes and does right, it may be
that he will be among the prosperous. For thy Lord creates what He
pleases and chooses; they have not the choice! Celebrated be the praise
of God! and exalted be He above what they associate with Him!

Thy Lord knows what they conceal in their breasts and what they
manifest.

\[70\] He is God, there is no god but He; to Him belongs praise, in the
first and the last; and His is the judgment; and unto Him shall ye
return!

Have ye considered, if God were to make for you the night endless until
the resurrection day, who is the god, but God, to bring you light? can
ye not then hear?

Say, 'Have ye considered, if God were to make for you the day endless
until the day of judgment, who is the god, except God, to bring you the
night to rest therein? can ye not then see?' But of His mercy He has
made for you the night and the day, that ye may rest therein, and crave
of His grace, haply ye may give thanks.

And the day when He shall call them and shall say, 'Where are my
partners whom ye did pretend?' \[75\] And we will pluck from every
nation a witness; and we will say, 'Bring your proof and know that

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the truth is God's;' and that which they had devised shall stray away
from them.

Verily, Korah <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) was of the people of
Moses, and he was outrageous against them; and we gave him treasuries of
which the keys would bear down a band of men endowed with strength. When
his people said to him, 'Exult not; verily, God loves not those who
exult! but crave, through what God has given thee, the future abode; and
forget not thy portion in this world, and do good, as God has done good
to thee; and seek not evil doing in the earth; verily, God loves not the
evildoers!'

Said he, 'I have only been given it for knowledge which I have!' did he
not know that God had destroyed before him many generations of those who
were stronger than he, and had amassed more? But the sinners. need not
to be asked concerning their crimes.

And he went out amongst the people in his ornaments; those who desired
the life of this world said, 'O would that we had the like of what Korah
has been given! verily, he is endowed with mighty fortune!'

\[80\], But those who had been given knowledge said, 'Woe to you! the
reward of God is better for him who believes and does right; but none
shall meet with it except the patient. And we clave the earth with him
and with his house; and he had no troop to help him against God, nor was
he of those who were helped!'

And on the morrow those who had yearned for

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

his place the day before said, 'Ah, ah! God extends provision to whom He
pleases of His servants, or He doles it out; had not God been gracious
to us, the earth would have cleft open with us! Ah, ah! the unbelievers
shall not prosper!'

That is the future abode; we make it for those who do not wish to be
haughty in the earth, nor to do evil, and the end is for the pious.

He who brings a good deed shall have better than it; and he who brings
an evil deed-those who do evil deeds shall only be rewarded for that
which they have done. \[85\] Verily, He who hath ordained the Qur’ân for
thee will restore thee to thy returning place. Say, 'My Lord knows. best
who brings guidance, and who is in obvious error; nor couldst thou hope
that the Book would be thrown to thee, save as a mercy from thy Lord! be
not then a backer up of those who misbelieve; and let them not turn thee
from the signs of God, after they have been sent down to thee; but call
unto thy Lord and be not of the idolaters; and call not with God upon
any other god; there is no god but He! everything is perishable, except
His face; His is the judgment, and unto Him shall ye return!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[108:1](028.htm#fr_148) Hâmân, according to the
Qur’ân, is made out to be the prime minister of Pharaoh.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[108:2](028.htm#fr_149) Either devoid of
patience, according to some, or of anxiety, according to others, or it
may be to everything but the thought of Moses.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[108:3](028.htm#fr_150) That is, Moses was made
to refuse the breast of the Egyptian woman before his sister came to
offer her services, and point out a nurse who would rear him.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[111:1](028.htm#fr_151) See Part II, p. 35,
note 1.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[113:1](028.htm#fr_152) That is, the Pentateuch
and Qur’ân.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[116:1](028.htm#fr_153) In Arabic Qârûn. The
legend based upon Talmudic tradition of Korah's immense wealth appears
to be also confused with that of Crœsus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. The Chapter of the Spider](029)

</div>
