<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/053) 
[Pickthall](../pick/053)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/05301)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq053)  [Rodwell](../qr/053)   
[Previous](052)  [Next](054) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE STAR.

### (LIII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

By the star when it falls, your comrade errs not, nor is he deluded! nor
speaks he out of lust! It is but an inspiration inspired! \[5\] One
mighty in power <span id="fr_346"></span>[3](#fn_346) taught him,
endowed with sound understanding, and appeared, he being in the loftiest
tract.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Then drew he near and hovered o’er! until he was two bows' length off or
nigher still! \[10\] Then he inspired his servant what he inspired him;
the heart belies not what he saw! What, will ye dispute with him on what
he saw?

And he saw him another time, by the lote tree none may pass; \[15\] near
which is the garden of the Abode! When there covered the lote tree what
did cover it! The sight swerved not nor wandered. He saw then the
greatest of the signs of his Lord.

Have ye considered Allât and Al ’Huzzâ, \[20\] and Manât the other
third <span id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_347)? Shall there be male
offspring for Him and female for you? That were an unfair division! They
are but names which ye have named, ye and your fathers! God has sent
down no authority for them! They do but follow suspicion and what their
souls lust after!--And yet there has come to them guidance from their
Lord.

Shall man have what he desires? \[25\] But God's is the hereafter and
the present!

How many an angel in the heaven!--their intercession avails not at all,
save after God has given permission to whomsoever He will and is pleased
with!

Verily, those who believe not in the hereafter do surely name the angels
with female names <span id="fr_348"></span>[2](#fn_348)!--but they have
no knowledge thereof; they do but follow suspicion, and, verily,
suspicion shall not avail against the truth at all!

130\] But turn aside from him who turns his back upon our remembrance
and desires naught but this

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

world's life! This is their sum of knowledge; verily, thy Lord knows
best who has erred from His way, and He knows best who is guided!

God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, that He may
reward those who do evil for what they have done; and may reward those
who do good with good! those who shun great sins and iniquities,--all
but venial faults,--verily, thy Lord is of ample forgiveness; He knows
best about you, when He produced you from the earth, and when ye were
embryos in the wombs of your mothers.

Make not yourselves out, then, to be pure; He knows best who it is that
fears.

Hast thou considered him who turns his back? who gives but little \[35\]
and then stops <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_349)? Has he then the
knowledge of the unseen, so that he can see?

Has he not been informed of what is in the pages of Moses and Abraham
who fulfilled his word?--that no burdened soul shall bear the burden of
another? \[40\] and that man shall have only that for which he strives;
and that his striving shall at length be seen? Then shall he be rewarded
for it with the most full reward; and that unto thy Lord is the limit;
\[45\] and that it is He who makes men laugh and weep; and that it is He
who kills and makes alive; and that He created pairs, male

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

and female, from a clot when it is emitted; and that for Him is the next
production <span id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_350); and that he enriches
and gives possession: \[50\] and that He is the Lord of the
Dog-star <span id="fr_351"></span>[2](#fn_351), and that He it was who
destroyed ‘Âd of yore, and Thamûd, and left none of them; and the people
of Noah before them,--verily, they were most unjust and outrageous!

And the overthrown (cities) <span id="fr_352"></span>[3](#fn_352) He
threw down; \[55\] and there covered them what did cover them!

Which then of your Lord's benefits do ye dispute?

This is a warner, one of the warners of yore!

The approaching day approaches; there is none to discover it but God.

At this new discourse then do ye wonder? \[60\] and do ye laugh and not
weep? and ye divert yourselves the while!

But adore God and serve (Him) <span id="fr_353"></span>[4](#fn_353).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_346"></span>[251:3](053.htm#fr_346) The angel Gabriel, who
appeared twice to Mohammed in his natural form, namely, on the occasion
of the 'Night journey,' to which this passage refers, and on the first
revelation of the Qur’ân. (See Introduction, pp. xx and xxxii.)

<span id="fn_347"></span>[252:1](053.htm#fr_347) See Introduction, p.
xxvii, and Part II, p. 62, note 1.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[252:2](053.htm#fr_348) See Introduction, pp.
xii and xiii.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[253:1](053.htm#fr_349) This passage refers to
one El Walîd ibn Mu*g*hâirah, who being abused for following Mohammed
and forsaking the religion of the Qurâi*s*, answered that he had done so
to escape divine vengeance. Thereupon an idolater offered to take on
himself El Walîd's sin for a certain sum of money. The offer was
accepted, and Walîd apostatized from El Islâm, paying down a portion of
the amount agreed upon at the time. Later on he refused to pay the
balance on the ground that he had already paid enough.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[254:1](053.htm#fr_350) I.e. the resurrection.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[254:2](053.htm#fr_351) Sirius, or the
Dog-star, was an object of worship amongst the ancient Arabs.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[254:3](053.htm#fr_352) Sodom, Gomorrah, &c.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[254:4](053.htm#fr_353) At this verse the
Qurâi*s*, who were present at the first reading of this chapter when
their gods were spoken well of, fell down adoring with Mohammed. See
Introduction, p. xxxii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIV. The Chapter of the Moon](054)

</div>
