<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/054) 
[Pickthall](../pick/054)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/05401)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq054)  [Rodwell](../qr/054)   
[Previous](053)  [Next](055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE MOON.

### (LIV. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

The Hour draws nigh, and the moon is split

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

asunder <span id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_354). But if they see a sign
they turn aside and say, 'Magic, continuous <span
id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_355)!'

And they call it a lie and follow their lusts; but every matter is
settled!

There has come to them some information <span
id="fr_356"></span>[3](#fn_356) with restraint in it--\[5\] wisdom
far-reaching--but warners avail not!

But turn thy back on them!

The day when the caller <span id="fr_357"></span>[4](#fn_357) shall call
to an awkward thing <span id="fr_358"></span>[5](#fn_358).

Humbly casting down their looks shall they come forth from their graves,
as though they were locusts scattered abroad!

Hurrying forwards to the caller! the misbelievers shall say, 'This is a
difficult day!'

Noah's people before them called (the apostles) liars; they called our
servant a liar; and they said, 'Mad!' and he was rejected.

\[10\] And he called upon his Lord, 'Verily, I am overcome, come then to
my help!'

And we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down!

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

And we made the earth burst forth in springs, and the waters met at a
bidding already decreed.

But we bore him on the thing of planks and nails; sailing on beneath our
eyes, a reward for him who had been disbelieved!

\[15\] And we left it a sign;--but is there any one who will mind?

‘Âd called the apostles liars, and how was my punishment and my warning?

Verily, we sent on them a cold storm wind on a day of continuous
ill-luck!

\[20\] It reft men away as though they had been palm stumps torn up!

We have made the Qur’ân easy as a reminder--but is there any one who
will mind?

Thamûd called the warnings lies, and said, 'A mortal, one of us, alone,
shall we follow him? then indeed were we in error and excitement <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_359)!

\[25\] 'Is the warning cast on him alone among us? nay, he is an
insolent liar!

'They shall know to-morrow about the insolent liar!

'Verily, we are about to send the she-camel as a trial for them, then
watch them and have patience! and inform them that the water is shared
between them (and her); each draught shall be sought by turns.'

Then they called their companion, and he plied (a knife) and hamstrung
her.

\[30\] Then how was my punishment and my warning? Verily, we sent
against them one noise, and they were like the dry sticks of him who
builds a fold.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

We have made the Qur’ân easy as a reminder--but is there any one who
will mind?

Lot's people called the apostles liars; verily, we sent against them a
heavy sand storm; all, save Lot's family, we saved them at the dawn.
\[35\] As a favour from us; so do we reward him who gives thanks!

He indeed had warned them of our assault, but they doubted of the
warning.

And they desired his guest, and we put out their eyes.

'So taste ye my torment and warning!'

And there overtook them on the morning a settled punishment!

'So taste ye my torment and warning!'

\[40\] We have made the Qur’ân easy as a reminder--but is there any one
who will mind?

The warning came to Pharaoh's people; they called our signs all lies,
and we seized on them with the seizing of a mighty powerful one.

Are your misbelievers better than they? or have ye an exemption in the
Scriptures? Or do they say we are a victorious company?

\[45\] The whole shall be routed and shall turn their backs in
flight <span id="fr_360"></span>[1](#fn_360).

Nay, the Hour is their promised time! and the Hour is most severe and
bitter!

Verily, the sinners are in error and excitement. On the day when they
shall be dragged to the fire upon their faces!--'Taste ye the touch of
hell.'

Verily, everything have we created by decree, \[50\] and our bidding is
but one (word), like the twinkling of an eye!

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

We have destroyed the like of you--but is there any who will mind?

And everything they do is in the books <span
id="fr_361"></span>[1](#fn_361), and everything small and great is
written down.

Verily, the pious shall be amid gardens and rivers, \[55\] in the seat
of truth, with the powerful king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_354"></span>[255:1](054.htm#fr_354) According to a
tradition this refers to a miracle: the unbelievers having asked for a
sign, the moon appeared to be cloven in twain. The tradition is,
however, supported by very doubtful authority, and is directly opposed
to the teaching of the Qur’ân elsewhere, for the power to comply with
the demand for a sign is always distinctly disclaimed. The more usual
explanation is the natural one, that the expression merely refers to one
of the signs of the day of judgment.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[255:2](054.htm#fr_355) This word is
interpreted by some to mean 'transient,' by others 'powerful.'

<span id="fn_356"></span>[255:3](054.htm#fr_356) The Qur’ân.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[255:4](054.htm#fr_357) The angel Isrâfîl.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[255:5](054.htm#fr_358) The last judgment.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[256:1](054.htm#fr_359) Or madness.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[257:1](054.htm#fr_360) This is appealed to by
Muslims as a prophecy fulfilled at the battle of Bedr.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[258:1](054.htm#fr_361) The books kept by the
recording angels.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LV. The Chapter of the Merciful](055)

</div>
