<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/065) 
[Pickthall](../pick/065)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/06501)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq065)  [Rodwell](../qr/065)   
[Previous](064)  [Next](066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF DIVORCE.

### (LXV. Medînah.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

O thou prophet! when ye divorce women, then divorce them at their
term <span id="fr_411"></span>[1](#fn_411), and calculate the term and
fear God your Lord. Do not drive them out of their houses unless they
have committed manifest adultery. These are God's bounds, and whoso
transgresses God's bounds has wronged himself. Thou knowest not whether
haply God may cause something fresh to happen after that <span
id="fr_412"></span>[2](#fn_412).

And when they have reached their appointed time, then retain them with
kindness, or separate from them with kindness; and bring as witnesses
men of equity from among you; and give upright testimony to God. That is
what He admonishes him who believes in God and the last day; and
whosoever fears God, He will make for him a (happy) issue, and will
provide for him from whence he reckoned not.

And whosoever relies on God, He is sufficient for him: verily, God will
attain His purpose:--God has set for everything a period.

And such of your women as despair of menstruation,--

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

if ye doubt, then their term is three months; and such as have not
menstruated too.

And those who are heavy with child their appointed time is when they
have laid down their burden; and whosoever fears God, He will make for
him an easy affair.

\[5\] That is God's command, He has sent it down to you; and whosoever
fears God He will cover for him his offences and will make grand for him
his hire.

Let them <span id="fr_413"></span>[1](#fn_413) dwell where ye dwell,
according to your means, and do not harm them, to reduce them to
straits; and if they be heavy with child, then pay for them until they
lay down their burdens; and if they suckle (the child) for you, then
give them their hire, and consult among yourselves in reason; but if ye
be in difficulties, and another woman shall suckle the child for him,
let him who has plenty expend of his plenty; but he whose provision is
doled out, let him expend of what God has given him; God will not compel
any soul beyond what He has given it;--God will make after difficulty
ease!

How many a city has turned away from the bidding of its Lord and His
apostles; and we called them to a severe account, and we tormented them
with an unheard-of torment!

And they tasted the evil results of their conduct; and the end of their
conduct was loss!

\[10\] God prepared for them severe torment;--then fear God, ye who are
endowed with minds! Ye who believe! God has sent down to you a

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

reminder;--an apostle to recite to you God's manifest signs;--to bring
forth those who believe and act aright from darkness into light! and
whoso believes in God and acts right He will bring him into gardens
beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever and for aye! God
has made goodly for him his provision!

God it is who created seven heavens, and of the earth the like thereof.
The bidding descends between them, that ye may know that God is mighty
over all, and that God has encompassed all things with His knowledge!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_411"></span>[288:1](065.htm#fr_411) When they have had
three periods of menstruation; or, if they prove with child, after their
delivery. See Part I, p. 34.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[288:2](065.htm#fr_412) I.e. whether God may
not reconcile them again.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[289:1](065.htm#fr_413) The divorced women.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXVI. The Chapter of Prohibition](066)

</div>
