<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/073) 
[Pickthall](../pick/073)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/07301)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq073)  [Rodwell](../qr/073)   
[Previous](072)  [Next](074) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE ENWRAPPED.

### (LXXIII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

O thou who art enwrapped! rise by night except a little--the half, or
deduct therefrom a little, or

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

add thereto, and chant the Qur’ân chanting. \[5\] Verily, we will cast
on thee a heavy speech.

Verily, the early part of the night is stronger in impressions and more
upright In speech!

Verily, thou hast by day a long employment; but mention the name of thy
Lord and devote thyself thoroughly to Him, the Lord of the east and the
west; there is no god but He; then take Him for a guardian!

\[10\] And endure patiently what they say, and flee from them with a
decorous flight.

And leave me and those who say it is a lie, who are possessed of
comfort; and let them bide for a while.

Verily, with us are heavy fetters and hell-fire, and food that chokes,
and mighty woe!

On the day when the earth and the mountains shall tremble and the earth
shall be as a crumbling sand-hill!

\[15\] Verily, we have sent unto you an apostle bearing witness against
you, as we sent an apostle unto Pharaoh.

But Pharaoh rebelled against the apostle, and we seized him with an
overpowering punishment.

Then how will ye shield yourselves if ye misbelieve from the day which
shall make children grey-headed, whereon the heaven cleaves--its promise
shall be fulfilled!

Verily, this is a memorial, and whoso will, let him take unto his Lord a
way <span id="fr_440"></span>[1](#fn_440).

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

\[20\] Verily, thy Lord knows that thou dost stand up to pray nearly
two-thirds of the night, or the half of it or the third of it, as do
part of those who are with thee; for God measures the night and the day;
He knows that ye cannot calculate it, and He turns relentant towards
you.

So read what is easy of the Qur’ân. He knows that there will be of you
some who are sick and others who beat about in the earth craving the
grace of God, and others who are fighting in the cause of God. Then read
what is easy of it and be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and lend
to God a goodly loan, for what ye send forward for yourselves of good ye
will find it with God. It is better and a greater hire; and ask ye
pardon of God: verily, God is forgiving, merciful!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_440"></span>[307:1](073.htm#fr_440) From verse 20 the rest
of the sûrah seems from its style to belong to the Medînah period; and
there is a tradition ascribed to ‘Âyeshah that it was revealed a year
later than the earlier part of the chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXIV. The Chapter of the 'Covered'](074)

</div>
