[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15008)  [Next](sbe15010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## VII.

## MAITRÂYANA-BRÂHMANA-UPANISHAD.

IN the case of this Upanishad we must first of all attempt to settle its
right title. Professor Cowell, in his edition and translation of it,
calls it Maitri or Maitrâya*n*îya-upanishad, and states that it belongs
to the Maitrâya*n*îya-*s*âkhâ of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda, and that it
formed the concluding portion of a lost Brâhma*n*a of that *S*âkhâ,
being preceded by the sacrificial (karma) portion, which consisted of
four books.

In his MSS. the title varied between Maitry-upanishad and
Maitrî-*s*âkhâ-upanishad. A Poona MS. calls it
Maitrâya*n*îya-*s*âkhâ-upanishad, and a MS. copied for Baron von
Eckstein, Maitrâya*n*îyopanishad. I myself in the Alphabetical List of
the Upanishads, published in the journal of

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

the German Oriental Society, called it, No. 104, Maitrâya*n*a or
Maitrî-upanishad, i.e. either the Upanishad of the Maitrâya*n*as, or the
Upanishad of Maitrî, the principal teacher.

In a MS. which I received from Dr. Burnell, the title of our Upanishad
is Maitrâya*n*î-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, varying with
Maitrâya*n*î-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, and Srîyagus*s*âkhâyâm
Maitrâya*n*îya-brâhma*n*a-upanishad.

The next question is by what name this Upanishad is quoted by native
authorities. Vidyâranya, in his
Sarvopanishad-arthânubhûtiprakâ*s*a <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52),
v. 1, speaks of the Maitrâya*n*îyanâmnî yâ*g*ushî *s*âkhâ, and he
mentions Maitra (not Maitrî) as the author of that *S*âkhâ. (vv.
55,150).

In the Muktikâ-upanishad <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) we meet
with the name of Maitrâya*n*î as the twenty-fourth Upanishad, with the
name of Maitreyî as the twenty-ninth; and again, in the list of the
sixteen Upanishads of the Sâma-veda, we find Maitrâya*n*î and Maitreyî
as the fourth and fifth.

Looking at all this evidence, I think we should come to the conclusion
that our Upanishad derives its name from the *S*âkhâ of the
Maitrâya*n*as, and may therefore be called Maitrâya*n*a-upanishad or
Maitrâya*n*î Upanishad. Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad seems likewise
correct, and Maitrâya*n*i-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, like
Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a-upanishad and Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitopanishad,
might be defended, if Maitrâyanîn were known as a further derivative of
Maitrâya*n*a. If the name is formed from the teacher Maitrî or Maitra,
the title of Maitrî-upanishad would also be correct, but I doubt whether
Maitrî-upanishad would admit of any grammatical justification <span
id="fr_54"></span>[3](#fn_54).

Besides this Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, however, I possess a MS.
of what is called the Maitreyopanishad, sent to me likewise by the late
Dr. Burnell. It is very short, and contains no more than the substance
of the first Prapâ*th*aka of the Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad. I
give

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

the text of it, as far as it can be restored from the one MS. in my
possession:

Hari*h* Om. B*ri*hadratho vai nâma râ*g*â vairâ*g*ye putra*m*
nidhâpayitvedam a*s*â*s*vatam manyamâna*h* sarîra*m* vairâgyam upeto
'ra*n*ya*m* nir*g*agâma. Sa tatra paramam tapa <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) âdityam udîkshamâ*n*a ûrdhvas tish*th*aty.
Ante sahasrasya muner antikam â*g*agâma <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56). Atha B*ri*hadratho brahmavitpravaram
munîndra*m* sampû*g*ya stutvâ bahu*s*a*h* pra*n*âmam akarot. So 'bravîd
agnir ivâdhûmakas te*g*asâ nirdahann ivâtmavid Bhagavâ*ñ* *kh*âkâyanya,
uttish*th*ottish*th*a vara*m* v*rin*îshveti râ*g*ânam abravît <span
id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57). Sa tasmai punar namask*ri*tyovâ*k*a,
Bhagavan nâ(ha)mâtmavit tva*m* tattvavi*k* *kh*u*s*rumo vayam; sa tvam
no brûhity etad vratam purastâd a*s*akyam mâ pri*kkh*a pra*sñ*am
Aikshvâkânyân kâmân v*rin*îshveti Sâkâyanya*h*. *S*arîrasya *s*arîre
(sic) *k*ara*n*âv abhim*ris*yamâno râ*g*emâ*m* gâthâ*m* *g*agâda. 1

Bhagavann,
asthi*k*armasnâyuma*gg*âmâ*m*sa*s*ukla*s*o*n*ita*s*reshmâ*s*rudashikâvi*n*mûtrapittakaphasa*m*ghâte
durgandhe ni*h*sâre 'smi*ñ* *kh*arîre ki*m* kâmabhogai*h*. 2

Kâmakrodhalobhamohabhayavishâdershesh*t*aviyogânish*t*asamprayogakshutpipâsâ*g*arâm*ri*tyuroga*s*okâdyair
abhihate 'smi*ñ* *kh*arîre ki*m* kâmabhogai*h*. 3

Sarva*m* *k*eda*m* kshayish*n*u pa*s*yâmo yatheme da*m*sama*s*akâdayas
t*rin*avan <span id="fr_58"></span>[4](#fn_58) na*s*yata
yodbhûtapradhva*m*sina*h*. 4

Atha kim etair vâ pare 'nye dhamartharâ*s* (sic) *k*akravartina*h*
Sudyumnabhûridyumnakuvalayâ*s*vayauvanâ*s*vavaddh*ri*yâ*s*vâ*s*vapati*h*
*s*a*s*abindur hari*sk*andro '*m*barîsho nanukastvayâtir yayâtir
a*n*ara*n*yokshasenâdayo marutabharataprabh*ri*tayo râ*g*âno mishato
bandhuvargasya mahatî*m* *s*riya*m* tyaktvâsmâl lokâd amu*m* lokam
prayânti. 5.

Atha kim etair vâ pare 'nye
gandharvâsurayaksharâkshasabhûtaga*n*api*s*â*k*oragrahâdinâ*m*
nirodhanam pa*s*yâma*h*. 6

Atha kim etair vânyanâ*m* sosha*n*a*m* mahâr*n*avânâ*m*

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

*s*ikhari*n*âm prapatana*m* dhruvasya pra*k*alana*m* vâtarû*n*â*m*
nima*gg*anam p*ri*thivyâ*h* sthânâpasara*n*a*m* surâ*n*âm. So 'ham ity
etadvidhe 'smin sa*m*sâre ki*m* kâmopabhogair yair evâ*s*ritasya
sak*ri*d âvartana*m* d*ris*yata ity uddhartum arhasi tyandodapânabheka
ivâham asmin sa*m* Bhagavas tva*m* gatis tva*m* no gatir iti. 7

Ayam <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) agnir vai*s*vânaro yo 'yam
anta*h* purushe yenedam annam pa*k*yate yad idam adyate tasyaisha ghosho
bhavati yam etat kar*n*âv apidhâya s*rin*oti, sa yadotkramishyan <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60) bhavati naina*m* ghosha*m* s*rin*oti. 8

Yathâ <span id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_61) nirindhano vahni*h* svayonâv
upa*s*âmyati. 9 <span id="fr_62"></span>[4](#fn_62)

Sa *s*iva*h* so 'nte vai*s*vânaro bhûtvâ sa dagdhvâ sarvâ*n*i bhûtâni
p*ri*thivyapsu pralîyate <span id="fr_63"></span>[5](#fn_63), âpas
te*g*asi lîyante <span id="fr_64"></span>[6](#fn_64), te*g*o vâyau
pralîyate <span id="fr_65"></span>[7](#fn_65), vâyur âkâ*s*e
vilîyate <span id="fr_66"></span>[8](#fn_66), âkâ*s*am indriyeshv,
indriyâ*n*i tanmâtreshu, tanmâtrâ*n*i bhûtâdau vilîyante <span
id="fr_67"></span>[9](#fn_67), bhûtâdi mahati vilîyate <span
id="fr_68"></span>[10](#fn_68), mahân avyakte vilîyate <span
id="fr_69"></span>[11](#fn_69), avyaktam akshare vilîyate <span
id="fr_70"></span>[12](#fn_70)\], aksharam tamasi vilîyate <span
id="fr_71"></span>[13](#fn_71), tama ekîbhavati parasmin, parastân
na <span id="fr_72"></span>[14](#fn_72) san nâsan na sad ityetan
nirvâ*n*am anu*s*âsanam iti vedânu*s*âsanam.

We should distinguish therefore between the large
Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad and the smaller Maitreyopanishad. The
title of Maitreyî-brâhma*n*a has, of course, a totally different origin,
and simply means the Brâhma*n*a which tells the story of Maitreyî <span
id="fr_73"></span>[15](#fn_73).

As Professor Cowell, in the Preface to his edition and translation of
the Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, has discussed its peculiar
character, I have little to add on that subject. I agree with him in
thinking that this Upanishad has grown, and contains several accretions.
The Sanskrit commentator himself declares the sixth and seventh chapters
to be Khilas or supplementary. Possibly the Maitreya-upanishad, as
printed above, contains the earliest framework. Then we have traces of
various recensions. Professor Cowell (Preface, p. vi) mentions a MS.,
copied

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

for Baron Eckstein, apparently from a Telugu original, which contains
the first five chapters only, numbered as four. The verses given in VI,
34 (p. 177), beginning with 'atreme *s*lokâ bhavanti, are placed after
IV, 3. In my own MS. these verses are inserted at the beginning of the
fifth chapter <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74). Then follows in Baron
Eckstein's MS. as IV, 5, what is given in the printed text as V, 1, 2
(pp. 69-76). In my own MS., which likewise comes from the South, the
Upanishad does not go beyond VI, 8, which is called the sixth chapter
and the end of the Upanishad.

We have in fact in our Upanishad the first specimen of that peculiar
Indian style, so common in the later fables and stories, which delights
in enclosing one story within another. The kernel of our Upanishad is
really the dialogue between the Vâlakhilyas and Pra*g*âpati Kratu. This
is called by the commentator (see p. 331, note) a Vyâkhyâna, i.e. a
fuller explanation of the Sûtra which comes before, and which expresses
in the few words, 'He is the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless,
this is Brahman,' the gist of the whole Upanishad.

This dialogue, or at all events the doctrine which it was meant to
illustrate, was communicated by Maitrî (or Maitra) to *S*âkâyanya, and
by *S*âkâyanya to King B*ri*hadratha Aikshvâka, also called Marut (II,
1; VI, 30). This dialogue might seem to come to an end in VI, 29, and
likewise the dialogue between *S*âkâyanya and B*ri*hadratha; but it is
carried on again to the end of VI, 30, and followed afterwards by a
number of paragraphs which may probably be considered as later
additions.

But though admitting all this, I cannot bring myself to follow Professor
Cowell in considering, as he does, even the earlier portion of the
Upanishad as dating from a late period, while the latter portions are
called by him comparatively modern, on account of frequent Vaish*n*ava
quotations. What imparts to this Upanishad, according to my opinion, an
exceptionally genuine and ancient character, is the preservation in it
of that peculiar Sandhi which,

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

thanks to the labours of Dr. von Schroeder, we now know to be
characteristic of the Maitrâya*n*a-*s*âkhâ. In that *S*âkhâ final
unaccented as and e are changed into â, if the next word begins with an
accented vowel, except a. Before initial a, however, e remains
unchanged, and as becomes o, and the initial a is sometimes elided,
sometimes not. Some of these rules, it must be remembered, run counter
to Pâ*n*ini, and we may safely conclude therefore that texts in which
they are observed, date from the time before Pâ*n*ini. In some MSS., as,
for instance, in my own MS. of the Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad,
these rules are not observed, but this makes their strict observation in
other MSS. all the more important. Besides, though to Dr. von Schroeder
belongs, no doubt, the credit of having, in his edition of the
Maitrâya*n*î Samhitâ, first pointed out these phonetic peculiarities,
they were known as such to the commentators, who expressly point out
these irregular Sandhis as distinctive of the Maitrâya*n*î *s*âkhâ. Thus
we read Maitr. Up. II, 3 (p. 18), that tigmate*g*asâ ûrdhvaretaso,
instead of tigmate*g*asâ, is eva*m*vidha eta*kkh*âkhâsaṅketapâ*th*as
*kh*ândasa*h* sarvatra, i.e. is throughout the Vedic reading indicatory
of that particular *S*âkhâ, namely the Maitrâya*n*î.

A still stranger peculiarity of our *S*âkhâ is the change of a final t
before initial *s* into *ñ*. This also occurs in our Upanishad. In VI,
8, we read *s*vâ*ñ* *s*arîrâd; in VI, 2 7, ya*ñ* *s*arîrasya. Such a
change seems phonetically so unnatural, that the tradition must have
been very strong to perpetuate it among the Maitrâya*n*as.

Now what is important for our purposes is this, that these phonetic
peculiarities run through all the seven chapters of our Upanishad. This
will be seen from the following list:

I. Final as changed into â before initial vowel <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75):

II, 3, tigmatega*s*â ûrdhvaretaso (Comm. eta*kkh*âkhâsaṅketapâ*th*as
*kh*ândasa*h* sarvatra).

II, 5, vibodhâ evam. II, 7, avasthitâ iti.

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

III, 5, etair abhibhûtâ îti. IV, i, vidyatâ iti.

VI, 4, pra*n*avâ iti; bhâmyâdayâ eko.

VI, 6, âdityâ iti; âhavanîyâ iti; sûryâ iti; ahaṅkârâ iti; vyânâ iti.
VI, 7, bhargâ iti.

VI, 7, sannivish*t*â iti. VI, 23, devâ oṅkâro.

VI, 30, prâyâtâ iti. VI, 30, vinirgatâ iti.

II\. Final e before initial vowels becomes â. For instance:

I, 4, d*ris*yatâ iti. II, 2, nishpadyatâ iti.

III, 2, âpadyatâ iti. III, 2, pushkarâ iti.

IV, i, vidyatâ iti. VI, 10, bhuṅktâ iti.

VI, 20, a*s*nutâ iti. VI, 30, ekâ âhur.

Even prag*ri*hya e is changed to â in--

VI, 23, etâ upâsita, i.e. ete uktalaksha*n*e brahma*n*î.

In VI, 31, instead of te etasya, the commentator seems to have read te
vâ etasya.

III\. Final as before â, u, and au becomes a, and is then contracted.
For instance:

I, 4, vanaspatayodbhûta, instead of vanaspataya, udbhûta. (Comm.
Sandhi*s* *kh*ândaso vâ, ukâro vâtra lupto drash*t*avya*h*.)

II, 6, devaush*n*yam, instead of deva aush*n*yam. (Comm. Sandhi*s*
*kh*ândasa*h*.)

VI, 24, atamâvish*t*am, instead of atama-âvish*t*am (Comm. Sandhi*s*
*kh*ândasa*h*); cf. Khâ*nd*. Up. VI, 8, 3, a*s*anâyeti (Comm.
visar*g*anîyalopa*h*).

IV\. Final e before i becomes a, and is then contracted. For instance:

VI, 7, âtmâ *g*anîteti for *g*anîta iti. (Comm. *g*ânite, *g*ânâti.)

VI, 28, ava*t*aiva for avata iva. (Comm. Sandhiv*ri*ddhî *kh*ândase.)

V. Final au before initial vowels becomes â. For instance:

II, 6, yena vâ etâ anug*ri*hîtâ iti.

VI, 22, asâ abhidhyâtâ.

On abhibhûyamânay iva, see p. 295, note 2.

V, 2, asâ âtmâ (var. lect. asâv âtmâ).

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

VI\. Final o of atho produces elision of initial short a. For instance:

III, 2, atho 'bhibhûatvât. (Comm. Sandhi*s* *kh*ândasa*h*.) Various
reading, ato 'bhibhûtatvât.

VI, 1, so antar is explained as sa u.

VII\. Other irregularities:

VI, 7, âpo pyâyanât, explained by pyâyanât and âpyâyanât. Might it be,
âpo 'py ayanât?

VI, 7, âtmano tmâ netâ.

II, 6, so tmânam abhidhyâtvâ.

VI, 35, dvidharmondharn for dvidharmândham. (Comm. *kh*ândasa.)

VI, 35, te*g*asendham, i. e. tegasâ-iddhan. (In explaining other
irregular compounds, too, as in I, 4, the commentator has recourse to a
*kh*ândasa or prâmâdika licence.)

VI, 1, hira*n*yavasthât for hira*n*yâvasthât. Here the dropping of a in
avasthât is explained by a reference to Bhâguri (vash*t*i Bhâgurir
allopam avâpyor upasargayo*h*). See Vopadeva III, 171.

VIII\. Vi*s*lish*t*apâtha:

VII, 2, brahmadhîyâlambana. (Comm. vi*s*lish*t*apâtha*s* *kh*ândasa*h*.)

VI, 35, apyay aṅkurâ for apy aṅkurâ. (Comm. yakâra*h*
pramâdapa*th*ita*h*.)

On the contrary VI, 35, vlîyânte for vilîyante.

If on the grounds which we have hitherto. examined there seems good
reason to ascribe the Maitrâya*n*a-brâhma*n*a-upanishad to an early
rather than to a late period, possibly to an ante-Pâ*n*inean period, we
shall hardly be persuaded to change this opinion on account of supposed
references to Vaishnava or to Bauddha doctrines which some scholars have
tried to discover in it.

As to the worship of Vishnu, as one of the many manifestations of the
Highest Spirit, we have seen it alluded to in other Upanishads, and we
know from the Brâhma*n*as that the name of Vishnu was connected with
many of the earliest Vedic sacrifices.

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

As to Bauddha doctrines, including the very name of Nirvâ*n*a (p. xlvi,
l. 19), we must remember, as I have often remarked, that there were
Bauddhas before Buddha. B*ri*haspati, who is frequently quoted in later
philosophical writings as the author of an heretical philosophy, denying
the authority of the Vedas, is mentioned by name in our Upanishad (VII,
9), but we are told that this Brihaspati, having become Sukra,
promulgated his erroneous doctrines in order to mislead the Asuras, and
thus to insure the safety of Indra, i.e. of the old faith.

The fact that the teacher of King B*ri*hadratha in our Upanishad is
called *S*âkâyanya, can never be used in support of the idea that, being
a descendant of *S*âka <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76), he must have
been, like *S*âkyamuni, a teacher of Buddhist doctrines. He is the very
opposite in our Upanishad, and warns his hearers against such doctrines
as we should identify with the doctrines of Buddha. As I have pointed
out on several occasions, the breaking through the law of the Âsramas is
the chief complaint which orthodox Brâhmans make against Buddhists and
their predecessors, and this is what *S*âkâyanya condemns. A Brâhman may
become a Sannyâsin, which is much the same as a Buddhist Bhikshu, if he
has first passed through the three stages of a student, a householder,
and a Vânaprastha. But to become a Bhikshu without that previous
discipline, was heresy in the eyes of the Brâhmans, and it was exactly
that heresy which the Bauddhas preached and practised. That this social
laxity was gaining ground at the time when our Upanishad was written is
clear (see VII, 8). We hear of people who wear red dresses (like the
Buddhists) without having a right to them; we even hear of books,
different from the Vedas, against which the true Brâhmans are warned.
All this points to times when what we call Buddhism was in the air, say
the sixth century B. C., the very time to which I have always assigned
the origin of the genuine and classical Upanishads. The Upanishads are
to my mind the germs of Buddhism,

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

while Buddhism is in many respects the doctrine of the Upanishads
carried out to its last consequences, and, what is important, employed
as the foundation of a new social system. In doctrine the highest goal
of the Vedânta, the knowledge of the true Self, is no more than the
Buddhist Samyaksambodhi; in practice the Sannyâsin is the Bhikshu, the
friar, only emancipated alike from the tedious discipline of the
Brâhmanic student, the duties of the Brâhmanic householder, and the yoke
of useless penances imposed on the Brâhmanic dweller in the forest. The
spiritual freedom of the Sannyâsin becomes in Buddhism the common
property of the Saṅgha, the Fraternity, and that Fraternity is open
alike to the young and the old, to the Brâhman and the Sûdra, to the
rich and the poor, to the wise and the foolish. In fact there is no
break between the India of the Veda and the India of the Tripitaka, but
there is an historical continuity between the two, and the connecting
link between extremes that seem widely separated must be sought in the
Upanishads <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77).

F. MAX MÜLLER.

OXFORD, February, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xliv:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_52) See Cowell, Maitr:
Up. pref. p. iv.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xliv:2](sbe15009.htm#fr_53) Calcutta, 1791
(1869), p. 4; also as quoted in the Mahâvâkya-ratnâvalî, p.
2<sup>b</sup>.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xliv:3](sbe15009.htm#fr_54) Dr. Burnell, in his
Tanjore Catalogue, mentions, p. 35a, a Maitrâya*n*î-brâhma*n*opanishad,
which can hardly be a right title, and p. 36<sup>b</sup> a
Maitrâya*n*îya and Maitreyĭbrâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xlv:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_55) One expects âsthâya.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xlv:2](sbe15009.htm#fr_56) This seems better
than the Maitrâya*n*a text. He went near a Muni, viz. *S*âkâyanya.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xlv:3](sbe15009.htm#fr_57) This seems
unnecessary.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xlv:4](sbe15009.htm#fr_58) There may be an
older reading hidden in this, from which arose the reading of the
Maitrâyana B. U. t*rin*avanaspatayodbhûtapradhva*m*sina*h*, or yo
bhûtapradhva*m*sina*h*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xlvi:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_59) Maitr. Up. II, 6;
p. 32.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xlvi:2](sbe15009.htm#fr_60) kramishyân, m.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xlvi:3](sbe15009.htm#fr_61) Yadhâ, m.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xlvi:4](sbe15009.htm#fr_62) Maitr. Up. VI, 34;
p. 178.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xlvi:5](sbe15009.htm#fr_63) lipyate.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xlvi:6](sbe15009.htm#fr_64) lipyante.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xlvi:7](sbe15009.htm#fr_65) lîyyate.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xlvi:8](sbe15009.htm#fr_66) lîyyate.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xlvi:9](sbe15009.htm#fr_67) liyante.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xlvi:10](sbe15009.htm#fr_68) liyyate.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xlvi:11](sbe15009.htm#fr_69) lipyate.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xlvi:12](sbe15009.htm#fr_70) liyyate.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xlvi:13](sbe15009.htm#fr_71) liyyate.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xlvi:14](sbe15009.htm#fr_72) tânasannâ.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xlvi:15](sbe15009.htm#fr_73) See Khâ*nd*. Up.
p. 623.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xlvii:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_74) See p. 303, note
1; p. 305. note 1; p. 312, note 1.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xlviii:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_75) I have left out
the restriction as to the accent of the vowels, because they are
disregarded in the Upanishad. It should be observed that this peculiar
Sandhi occurs in the Upanishad chiefly before iti.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[li:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_76) *S*âkâyanya means a
grandson or further descendant of *S*âka; see Ga*n*aratnâvalî (Baroda,
1874), p. 57<sup>a</sup>.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[lii:1](sbe15009.htm#fr_77) As there is room
left on this page, I subjoin a passage from the
Abhidharma-kosha-vyâkhyâ, ascribed to the Bhagavat, but which, as far as
style and thought are concerned, might be taken from an Upanishad:
Ukta*m* hi Bhagavatâ: P*ri*thivî bho Gautama kutra pratish*th*itâ?
P*ri*thivî Brâhma*n*a abma*nd*ale pratish*th*itâ. Abma*nd*alam bho
Gautama kva pratish*th*itam? Vâyau pratish*th*itam. Vâyur bho Gautama
kva pratish*th*ita*h*? Âkâ*s*e pratish*th*itah. Âkâ*s*am bho Gautama
kutra pratish*th*itam? Atisarasi Mahâbrâhma*n*a, atisarasi
Mahâbrâhma*n*a. Âkâsam Brâhma*n*âpratish*th*itam, anâlambanam iti
vistara*h*. Tasmâd asty âkâsam iti Vaibhâshikâ*h*. (See B*ri*had-Âr. Up.
III, 6, 1. Burnouf, Introduction à l'histoire du Buddhisme, p. 449.)

'For it is said by the Bhagavat: "O Gautama, on what does the earth
rest?" "The earth, O Brâhma*n*a, rests on the sphere of water." "O
Gautama, on what does the sphere of water rest?" "It rests on the air."
"O Gautama, on what does the air rest?" "It rests on the ether (âkâsa)."
"O Gautama, on what does the ether rest?" "Thou goest too far, great
Brâhma*n*a; thou goest too far, great Brâhma*n*a. The ether, O
Brâhma*n*a, does not rest. It has no support." Therefore the
Vaibhâshikas hold that there is an ether,' &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe15010)
