[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15009)  [Next](sbe15011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# KA*TH*A-UPANISHAD.

## FIRST ADHYÂYA.

### FIRST VALLÎ

1\. VÂ*G*A*S*RAVASA <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78), desirous (of
heavenly rewards), surrendered (at a sacrifice) all that he possessed.
He had a son of the name of Na*k*iketas.

2\. When the (promised) presents were being given (to the priests),
faith entered into the heart of Na*k*iketas, who was still a boy, and he
thought:

3\. 'Unblessed <span id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79), surely, are the
worlds to which a man goes by giving (as his promised present at a
sacrifice) cows which have drunk water, eaten hay, given their
milk <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80), and are barren.'

4\. He (knowing that his father had promised to give up all that he
possessed, and therefore his son also) said to his father: 'Dear father,
to whom wilt thou give me?'

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

He said it a second and a third time. Then the father replied (angrily):

'I shall give thee <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) unto Death.'

(The father, having once said so, though in haste, had to be true to his
word and to sacrifice his son.)

5\. The son said: 'I go as the first, at the head of many (who have
still to die); I go in the midst of many (who are now dying). What will
be the work of Yama (the ruler of the departed) which to-day he has to
do unto me <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82)?

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

6\. 'Look back how it was with those who came before, look forward how
it will be with those who come hereafter. A mortal ripens like corn,
like corn he springs up again <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83).'

 

(Na*k*iketas enters into the abode of Yama Vaivasvata, and there is no
one to receive him. Thereupon one of the attendants of Yama is supposed
to say:)

7\. 'Fire enters into the houses, when a Brâhma*n*a enters as a
guest <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84). That fire is quenched by this
peace-offering;--bring water, O Vaivasvata <span
id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85)!

8\. 'A Brâhma*n*a that dwells in the house of a foolish man without
receiving food to eat, destroys his hopes and expectations, his
possessions, his righteousness, his sacred and his good deeds, and all
his sons and cattle <span id="fr_86"></span>[4](#fn_86).'

(Yama, returning to his house after an absence of three nights, during
which time Na*k*iketas had received no hospitality from him, says:)

9\. 'O Brâhma*n*a, as thou, a venerable guest, hast dwelt in my house
three nights without eating,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

therefore choose now three boons. Hail to thee! and welfare to me!'

10\. Na*k*iketas said: 'O Death, as the first of the three boons I
choose that Gautama, my father, be pacified, kind, and free from anger
towards me; and that he may know me and greet me, when I shall have been
dismissed by thee.'

11\. Yama said: 'Through my favour Auddâlaki Âru*n*i, thy father, will
know thee, and be again towards thee as he was before. He shall sleep
peacefully through the night, and free from anger, after having seen
thee freed from the mouth of death.'

12\. Na*k*iketas said: 'In the heaven-world there is no fear; thou art
not there, O Death, and no one is afraid on account of old age. Leaving
behind both hunger and thirst, and out of the reach of sorrow, all
rejoice in the world of heaven.'

13\. 'Thou knowest, O Death, the fire-sacrifice which leads us to
heaven; tell it to me, for I am full of faith. Those who live in the
heaven-world reach immortality,--this I ask as my second boon.'

14\. Yama said: 'I tell it thee, learn it from me, and when thou
understandest that fire-sacrifice which leads to heaven, know, O
Na*k*iketas, that it is the attainment of the endless worlds, and their
firm support, hidden in darkness <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87).'

15\. Yama then told him that fire-sacrifice, the beginning of all the
worlds <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88), and what bricks are

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

required for the altar, and how many, and how they are to be placed. And
Na*k*iketas repeated all as it had been told to him. Then M*ri*tyu,
being pleased with him, said again:

16\. The generous <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89), being satisfied,
said to him:

I give thee now another boon; that fire-sacrifice shall be named after
thee, take also this many-coloured chain <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90).'

17\. 'He who has three times performed this Nâ*k*iketa rite, and has
been united with the three (father, mother, and teacher), and has
performed the three duties (study, sacrifice, almsgiving) overcomes
birth and death. When he has learnt and understood this fire, which
knows (or makes us know) all that is born of Brahman <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_91), which is venerable and divine, then he
obtains everlasting peace.'

18\. 'He who knows the three Nâ*k*iketa fires, and knowing the three,
piles up the Nâ*k*iketa sacrifice, he, having first thrown off the
chains of death, rejoices in the world of heaven, beyond the reach of
grief.'

19\. 'This, O Na*k*iketas, is thy fire which leads to heaven, and which
thou hast chosen as thy second boon. That fire all men will
proclaim <span id="fr_92"></span>[4](#fn_92). Choose now, O Na*k*iketas,
thy third boon.'

20\. Na*k*iketas said: 'There is that doubt, when a man is dead,--some
saying, he is; others, he is not. This I should like to know, taught by
thee; this is the third of my boons.'

21\. Death said: 'On this point even the gods

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

have doubted formerly; it is not easy to understand. That subject is
subtle. Choose another boon, O Na*k*iketas, do not press me, and let me
off that boon.'

22\. Na*k*iketas said: 'On this point even the gods have doubted indeed,
and thou, Death, hast declared it to be not easy to understand, and
another teacher like thee is not to be found:--surely no other boon is
like unto this.'

23\. Death said: 'Choose sons and grandsons who shall live a hundred
years, herds of cattle, elephants, gold, and horses. Choose the wide
abode of the earth, and live thyself as many harvests as thou desirest.'

24\. 'If you can think of any boon equal to that, choose wealth, and
long life. Be (king), Na*k*iketas, on the wide earth <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93). I make thee the enjoyer of all desires.'

25\. 'Whatever desires are difficult to attain among mortals, ask for
them according to thy wish;--these fair maidens with their chariots and
musical instruments,--such are indeed not to be obtained by men,--be
waited on by them whom I give to thee, but do not ask me about dying.'

26\. Na*k*iketas said: 'These things last till tomorrow, O Death, for
they wear out this vigour of all the senses. Even the whole of life is
short. Keep thou thy horses, keep dance and song for thyself.'

27\. 'No man can be made happy by wealth. Shall we possess wealth, when
we see thee? Shall we live,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

as long as thou rulest? Only that boon (which I have chosen) is to be
chosen by me.'

28\. 'What mortal, slowly decaying here below, and knowing, after having
approached them, the freedom from decay enjoyed by the immortals, would
delight in a long life, after he has pondered on the pleasures which
arise from beauty and love <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)?'

29\. 'No, that on which there is this doubt, O Death, tell us what there
is in that great Hereafter. Na*k*iketas does not choose another boon but
that which enters into the hidden world.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[1:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_78) Vâ*g*a*s*ravasa is
called Âru*n*i Auddâlaki Gautama, the father of Na*k*iketas. The father
of *S*vetaketu, another enlightened pupil (see *Kh*ând. Up. VI, 1, 1),
is also called Âru*n*i (Uddâlaka, comm. Kaush. Up. I, x) Gautama.
*S*vetaketu himself is called Âru*n*eya, i.e. the son of Âru*n*i, the
grandson of Âru*n*a, and likewise Auddâlaki. Auddâlaki is a son of
Uddâlaka, but *S*aṅkara (Kâ*th*. Up. I, 11) takes Auddâlaki as possibly
the same as Uddâlaka. See B*ri*h. Âr. Up. III, 6, 1.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[1:2](sbe15010.htm#fr_79) As to @änanda@,
unblessed, see B*ri*h. Âr. Up. IV, 4, 11; Vâ*g*as. Sa*m*h. Up. 3 (Sacred
Books of the East, vol. i, p. 310.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[1:3](sbe15010.htm#fr_80) Ânandagiri explains
that the cows meant here are cows no longer able to drink, to eat, to
give milk, and to calve.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[2:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_81) Dadâmi, I give, with
the meaning of the future. Some MSS. write dâsyâmi.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[2:2](sbe15010.htm#fr_82) I translate these
verses freely, i.e. independently of the commentator, not that I ever
despise the traditional interpretation which the commentators have
preserved to us, but because I think that, after having examined it, we
have a right to judge for ourselves. *S*aṅkara says that the son, having
been addressed by his father full of anger, was sad, and said to
himself: 'Among many pupils I am the first, among many middling pupils I
am the middlemost, but nowhere am I the last. Yet though I am such a
good pupil, my father has said that he will consign me unto death. What
duty has he to fulfil toward Yama which he means to fulfil to-day by
giving me to him? There may be no duty, he may only have spoken in
haste. Yet a father's word must not be broken.' Having considered this,
the son comforted his father, and exhorted him to behave like his
forefathers, and to keep his word. I do not think this view of
*S*aṅkara's could have been the view of the old poet. He might have made
the son say that he was the best or one of the best of his father's
pupils, but hardly that he was also one of his middling pupils, thus
implying that he never was among the worst. That would be out of keeping
with the character of Na*k*iketas, as drawn by the poet himself.
Na*k*iketas is full of faith and wishes to die, he would be the last to
think of excuses why he should not die. The second half of the verse may
be more doubtful. It may mean what *S*aṅkara thinks it means, only that
we should get thus again an implied complaint of Na*k*iketas against his
father, and this is not in keeping with his character. The mind of
Na*k*iketas is bent on what is to come, on what he will see after death,
and on what Yama will do unto him. 'What has Yama to do,' he asks, 'what
can he do, what is it that he will to-day do unto <span id="page_3">p.
3</span> me?' This seems to me consistent with the tenor of the ancient
story, while *S*aṅkara's interpretations and interpolations savour too
much of the middle ages of India.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[3:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_83) Sasyâ, corn rather
than grass; εἴα, ἤιον Benfey; Welsh haidd, according to Rhys; different
from *s*ash-pa, ces-pes, Benfey.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[3:2](sbe15010.htm#fr_84) Cf. Vasish*th*a XI,
13; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 51.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[3:3](sbe15010.htm#fr_85) Vaivasvata, a name of
Yama, the ruler of the departed. Water is the first gift to be offered
to a stranger who claims hospitality.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[3:4](sbe15010.htm#fr_86) Here again some words
are translated differently from *S*aṅkara. He explains â*s*â as asking
for a wished-for object, pratikshâ as looking forward with a view to
obtaining an unknown object. Saṅgata he takes as reward for intercourse
with good people; sûn*ri*tâ, as usual, as good and kind speech; ish*t*a
as rewards for sacrifices; pûrta as rewards for public benefits.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[4:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_87) The commentator
translates: 'I tell it thee, attend to me who knows the heavenly fire.'
Here the nom. sing. of the participle would be very irregular, as we can
hardly refer it to bravîmi. Then, 'Know this fire as a means of
obtaining the heavenly world, know that fire as the rest or support of
the world, when it assumes the form of Virâ*g*, and as hidden in the
heart of men.'

<span id="fn_88"></span>[4:2](sbe15010.htm#fr_88) *S*aṅkara: the first
embodied, in the shape of Virâ*g*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[5:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_89) Verses 16-18 seem a
later addition.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[5:2](sbe15010.htm#fr_90) This arises probably
from a misunderstanding of verse 11, 3.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[5:3](sbe15010.htm#fr_91) *G*âtavedas.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[5:4](sbe15010.htm#fr_92) Tavaiva is a later
addition, caused by the interpolation of verses 15-18.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[6:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_93) Mahâbhûmau, on the
great earth, has been explained also by mahâ bhûmau, be great on the
earth. It is doubtful, however, whether mahi for mahin could be admitted
in the Upanishads, and whether it would not be easier to write mahân
bhûmau.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[7:1](sbe15010.htm#fr_94) A very obscure verse.
*S*aṅkara gives a various reading kva tadâstha*h* for kvadha*h*stha*h*,
in the sense of I given to these pleasures,' which looks like an
emendation. I have changed a*g*îryatâm into a*g*âryatâm, and take it for
an acc. sing., instead of a gen. plur., which could hardly be governed
by upetya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2](sbe15011)
