[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15069)  [Next](sbe15071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### SEVENTH BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_410"></span>[1](#fn_410).

1\. Then Uddâlaka Âruni <span id="fr_411"></span>[2](#fn_411) asked.
'Yâ*gñ*avalkya,' he said, 'we dwelt among the Madras in the houses of
Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya, studying the sacrifice. His wife was possessed of a
Gandharva, and we asked him: "Who art thou?" He answered: "I am Kabandha
Âtharva*n*a." And he said to Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya and to (us) students:
"Dost thou know, Kâpya, that thread by which this world and the other
world, and all beings are strung together?" And Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya
replied: "I do not know it, Sir." He said again to Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya and
to (us) students: "Dost thou know, Kâpya, that puller (ruler) within
(antaryâmin), who within pulls (rules) this world and the other world
and all beings?" And Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya replied: "I do not know it, Sir."
He said again to Pata*ñk*ala Kâpya and to (us) students: "He, O Kâpya,
who knows that thread and him who pulls (it) within, he knows Brahman,
he knows the worlds, he knows the Devas, he knows the Vedas, he knows
the Bhûtas (creatures), he knows the Self, he knows everything." Thus
did he (the Gandharva) say to them, and I know it. If thou, O
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, without knowing that string and the puller within,
drivest away those Brahma-cows (the cows offered as a prize to him who
best knows Brahman), thy head will fall off.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'O Gautama, I believe I know that thread and the
puller within.'

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

The other said: 'Anybody may say, I know, I know. Tell what thou
knowest.'

2\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Vâyu (air) is that thread, O Gautama. By air,
as by a thread, O Gautama, this world and the other world, and all
creatures are strung together. Therefore, O Gautama, people say of a
dead person that his limbs have become unstrung; for by air, as by a
thread, O Gautama, they were strung together.'

The other said: 'So it is, O Yâ*gñ*avalkya. Tell now (who is) the puller
within.'

3\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'He who dwells in the earth, and within the
earth <span id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412), whom the earth does not
know, whose body the earth is, and who pulls (rules) the earth within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

4\. 'He who dwells in the water, and within the water, whom the water
does not know, whose body the water is, and who pulls (rules) the water
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

5\. 'He who dwells in the fire, and within the fire, whom the fire does
not know, whose body the fire is, and who pulls (rules) the fire within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

6\. 'He who dwells in the sky, and within the sky, whom the sky does not
know, whose body the sky is, and who pulls (rules) the sky within, he is
thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

7\. 'He who dwells in the air (vâyu), and within the air, whom the air
does not know, whose body the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

air is, and who pulls (rules) the air within, he is thy Self, the puller
(ruler) within, the immortal.'

8\. 'He who dwells in the heaven (dyu), and within the heaven, whom the
heaven does not know, whose body the heaven is, and who pulls (rules)
the heaven within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the
immortal.'

9\. 'He who dwells in the sun (Âditya), and within the sun, whom the sun
does not know, whose body the sun is, and who pulls (rules) the sun
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

10\. 'He who dwells in the space (disah), and within the space, whom the
space does not know, whose body the space is, and who pulls (rules) the
space within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

11\. 'He who dwells in the moon and stars (*k*andra-târakam), and within
the moon and stars, whom the moon and stars do not know, whose body the
moon and stars are, and who pulls (rules) the moon and stars within, he
is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

12\. 'He who dwells in the ether (âkâsa), and within the ether, whom the
ether does not know, whose body the ether is, and who pulls (rules) the
ether within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

13\. 'He who dwells in the darkness (tamas), and within the darkness,
whom the darkness does not know, whose body the darkness is, and who
pulls (rules) the darkness within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler)
within, the immortal.'

14\. 'He who dwells in the light (te*g*as), and within the light, whom
the light does not know, whose

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

body the light is, and who pulls (rules) the light within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

So far with respect to the gods (adhidaivatam); now with respect to
beings (adhibhûtam).

15\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'He who dwells in all beings, and within all
beings, whom all beings do not know, whose body all beings are, and who
pulls (rules) all beings within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler)
within, the immortal.'

16\. 'He who dwells in the breath (prâ*n*a), and within the breath, whom
the breath does not know, whose body the breath is, and who pulls
(rules) the breath within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal.'

17\. 'He who dwells in the tongue (vâ*k*), and within the tongue, whom
the tongue does not know, whose body the tongue is, and who pulls
(rules) the tongue within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal.'

18\. 'He who dwells in the eye, and within the eye, whom the eye does
not know, whose body the eye is, and who pulls (rules) the eye within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

19\. 'He who dwells in the ear, and within the ear, whom the ear does
not know, whose body the ear is, and who pulls (rules) the ear within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

20\. 'He who dwells in the mind, and within the mind, whom the mind does
not know, whose body the mind is, and who pulls (rules) the mind within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

21\. 'He who dwells in the skin, and within the skin, whom the skin does
not know, whose body the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

skin is, and who pulls (rules) the skin within, he is thy Self, the
puller (ruler) within, the immortal.'

22\. 'He who dwells in knowledge <span id="fr_413"></span>[1](#fn_413),
and within knowledge, whom knowledge does not know, whose body knowledge
is, and who pulls (rules) knowledge within, he is thy Self, the puller
(ruler) within, the immortal.'

23\. 'He who dwells in the seed, and within the seed, whom the seed does
not know, whose body the seed is, and who pulls (rules) the seed within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal; unseen, but
seeing; unheard, but hearing; unperceived, but perceiving; unknown, but
knowing. There is no other seer but he, there is no other hearer but he,
there is no other perceiver but he, there is no other knower but he.
This is thy Self, the ruler within, the immortal. Everything else is of
evil.' After that Uddâlaka Âruni held his peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_410"></span>[132:1](sbe15070.htm#fr_410) Mâdhyandina text,
p. 1072.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[132:2](sbe15070.htm#fr_411) Afterwards
addressed as Gautama; see before, p. 1, note.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[133:1](sbe15070.htm#fr_412) I translate antara
by 'within,' according to the commentator, who explains it by
abhyantara, but I must confess that I should prefer to translate it by
'different from,' as Deussen does, l. c. p. 160, particularly as it
governs an ablative.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[136:1](sbe15070.htm#fr_413) Self, i.e. the
individual Self, according to the Mâdhyandina school; see Deussen, p.
161.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 8](sbe15071)
