[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15072)  [Next](sbe15074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

## FOURTH ADHYÂYA.

### FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

1\. When *G*anaka Vaideha was sitting (to give audience), Yâ*gñ*avalkya
approached, and *G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Yâ*gñ*avalkya, for what object
did you come, wishing for cattle, or for subtle questions <span
id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_459)?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'For both, Your Majesty;

2\. 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: '*G*itvan *S*ailini told me that speech (vâk)
is Brahman.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit of a good) father,
mother, and teacher might tell, so did Sailini <span
id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_460) tell you, that speech is Brahman; for
what is the use of a dumb person? But did he tell you the body (âyatana)
and the resting-place (pratish*th*â) of that Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only <span id="fr_461"></span>[3](#fn_461).'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'The tongue is its body, ether its place, and one
should worship it as knowledge.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of that knowledge?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'Your Majesty, speech itself (is knowledge). For
through speech, Your Majesty, a friend is known (to be a friend), and
likewise the *Ri*g-Veda, Ya*g*ur-veda, Sâma-veda, the Atharvâṅgirasas,
the Itihâsa (tradition), Purâ*n*a-vidyâ (knowledge of the past), the
Upanishads, *S*lokas (verses), Sûtras (rules), Anuvyâkhyânas and
Vyâkhyânas (commentaries <span id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_462), &c.);
what is sacrificed, what is poured out, what is (to be) eaten and drunk,
this world and the other world, and all creatures. By speech alone, Your
Majesty, Brahman is known, speech indeed, O King, is the Highest
Brahman. Speech does not desert him who worships that (Brahman) with
such knowledge, all creatures approach him, and having become a god, he
goes to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

3\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: 'Udaṅka *S*aulbâyana told me that life
(prâ*n*a) <span id="fr_463"></span>[2](#fn_463) is Brahman.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit of a good) father,
mother, and teacher might tell, so did

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Udaṅka
*S*aulbâyana tell you that life is Brahman; for what is the use of a
person without life? But did he tell you the body and the resting-place
of that Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Breath is its body, ether its place, and one should
worship it as what is dear.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of that which is dear?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'Your Majesty, life itself (is that which is
dear);' because for the sake of life, Your Majesty, a man sacrifices
even for him who is unworthy of sacrifice, he accepts presents from him
who is not worthy to bestow presents, nay, he goes to a country, even
when there is fear of being hurt <span id="fr_464"></span>[1](#fn_464),
for the sake of life. Life, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Life does
not desert him who worships that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all
creatures approach him, and having become a god, he goes to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

4\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: 'Barku Vârsh*n*a told me that sight
(*k*akshus) is Brahman.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit of a good) father,
mother, and teacher might tell, so did Barku Vârshna tell you that sight
is Brahman; for what is the use of a person who cannot see? But did he
tell you the body and the resting-place of that Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'The eye is its body, ether its place, and one
should worship it as what is true.'

Ganaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of that which is true?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'Your Majesty, sight itself (is that which is
true); for if they say to a man who sees with his eye, "Didst thou see?"
and he says, "I saw," then it is true. Sight, O King, is the Highest
Brahman. Sight does not desert him who worships that (Brahman) with such
knowledge, all creatures approach him, and having become a god, he goes
to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

5\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: 'Gardabhîvibhîta Bhâradvâ*g*a told me that
hearing (*s*ruta) is Brahman.'

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit of a good) father,
mother, and teacher might tell, so did Gardabhîvibhîta Bhâradvâ*g*a tell
you that hearing is Brahman; for what is the use of a person who cannot
hear? But did he tell you the body and the resting-place of that
Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'The ear is its body, ether its place, and we should
worship it as what is endless.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of that which is endless?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya, replied: 'Your Majesty, space (disa*h*) itself (is that
which is endless), and therefore to whatever space (quarter) he goes, he
never comes to the end of it. For space is endless. Space indeed, O
King, is hearing <span id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_465), and hearing
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Hearing does not desert him who
worships that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures approach him,
and having become a god, he goes to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

6\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: 'Satyakâma *G*âbâla told me that mind <span
id="fr_466"></span>[1](#fn_466) (manas) is Brahman.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit of a good) father,
mother, and teacher might tell, so did Satyakâma *G*âbâla tell you that
mind is Brahman; for what is the use of a person without mind? But did
he tell you the body and the resting-place of that Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Mind itself is its body, ether its place, and we
should worship it as bliss.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of bliss?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'Your Majesty, mind itself; for with the mind
does a man desire a woman, and a like son is born of her, and he is
bliss. Mind indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Mind does not desert
him who worships that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures
approach him, and having become a god, he goes to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

7\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Let us hear what anybody may have told you.'

*G*anaka Vaideha replied: 'Vidagdha *S*âkalya told me that the heart
(hridaya) is Brahman.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'As one who had (the benefit

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so did Vidagdha
*S*âkalya tell you that the heart is Brahman; for what is the use of a
person without a heart? But did he tell you the body and the
resting-place of that Brahman?'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'He did not tell me.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'Your Majesty, this (Brahman) stands on one leg
only.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'Then tell me, Yâ*gñ*avalkya.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'The heart itself is its body, ether its place, and
we should worship it as certainty (sthiti).'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'What is the nature of certainty?'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya replied: 'Your Majesty, the heart itself; for the heart
indeed, O King, is the body of all things, the heart is the
resting-place of all things, for in the heart, O King, all things rest.
The heart indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. The heart does not
desert him who worships that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all
creatures approach him, and having become a god, he goes to the gods.'

*G*anaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for this) a thousand cows with
a bull as big as an elephant.'

Yâ*gñ*avalkya said: 'My father was of opinion that one should not accept
a reward without having fully instructed a pupil.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_459"></span>[152:1](sbe15073.htm#fr_459) A*n*v-anta, formed
like Sûtrânta, Siddhânta, and probably Vedânta, means subtle questions.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[152:2](sbe15073.htm#fr_460) Roer and Poley
give here *S*ailina; Weber also (pp. 1080 and 1081) has twice Sailina
(*S*ilinasyâpatyam).

<span id="fn_461"></span>[152:3](sbe15073.htm#fr_461) This seems to mean
that *G*itvan's explanation of Brahman is lame or imperfect, because
there are four pâdas of that Brahman, and he taught one only. The other
three are its body, its place, and its form of worship (pra*gñ*etîyam
upanishad brahma*n*as *k*aturtha*h* pâda*h*). See also Maitr. Up. VII,
p. 221.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[153:1](sbe15073.htm#fr_462) See before, II, 4,
10; and afterwards, IV, 5, 11.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[153:2](sbe15073.htm#fr_463) See Taitt. Up.
III, 3.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[154:1](sbe15073.htm#fr_464) Or it may mean, he
is afraid of being hurt, to whatever country he goes, for the sake of a
livelihood.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[156:1](sbe15073.htm#fr_465) Dvivedagaṅga
states, digbhâgo hi pârthivâdhish*th*ânâva*kkh*inna*h* *s*rotram ity
u*k*yate, atas tayor ekatvam.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[157:1](sbe15073.htm#fr_466) See also Taitt.
Up. III, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 2](sbe15074)
