[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15055)  [Next](sbe15057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296).

1\. 'When the father (of creation) had produced by knowledge and penance
(work) the seven kinds of food, one of his (foods) was common to all
beings, two he assigned to the Devas, (1)

'Three he made for himself, one he gave to the animals. In it all rests,
whatsoever breathes and breathes not. (2)

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

'Why then do these not perish, though they are always eaten? He who
knows this imperishable one, he eats food with his face. (3)

'He goes even to the Devas, he lives on strength.' (4)

2\. When it is said, that 'the father produced by knowledge and penance
the seven kinds of food,' it is clear that (it was he who) did so. When
it is said, that 'one of his (foods) was common,' then that is that
common food of his which is eaten. He who worships (eats) that (common
food), is not removed from evil, for verily that food is mixed
(property) <span id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_297). When it is said, that
'two he assigned to the Devas,' that is the huta, which is sacrificed in
fire, and the prahuta, which is given away at a sacrifice. But they also
say, the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices are here intended, and
therefore one should not offer them as an ish*t*i or with a wish.

When it is said, that 'one he gave to animals,' that is milk. For in the
beginning (in their infancy) both men and animals live on milk. And
therefore they either make a new-born child lick gh*ri*ta (butter), or
they make it take the breast. And they call a new-born creature
'at*rin*âda,' i.e. not eating herbs. When it is said, that 'in it all
rests, whatsoever breathes and breathes not,' we see that all this,
whatsoever breathes and breathes not, rests and depends on milk.

And when it is said (in another Brâhma*n*a), that a man who sacrifices
with milk a whole year <span id="fr_298"></span>[2](#fn_298), overcomes
death again, let him not think so. No, on

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the very day on which he sacrifices, on that day he overcomes death
again; for he who knows this, offers to the gods the entire food (viz.
milk).

When it is said, 'Why do these not perish, though they are always
eaten,' we answer, Verily, the Person is the imperishable, and he
produces that food again and again <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299).

When it is said, 'He who knows this imperishable one, I then, verily,
the Person is the imperishable one, for he produces this food by
repeated thought, and whatever he does not work by his works, that
perishes.

When it is said, that 'he eats food with his face,' then face means the
mouth, he eats it with his mouth.

When it is said, that 'he goes even to the Devas, he lives on strength,'
that is meant as praise.

3\. When it is said, that 'he made three for himself,' that means that
he made mind, speech, and breath for himself. As people say, 'My mind
was elsewhere, I did not see; my mind was elsewhere, I did not hear,' it
is clear that a man sees with his mind and hears with his mind <span
id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_300). Desire, representation, doubt, faith,
want of faith, memory <span id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_301),
forgetfulness, shame, reflexion, fear, all this is mind. Therefore even
if a man is touched on the back, he knows it through the mind.

Whatever sound there is, that is speech. Speech indeed is intended for
an end or object, it is nothing by itself.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

The up-breathing, the down-breathing, the back-breathing, the
out-breathing, the on-breathing, all that is breathing is breath
(prâ*n*a) only. Verily that Self consists of it; that Self consists of
speech, mind, and breath.

4\. These are the three worlds: earth is speech, sky mind, heaven
breath.

5\. These are the three Vedas: the *Ri*g-veda is speech, the
Ya*g*ur-veda mind, the Sâma-veda breath.

6\. These are the Devas, Fathers, and men: the Devas are speech, the
Fathers mind, men breath.

7\. These are father, mother, and child: the father is mind, the mother
speech, the child breath.

8\. These are what is known, what is to be known, and what is unknown.

What is known, has the form of speech, for speech is known. Speech,
having become this, protects man <span id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_302).

9\. What is to be known, has the form of mind, for mind is what is to be
known. Mind, having become this, protects man.

10\. What is unknown, has the form of breath, for breath is unknown.
Breath, having become this, protects man <span
id="fr_303"></span>[2](#fn_303).

11\. Of that speech (which is the food of Pra*g*âpati) earth is the
body, light the form, viz. this fire. And so far as speech extends, so
far extends the earth, so far extends fire.

12\. Next, of this mind heaven is the body, light the form, viz. this
sun. And so far as this mind

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

extends, so far extends heaven, so far extends the sun. If they (fire
and sun) embrace each other, then wind is born, and that is Indra, and
he is without a, rival. Verily a second is a rival, and he who knows
this, has no rival.

13\. Next, of this breath water is the body, light the form, viz. this
moon. And so far as this breath extends, so far extends water, so far
extends the moon.

These are all alike, all endless. And he who worships them as finite,
obtains a finite world, but he who worships them as infinite, obtains an
infinite world.

14\. That Pra*g*âpati is the year, and he consists of sixteen digits.
The nights <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_304) indeed are his fifteen
digits, the fixed point <span id="fr_305"></span>[2](#fn_305) his
sixteenth digit. He is increased and decreased by the nights. Having on
the new-moon night entered with the sixteenth part into everything that
has life, he is thence born again in the morning. Therefore let no one
cut off the life of any living thing on that night, not even of a
lizard, in honour (pû*g*ârtham) of that deity.

15\. Now verily that Pra*g*âpati, consisting of sixteen digits, who is
the year, is the same as a man who knows this. His wealth constitutes
the fifteen digits, his Self the sixteenth digit. He is increased and
decreased by that wealth. His Self is the nave, his wealth the felly.
Therefore even if he loses everything, if he lives but with his Self,
people say, he lost the felly (which can be restored again).

16\. Next there are verily three worlds, the world of men, the world of
the Fathers, the world of the Devas. The world of men can be gained by a
son

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

only, not by any other work. By sacrifice the world of the Fathers, by
knowledge the world of the Devas is gained. The world of the Devas is
the best of worlds, therefore they praise knowledge.

17\. Next follows the handing over. When a man thinks he is going to
depart, he says to his son: 'Thou art Brahman (the Veda, so far as
acquired by the father); thou art the sacrifice (so far as performed by
the father); thou art the world.' The son answers: 'I am Brahman, I am
the sacrifice, I am the world.' Whatever has been learnt (by the father)
that, taken as one, is Brahman. Whatever sacrifices there are, they,
taken as one, are the sacrifice. Whatever worlds there are, they, taken
as one, are the world. Verily here ends this (what has to be done by a
father, viz. study, sacrifice, &c.) 'He (the son), being all this,
preserved me from this world <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306),'
thus he thinks. Therefore they call a son who is instructed (to do all
this), a world-son (lokya), and therefore they instruct him.

When a father who knows this, departs this world, then he enters into
his son together with his own spirits (with speech, mind, and breath).
If there is anything done amiss by the father, of all that the son
delivers him, and therefore he is called Putra, son <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_307). By help of his son the father stands
firm in this world <span id="fr_308"></span>[3](#fn_308). Then these
divine immortal spirits (speech, mind, and breath) enter into him.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

18\. From the earth and from fire, divine speech enters into him. And
verily that is divine speech whereby, whatever he says, comes to be.

19\. From heaven and the sun, divine mind enters into him. And verily
that is divine mind whereby he becomes joyful, and grieves no more.

20\. From water and the moon, divine breath (spirit) enters into him.
And verily that is divine breath which, whether moving or not moving,
does not tire, and therefore does not perish. He who knows this, becomes
the Self of all beings. As that deity (Hira*n*yagarbha) is, so does he
become. And as all beings honour that deity (with sacrifice, &c.), so do
all beings honour him who knows this.

Whatever grief these creatures suffer, that is all one <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_309) (and therefore disappears). Only what is
good approaches him; verily, evil does not approach the Devas.

21\. Next follows the consideration of the observances <span
id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_310) (acts). Pra*g*âpati created the actions
(active senses). When they had been created, they strove among
themselves. Voice held, I shall speak; the eye held, I shall see; the
ear held, I shall hear; and thus the other actions too, each according
to its own act. Death, having become weariness, took them and seized
them. Having seized them, death held them back (from their work).
Therefore speech grows weary, the eye grows weary, the ear grows weary.
But death did not seize the central breath. Then the others tried to
know him, and

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

said: 'Verily, he is the best of us, he who, whether moving or not, does
not tire and does not perish. Well, let all of us assume his form.'
Thereupon they all assumed his form, and therefore they are called after
him 'breaths' (spirits).

In whatever family there is a man who knows this, they call that family
after his name. And he who strives with one who knows this, withers away
and finally dies. So far with regard to the body.

22\. Now with regard to the deities.

Agni (fire) held, I shall burn; Âditya (the sun) held, I shall warm;
*K*andramas (the moon) held, I shall shine; and thus also the other
deities, each according to the deity. And as it was with the central
breath among the breaths, so it was with Vâyu, the wind among those
deities. The other deities fade, not Vâyu. Vâyu is the deity that never
sets.

23\. And here there is this *S*loka:

'He from whom the sun rises, and into whom it sets' (he verily rises
from the breath, and sets in the breath)

'Him the Devas made the law, he only is to-day, and he to-morrow also'
(whatever these Devas determined then, that they perform to-day
also <span id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_311)).

Therefore let a man perform one observance only, let him breathe up and
let him breathe down, that the evil death may not reach him. And when he
performs it, let him try to finish it. Then he obtains through it union
and oneness with that deity (with prâ*n*a).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[91:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_296) Mâdhyandina text,
p. 1054.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[92:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_297) It belongs to all
beings.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[92:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_298) This would imply
360 sacrificial days, each with two oblations, i.e. 720 oblations.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[93:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_299) Those who enjoy the
food, become themselves creators. Comm.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[93:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_300) See Deussen,
Vedânta, p. 358.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[93:3](sbe15056.htm#fr_301) Firmness, strength.
Comm.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[94:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_302) 'The food (speech),
having become known, can be consumed.' Comm.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[94:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_303) This was
adhibhautika, with reference to bhûtas, beings. Next follows the
adhidaivika, with reference to the devas, gods. Comm.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[95:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_304) Meant for
nychthemera.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[95:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_305) When he is just
invisible at the new moon.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[96:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_306) Roer seems to have
read sa*m*naya, 'all this multitude.' I read, etan mi sarva*m* sann ayam
ito 'bhuna*g*ad iti.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[96:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_307) The Comm. derives
putra from pu (pûr), to fill, and tra (trâ), to deliver, a deliverer who
fills the holes left by the father, a stopgap. Others derive it from
put, a hell, and tri, to protect; cf. Manu IX, 138.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[96:3](sbe15056.htm#fr_308) 'The manushya-loka,
not the pit*ri*-loka and deva-loka.' Comm.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[97:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_309) 'Individuals
suffer, because one causes grief to another. But in the universal soul,
where all individuals are one, their sufferings are neutralised.' Comm.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[97:2](sbe15056.htm#fr_310) The upâsana or
meditative worship.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[98:1](sbe15056.htm#fr_311) The prâ*n*a-vrata
and vâyu-vrata. Comm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 6](sbe15057)
