[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15061)  [Next](sbe15063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_369"></span>[2](#fn_369).

1\. This earth is the honey <span id="fr_370"></span>[3](#fn_370)
(madhu, the effect) of all beings, and all beings are the honey (madhu,
the effect) of this earth. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this
earth, and that bright immortal person incorporated in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that
Brahman, that All.

2\. This water is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey
of this water. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this water, and
that bright, immortal person, existing as seed in the body (both are
madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman,
that All.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

3\. This fire is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey
of this fire. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this fire, and
that bright, immortal person, existing as speech in the body (both are
madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman,
that All.

4\. This air is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey of
this air. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this air, and that
bright, immortal person existing as breath in the body (both are madhu).
He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that
All.

5\. This sun is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey of
this sun. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this sun, and that
bright, immortal person existing as the eye in the body (both are
madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman,
that All.

6\. This space (disa*h*, the quarters) is the honey of all beings, and
all beings are the honey of this space. Likewise this bright, immortal
person in this space, and that bright, immortal person existing as the
ear in the body (both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self,
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

7\. This moon is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey
of this moon. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this moon, and
that bright, immortal person existing as mind in the body (both are
madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman,
that All.

8\. This lightning is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the
honey of this lightning. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this
lightning, and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

that bright, immortal person existing as light in the body (both are
madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman,
that All.

9\. This thunder <span id="fr_371"></span>[1](#fn_371) is the honey of
all beings, and all beings are the honey of this thunder. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this thunder, and that bright, immortal
person existing as sound and voice in the body (both are madhu). He
indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

10\. This ether is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey
of this ether. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this ether, and
that bright, immortal person existing as heart-ether in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that
Brahman, that All.

11\. This law (dharma*h*) is the honey of all beings, and all beings are
the honey of this law. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this
law, and that bright, immortal person existing as law in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that
Brahman, that All.

12\. This true <span id="fr_372"></span>[2](#fn_372) (satyam) is the
honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey of this true. Likewise
this bright, immortal person in what is true, and that bright, immortal
person existing as the true in the body (both are madhu). He indeed is
the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

13\. This mankind is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the
honey of this mankind. Likewise

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

this bright, immortal person in mankind, and that bright, immortal
person existing as man in the body (both are madhu). He indeed is the
same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

14\. This Self is the honey of all beings, and all beings are the honey
of this Self Likewise this bright, immortal person in this Self, and
that bright, immortal person, the Self (both are madhu). He indeed is
the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

15\. And verily this Self is the lord of all beings, the king of all
beings. And as all spokes are contained in the axle and in the felly of
a wheel, all beings, and all those selfs (of the earth, water, &c.) are
contained in that Self.

16\. Verily Dadhyak Âtharva*n*a proclaimed this honey (the madhu-vidyâ)
to the two A*s*vins, and a *Ri*shi, seeing this, said (Rv. I, 116, 12):

'O ye two heroes (A*s*vins), I make manifest that fearful deed of yours
(which you performed) for the sake of gain <span
id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_373), like as thunder <span
id="fr_374"></span>[2](#fn_374) makes manifest the rain. The honey
(madhu-vidyâ) which Dadhyak Âtharva*n*a proclaimed to you through the
head of a horse,' . . .

17\. Verily Dadhyak Âtharva*n*a <span id="fr_375"></span>[3](#fn_375)
proclaimed this honey to the two A*s*vins, and a *Ri*shi, seeing this,
said (Rv. I, 117, 22):

'O A*s*vins, you fixed a horse's head on Âtharva*n*a Dadhyak, and he,
wishing to be true (to his promise),

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

proclaimed to you the honey, both that of Tvasht*ri* <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_376) and that which is to be your secret, O
ye strong ones.

18\. Verily Dadhyak Âtharva*n*a proclaimed this honey to the two
A*s*vins, and a *Ri*shi, seeing this, said:

'He (the Lord) made bodies with two feet, he made bodies with four feet.
Having first become a bird, he entered the bodies as purusha (as the
person).' This very purusha is in all bodies the puri*s*aya, i.e. he who
lies in the body (and is therefore called purusha). There is nothing
that is not covered by him, nothing that is not filled by him.

19\. Verily Dadhya*k* Âtharva*n*a proclaimed this honey to the two
A*s*vins, and a *Ri*shi, seeing this, said (Rv. VI, 47, 18):

'He (the Lord) became like unto every form <span
id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_377), and this is meant to reveal the (true)
form of him (the Âtman). Indra (the Lord) appears multiform through the
Mâyâs (appearances), for his horses (senses) are yoked, hundreds and
ten.'

This (Âtman) is the horses, this (Âtman) is the ten, and the thousands,
many and endless. This is the Brahman, without cause and without effect,
without anything inside or outside; this Self is Brahman, omnipresent
and omniscient. This is the teaching (of the Upanishads).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_368"></span>[113:1](sbe15061.htm#fr_368) Instead of the
last line, B. adds (IV, 5, 15): That Self is to be described by No, no!
He is incomprehensible, for be cannot be comprehended; he is
imperishable, for he cannot perish; he is unattached, for he does not
attach himself; unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not fail. How, O
beloved, should he know the Knower? Thus, O Maitreyî, thou hast been
instructed. Thus far goes immortality.' Having said so, Yâ*gñ*avalkya
went away (into the forest). 15. See also *Kh*ând. Up. VII, 24, 1.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[113:2](sbe15062.htm#fr_369) Mâdhyandina text,
p. 1064.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[113:3](sbe15062.htm#fr_370) Madhu, honey,
seems to be taken here as an instance of something which is both cause
and effect, or rather of things which are mutually dependent on each
other, or cannot exist without one other. As the bees make the honey,
and the honey makes or supports the bees, bees and honey are both cause
and effect, or at all events are mutually dependent on one other. In the
same way the earth and all living beings are looked upon as mutually
dependent, living beings presupposing the earth, and the earth
presupposing living beings. This at all events seems to be the general
idea of what is called the Madhuvidyâ, the science of honey, which
Dadhya*k* communicated to the A*s*vins.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[115:1](sbe15062.htm#fr_371) Stanayitnu,
thunder, is explained by the commentator as Par*g*anya.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[115:2](sbe15062.htm#fr_372) Satyam, the true,
the real, not, as it is generally translated, the truth.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[116:1](sbe15062.htm#fr_373) The translation
here follows the commentary.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[116:2](sbe15062.htm#fr_374) Tanyatu, here
explained as Par*g*anya.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[116:3](sbe15062.htm#fr_375) *S*aṅkara
distinguishes here between Atharva*n*a and Âtharva*n*a, if the text is
correct.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[117:1](sbe15062.htm#fr_376) *S*aṅkara explains
Tvasht*ri* as the sun, and the sun as the head of the sacrifice which,
having been cut off, was to be replaced by the pravargya rite. The
knowledge of this rite forms the honey of Tvasht*ri*. The other honey
which is to be kept secret is the knowledge of the Self, as taught
before in the Madhu-brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[117:2](sbe15062.htm#fr_377) He assumed all
forms, and such forms, as two-footed or four-footed animals, remained
permanent. Comm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 6](sbe15063)
