[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15002)  [Next](sbe15004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

## I.

## THE KA*TH*A-UPANISHAD.

THE Ka*th*a-upanishad is probably more widely known than any other
Upanishad. It formed part of the Persian translation, was rendered into
English by Râmmohun Roy, and has since been frequently quoted by
English, French, and German writers as one of the most perfect specimens
of the mystic philosophy and poetry of the ancient Hindus.

It was in the year 1845 that I first copied at Berlin the text of this
Upanishad, the commentary of *S*aṅkara (MS. 127 Chambers <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)), and the gloss of Gopâlayogin (MS. 224
Chambers). The text and commentary of *S*aṅkara and the gloss of
Ânandagiri have since been edited by Dr. Roer in the Bibliotheca Indica,
with translation and notes. There are other translations, more or less
perfect, by Râmmohun Roy, Windischmann, Poley, Weber, Muir, Regnaud,
Gough, and others. But there still remained many difficult and obscure
portions, and I hope that in some at least of the passages where I
differ from my predecessors, not excepting *S*aṅkara, I may have
succeeded in rendering the original meaning of the author more
intelligible than it has hitherto been.

The text of the Ka*th*a-upanishad is in some MSS. ascribed to the
Ya*g*ur-veda. In the Chambers MS. of the commentary also it is said to
belong to that Veda <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18), and in the
Muktikopanishad it stands first among the Upanishads of the Black
Ya*g*ur-veda. According to Colebrooke (Miscellaneous Essays, 1, 96,
note) it is referred to the Sâma-veda also. Generally, however, it is
counted as one of the Âtharva*n*a Upanishads.

The reason why it is ascribed to the Ya*g*ur-veda, is probably because
the legend of Na*k*iketas occurs in the Brâhma*n*a of the Taittirîya
Ya*g*ur-veda. Here we read (III, 1, 8):

Vâ*g*a*s*ravasa, wishing for rewards, sacrificed all his

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

wealth. He had a son, called Na*k*iketas. While he was still a boy,
faith entered into him at the time when the cows that were to be given
(by his father) as presents to the priests, were brought in. He said:
'Father, to whom wilt thou give me?' He said so a second and third time.
The father turned round and said to him: 'To Death, I give thee.'

Then a voice said to the young Gautama, as he stood up: 'He (thy father)
said, Go away to the house of Death, I give thee to Death.' Go therefore
to Death when he is not at home, and dwell in his house for three nights
without eating. If he should ask thee, 'Boy, how many nights hast thou
been here?' say, 'Three.' When he asks thee, 'What didst thou eat the
first night?' say, 'Thy offspring.' 'What didst thou eat the second
night?' say, 'Thy cattle.' 'What didst thou eat the third night?' say,
'Thy good works.'

He went to Death, while he was away from home, and lie dwelt in his
house for three nights without eating. When Death returned, he asked:
'Boy, how many nights hast thou been here?' He answered: 'Three.' 'What
didst thou eat the first night?' 'Thy offspring.', 'What didst thou eat
the second night?' 'Thy cattle.' 'What didst thou eat the third night?'
'Thy good works.'

Then he said: 'My respect to thee, O venerable sir! Choose a boon.'

'May I return living to my father,' he said.

'Choose a second boon.'

'Tell me how my good works may never perish.'

Then he explained to him this Nâkiketa fire (sacrifice), and hence his
good works do not perish.

'Choose a third boon.'

'Tell me the conquest of death again.'

Then he explained to him this (chief) Nâkiketa fire (sacrifice), and
hence he conquered death again <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19).

This story, which in the Brâhma*n*a is told in order to explain the name
of a certain sacrificial ceremony called

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nâkiketa, was used
as a peg on which to hang the doctrines of the Upanishad. In its
original form it may have constituted one Adhyâya only, and the very
fact of its division into two Adhyâyas may show that the compilers of
the Upanishad were still aware of its gradual origin. We have no means,
however, of determining its original form, nor should we even be
justified in maintaining that the first Adhyâya ever existed by itself,
and that the second was added at a much later time. Whatever its
component elements may have been before it was an Upanishad, when it was
an Upanishad it consisted of six Vallîs, neither more nor less.

The name of vallî, lit. creeper, as a subdivision of a Vedic work, is
important. It occurs again in the Taittirîya Upanishads. Professor Weber
thinks that vallî, creeper, in the sense of chapter, is based on a
modern metaphor, and was primarily intended for a creeper, attached to
the *s*âkhâs or branches of the Veda <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20). More likely, however, it was used in the
same sense as parvan, a joint, a shoot, a branch, i.e. a division.

Various attempts have been made to distinguish the more modern from the
more ancient portions of our Upanishad <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21). No doubt there are peculiarities of
metre, grammar, language, and thought which indicate the more primitive
or the more modern character of certain verses. There are repetitions
which offend us, and there are several passages which are clearly taken
over from other Upanishads, where they seem to have had their original
place. Thirty-five years ago, when I first worked at this Upanishad, I
saw no difficulty in re-establishing what I thought the original text of
the Upanishad must have been. I now feel that we know so little of the
time and the circumstances when these half-prose and half-metrical
Upanishads were first put together, that I should hesitate

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

before expunging even the most modern-sounding lines from the original
context of these Vedântic essays <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22).

The mention of Dhât*ri*, creator, for instance (Ka*th*. Up. II, 20), is
certainly startling, and seems to have given rise to a very early
conjectural emendation. But dhât*ri* and vidhât*ri* occur in the hymns
of the Rig-veda (X, 82, 2), and in the Upanishads (Maitr. Up. VI, 8);
and Dhât*ri*, as almost a personal deity, is invoked with Pra*g*âpati in
Rig-veda X, 184, I. Deva, in the sense of God (Ka*th*. Up. II, 12), is
equally strange, but occurs in other Upanishads also (Maitr. Up. VI, 23;
*S*vetâ*s*v. Up. I, 3). Much might be said about setu, bridge (Ka*th*.
Up. III, 2; Mu*nd*. Up. II, 2, 5), âdar*s*a, mirror (Ka*th*. Up. VI, 5),
as being characteristic of a later age. But setu is not a bridge, in our
sense of the word, but rather a wall, a bank, a barrier, and occurs
frequently in other Upanishads (Maitr. Up. VII. 7; Khâ*nd*. Up. VIII, 4;
B*ri*h. Up. IV, 4, 22, &c.), while âdar*s*as, or mirrors, are mentioned
in the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka and the Srauta-sûtras. Till we know something
more about the date of the first and the last composition or compilation
of the Upanishads, how are we to tell what subjects and what ideas the
first author or the last collector was familiar with? To attempt the
impossible may seem courageous, but it is hardly scholarlike.

With regard to faulty or irregular readings, we can never know whether
they are due to the original composers, the compilers, the repeaters, or
lastly the writers of the Upanishads. It is easy to say that adre*s*ya
(Mu*nd*. Up. I, 1, 6) ought to be ad*ri*sya; but who would venture to
correct that form? Whenever that verse is quoted, it is quoted with
adresya, not adrisya. The commentators themselves tell us sometimes that
certain forms are either Vedic or due to carelessness (pramâdapâ*th*a);
but that very fact shows that such a form, for instance, as samîyâta
(Khâ*nd*. Up. I, 12, 3) rests on an old authority.

No doubt, if we have the original text of an author, and can prove that
his text was corrupted by later compilers

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

or copyists or printers, we have a right to remove those later
alterations, whether they be improvements or corruptions. But where, as
in our case, we can never hope to gain access to original documents, and
where we can only hope, by pointing out what is clearly more modem than
the rest or, it may be, faulty, to gain an approximate conception of
what the original composer may have had in his mind, before handing his
composition over to the safe keeping of oral tradition, it is almost a
duty to discourage, as much as lies in our power, the work of
reconstructing an old text by so-called conjectural emendations or
critical omissions.

I have little doubt, for instance, that the three verses 16-18 in the
first Vallî of the Ka*th*a-upanishad are later additions, but I should
not therefore venture to remove them. Death had granted three boons to
Na*k*iketas, and no more. In a later portion, however, of the Upanishad
(II, 3), the expression s*ri*ṅkâ vittamayî occurs, which I have
translated by 'the road which leads to wealth.' As it is said that
Na*k*iketas did not choose that s*ri*ṅkâ, some reader must have supposed
that a s*ri*ṅkâ was offered him by Death. S*ri*ṅkâ, however, meant
commonly a string or necklace, and hence arose the idea that Death must
have offered a necklace as an additional gift to Na*k*iketas. Besides
this, there was another honour done to Na*k*iketas by M*ri*tyu, namely,
his allowing the sacrifice which he had taught him, to be called by his
name. This also, it was supposed, ought to have been distinctly
mentioned before, and hence the insertion of the three verses 16-18.
They are clumsily put in, for after punar evâha, 'he said again,' verse
16 ought not to have commenced by tam abravît, 'he said to him.' They
contain nothing new, for the fact that the sacrifice is to be called
after Na*k*iketas was sufficiently indicated by verse 19, 'This, O
Na*k*iketas, is thy fire which leads to heaven, which thou hast chosen
as thy second boon.' But so anxious was the interpolator to impress upon
his hearers the fact that the sacrifice should in future go by that
name, that, in spite of the metre, he inserted tavaiva, 'of thee alone,'
in verse 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxi:1](sbe15003.htm#fr_17) MS. 133 is a mere
copy of MS. 127.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxi:2](sbe15003.htm#fr_18) Ya*g*urvede
Ka*th*avallîbhâshyam.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxii:1](sbe15003.htm#fr_19) The commentator
explains punar-m*ri*tyu as the death that follows after the present
inevitable death.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe15003.htm#fr_20) History of Indian
Literature, p. 93, note; p. 157.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxiii:2](sbe15003.htm#fr_21) Though it would be
unfair to hold Professor Weber responsible for his remarks on this and
other questions connected with the Upanishads published many years ago
(Indische Studien, 1853, p. 197), and though I have hardly ever thought
it necessary to criticise them, some of his remarks are not without
their value even now.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe15003.htm#fr_22) See Regnaud, Le
Pessimisme Brahmanique, Annales du Musée Guimet, 1880; tom. i, p. 101.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II: The Mundaka-Upanishad](sbe15004)
