[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft04)  [Next](hft06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### II

### EXPLOITS OF MAUI

###### REV. A. O. FORBES

#### I.--SNARING THE SUN

MAUI was the son of Hina-lau-ae and Hina, and they dwelt at a place
called Makalia, above Kahakuloa, on West Maui. Now, his mother Hina made
*kapas*. And as she spread them out to dry, the days were so short that
she was put to great trouble and labor in hanging them out and taking
them in day after day until they were dry. Maui, seeing this, was filled
with pity for her, for the days were so short that, no sooner had she
got her *kapas* all spread out to dry, than the Sun went down, and she
had to take them in again. So he determined to make the Sun go slower.
He first went to Wailohi, in Hamakua, on East Maui, to observe the
motions of the Sun. There he saw that it rose toward Hana. He then went
up on Haleakala, and saw that the Sun in its course came directly over
that mountain. He then went home again, and after a few days went to a
place called Paeloko, at Waihee. There he cut down all the
cocoanut-trees, and gathered the fibre of the cocoanut husks in great
quantity. This he manufactured into strong cord. One Moemoe, seeing
this,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

said tauntingly to him: "Thou wilt never catch the Sun. Thou art an idle
nobody."

Maui answered: "When I conquer my enemy, and my desire is attained, I
will be your death." So he went up Haleakala again, taking his cord with
him. And when the Sun arose above where he was stationed, he prepared a
noose of the cord and, casting it, snared one of the Sun's larger beams
and broke it off. And thus he snared and broke off, one after another,
all the strong rays of the Sun.

Then shouted he exultingly: "Thou art my captive, and now I will kill
thee for thy going so swiftly."

And the Sun said: "Let me live, and thou shalt see me go more slowly
hereafter. Behold, hast thou not broken off all my strong legs, and left
me only the weak ones?"

So the agreement was made, and Maui permitted the Sun to pursue its
course, and from that time on it went more slowly; and that is the
reason why the days are longer at one season of the year than at
another. It was this that gave the name to that mountain, which should
properly be called *Alehe-ka-la* (sun snarer), and not *Haleakala*.

When Maui returned from this exploit, he went to find Moemoe, who had
reviled him. But that individual was not at home. He went on in his
pursuit till he came upon him at a place called Kawaiopilopilo, on the
shore to the eastward of the black rock called Kekaa, north of Lahaina.
Moemoe dodged him up hill and down, until at last Maui, growing wroth,
leaped upon and slew the fugitive. And the dead

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

body was transformed into a long rock, which is there to this day, by
the side of the road.

#### II.--THE ORIGIN OF FIRE

Maui and Hina dwelt together, and to them were born four sons, whose
names were Maui-mua, Maui-hope, Maui-kiikii, and Maui-o-ka-lana. These
four were fishermen. One morning, just as the edge of the Sun lifted
itself up, Maui-mua roused his brethren to go fishing. So they launched
their canoe from the beach at Kaupo, on the island of Maui, where they
were dwelling, and proceeded to the fishing ground. Having arrived
there, they were beginning to fish, when Maui-o-ka-lana saw the light of
a fire on the shore they had left, and said to his brethren: "Behold,
there is a fire burning. Whose can this fire be?"

And they answered: "Whose, indeed? Let us return to the shore, that we
may get our food cooked; but first let us get some fish."

So, after they had obtained some fish, they turned toward the shore; and
when the canoe touched the beach Maui-mua leaped ashore and ran toward
the spot where the fire had been burning. Now, the curly-tailed *alae*
(mud-hens) were the keepers of the fire; and when they saw him coming
they scratched the fire out and flew away. Maui-mua was defeated, and
returned to the house to his brethren.

Then said they to him: "How about the fire?" "How, indeed?" he answered.
"When I got there, behold, there was no fire; it was out. I supposed

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

some man had the fire, and behold, it was not so; the alae are the
proprietors of the fire, and our bananas are all stolen."

When they heard that, they were filled with anger, and decided not to go
fishing again, but to wait for the next appearance of the fire. But
after many days had passed without their seeing the fire, they went
fishing again, and behold, there was the fire! And so they were
continually tantalized. Only when they were out fishing would the fire
appear, and when they returned they could not find it.

This was the way of it. The curly-tailed alae knew that Maui and Hina
had only these four sons, and if any of them stayed on shore to watch
the fire while the others were out in the canoe the alae knew it by
counting those in the canoe, and would not light the fire. Only when
they could count four men in the canoe would they light the fire. So
Maui-mua thought it over, and said to his brethren: "To-morrow morning
do you go fishing, and I will stay ashore. But do you take the calabash
and dress it in kapa, and put it in my place in the canoe, and then go
out to fish."

They did so, and when they went out to fish the next morning, the alae
counted and saw four figures in the canoe, and then they lit the fire
and put the bananas on to roast. Before they were fully baked one of the
alae cried out: "Our dish is cooked! Behold, Hina has a smart son."

And with that, Maui-mua, who had stolen close to them unperceived,
leaped forward, seized the curly-tailed alae and exclaimed: "Now I will
kill you, you

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

scamp of an alae! Behold, it is. you who are keeping the fire from us. I
will be the death of you for this."

Then answered the alae: "If you kill me the secret dies with me, and you
won't get the fire." As Maui-mua began to wring its neck, the alae again
spoke, and said: "Let me live, and you shall have the fire."

So Maui-mua said: "Tell me, where is the fire?"

The alae replied: "It is in the leaf of the a-pe plant " (*Alocasia
macrorrhiza*).

So, by the direction of the alae, Maui-mua began to rub the leaf-stalk
of the ape-plant with a piece of stick, but the fire would not come.
Again he asked: "Where is this fire that you are hiding from me?"

The alae answered: "In a green stick."

And he rubbed a green stick, but got no fire. So it went on, until
finally the alae told him he would find it in a dry stick; and so,
indeed, he did. But Maui-mua, in revenge for the conduct of the alae,
after he had got the fire from the dry stick, said: "Now, there is one
thing more to try." And he rubbed the top of the alae's head till it was
red with blood, and the red spot remains there to this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Pele and the Deluge](hft06)
