[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft03)  [Next](hft05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# HAWAIIAN FOLK TALES

### I

### LEGENDS RESEMBLING OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY

###### REV. C. M. HYDE, D. D.

IN the first volume of Judge Fornander's elaborate work on "The
Polynesian Race" he has given some old Hawaiian legends which closely
resemble the Old Testament history. How shall we account for such
coincidences?

Take, for instance, the Hawaiian account of the Creation. The *Kane*,
*Ku*, and *Lono:* or, Sunlight, Substance, and Sound,--these constituted
a triad named *Ku-Kaua-Kahi*, or the Fundamental Supreme Unity. In
worship the reverence due was expressed by such epithets as
*Hi-ka-po-loa*, *Oi-e*, Most Excellent, etc. "These gods existed from
eternity, from and before chaos, or, as the Hawaiian term expressed it,
'*mai ka po mai*' (from the time of night, darkness, chaos). By an act
of their will these gods dissipated or broke into pieces the existing,
surrounding, all-containing po, night, or chaos. By this act light
entered into space. They then created the heavens, three in number, as a
place to dwell in; and the earth to be their footstool, *he keehina
honua a Kane.* Next they created the sun,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

moon, stars, and a host of angels, or spirits--*i kini akua*--to
minister to them. Last of all they created man as the model, or in the
likeness of Kane. The body of the first man was made of red earth--*lepo
ula*, or *alaea*--and the spittle of the gods--*wai nao*. His head was
made of a whitish clay--*palolo*--which was brought from the four ends
of the world by Lono. When the earth-image of Kane was ready, the three
gods breathed into its nose, and called on it to rise, and it became a
living being. Afterwards the first woman was created from one of the
ribs--*lalo puhaka*--of the man while asleep, and these two were the
progenitors of all mankind. They are called in the chants and in various
legends by a large number of different names; but the most common for
the man was Kumuhonua, and for the woman Keolakuhonua \[or
*Lalahonua*\].

"Of the creation of animals these chants are silent; but from the pure
tradition it may be inferred that the earth at the time of its creation
or emergence from the watery chaos was stocked with vegetable and
animal. The animals specially mentioned in the tradition as having been
created by Kane were hogs (*puaa*), dogs (*ilio*), lizards or reptiles
(*moo*).

"Another legend of the series, that of *Wela-ahi-lani*, states that
after Kane had destroyed the world by fire, on account of the wickedness
of the people then living, he organized it as it now is, and created the
first man and the first woman, with the assistance of Ku and Lono,
nearly in the same manner as narrated in the former legend of Kumuhonua.
In this legend the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

man is called Wela-ahi-lani, and the woman is called Owe."

Of the primeval home, the original ancestral seat of mankind, Hawaiian
traditions speak in highest praise. "It had a number of names of various
meanings, though the most generally occurring, and said to be the
oldest, was *Kalana-i-hau-ola* (Kalana with the life-giving dew). It was
situated in a large country, or continent, variously called in the
legends Kahiki-honua-kele, Kahiki-ku, Kapa-kapa-ua-a-Kane, Molo-lani.
Among other names for the primary homestead, or paradise, are *Pali-uli*
(the blue mountain), *Aina-i-ka-kaupo-o-Kane* (the land in the heart of
Kane), *Aina-wai-akua-a-Kane* (the land of the divine water of Kane).
The tradition says of Pali-uli, that it was a sacred, tabooed land; that
a man must be righteous to attain it; if faulty or sinful he will not
get there; if he looks behind he will not get there; if he prefers his
family he will not -enter Pali-uli." "Among other adornments of the
Polynesian Paradise, the Kalana-i-hau-ola, there grew the *Ulu kapu a
Kane*, the breadfruit tabooed for Kane, and the *ohia hemolele*, the
sacred apple-tree. The priests of the olden time are said to have held
that the tabooed fruits of these trees were in some manner connected
with the trouble and death of Kumuhonua and Lalahonua, the first man and
the first woman. Hence in the ancient chants he is called
*Kane-laa-uli*, *Kumu-uli*, *Kulu-ipo*, the fallen chief, he who fell on
account of the tree, or names of similar import."

According to those legends of Kumuhonua and

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wela-ahi-lani, "at
the time when the gods created the stars, they also created a multitude
of angels, or spirits (*i kini akua*), who were not created like men,
but made from the spittle of the gods (*i kuhaia*), to be their servants
or messengers. These spirits, or a number of them, disobeyed and
revolted, because they were denied the *awa;* which means that they were
not permitted to be worshipped, *awa* being a sacrificial offering and
sign of worship. These evil spirits did not prevail, however, but were
conquered by Kane, and thrust down into uttermost darkness (*ilalo loa i
ka po*). The chief of these spirits was called by some Kanaloa, by
others Milu, the ruler of Po; Akua ino; Kupu ino, the evil spirit. Other
legends, however, state that the veritable and primordial lord of the
Hawaiian inferno was called Manua. The inferno itself bore a number of
names, such as Po-pau-ole, Po-kua-kini, Po-kini-kini, Po-papa-ia-owa,
Po-ia-milu. Milu, according to those other legends, was a chief of
superior wickedness on earth who was thrust down into Po, but who was
really both inferior and posterior to Manua. This inferno, this Po, with
many names, one of which remarkably enough was *Ke-po-lua-ahi*, the pit
of fire, was not an entirely dark place. There was light of some kind
and there was fire. The legends further tell us that when Kane, Ku, and
Lono were creating the first man from the earth, Kanaloa was present,
and in imitation of Kane, attempted to make another man out of the
earth. When his clay model was ready, he called to it to become alive,
but no life came to it. Then Kanaloa became very angry, and said to
Kane,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'I will take your
man, and he shall die,' and so it happened. Hence the first man got his
other name *Kumu-uli*, which means a fallen chief, *he ’lii kahuli*. . .
. With the Hawaiians, Kanaloa is the personified spirit of evil, the
origin of death, the prince of Po, or chaos, and yet a revolted,
disobedient spirit, who was conquered and punished by Kane. The
introduction and worship of Kanaloa, as one of the great gods in the
Hawaiian group, can be traced back only to the time of the immigration
from the southern groups, some eight hundred years ago. In the more
ancient chants he is never mentioned in conjunction with Kane, Ku, and
Lono, and even in later Hawaiian mythology he never took precedence of
Kane. The Hawaiian legend states that the oldest son of Kumuhonua, the
first man, was called Laka, and that the next was called Ahu, and that
Laka was a bad man; he killed his brother Ahu.

"There are these different Hawaiian genealogies, going back with more or
less agreement among themselves to the first created man. The genealogy
of Kumuhonua gives thirteen generations inclusive to Nuu, or Kahinalii,
or the line of Laka, the oldest son of Kumuhonua. (The line of Seth from
Adam to Noah counts ten generations.) The second genealogy, called that
of Kumu-uli, was of greatest authority among the highest chiefs down to
the latest times, and it was taboo to teach it to the common people.
This genealogy counts fourteen generations from Huli-houna, the first
man, to Nuu, or Nana-nuu, but inclusive, on the line of Laka. The third
genealogy,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

which, properly speaking, is that of Paao, the high priest who came with
Pili from Tahiti, about twenty-five generations ago, and was a reformer
of the Hawaiian priesthood, and among whose descendants it has been
preserved, counts only twelve generations from Kumuhonua to Nuu, on the
line of Kapili, youngest son of Kumuhonua."

"In the Hawaiian group there are several legends of the Flood. One
legend relates that in the time of Nuu, or Nana-nuu (also pronounced
*lana*, that is, floating), the flood, *Kaiakahinalii*, came upon the
earth, and destroyed all living beings; that Nuu, by command of his god,
built a large vessel with a house on top of it, which was called and is
referred to in chants as '*He waa halau o ka Moku*,' the royal vessel,
in which he and his family, consisting of his wife, Lilinoe, his three
sons and their wives, were saved. When the flood subsided, Kane, Ku, and
Lono entered the waa halau of Nuu, and told him to go out. He did so,
and found himself on the top of Mauna Kea (the highest mountain on the
island of Hawaii). He called a cave there after the name of his wife,
and the cave remains there to this day--as the legend says in testimony
of the fact. Other versions of the legend say that Nuu landed and dwelt
in Kahiki-honua-kele, a large and extensive country." . . . "Nuu left
the vessel in the evening of the day and took with him a pig, cocoanuts,
and awa as .an offering to the god Kane. As he looked up he saw the moon
in the sky. He thought it was the god, saying to himself, 'You are Kane,
no doubt, though

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

you have transformed yourself to my sight.' So he worshipped the moon,
and offered his offerings. Then Kane descended on the rainbow and spoke
reprovingly to Nuu, but on account of the mistake Nuu escaped
punishment, having asked pardon of Kane." . . . "Nuu's three sons were
Nalu-akea, Nalu-hoo-hua, and Nalu-mana-mana. In the tenth generation
from Nuu arose Lua-nuu, or the second Nuu, known also in the legend as
Kane-hoa-lani, Kupule, and other names. The legend adds that by command
of his god he was the first to introduce circumcision to be practised
among his descendants. He left his native home and moved a long way off
until he reached a land called Honua-ilalo, 'the southern country.'
Hence he got the name Lalo-kona, and his wife was called Honua-po-ilalo.
He was the father of Ku-nawao by his slave-woman Ahu (O-ahu) and of
Kalani-menehune by his wife, Mee-hewa. Another says that the god Kane
ordered Lua-nuu to go up on a mountain and perform a sacrifice there.
Lua-nuu looked among the mountains of Kahiki-ku, but none of them
appeared suitable for the purpose. Then Lua-nuu inquired of God where he
might find a proper place. God replied to him: 'Go travel to the
eastward, and where you find a sharp-peaked hill projecting
precipitously into the ocean, that is the hill for the sacrifice.' Then
Lua-nuu and his son, Kupulu-pulu-a-Nuu, and his servant, Pili-lua-nuu,
started off in their boat to the eastward. In remembrance of this event
the Hawaiians called the back of Kualoa *Koo-lau;* Oahu (after one of
Lua-nuu's names), *Kane-hoa-lani;* 

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and the smaller hills in front of it were named *Kupu-pulu* and
*Pili-lua-nuu*. Lua-nuu is the tenth descendant from Nuu by both the
oldest and the youngest of Nuu's sons. This oldest son is represented to
have been the progenitor of the *Kanaka-maoli*, the people living on the
mainland of Kane (*Aina kumupuaa a Kane*): the youngest was the
progenitor of the white people (*ka poe keokeo maoli*). This Lua-nuu
(like Abraham, the tenth from Noah, also like Abraham), through his
grandson, Kini-lau-a-mano, became the ancestor of the twelve children of
the latter, and the original founder of the Menehune people, from whom
this legend makes the Polynesian family descend."

The Rev. Sheldon Dibble, in his history of the Sandwich Islands,
published at Lahainaluna, in 1843, gives a tradition which very much
resembles the history of Joseph. "Waikelenuiaiku was one of ten brethren
who had one sister. They were all the children of one father, whose name
was Waiku. Waikelenuiaiku was much beloved by his father, but his
brethren hated him. On account of their hatred they carried him and cast
him into a pit belonging to Holonaeole. The oldest brother had pity on
him, and gave charge to Holonaeole to take good care of him.
Waikelenuiaiku escaped and fled to a country over which reigned a king
whose name was Kamohoalii. There he was thrown into a dark place, a pit
under ground, in which many persons were confined for various crimes.
Whilst confined in this dark place he told his companions to dream
dreams and tell

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

them to him. The night following four of the prisoners had dreams. The
first dreamed that he saw a ripe *ohia* (native apple), and his spirit
ate it; the second dreamed that he saw a ripe banana, and his spirit ate
it; the third dreamed that he saw a hog, and his spirit ate it; and the
fourth dreamed that he saw *awa*, pressed out the juice, and his spirit
drank it. The first three dreams, pertaining to food, Waikelenuiaiku
interpreted unfavorably, and told the dreamers they must prepare to die.
The fourth dream, pertaining to drink, he interpreted to signify
deliverance and life. The first three dreamers were slain according to
the interpretation, and the fourth was delivered and saved. Afterward
this last dreamer told Kamohoalii, the king of the land, how wonderful
was the skill of Waikelenuiaiku in interpreting dreams, and the king
sent and delivered him from prison and made him a principal chief in his
kingdom."

Judge Fornander alludes to this legend, giving the name, however,
*Aukelenui-a-Iku*, and adding to it the account of the hero's journey to
the place where the water of life was kept (*ka-wai-ola-loa-a-Kane*),
his obtaining it and therewith resuscitating his brothers, who had been
killed by drowning some years before. Another striking similarity is
that furnished to Judge Fornander in the legend of *Ke-alii-waha-nui:*
"He was king of the country called Honua-i-lalo. He oppressed the
Menehune people. Their god Kane sent Kane-apua and Kaneloa, his elder
brother, to bring the people away, and take them to the land which Kane
had given them, and which was called

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Ka aina momona a
Kane*, or *Ka one lauena a Kane*, and also *Ka aina i ka haupo a Kane*.
The people were then told to observe the four Ku days in the beginning
of the month as *Kapu-hoano* (sacred or holy days), in remembrance of
this event, because they thus arose (*Ku*) to depart from that land.
Their offerings on the occasion were swine and goats." The narrator of
the legend explains that formerly there were goats without horns, called
*malailua*, on the slopes of Mauna Loa on Hawaii, and that they were
found there up to the time of Kamehameha I. The legend further relates
that after leaving the land of Honualalo, the people came to the
*Kai-ula-a-Kane* (the Red Sea of Kane); that they were pursued by
Ke-alii-waha-nui; that Kane-apua and Kanaloa prayed to Lono, and finally
reached the *Aina lauena a Kane*.

"In the famous Hawaiian legend of *Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele*, it is said
that when Hiiaka went to the island of Kauai to recover and restore to
life the body of Lohiau, the lover of her sister, Pele, she arrived at
the foot of the Kalalau Mountain shortly before sunset. Being told by
her friends at Haena that there would not be daylight sufficient to
climb the *pali* (precipice) and get the body out of the cave in which
it was hidden, she prayed to her gods to keep the sun stationary (*i ka
muli o Hea*) over the brook Hea, until she had accomplished her object.
The prayer was heard, the mountain was climbed, the guardians of the
cave vanquished, and the body recovered."

A story of retarding the sun and making the day

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

longer to accomplish his purpose is told of Maui-a-kalana, according to
Dibble's history.

Judge Fornander alludes to one other legend with incidents similar to
the Old Testament history wherein "Na-ula-a-Maihea, an Oahu prophet,
left Oahu for Kauai, was upset in his canoe, was swallowed by a whale,
and thrown up alive on the beach at Wailua, Kauai."

Judge Fornander says that, when he first heard the legend of the two
brother prophets delivering the Menehune people, "he was inclined to
doubt its genuineness and to consider it as a paraphrase or adaptation
of the Biblical account by some semi-civilized or semi-Christianized
Hawaiian, after the discovery of the group by Captain Cook. But a larger
and better acquaintance with Hawaiian folk-lore has shown that though
the details of the legend, as interpreted by the Christian Hawaiian from
whom it was received, may possibly in some degree, and unconsciously to
him, perhaps, have received a Biblical coloring, yet the main facts of
the legend, with the identical names of persons and places, are referred
to more or less distinctly in other legends of undoubted antiquity." And
the Rev. Mr. Dibble, in his history, says of these Hawaiian legends,
that "they were told to the missionaries before the Bible was translated
into the Hawaiian tongue, and before the people knew much of sacred
history. The native who acted as assistant in translating the history of
Joseph was forcibly struck with its similarity to their ancient
tradition. Neither is there the least room for supposing that the songs
referred to are recent inventions.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They can all be
traced back for generations, and are known by various persons residing
on different islands who have had no communication with each other. Some
of them have their date in the reign of some ancient king, and others
have existed time out of mind. It may also be added, that both their
narrations and songs are known the best by the very oldest of the
people, and those who never learned to read; whose education and
training were under the ancient system of heathenism."

"Two hypotheses," says Judge Fornander, "may with some plausibility be
suggested to account for this remarkable resemblance of folk-lore. One
is, that during the time of the Spanish galleon trade, in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, between the Spanish Main and Manila, some
shipwrecked people, Spaniards and Portuguese, had obtained sufficient
influence to introduce these scraps of Bible history into the legendary
lore of this people. . . . On this first hypothesis I remark that, if
the shipwrecked foreigners were educated men, or only possessed of such
Scriptural knowledge as was then imparted to the commonality of laymen,
it is morally impossible to conceive that a Spaniard of the sixteenth
century should confine his instruction to some of the leading events of
the Old Testament, and be totally silent upon the Christian
dispensation, and the cruciolatry, mariolatry, and hagiolatry of that
day. And it is equally impossible to conceive that the Hawaiian
listeners, chiefs, priests, or commoners, should have retained and
incorporated so much of the former in their own folk-lore, and yet

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

have utterly forgotten every item bearing upon the latter.

"The other hypothesis is, that at some remote period either a body of
the scattered Israelites had arrived at these islands direct, or in
Malaysia, before the exodus of 'the Polynesian family,' and thus
imparted a knowledge of their doctrines, of the early life of their
ancestors, and of some of their peculiar customs, and that having been
absorbed by the people among whom they found a refuge, this is all that
remains to attest their presence--intellectual tombstones over a lost
and forgotten race, yet sufficient after twenty-six centuries of silence
to solve in some measure the ethnic puzzle of the lost tribes of Israel.
In regard to this second hypothesis, it is certainly more plausible and
cannot be so curtly disposed of as the Spanish theory. . . . So far from
being copied one from the other, they are in fact independent and
original versions of a once common legend, or series of legends, held
alike by Cushite, Semite, Turanian, and Aryan, up to a certain time,
when the divergencies, of national life and other causes brought other
subjects peculiar to each other prominently in the foreground; and that
as these divergencies hardened into system and creed, that grand old
heirloom of a common past became overlaid and colored by the peculiar
social and religious atmosphere through which it has passed up to the
surface of the present time. But besides this general reason for
refusing to adopt the Israelitish theory, that the Polynesian legends
were introduced by fugitive or emigrant Hebrews from the subverted
kingdoms of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel or Judah,
there is the more special reason to be added that the organization and
splendor of Solomon's empire, his temple, and his wisdom became
proverbial among the nations of the East subsequent to his time; on all
these, the Polynesian legends are absolutely silent."

In commenting on the legend of *Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele*, Judge
Fornander says: "If the Hebrew legend of Joshua or a Cushite version
give rise to it, it only brings down the community of legends a little
later in time. And so would the legend of *Naulu-a-Maihea*, . . . unless
the legend of Jonah, with which it corresponds in a measure, as well as
the previous legend of Joshua and the sun, were Hebrew anachronisms
compiled and adapted in later times from long antecedent materials, of
which the Polynesian references are but broken and distorted echoes,
bits of legendary mosaics, displaced from their original surroundings
and made to fit with later associations."

In regard to the account of the Creation, he remarks that "the Hebrew
legend infers that the god Elohim existed contemporaneously with and
apart from the chaos. The Hawaiian legend makes the three great gods,
Kane, Ku, and Lono, evolve themselves out of chaos. . . . The order of
creation, according to Hawaiian folk-lore, was that after Heaven and
earth had been separated, and the ocean had been stocked with its
animals, the stars were created, then the moon, then the sun." Alluding
to the fact that the account in Genesis is truer to nature, Judge
Fornander nevertheless propounds the inquiry whether this fact may not

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "indicate that the
Hebrew text is a later emendation of an older but once common
tradition"?

Highest antiquity is claimed for Hawaiian traditions in regard to events
subsequent to the creation of man. "In one of the sacrificial hymns of
the Marquesans, when human victims were offered, frequent allusions were
made to 'the red apples eaten in Naoau,' . . . and to the 'tabooed
apples of Atea,' as the cause of death, wars, pestilence, famine, and
other calamities, only to be averted or atoned for by the sacrifice of
human victims. The close connection between the Hawaiian and the
Marquesan legends indicates a common origin, and that origin can be no
other than that from which the Chaldean and Hebrew legends of sacred
trees, disobedience, and fall also sprang." In comparison of "the
Hawaiian myth of Kanaloa as a fallen angel antagonistic to the great
gods, as the spirit of evil and death in the world, the Hebrew legends
are more vague and indefinite as to the existence of an evil principle.
The serpent of Genesis, the Satan of Job, the Hillel of Isaiah, the
dragon of the Apocalypse--all point, however, to the same underlying
idea that the first cause of sin, death, evil, and calamities, was to be
found in disobedience and revolt from God. They appear as disconnected
scenes of a once grand drama that in olden times riveted the attention
of mankind, and of which, strange to say, the clearest synopsis and the
most coherent recollection are, so far, to be found in Polynesian
traditions. It is probably in vain to inquire with whom the legend of an
evil spirit and his operations in Heaven and on

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

earth had its origin. Notwithstanding the apparent unity of design and
remarkable coincidence in many points, yet the differences in coloring,
detail, and presentation are too great to suppose the legend borrowed by
one from either of the others. It probably descended to the Chaldeans,
Polynesians, and Hebrews alike, from a source or people anterior to
themselves, of whom history now is silent."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Exploits of Maui](hft05)
