[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft17)  [Next](hft19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### XV

### KAALA AND KAAIALII

#### A LEGEND OF LANAI

###### W. M. GIBSON

BORDERING upon the land of Kealia, on the southwest coast of Lanai,
where was a *pahonua*, or place of refuge, are the remains of Kaunolu,
an ancient *heiau*, or temple. Its ruins lie within the mouth of a deep
ravine, whose extending banks run out into the sea and form a bold,
bluff-bound bay. On the top of the western bank there is a stone-paved
platform, called the *kuaha*. Outside of this, and separated by a narrow
alley-way, there runs a broad high wall, which quite encircles the
kuaha. Other walls and structures lead down the bank, and the slope is
terraced and paved down to the tide-worn stones of the shore.

At the beach there is a break; a great block of the bluff has been rent
away by some convulsion of nature, and stands out like a lone tower,
divided from the main by a gulf of the sea. Its high walls beetle from
their tops, upon which neither man nor goat can climb. But you can
behold on the flat summit of this islet bluff, portions of ancient work,
of altars and walls, and no doubt part of the mainland temple, to which
this fragment once was joined. But man can

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

visit this lone tower's top no more, and his feet can never climb its
overhanging walls.

Inland from the temple there are many remains of the huts of the people
of the past. The stone foundations, the inclosures for swine, the round
earth ovens, and other traces of a throng of people cover many acres of
beach and hillside. This was a town famed as an abode of gods and a
refuge for those who fled for their lives; but it drew its people mainly
through the fame of its fishing-ground, which swarmed with the varied
life of the Hawaiian seas.

To this famed fishing-ground came the great hero of Hawaii to tax the
deep, when he had subdued this and the other isles. He came with his
fleets of war canoes; with his faithful *koas*, or fighting men, with
his chiefs, and priests, and women, and their trains. He had a house
here. Upon the craggy bluff that forms the eastern bank of the bay there
is a lonely *pa*, or wall, and stones of an ancient fort, overlooking
the temple, town, and bay.

Kamehameha came to Kealia for sport rather than for worship. Who so
loved to throw the maika ball, or hurl the spear, or thrust aside the
many javelins flung at his naked chest, as the chief of Kohala? He rode
gladly on the crest of the surf waves. He delighted to drive his canoe
alone out into the storm. He fought with the monsters of the deep, as
well as with men. He captured the great shark that abounds in the bay,
and he would clutch in the fearful grip of his hands the deadly eel or
snake of these seas, the terror of fishes and men.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

When this warrior king came to Kaunolu, the islanders thronged to the
shore to pay homage to the great chief, and to lay at the feet of their
sovereign, as was their wont, the products of the isle: the taro, the
yam, the hala, the cocoanut, ohelo, banana, and sweet potato. They piled
up a mound of food before the door of the King's pakui, along with a
clamorous multitude of fat poi-fed dogs, and of fathom-long swine.

Besides this tribute of the men, the workers of the land, the women
filled the air with the sweet odors of their floral offerings. The
maidens were twined from head to waist with *leis* or wreaths of the
*na-u*, which is Lanai's own lovely jessamine--a rare gardenia, whose
sweet aroma loads the breeze, and leads you to the bush when seeking it
afar off. These garlands were fastened to the plaited pili thatch of the
King's pakui; they were placed on the necks of the young warriors, who
stood around the chief; and around his royal brows they twined an
odorous crown of maile.

The brightest of the girlish throng who stood before the dread Lord of
the Isles was Kaala, or Sweet Scented, whose fifteen suns had just
burnished her sweet brown face with a soft golden gloss; and her large,
round, tender eyes knew yet no wilting fires. Her neck and arms, and all
of her young body not covered by the leafy pa-u, was tinted with a soft
sheen like unto a rising moon. Her skin glowed with the glory of youth,
and mingled its delicate odor of health with the blooms of the groves,
so that the perfume of her presence received fittingly the name of
Fragrance.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

In those rude days the island race was sound and clean. The supple round
limbs were made bright and strong by the constant bath and the temperate
breeze. They were not cumbered with clothing; they wore no long,
sweating gowns, but their smooth, shining skins reflected back their
sun, which gave them such a rich and dusky charm.

Perhaps such a race cannot long wear all our gear and live. They are
best clothed with sea foam, or with the garlands of their groves. Flow
sweetly blend the brown and green; and when young, soft, amber-tinted
cheeks, glowing with the crimson tide beneath, are wreathed with the
odorous evergreens of the isles, you see the poesy of our kind, and the
sweet, wild grace that dwelt in the Eden Paradise.

The sweet Kaala stood mindless of harm, as the playful breeze rustled
the long blades of the la-i (*dracæna*) leaves, hanging like a bundle of
green swords from her waist; and as they twirled and fluttered in the
air, revealed the soft, rounded form, whose charm filled the eye and
heart of one who stood among the braves of the great chief--the heart of
the stout young warrior Kaaialii.

This youth had fought in the battle of Maunalei, Lanai's last bloody
fight. With his long-reaching spear, wielded with sinewy arms, he urged
the flying foe to the top of a fearful cliff, and mocking the cries of a
huddled crowd of panic-scared men, drove them with thrusts and shouts
till they leaped like frightened sheep into the jaws of the deep, dark
chasm, and their torn corses strewed the jagged stones below.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Kaaialii, like many a butcher of his kind, was comely to see. With the
lion's heart, he had the lion's tawny hue. A swart grace beamed beneath
his curling brows. He had the small, firm hand to throttle or caress,
and eyes full of fire for hate or love; and love's flame now lit the
face of the hero of the bloody leap, and to his great chief he said, "O
King of all the isles, let this sweet flower be mine, rather than the
valley thou gayest me for my domain."

Said Kamehameha: "You shall plant the Lanai jessamine in the valley I
gave you in Kohala. But there is another who claims our daughter, who is
the stout bone-breaker, the scarred Mailou. My spear-man of Maunalei can
have no fear; and you shall wrestle with him; and let the one whose arms
can clasp the girl after the fight carry her to his house, where one
kapa shall cover the two."

The poor maid, the careless gift of savage power, held up her clasped
hands with a frightened gesture at the dread name of the breaker of
bones; for she had heard how he had sucked the breath of many a dainty
bloom like her, then crunched the wilted blossom with sinews of hate,
and flung it to the sharks.

And the Lanai maiden loved the young chief of Hawaii. He had indeed
pierced her people, but only the tender darts of his eyes had wounded
her. Turning to him, she looked her savage, quick, young love, and said,
"O Kaaialii, may thy grip be as sure as thy thrust. Save me from the
bloody virgin-eater, and I will catch the squid and beat the kapa for
thee all my days."

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

The time of contest approached. The King sat under the shade of a leafy
*kou*, the royal tree of the olden time, which has faded away with the
chiefs it once did shelter. On the smooth shell floor, covered with the
hala mat, stood the bare-limbed braves, stripped to the malo, who with
hot eyes of hate shot out their rage of lust and blood, and stretched
out their strangling arms. They stood, beating with heavy fists their
broad, glossy chests of bronze, and grinning face to face, they glowered
their savage wish to kill. Then, with right foot advanced, and right arm
uplifted, they pause to shout their gage of battle, and tell to each how
they would maim and tear, and kill, and give each other's flesh for food
to some beastly maw.

And now, each drawing near to each, with arms uplifted, and outspread
palms with sinewy play, like nervy claws trying to clutch or grip, they
seek a chance for' a deadly clinch. And swift the scarred
child-strangler has sprung with his right to the young spear-man's
throat, who as quickly hooks the lunging arm within the crook of his,
and with quick, sledge-like blow breaks the shoulder arm-bone.

With fury the baffled bone-breaker grips with the uncrippled hand; but
now two stout young arms, tense with rage, soon twist and break the one
unaided limb. Then with limp arms the beaten brute turns to flee; but
swift hate is upon him, and clutches him by the throat; and pressing him
down, the hero of Kaala holds his knee to the hapless wretch's back, and
with knee bored into the backward bended spine, he strains

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

and jerks till the jointed bones snap and break, and the dread throttler
of girls and babes lies prone on the mat, a broken and bloody corse.

"Good!" cried the King. "Our son has the strength of Kanekoa. Now let
our daughter soothe the limbs of her lover. Let her stroke his skin,
press his joints, and knead his back with the loving grip and touch of
the lomilomi. We will have a great bake, with the hula and song; and
when the feast is over, then shall they be one."

A line of women squat down. They crone their wild refrain, praising the
one who wins in strife and love. They seize in their right hand the hula
gourd, clattering with pebbles inside. They whirl it aloft, they shake,
they swing, they strike their palms, they thump the mat; and now with
supple joints they twirl their loins, and with heave and twist, and with
swing and song, the savage dance goes on.

Kaala stood up with the maiden throng, the tender, guarded gifts of
kings. They twined their wreaths, they swayed, and posed their shining
arms; and flapping with their hands their leafy skirts, revealed their
rounded limbs. This fires the gaze of men, and the hero of the day with
flaming eyes, springs and clasps his love, crying as he bears her away:
"Thou shalt dance in my hut in Kohala for me alone, forever!"

At this, a stout yet grizzled man of the isle lifts up his voice and
wails: "Kaala, my child, is gone. Who shall soothe my limbs when I
return from spearing the ohua? And who shall feed me with taro and
bread-fruit like the chief of Olowalu, when I have no

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

daughter to give away? I must hide from the chief or I die." And thus
wailed out Opunui, the father of Kaala.

But a fierce hate stirred the heart of Opunui. His friend was driven
over the cliff at Maunalei, and he himself had lived only by crawling at
the feet of the slayer. He hid his hate, and planned to save his girl
and balk the killer of his people. He said in his heart, "I will hide
her in the sea, and none but the fish gods and I shall know where the
ever-sounding surf surges over Kaala."

Now, in the morn, when the girl with ruddy brown cheeks, and glowing
with the brightening dawn of love, stood in the doorway of the lodge of
her lord, and her face was sparkling with the sheen from the sun, her
sire in humble guise stood forth and said, "My child, your mother at
Mahana is dying. Pray you, my lord, your love, that you may see her once
more before his canoe shall bear you to his great land."

"Alas!" said the tender child, "since when is Kalani ill? I shall carry
to her this large sweet fish speared by my lord; and when I have rubbed
her aching limbs, she will be well again with the love touch of her
child. Yes, my lord will let me go. Will you not, O Kaaialii; will you
not let me go to give my mother a last embrace, and I shall be back
again before the moon has twice spanned the bay?"

The hero clasped his young love with one stout twining arm, and gazing
into her eyes, he with a caressing hand put back from her brow her
shining hair, and thus to his heart's life he spoke: "O my

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

sweet flower, how shall I live without thee, even for this day's march
of the sun? For thou art my very breath, and I shall pant and die like a
stranded fish without thee. But no, let me not say so. Kaaialii is a
chief who has fought men and sharks; and he must not speak like a girl.
He too loves his mother, who looks for him in the valley of Kohala; and
shall he deny thy mother, to look her last upon the sweet face and the
tender limbs that she fed and reared for him? Go, my Kaala. But thy
chief will sit and watch with a hungering heart, till thou come back to
his arms again."

And the pretty jessamine twined her arms around his neck, and laying her
cheek upon his breast said, with upturned tender glances, "O my chief,
who gayest me life and sweet joy; thy breath is my breath; thy eyes are
my sweetest sight; thy breast is my only 'd resting-place; and when I go
away, I shall all the way look back to thee, and go slowly with a
backward turned heart; but when I return to thee, I shall have wings to
bear me to my lord."

"Yes, my own bird," said Kaaialii, "thou must fly, but fly swiftly in
thy going as well as in thy coming; for both ways thou fliest to me.
When thou art gone I shall spear the tender ohua fish, I shall bake the
yam and banana, and I will fill the calabash with sweet water, to feed
thee, my heart, when thou shalt come; and thou shalt feed me with thy
loving eyes.

"Here, Opunui! take thy child. Thou gayest life to her, but now she
gives life to me. Bring her back all well, ere the sun has twice risen.
If she come not

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

soon, I shall die; but I should slay thee before I die; therefore, O
Opunui, hasten thy going and thy coming, and bring back my life and love
to me."

And now the stern hero unclasped the weeping girl. His eye was calm, but
his shut lips showed the work within of a strong and tender heart of
love. He felt the ache of a larger woe than this short parting. He
pressed the little head between his palms; he kissed the sobbing lips
again and again; he gave one strong clasp, heart to heart, and then
quickly strode away.

As Kaala tripped along the stony up-hill path, she glanced backward on
her way, to get glimpses of him she loved, and she beheld her chief
standing on the topmost rock of the great bluff overhanging the sea. And
still as she went and looked, still there he stood; and when on the top
of the ridge and about to descend into the great valley, she turned to
look her last, still she saw her loving lord looking up to her.

The silent sire and the weeping child soon trod the round, green vale of
Palawai. She heeded not now to pluck, as was her wont, the flowers in
her path; but thought how she should stop a while, as she came back, to
twine a wreath for her dear lord's neck. And thus this sad young love
tripped along with innocent hope by the moody Opunui's side.

They passed through the groves of Kalulu and Kumoku, and then the man
swerved from the path leading to Mahana and turned his face again
seaward. At this the sad and silent child looked up into the face of her
grim and sullen sire and said: "O father,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

we shall not find mother on this path, but we shall lose our way and
come to the sea once more."

"And thy mother is by the sea, by the bay of Kaumalapau. There she
gathers limpets on the rocks. She has dried a large squid for thee. She
has pounded some taro and filled her calabash with poi, and would feed
thee once more. She is not sick; but had I said she was well, thy lord
would not have let thee go; but now thou art on the way to sleep with
thy mother by the sea."

The poor weary girl now trudged on with a doubting heart. She glanced
sadly at her dread sire's moody eye. Silent and sore she trod the stony
path leading down to the shore, and when she came to the beach with
naught in view but the rocks and sea, she said with a bursting heart, "O
my father, is the shark to be my mother, and I to never see my dear
chief any more?"

"Hear the truth," cried Opunui. "Thy home for a time is indeed in the
sea, and the shark shall be thy mate, but he shall not harm thee. Thou
goest down where the sea god lives, and he shall tell thee that the
accursed chief of the bloody leap shall not carry away any daughter of
Lanai. When Kaaialii has sailed for Kohala then shall the chief of
Olowalu come and bring thee to earth again."

As the fierce sire spoke, he seized the hand of Kaala, and unheeding her
sobs and cries, led her along the' rugged shore to a point eastward of
the bay, where the beating sea makes the rocky shore tremble beneath the
feet. Here was a boiling gulf, a fret and foam of

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the sea, a roar of waters, and a mighty jet of brine and spray from a
spouting cave whose mouth lay deep beneath the battling tide.

See yon advancing billow! The south wind sends it surging along. It
rears its combing, whitening crest, and with mighty, swift-rushing
volume of angry green sea, it strikes the mouth of the cave; it drives
and packs the pent-up air within, and now the tightened wind rebounds,
and driving back the ramming sea, bursts forth with a roar as the huge
spout of sea leaps upward to the sky, and then comes curving down in
gentle silver spray.

The fearful child now clasped the knees of her savage sire. "Not there,
O father," she sobbed and wailed. "The sea snake (the *puhi*) has his
home in the cave, and he will bite and tear me, and ere I die, the
crawling crabs will creep over me and pick out my weeping eyes. Alas, O
father, better give me to the shark, and then my cry and moan will not
hurt thine ear."

Opunui clasped the slender girl with one sinewy arm, and with a bound he
leaped into the frothed and fretted pool below. Downward with a
dolphin's ease he moved, and with his free arm beating back the brine,
moved along the ocean bed into the sea cave's jagged jaws; and then
stemming with stiffened sinew the wind-driven tide, he swam onward till
he struck a sunless beach and then stood inside the cave, whose mouth is
beneath the sea.

Here was a broad, dry space with a lofty, salt-icicled roof. The green,
translucent sea, as it rolled back and

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

forth at their feet, gave to their brown faces a ghastly white glare.
The scavenger crabs scrambled away over the dank and dripping stones,
and the loathsome biting eel, slowly reached out its well-toothed,
wide-gaping jaw to tear the tender feet that roused it from its horrid
lair, where the dread sea god dwelt.

The poor hapless girl sank down upon this gloomy shore and cried,
clinging to the kanaka's knee: "O father, beat out my brains with this
jagged stone, and do not let the eel twine around my neck, and trail
with a loathsome, slimy, creeping crawl over my body before I die. Oh!
the crabs will pick and tear me before my breath is gone."

"Listen," said Opunui. "Thou shalt go back with me to the warm sunny
air. Thou shalt tread again the sweet-smelling flowery vale of Palawai,
and twine thy neck with wreaths of scented jessamine, if thou wilt go
with me to the house of the chief of Olowalu and there let thy bloody
lord behold thee wanton with thy love in another chief's arms."

"Never," shouted the lover of Kaaialii, "never will I meet any clasp of
love but that of my own chief. If I cannot lay my head again upon his
breast, I will lay it in death upon these cold stones. If his arm shall
never again draw me to his heart, then let the eel twine my neck and let
him tear away my cheeks rather than that another beside my dear lord
shall press my face."

"Then let the eel be thy mate," cried Opunui, as he roughly unclasped
the tender arms twined around his knees; "until the chief of Olowalu
comes to seize

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

thee, and carry thee to his house in the hills of Maui. Seek not to
leave the cave. Thou knowest that with thy weak arms, thou wilt tear
thyself against the jagged rocks in trying to swim through the swift
flowing channel. Stay till I send for thee, and live." Then dashing out
into the foaming gulf with mighty buffeting arms he soon reached the
upper air.

And Kaaialii stood upon the bluff, looking up to the hillside path by
which his love had gone, long after her form was lost to view in the
interior vales. And after slight sleep upon his mat, and walking by the
shore that night, he came at dawn and climbed the bluff again to watch
his love come down the hill. And as he gazed he saw a leafy skirt
flutter in the wind, and his heart fluttered to clasp his little girl;
but as a curly brow drew near, his soul sank to see it was not his love,
but her friend Ua (rain) with some sad news upon her face.

With hot haste and eager asking eyes does the love-lorn chief meet the
maiden messenger, and cries, "Why does Kaala delay in the valley? Has
she twined wreaths for another's neck for me to break? Has a wild hog
torn her? Or has the anaana prayer of death struck her heart, and does
she lie cold on the sod of Mahana? Speak quickly, for thy face kills me,
O Ua!"

"Not thus, my lord," said the weeping girl, as the soft shower fell from
Ua's sweet eyes. "Thy love is not in the valley; and she has not reached
the hut of her mother Kalani. But kanakas saw from the hills of Kalulu
her father lead her through the forest of

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kumoku; since then
our Kaala has not been seen, and I fear has met some fate that is to
thwart thy love."

"Kaala lost? The blood of my heart is gone!" He hears no more! The
fierce chief, hot with baffled passion, strikes madly at the air, and
dashes away, onward up the stony hill; and upward with his stout young
savage thews, he bounds along without halt or slack of speed till he
reaches the valley's rim, then rushes down its slopes.

He courses over its bright green plains. He sees in the dusty path some
prints that must be those of the dear feet he follows now. His heart
feels a fresh bound; he feels neither strain of limb nor scantness of
breath, and, searching as he runs, he descries before him in the plain
the deceitful sire alone.

"Opunui," he cries, "give me Kaala, or thy life!" The stout, gray kanaka
looks to see the face of flame and the outstretched arms, and stops not
to try the strength of his own limbs, or to stay for any parley, but
flies across the valley, along the very path by which the fierce lover
came; and with fear to spur him on, he keeps well before his well blown
foe.

But Kaaialii is now a god; he runs with new strung limbs, and presses
hard this fresh-footed runner of many a race. They are within two
spears' length of each other's grip upon the rim of the vale; and hot
with haste the one, and with fear the other, they dash along the rugged
path of Kealia, and rush downward to the sea. They bound o’er the
fearful path of clinkers. Their torn feet heed not the pointed stones.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The elder seeks
the shelter of the taboo; and now, both roused by the outcries of a
crowd that swarm on the bluffs around, they put forth their remaining
strength and strive who shall gain first the entrance to the sacred wall
of refuge.

For this the hunted sire strains his fast failing nerve; and the youth
with a shout quickens his still tense limbs. He is within a spear's
length; he stretches out his arms. Ha, old man! he has thy throat within
his grip. But no, the greased neck slips the grasp; the wretch leaps for
his dear life, he gains the sacred wall, he bounds inside, and the
furious foe is stopped by the staves of priests.

The baffled chief lies prone in the dust, and curses the gods and the
sacred taboo. After a time he is led away to his hut by friends; and
then the soothing hands of Ua rub and knead the soreness out of his
limbs. And when she has set the calabash of poi before him along with
the relishing dry squid, and he has filled himself and is strong again,
he will not heed any entreaty of chief or friends; not even the
caressing lures of Ua, who loves him; but he says, "I will go and seek
Kaala; and if I find her not, I die."

Again the love-lorn chief seeks the inland. He shouts the name of his
lost love in the groves of Kumoku, and throughout the forest of Mahana.
Then he roams through the cloud-canopied valley of Palawai; he searches
among the wooded canyons of Kalulu, and he wakes the echoes with the
name of Kaala in the gorge of the great ravine of Maunalei. He follows
this high walled barranca over its richly

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

flowered and shaded floor; and also along by the winding stream, until
he reaches its source, an abrupt wall of stone, one hundred feet high,
and forming the head of the ravine. From the face of this steep,
towering rock, there exudes a sweet, clear rain, a thousand trickling
rills of rock-filtered water leaping from points of fern and moss, and
filling up an ice cold pool below, at which our weary chief gladly
slaked his thirst. The hero now clambers the steep walls of the gorge,
impassable to the steps of men in these days; but he climbs with toes
thrust in crannies, or resting on short juts and points of rock; and he
pulls himself upward by grasping at out-cropping bushes and strong tufts
of fern. And thus with stout sinew and bold nerve the fearless spearman
reaches the upper land from whence he had, in his day of devouring rage,
hurled and driven headlong the panic-stricken foe.

And now he runs on over the lands of Paomai, through the wooded dells of
the gorge of Kaiholena, and onward across Kaunolu and Kalulu, until he
reaches the head spring of sacred Kealia called Waiakekua; and here he
gathered bananas and ohelo berries; and as he stayed his hunger with the
pleasant wild fruit, he beheld a white-haired priest of Kaunolu, bearing
a calabash of water.

The aged priest feared the stalwart chief, because he was not upon his
own sacred ground, under the safe wing of the taboo; and therefore he
bowed low and clasped the stout knees, and offered the water to slake
the thirst of the sorrowing chief. But Kaaialii cried out: "I thirst not
for water, but for the sight of my

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

love. Tell me where she is hid, and I will bring thee hogs and men for
the gods." And to this the glad priest replied:

"Son of the stout spear! I know thou seekest the sweet Flower of
Palawai; and no man but her sire has seen her resting-place; but I know
that thou seekest in vain in the groves, and in the ravines, and in this
mountain. Opunui is a great diver and has his dens in the sea. He leaves
the shore when no one follows, and he sleeps with the fish gods, and
thou wilt find thy love in some cave of the rock-bound southern shore."

The chief quickly turns his face again seaward. He descends the deep
shaded pathway of the ravine of Kaunolu. He winds his way through shaded
thickets of ohia, sandalwood, the yellow mamani, the shrub violet, and
the fragrant na-u. He halted not as ht reached the plain of Palawai,
though the ever overhanging canopy of cloud that shades this valley of
the mountain cooled his weary feet. These upper lands were still, and no
voice was heard by the pili grass huts, and the maika balls and the
wickets of the bowling alley of Palawai stood untouched, because all the
people were with the great chief by the shore of Kaunolu; and Kaaialii
thought that he trod the flowery pathway of the still valley alone.

But there was one who, in soothing his strained limbs after he fell by
the gateway of the temple, had planted strong love in her own heart; and
she, Ua, with her lithe young limbs, had followed this sorrowing lord
through all his weary tramp, even through

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the gorges, and over the ramparts of the hills, and she was near the
sad, wayworn chief when he reached the southern shore.

The weary hero only stayed his steps when he reached the brow of the
great bluff of Palikaholo. The sea broke many hundred feet below where
he stood. The gulls and screaming boatswain birds sailed in mid-air
between his perch and the green waves. He looked up the coast to his
right, and saw the lofty, wondrous sea columns of Honopu. He looked to
the left, and beheld the crags of Kalulu, but nowhere could he see any
sign which should tell him where his love was hid away.

His strong, wild . nature was touched by the distant sob and moan of the
surf. It sang a song for his sad, savage soul. It roused up before his
eyes other eyes, and lips, and cheeks, and clasps of tender arms. His
own sinewy ones he now stretched out wildly in the mocking air. He
groaned, and sobbed, and beat his breast as he cried out, "Kaala! O
Kaala! Where art thou? Dost thou sleep with the fish gods, or must I go
to join thee in the great shark's maw?"

As the sad hero thought of this dread devourer of many a tender child of
the isles, he hid his face with his hands,--looking with self-torture
upon the image of his soft young love, crunched, bloody and shrieking,
in the jaws of the horrid god of the Hawaiian seas; and as he thought
and waked up in his heart the memories of his love, he felt that he must
seek her even in her gory grave in the sea.

Then he looks forth again, and as he gazes down

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

by the shore his eyes rest upon the spray of the blowing cave near
Kaumalapau. It leaps high with the swell which the south wind sends. The
white mist gleams in the sun. Shifting forms and shades are seen in the
varied play of the up-leaping cloud. And as with fevered soul he
glances, he sees a form spring up in the ever bounding spray.

He sees with his burning eyes the lines of the sweet form that twines
with tender touch around his soul. He sees the waving hair, that mingles
on his neck with his own swart curls. He sees,--he thinks he sees,--in
the leap and play of sun-tinted spray, his love, his lost Kaala; and
with hot foot he rushes downward to the shore.

He stands upon the point of rock whence Opunui sprang. He feels the
throb beneath his feet of the beating, bounding tide. He sees the fret
and foam of the surging gulf below the leaping spray, and is wetted by
the shore-driven mist. He sees all of this wild, working water, but he
does not see Kaala.

And yet he peers into this mad surf for her he seeks. The form that he
has seen still leads him on. He will brave the sea god's wrath; and he
fain would cool his brow of flame in the briny bath. He thinks he hears
a voice sounding down within his soul; and cries, "Where art thou, O
Kaala? I come, I come!" And as he cries, he springs into the white,
foaming surge of this ever fretted sea.

And one was near as the hero sprang; even Ua, with the clustering curls.
She loved the chief; she did hope that when his steps were stayed by the
sea, and

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

he had mingled his moan with the wild waters' wail, that he would turn
once more to the inland groves, where she would twine him wreaths, and
soothe his limbs, and rest his head upon her knees; but he has leaped
for death, he comes up no more, And Ua wailed for Kaaialii; and as the
chief rose no more from out the lashed and lathered sea, she cried out,
"*Auwe ka make!*" (Alas, he is dead!) And thus wailing and crying out,
and tearing her hair, she ran back over the bluffs, and down the shore
to the tabooed ground of Kealia, and wailing ever, flung herself at the
feet of Kamehameha.

The King was grieved to hear from Ua of the loss of his young chief. But
the priest Papalua standing near, said: "O Chief of Heaven, and of all
the isles; there where Kaaialii has leaped is the sea den of Opunui, and
as thy brave spearman can follow the turtle to his deep sea nest, he
will see the mouth of the cave, and in it, I think, he will find his
lost love, Kaala, the flower of Palawai."

At this Ua roused up. She called to her brother Keawe, and laying hold
on him, pulled him toward the shore, crying out, "To thy canoe, quick! I
will help thee to paddle to Kaumalapau." For thus she could reach the
cave sooner than by the way of the bluffs. And the great chief also
following, sprang into his swiftest canoe, and helping as was his wont,
plunged his blade deep into the swelling tide, and bounded along by the
frowning shore of Kumoku.

When Kaaialii plunged beneath the surging waters, he became at once the
searching diver of the Hawaiian

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

seas; and as his keen eye peered throughout the depths, he saw the
portals of the ocean cave into which poured the charging main. He then,
stemming with easy play of his well-knit limbs the suck and rush of the
sea, shot through the current of the gorge; and soon stood up upon the
sunless strand.

At first he saw not, but his ears took in at once a sad and piteous
moan,--a sweet, sad moan for his hungry ear, of the voice of her he
sought. And there upon the cold, dank, dismal floor he could dimly see
his bleeding, dying love. Quickly clasping and soothing her, he lifted
her up to bear her to the upper air; but the moans of his poor weak
Kaala told him she would be strangled in passing through the sea.

And as he sat down, and held her in his arms, she feebly spoke: "O my
chief, I can die now! I feared that the fish gods would take me, and I
should never see thee more. The eel bit me, and the crabs crawled over
me, and when I dared the sea to go and seek thee, my weak arms could not
fight the tide; I was torn against the jaws of the cave, and this and
the fear of the gods have so hurt me, that I must die."

"Not so, my love," said the sad and tearful chief. "I am with thee now.
I give thee the warmth of my heart. Feel my life in thine. Live, O my
Kaala, for me. Come, rest and be calm, and when thou canst hold thy
breath I will take thee to the sweet air again, and to thy valley, where
thou shalt twine wreaths for me." And thus with fond words and caresses
he sought to soothe his love.

But the poor girl still bled as she moaned; and with

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

fainter voice she said, "No, my chief, I shall never twine a wreath, but
only my arms once more around thy neck." And feebly clasping him, she
said in sad, sobbing, fainting tones, "Aloha, my sweet lord! Lay me
among the flowers by Waiakeakua, and do not slay my father."

Then, breathing moans and murmurs of love, she lay for a time weak and
fainting upon her lover's breast, with her arms drooping by her side.
But all at once she clasps his neck, and with cheek to cheek, she
clings, she moans, she gasps her last throbs of love and passes away;
and her poor torn corse lies limp within the arms of the love-lorn
chief.

As he cries out in his woe there are other voices in the cave. First he
hears the voice of Ua speaking to him in soothing tones as she stoops to
the body of her friend; and then in a little while he hears the voice of
his great leader calling to him and bidding him stay his grief. "O King
of all the Seas," said Kaaialii, standing up and leaving Kaala to the
arms of Ua, "I have lost the flower thou gayest me; it is broken and
dead, and I have no more joy in life."

"What!" said Kamehameha, "art thou a chief, and wouldst cast away life
for a girl? Here is Ua, who loves thee; she is young and tender like
Kaala. Thou shalt have her, and more, if thou dost want. Thou shalt
have, besides the land I gave thee in Kohala, all that thou shalt ask of
Lanai. Its great valley of Palawai shall be thine; and thou shalt watch
my fishing grounds of Kaunolu, and be the Lord of Lanai."

"Hear, O King," said Kaaialii. "I gave to Kaala

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

more of my life in loving her, and of my strength in seeking for her
than ever I gave for thee in battle. I gave to her more of love than I
ever gave to my mother, and more of my thought than I ever gave to my
own life. She was my very breath, and my life, and how shall I live
without her? Her face, since first I saw her, has been ever before me;
and her warm breasts were my joy and repose; and now that they are cold
to me, I must go where her voice and love have gone. If I shut my eyes
now I see her best; therefore let me shut my eyes forevermore." And as
he spoke, he stooped to clasp his love, said a tender word of adieu to
Ua, and then with a swift, strong blow, crushed in brow and brain with a
stone.

The dead chief lay by the side of his love, and Ua wailed over both.
Then the King ordered that the two lovers should lie side by side on a
ledge of the cave; and that they should be wrapped in tapas which should
be brought down through the sea in tight bamboos. Then there was great
wailing for the chief and the maid who lay in the cave; and thus wailed
Ua:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Where art thou, O brave chief?  
Where art thou, O fond girl?  
Will ye sleep by the sound of the sea?  
And will ye dream of the gods of the deep?  
O sire, where now is thy child?  
O mother, where now is thy son?  
The lands of Kohala shall mourn,  
And valleys of Lanai shall lament.  
The spear of the chief shall rot in the cave,  
And the tapa of the maid is left undone.  
The wreaths for his neck, they shall fade, <span id="page_180">p.
180</span>  
They shall fade away on the hills.  
O Kaaialii, who shall spear the uku?  
O Kaala, who shall gather the na-u?  
Have ye gone to the shores of Kahiki,  
To the land of our father, Wakea?  
Will ye feed on the moss of the cave,  
And the limpets of the surf-beaten shore?  
O chief, O friend, I would feed ye,  
O chief, O friend, I would rest ye.  
Ye loved, like the sun and the flower,  
Ye lived like the fish and the wave,  
And now like the seeds in a shell,  
Ye sleep in your cave by the sea.  
Alas! O chief, alas! O my friend,  
Will ye sleep in the cave evermore?"</span>

</div>

And thus Ua wailed, and then was borne away by her brother to the
sorrowful shore of Kaunolu, where there was loud wailing for the chief
and the maid; and many were the chants of lamentation for the two
lovers, who sleep side by side in the Spouting Cave of Kaala.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The Tomb of Puupehe, A Legend of Lanai](hft19)
