[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft15)  [Next](hft17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

### XIII

### OAHUNUI

###### MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

ON the plateau lying between Ewa and Waialua, on the island of Oahu, and
about a mile off, and mauka of the Kaukonahua bridge, is the historical
place called Kukaniloko. This was the ancient birthplace of the Oahu
kings and rulers. It was incumbent on all women of the royal line to
retire to this place when about to give birth to a child, on pain of
forfeiting the rank, privileges, and prerogatives of her expected
offspring, should that event happen in a less sacred place.

The stones were still standing some years ago, and perhaps are yet
undisturbed, where the royal accouchements took place. In ancient times
this locality was taboo ground, for here the high priest of the island
had his headquarters. Himself descended from the chief families, and
being, in many instances, an uncle or younger brother of the reigning
king, or connected by marriage with those of the royal line, and being
also at the head of a numerous, well organized, and powerful priesthood,
his influence was hardly second to that of the king, and in some matters
his authority was paramount.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

A few miles mauka of Kukaniloko, toward the Waimea Mountains, is
Helemano, where the last of the cannibal chiefs from the South Seas
finally settled when driven from the plains of Mokuleia and Waialua by
the inhabitants of those districts; for the people had been exasperated
by the frequent requisitions on the *kamaainas* (original inhabitants)
by the stranger chiefs to furnish material for their cannibal feasts.

To the east of Helemano, and about the same distance from Kukaniloko, is
Oahunui (Greater Oahu), another historical place. This was the residence
of the kings of the island. Tradition has it that previous to the advent
of the cannibal strangers the place was known by another name.

When the Lo Aikanaka, as the last of the man-eating chiefs are called,
were constrained to take up their residence in upper Helemano, a
district just outside of the boundaries of those reserved for the royal
and priestly residences, a young man called Oahunui was king. An elder
sister named Kilikiliula, who had been as a mother to him, was supposed
to share equally with him the royal power and prerogative. This sister
was married to a chief named Lehuanui, of the priestly line, but one not
otherwise directly connected with royalty, and was the mother of three
children; the two eldest being boys and the youngest a girl. They all
lived together in the royal enclosure, but in separate houses, according
to ancient custom.

Now, the Lo Aikanaka, on establishing themselves in upper Helemano, had
at first behaved very well. They had been circumspect and prudent in
their intercourse

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

with the royal retainers, and had visited the young King to render their
homage with every appearance of humility.

Oahunui was quite captivated by the plausible, suave manners of the
ingratiating southern chief and those of his immediate retainers, and he
invited them to a feast.

This civility was reciprocated, and the King dined with the strangers.
Here it was strongly suspected that the dish of honor placed before the
King was human flesh, served under the guise of pork.

The King found the dish very much to his liking, and intimated to the Lo
Aikanaka chief that his *aipuupuu* (chief cook or steward) understood
the preparation and cooking of pork better than the royal cook did.

The Lo Aikanaka took the hint, and the young King became a very frequent
guest at the Southerner's board--or rather, mat table. Some excuse or
other would be given to invite the royal guest, such as a challenge to
the King to a game of *konane* (a game like checkers); or a contest of
skill in the different athletic and warlike sports would be arranged,
and Oahunui would be asked to be the judge, or simply invited to view
them. As a matter of course, it would be expected that the King would
remain after the sports and partake of food when on friendly visits of
this nature. Thus with one excuse or another he spent a great deal of
his time with his new subjects and friends.

To supply the particular dainty craved by the royal visitor, the Lo
Aikanaka had to send out warriors to the passes leading to Waianae from
Lihue and Kalena, and also to the lonely pathway leading up to Kalakini,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

on the Waimea side, there to lie in ambush for any lone traveller, or
belated person after la-i, aaho, or ferns. Such a one would fall an easy
prey to the Lo Aikanaka stalwarts, skilful in the art of the *lua* (to
kill by breaking the bones).

This went on for some time, until the unaccountable disappearance of so
many people began to be connected with the frequent entertainments by
the southern chief. Oahunui's subjects began to hint that their young
King had acquired the taste for human flesh at these feasts, and that it
was to gratify his unnatural appetite for the horrid dish that he paid
his frequent visits to those who were his inferiors, contrary to all
royal precedent.

The people's disapproval of the intimacy of Oahunui with his new friends
was expressed more and more openly, and the murmurs of discontent grew
loud and deep. His chiefs and high priest became alarmed, and begged him
to discontinue his visits, or they would not be answerable for the
consequences. The King was thereby forced to heed their admonitions and
promised to keep away from Lo's, and did so for quite a while.

Now, all the male members of the royal family ate their meals with the
King when he was at home. This included, among others, Lehuanui, his
sister's husband, and their two sons--healthy, chubby little lads of
about eight and six years of age. One day after breakfast, as the roar
of the surf at Waialua could be distinctly heard, the King remarked that
the fish of Ukoa pond at Waialua must be pressing on to the *makaha*
(floodgates) and he would like some aholehole.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

This observation really meant a command to his brother-in-law to go and
get the fish, as he was the highest chief present except his two royal
nephews, too small to assume such duties.

Lehuanui, Kilikiliula's husband, accordingly went to Waialua with a few
of his own family retainers and a number of those belonging to the King.
They found the fish packed thick at the makaha, and were soon busily
engaged in scooping out, cleaning, and salting them. It was quite late
at night when Lehuanui, fatigued with the labors of the day, lay down to
rest. He had been asleep but a short time when he seemed to see his two
sons standing by his head. The eldest spoke to him: "Why do you sleep,
my father? While you are down here we are being eaten by your
brother-in-law, the King. We were cooked and eaten up, and our skulls
are now hanging in a net from a branch of the lehua-tree you are called
after, and the rest of our bones are tied in a bundle and buried under
the tree by the big root running to the setting sun."

Then they seemed to fade away, and Lehuanui started up, shivering with
fear. He hardly knew whether he had been dreaming or had actually seen
an apparition of his little sons. He had no doubt they were dead, and as
he remembered all the talk and innuendoes about the King's supposed
reasons for visiting the strangers and the enforced cessation of those
visits at the urgent request of the high priest and the chiefs, he came
to the conclusion that the King had expressed a desire for fish in his
presence only to send him out of the way. He reasoned that

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

no doubt the King had noticed the chubby forms and rounded limbs of the
little lads, and being debarred a chance of partaking surreptitiously of
human flesh, had compelled his servants to kill, cook, and serve up his
own nephews. In satisfying his depraved appetite, he had also got rid of
two who might become formidable rivals; for it was quite within the
possibilities that the priests and chiefs in the near future, should he
be suspected of a desire for a further indulgence in cannibal diet,
might depose him, and proclaim either one of the young nephews his
successor.

The father was so troubled that he aroused his immediate body servant,
and the two left Waialua for home shortly after midnight. They arrived
at the royal enclosure at dawn, and went first to the lehua-tree spoken
of by the apparition of the child, and on looking up amid the branches,
sure enough there dangled two little skulls in a large-meshed
fishing-net. Lehuanui then stooped down and scraped away the leaves and
loose dirt from the root indicated, and out rolled a bundle of tapa,
which on being opened was found to contain the bones of two children.
The father reached up for the net containing the skulls, and putting the
bundle of tapa in it, tied the net around his neck. The servant stood
by, a silent and grieved spectator of a scene whose meaning he fully
understood.

The father procured a stone adze and went to the King's sleeping-house,
the servant still following. Here every one but an old woman tending the
kukui-nut candle was asleep. Oahunui was stretched out on

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

a pile of soft mats covered with his *paiula*, the royal red kapa of
old. The cruel wretch had eaten to excess of the hateful dish he craved,
and having accompanied it with copious draughts of awa juice, was in a
heavy, drunken sleep.

Lehuanui stood over him, adze in hand, and called, "O King, where are my
children?" The stupefied King only stirred uneasily, and would not, or
could not, awake. Lehuanui called him three times, and the sight of the
drunken brute, gorged with his flesh and blood, so enraged the father
that he struck at Oahunui's neck with his stone adze, and severed the
head from the body at one blow.

The father and husband then strode to his own sleeping-house, where his
wife lay asleep with their youngest child in her arms. He aroused her
and asked for his boys. The mother could only weep, without answering.
He upbraided her for her devotion to her brother, and for having tamely
surrendered her children to satisfy the appetite of the inhuman monster.
He reminded her that she had equal power with her brother, and that the
latter was very unpopular, and had she chosen to resist his demands and
called on the retainers to defend her children, the King would have been
killed and her children saved.

He then informed her that, as she had given up his children to be killed
for her brother, he had killed him in retaliation, and, saying, "You
have preferred your brother to me and mine, so you will see no more of
me and mine," he tore the sleeping child from her arms and turned to
leave the house.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

The poor wife and mother followed, and, flinging herself on her husband,
attempted to detain him by clinging to his knees; but the father, crazed
by his loss and the thought of her greater affection for a cruel,
inhuman brother than for her own children, struck at her with all his
might, exclaiming, "Well, then, follow your brother," and rushed away,
followed by all his retainers.

Kilikiliula fell on the side of the stream opposite to where the
lehua-tree stood, and is said to have turned to stone. The stone is
pointed out to this day, balanced on the hillside of the ravine formed
by the stream, and is one of the objects for the Hawaiian sightseer.

The headless body of Oahunui lay where he was killed, abandoned by every
one. The story runs that in process of time it also turned to stone, as
a witness to the anger of the gods and their detestation of his horrible
crime. All the servants who had in any way been concerned, in obedience
to royal mandate, in killing and cooking the young princes were, at the
death of Kilikiliula, likewise turned to stone, just as they were, in
the various positions of crouching, kneeling, or sitting. All the rest
of the royal retainers, with the lesser chiefs and guards, fled in fear
and disgust from the place, and thus the once sacred royal home of the
Oahuan chiefs was abandoned and deserted.

The great god Kane's curse, it is believed, still hangs over the
desolate spot, in proof of which it is asserted that, although all this
happened hundreds of years ago, no one has ever lived there since.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Ahuula: A Legend of Kanikaniaula and the First Feather
Cloak](hft17)
