[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft16)  [Next](hft18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

### XIV

### AHUULA

#### A LEGEND OF KANIKANIAULA AND THE FIRST FEATHER CLOAK

###### MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

ELEIO was a *kukini* (trained runner) in the service of Kakaalaneo, King
of Maui, several runners being always kept by each king or *alii* of
consequence. These kukinis, when sent on any errand, always took a
direct line for their destination, climbing hills with the agility of
goats, jumping over rocks and streams, and leaping from precipices. They
were so fleet of foot that the common illustration of the fact among the
natives was the saying that when a kukini was sent on an errand that
would ordinarily take a day and a night, fish wrapped in ki leaves
(known as *lawalu*), if put on the fire on his starting, would not be
cooked sufficiently to be turned before he would be back. Being so
serviceable to the aliis, kukinis always enjoyed a high degree of
consideration, freedom, and immunity from the strict etiquette and
unwritten laws of a Hawaiian court. There was hardly anything so
valuable in their master's possession that they could not have it if
they wished.

Eleio was sent to Hana to fetch awa for the King,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

and was expected to be back in time for the King's supper. Kakaalaneo
was then living at Lahaina. Now, Eleio was not only a kukini, but he was
also a kahuna, and had been initiated in the ceremonies and observances
by which he was enabled to see spirits or wraiths, and was skilled in
medicines, charms, etc., and could return a wandering spirit to its body
unless decomposition had set in.

Soon after leaving Olowalu, and as he commenced' the ascent of
Aalaloloa, he saw a beautiful young woman ahead of him. He naturally
hastened his steps, intending to overtake such a charming
fellow-traveller; but, do what he would, she kept always just so far
ahead of him. Being the fleetest and most renowned kukini of his time,
it roused his professional pride to be outrun by a woman, even if only
for a short distance; so he was determined to catch her, and he gave
himself entirely to that effort. The young woman led him a weary chase
over rocks, hills, mountains, deep ravines, precipices, and dark
streams, till they came to the *Lae* (cape) of Hanamanuloa at Kahikinui,
beyond Kaupo, when he caught her just at the entrance to a *puoa*. A
puoa was a kind of tower, generally of bamboo, with a platform half-way
up, on which the dead bodies of persons of distinction belonging to
certain families or classes were exposed to the elements.

When Eleio caught the young woman she turned to him and cried: "Let me
live! I am not human, but a spirit, and inside this inclosure is my
dwelling."

He answered: "I have been aware for some time

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

of your being a spirit. No human being could have so outrun me."

She then said: "Let us be friends. In yonder house live my parents and
relatives. Go to them and ask for a hog, *kapas*, some fine mats, and a
feather cloak. Describe me to them and tell them that I give all those
things to you. The feather cloak is unfinished. It is now only a fathom
and a half square, and was intended to be two fathoms. There are enough
feathers and netting in the house to finish it. Tell them to finish it
for you." The spirit then disappeared.

Eleio entered the puoa, climbed on to the platform, and saw the dead
body of the girl. She was in every way as beautiful as the spirit had
appeared to him, and apparently decomposition had not yet set in. He
left the puoa and hurried to the house pointed out by the spirit as that
of her friends, and saw a woman wailing, whom, from the resemblance, he
at once knew to be the mother of the girl; so he saluted her with an
aloha. He then said: "I am a stranger here, but I had a travelling
companion who guided me to yonder puoa and then disappeared." At these
strange words the woman stopped wailing and called to her husband, to
whom she repeated what the stranger had said. The latter then asked:
"Does this house belong to you?"

Husband and wife, wondering, answered at once: "It does."

"Then," said Eleio, "my message is to you. My travelling companion has a
hog a fathom in length in

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

your care; also a pile of fine kapas of Paiula and others of fine
quality; also a pile of mats and an unfinished feather cloak, now a
fathom and a half in length, which you are to finish, the materials
being in the house. All these things she has given to me, and sent me to
you for them." Then he began to describe the young woman. Both parents
recognized the truthfulness of the description, and willingly agreed to
give up the things which their beloved daughter must have herself given
away. But when they spoke of killing the hog and making an *ahaaina*
(feast) for him, whom they had immediately resolved to adopt as a son,
he said: "Wait a little and let me ask: Are all these people I see
around this place your friends?"

They both answered: "They are our relatives--uncles, aunts, and cousins
to the spirit, who seems to have adopted you either as husband or
brother."

"Will they do your bidding in everything?" he asked.

They answered that they could be relied upon. He directed them to build
a large *lanai*, or arbor, to be entirely covered with ferns, ginger,
maile, and ieie--the sweet and odorous foliage greens of the islands. An
altar was to be erected at one end of the lanai and appropriately
decorated. The order was willingly carried out, men, women, and children
working with a I will, so that the whole structure was finished in a
couple of hours.

Eleio now directed the hog to be cooked. He also ordered cooked red and
white fish, red, white, and black cocks, and bananas of the lele and
maoli varieties,

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

to be placed on the altar. He ordered all women and children to enter
their houses and to assist him with their prayers; all pigs, chickens,
and dogs to be tied in dark huts to keep them quiet, and that the most
profound silence should be kept. The men at work were asked to remember
their gods, and to invoke their assistance for Eleio. He then started
for Hana, pulled up a couple of bushes of awa of Kaeleku, famous for its
medicinal properties, and was back again before the hog was cooked. The
awa was prepared, and when the preparations for the feast were complete
and set out, he offered everything to his gods and begged assistance in
what he was about to perform.

It seems the spirit of the girl had been lingering near him all the
time, seeming to be attached to him, but of course invisible to every
one. When Eleio had finished his invocation he turned and caught the
spirit, and, holding his breath and invoking the gods, he hurried to the
puoa, followed by the parents, who now began to understand that he was
going to try the *kapuku* (or restoration to life of the dead) on their
daughter. Arriving at the puoa, he placed the spirit against the insteps
of the girl and pressed it firmly in, meanwhile continuing his
invocation. The spirit entered its former tenement kindly enough until
it came to the knees, when it refused to go any further, as from there
it could perceive that the stomach was beginning to decompose, and it
did not want to be exposed to the pollution of decaying matter. But
Eleio, by the strength of his prayers, was enabled to push the spirit up
past the knees till it came to the

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

thigh bones, when the refractory spirit again refused to proceed. He had
to put additional fervor into his prayers to overcome the spirit's
resistance, and it proceeded up to the throat, when there was some
further check; by this time the father, mother, and male relatives were
all grouped around anxiously watching the operation, and they all added
the strength of their petitions to those of Eleio, which enabled him to
push the spirit past the neck, when the girl gave a sort of crow. There
was now every hope of success, and all the company renewed their prayers
with redoubled vigor. The spirit made a last feeble resistance at the
elbows and wrists, which was triumphantly overborne by the strength of
the united prayers. Then it quietly submitted, took complete possession
of the body, and the girl came to life. She was submitted to the usual
ceremonies of purification by the local priest, after which she was led
to the prepared lanai, when kahuna, maid, parents, and relatives had a
joyous reunion. Then they feasted on the food prepared for the gods, who
were only supposed to absorb the spiritual essence of things, leaving
the grosser material parts to their devotees, who, for the time being,
are considered their guests.

After the feast the feather cloak, kapas, and fine mats were brought and
displayed to Eleio; and the father said to him: "Take the woman thou
hast restored and have her for wife, and remain here with us; you will
be our son and will share equally in the love we have for her."

But our hero, with great self-denial and fidelity,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

said: "No, I accept her as a charge, but for wife, she is worthy to be
one for a higher than I. If you will trust her to me, I will take her to
my master, for by her beauty and charms she is worthy to be the queen of
our lovely island."

The father answered: "She is yours to do with as you will. It is as if
you had created her, for without you, where would she be now? We only
ask this, that you always remember that you have parents and relatives
here, and a home whenever you choose."

Eleio then asked that the feather cloak be finished for him before he
returned to his master. All who could work at feathers set about it at
once, including the fair girl restored to life; and he now learned that
she was called Kanikaniaula.

When it was completed he set out on his return to Lahaina accompanied by
the girl, and taking the feather cloak and the remaining awa he had not
used in his incantations. They travelled slowly according to the
strength of Kanikaniaula, who now in the body could not equal the speed
she had displayed as a spirit.

Arriving at Launiupoko, Eleio turned to her and said: "You wait and hide
here in the bushes while I go on alone. If by sundown I do not return, I
shall be dead. You know the road by which we came; then return to your
people. But if all goes well with me I shall be back in a little while."

He then went on alone, and when he reached Makila, on the confines of
Lahaina, he saw a number of people heating an *imu*, or underground
oven. On

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

perceiving him they started to bind and roast him alive, such being the
orders of the King, but he ordered them away with the request, "Let me
die at the feet of my master." And thus he passed successfully the imu
heated for him.

When he finally stood before Kakaalaneo, the latter said to him: "How is
this? Why are you not cooked alive, as I ordered? How came you to pass
my lunas?"

The kukini answered: "It was the wish of the slave to die at the feet of
his master, if die he must; but if so, it would be an irreparable loss
to you, my master, for I have that with me that will cause your name to
be renowned and handed down to posterity."

"And what is that?" questioned the King.

Eleio then unrolled his bundle and displayed to the astonished gaze of
the King and courtiers the glories of a feather cloak, before then
unheard of on the islands. Needless to say, he was immediately pardoned
and restored to royal favor, and the awa he had brought from Hana was
reserved for the King's special use in his offerings to the gods that
evening.

When the King heard the whole story of Eleio's absence, and that the
fair original owner was but a short way off, he ordered her to be
immediately brought before him that he might express his gratitude for
the wonderful garment. When she arrived, he was so struck with her
beauty and modest deportment that he asked her to become his Queen.
Thus, some of the highest chiefs of the land traced their descent from
Kakaalaneo and Kanikaniaula.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

The original feather cloak, known as the "*Ahu o Kakaalaneo*," is said
to be in the possession of the Pauahi Bishop Museum. At one time it was
used on state occasions as a *pa-u*, or skirt, by Princess Nahienaena,
own sister of the second and third Kamehamehas.

The ahuulas of the ancient Hawaiians were of fine netting, entirely
covered with feathers, woven in. These were either of one color and kind
or two or three different colors outlining patterns. The feathers were
knotted by twos or threes with twisted strands of the olona, the process
being called *uo*. They were then woven into the foundation netting
previously made the exact shape and size wanted. The whole process of
feather cloak making was laborious and intricate, and the making of a
cloak took a great many years. And as to durability, let the cloak of
[Kakaalaneo](errata.htm#2), now several centuries old, attest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Kaala and Kaaialii, A Legend of Lanai](hft18)
