[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft12)  [Next](hft14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### X

### STORIES OF THE MENEHUNES

#### HAWAII THE ORIGINAL HOME OF THE BROWNIES

###### THOS. G. THRUM

STUDENTS of Hawaiian folk-lore find much of coincident interest with
traditional or more historic beliefs of other and older lands. The same
applies, in a measure, to some of the ancient customs of the people.
This is difficult to account for, more especially since the Hawaiians
possessed no written language by which such knowledge could be preserved
or transmitted. Fornander and others discovered in the legends of this
people traces of the story of the Flood, the standing still of the sun,
and other narratives of Bible history, which some savants accept as
evidence of their Aryan origin. This claim we are not disposed to
dispute, but desire to present another line of tradition that has been
neglected hitherto, yet has promise of much interest.

It will doubtless interest some readers to learn that Hawaii is the real
home of the Brownies, or was; and that this adventurous nomadic tribe
were known to the Hawaiians long before Swift's satirical mind conceived
his Lilliputians.

It would be unreasonable to expect so great a range

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of nationalities and peculiar characteristics among the pygmies of
Hawaii as among the Brownies of story. Tradition naturally represents
them as of one race, and all nimble workers; not a gentleman dude, or
policeman in the whole lot. Unlike the inquisitive and mischievous
athletes of present fame, the original and genuine Brownies, known as
the Menehunes, are referred to as an industrious race. In fact, it was
their alleged power to perform a marvellous amount of labor in a short
space of time that has fixed them in the minds of Hawaiians, many of
whom point to certain traces of their work in various parts of the
islands to substantiate the traditional claim of their existence.

Meeting thus with occasional references to this active race, but mostly
in a vague way, it has been a matter of interesting inquiry among
Hawaiians, some of whom were noted *kaao*, or legend-bearers, for
further knowledge on the subject. Very naturally their ideas differ
respecting the Menehunes. Some treat the subject with gravity and
respect, and express the belief that they were the original inhabitants
of these islands, but gradually gave way to the heavier-bodied ancestors
of the present race; others consider that the history of the race has
been forgotten through the lapse of ages; while the more intelligent and
better educated look upon the Menehunes as a mythical class of gnomes or
dwarfs, and the account of their exploits as having been handed down by
tradition for social entertainment, as other peoples relate fairy
stories.

In the Hawaiian legend of Kumuhonua, Fornander states that the
Polynesians were designated as "the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

people, descendants from Menehune, son of Lua Nuu, etc. It disappeared
as a national name so long ago, however, that subsequent legends have
changed it to a term of reproach, representing them at times as a
separate race, and sometimes as a race of dwarfs, skilful laborers, but
artful and cunning."

In the following account and selection of stories gathered from various
native sources, as literal a rendition as possible has been observed by
the translators for the better insight it gives of Hawaiian thought and
character.

#### MOKE MANU'S ACCOUNT

The Menehunes were supposed to have been a wonderful people, small of
stature and of great activity. They were always united in doing any
service required of them. It was their rule that any work undertaken
must be completed in one night, otherwise it would be left unfinished,
as they did not labor twice on the same work; hence the origin of the
saying: "*He po hookahi, a ao ua pau*,"--in one night, and by dawn it is
finished.

There is no reliable history of the Menehunes. No one knows whence they
came, though tradition says they were the original people of the
Hawaiian Islands. They are thought to have been supernatural beings,
governed by some one higher in rank than themselves, whom they
recognized as having power and authority over them, that assigned them
to the mountains and hills where they lived permanently. They were said
to be the only inhabitants of the islands up to the time

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

of Papa and Wakea, and were invisible to every one but their own
descendants, or those connected with them in some way. Many persons
could hear the noise and hum of their voices, but the gift of seeing
them with the naked eye was denied to those not akin to them. They were
always willing to do the bidding of their descendants, and their
supernatural powers enabled them to perform some wonderful works.

#### PI'S WATERCOURSE

Pi was an ordinary man living in Waimea, Kauai, who wanted to construct
a *mano*, or dam, across the Waimea River and a watercourse therefrom to
a point near Kikiaola. Having settled upon the best locations for his
proposed work, he went up to the mountains and ordered all the Menehunes
that were living near Puukapele to prepare stones for the dam and
watercourse. The Menehunes were portioned off for the work; some to
gather stones, and others to cut them. All the material was ready in no
time (*manawa ole*), and Pi settled upon the night when the work was to
be done. When the time came he went to the point where the dam was to be
built, and waited. At the dead of night he heard the noise and hum of
the voices of the Menehunes on their way to Kikiaola, each of whom was
carrying a stone. The dam was duly constructed, every stone fitting in
its proper place, and the stone *auwai*, or watercourse, also laid
around the bend of Kikiaola. Before the break of day the work was
completed, and the water of the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Waimea River was
turned by the dam into the watercourse on the flat lands of Waimea.

When the work was finished Pi served out food for the Menehunes, which
consisted of shrimps (*opae*), this being the only kind to be had in
sufficient quantity to supply each with a fish to himself. They were
well supplied and satisfied, and at dawn returned to the mountains of
Puukapele rejoicing, and the hum of their voices gave rise to the
saying, "*Wawa ka Menehune i Puukapele, ma Kauai, puoho ka manu o ka
loko o Kawainui ma Koolaupoko, Oahu*"--the hum of the voices of the
Menehunes at Puukapele, Kauai, startled the birds of the pond of
Kawainui, at Koolaupoko, Oahu.

The *auwai*, or watercourse, of Pi is still to be seen at Kikiaola.

At one time Pi also told the Menehunes to wall in a fish-pond at the
bend of the Huleia River. They commenced work toward midnight, but at
dawn the walls of the pond were not sufficiently finished to meet, so it
was left incomplete, and has remained so to this day.

#### LAKA'S ADVENTURE

Wahieloa, a chief, lived at Kalaikoi, Kipahulu, Maui. He took to him a
wife named Hinahawea. In due time a boy was born to them, whom
Hinahowana, the mother of Hinahawea, brought up under her own care at
Alaenui. She called him Laka-a-wahieloa. He was greatly petted by his
parents. One day his father went to Hawaii in search

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

of the *Ala-Koiula a Kane* for a toy for his son, landing at Punaluu,
Kau, Hawaii, where he was killed in a cave called Keana-a-Kaualehu.

After a long absence Laka asked for his father, and his mother referred
him to his grandmother, who, on being questioned, told him that his
father went to Hawaii, and was supposed to be dead. Laka then asked for
means by which he could search for his father.

His grandmother replied: "Go to the mountains and look for the tree that
has leaves shaped like the moon on the night of Hilo, or Hoaka; such is
the tree for a canoe."

Laka followed this advice, and went to the mountains to find the tree
for his canoe. Finding a suitable one, he commenced to cut in the
morning, and by sundown he had felled it to the ground. This
accomplished, he went home. Returning the next day, to his surprise he
could not find his fallen tree, so he cut down another, with the same
result. Laka was thus tricked for several days, and in his perplexity
consulted again with his grandmother, who sent him off with the same
advice as before, to look for the crescent-shaped leaf.

He went to the mountains again and found the desired tree, but before
cutting it he dug a big hole on the side where the Kalala-Kamahele would
fall. Upon cutting the tree it fell right into the hole or trench, as
designed; then he jumped into it and lay in waiting for the person or
persons who were reërecting the trees he had cut down for his canoe.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

While thus waiting, he heard some one talking about raising the tree and
returning it to its former position, followed by some one chanting as
follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*E ka mano a ke Akua,  
Ke kini o ke Akua,  
Ka lehu a ke Akua,  
Ka lalani Akua,  
Ka pukui Akua!  
E na Akua a ke kuahiwi nei,  
I ka mauna,  
I ke kualono,  
I ka manowai la-e,  
E-iho!* <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)</span>

</div>

When this appeal ended there was a hum and noise, and in a short time
(*manawa ole*) the place was filled with a band of people, who
endeavored to lift the tree; but it would not move. Laka then jumped out
from his place of hiding and caught hold of two of the men, Mokuhalii
and Kapaaikee, and threatened to kill them for raising again the trees
he had cut for his canoe. Mokuhalii then told Laka that if they were
killed, nobody would be able to make a canoe for him, nor would anybody
pull it to the beach, but if they were spared they would willingly do it
for him, provided Laka would first build a big and long shed (*halau*)
of sufficient size to hold the canoe, and prepare sufficient food for
the men. Laka gladly consenting, released them and returned to his home
and built a shed on

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the level ground of Puhikau. Then he went up to the woods and saw the
canoe, ready and complete. The Menehunes told Laka that it would he
brought to the halau that night. At the dead of night the hum of the
voices of the Menehunes was heard; this was the commencement of the
lifting of the canoe. It was not dragged, but held up by hand. The
second hum of voices brought the canoe to Haloamekiei, at Pueo. And at
the third hum the canoe was carefully laid down in the halau. Food and
fish were there spread out for the workers, the *ha* of the taro for
food, and the opae and oopu for fish. At dawn the Menehunes returned to
their home. Kuahalau was the name of the halau, the remains of the
foundation of which were to be seen a few years ago, but now it is
ploughed over. The hole dug by Laka still exists.

#### KEKUPUA'S CANOE

Kakae, a chief, lived at Wahiawa, Kukaniloko, Waialua, Oahu. One day his
wife told him that she desired to go in search of her brother,
Kahanaiakeakua, who was supposed to be living at Tahiti. Kakae thereupon
ordered his man Kekupua to go into the woods and find a suitable tree
and make a canoe for his wife for this foreign voyage. Kekupua, with a
number of men under him, searched in the forest belt of Wahiawa,
Helemano, and Waoala, as also through the woods of Koolau, without
success. From Kahana they made a search through the mountains till they
came to Kilohana, in Kalihi Valley, and from there to Waolani, in
Nuuanu, where they slept in a cave.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the dead of
night they heard the hum as of human voices, but were unable to discern
any person, though the voices sounded close to them. At dawn silence
reigned again, and when the sun arose, lo, and behold! there stood a
large mound of stones, the setting of which resembled that of a heiau,
or temple, the remains of which are said to be noticeable to this day.

Kekupua and his men returned to their chief and reported their
unsuccessful search for a suitable *koa* (*Acacia koa*) tree for the
desired canoe, and related also the incident at Waolani. Kakae, being a
descendant of the Menehunes, knew immediately the authors of the strange
occurrence. He therefore instructed Kekupua to proceed to Makaho and
Kamakela and to stay there till the night of Kane, then go up to Puunui
and wait till hearing the hum and noise of the Menehunes, which would be
the signal of their finishing the canoe. And thus it was; the Menehunes,
having finished the canoe, were ready to pull it to the sea. He directed
them to look sharp, and two men would be noticed holding the ropes at
the *pu* (or head) of the canoe. One of them would leap from one side to
the other; he was the director of the work and was called *pale*. There
would be some men farther behind, holding the *kawelewele*, or
guiding-ropes. They were the *kahunas* that superintended the
construction of the canoe. He reminded them to remember these
directions, and when they saw these men, to give them orders and show
them the course to take in pulling the canoe to the sea.

Kekupua followed all these instructions faithfully.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He waited at
Puunui till dusk, when he heard a hum as of many voices, and proceeding
farther up near the slope of Alewa he saw these wonderful people. They
were like ordinary human beings but diminutive. He directed them to pull
the canoe along the *nae*, or farther side of the Puunui stream. By this
course the canoe was brought down as far as Kaalaa, near; Waikahalulu,
where, when daylight came, they left their burden and returned to
Waolani. The canoe was left in the ditch, where it remained for many
generations, and was called Kawaa-a-Kekupua (Kekupua's canoe), in honor
of the servant of the chief Kakae.

Thus, even with the help of the Menehunes, the wife of Kakae was not
satisfied in her desire.

#### AS HEIAU BUILDERS

The Menehunes are credited with the construction of numerous *heiaus*
(ancient temples) in various parts of the islands.

The heiau of Mookini, near Honoipu, Kohala, is I pointed out as an
instance of their marvellous work. The place selected for the site of
the temple was on a grassy plain. The stones in the nearest neighborhood
were for some reason not deemed suitable for the work, so those of
Pololu Valley, distant some twelve miles, were selected. Tradition says
the Menehunes were placed in a line covering the entire distance from
Pololu to Honoipu, whereby the stones were passed from hand to hand for
the entire work. Work was begun at the quiet of night, and at cock-

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

crow in the morning it was finished. Thus in one night the heiau of
Mookini was built.

Another temple of their erection was at Pepeekeo, Hilo, the peculiarity
of the work being that the stones had been brought together by the
residents of that part of the district, by direction of the chief, but
that in one night, the Menehunes gathered together and built it. The
chief and his people were surprised on coming the next morning to resume
their labors, to find the heiau completed.

There stands on the pali of Waikolu, near Kalaupapa, Molokai, a heiau
that Hawaiians believe to have been constructed by no one else than the
Menehunes. It is on the top of a ledge in the face of a perpendicular
cliff, with a continuous inaccessible cliff behind it reaching hundreds
of feet above. No one has ever been able to reach it either from above
or from below; and the marvel is how the material, which appears to be
seashore stones, was put in place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[113:1](hft13.htm#fr_6)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

O the four thousand gods,  
The forty thousand gods,  
The four hundred thousand gods,  
The file of gods,  
The assembly of gods!

O gods of these woods,  
Of the mountain,  
And the knoll,  
At the water-dam,  
Oh, come!

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Kahalaopuna, Princess of Manoa](hft14)
