[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft22)  [Next](hft24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

### XX

### THIS LAND IS THE SEA'S

#### TRADITIONAL ACCOUNT OF AN ANCIENT HAWAIIAN PROPHECY

###### TRANSLATED FROM MOKE MANU BY THOS. G. THRUM

IT is stated in the history of Kaopulupulu that he was famed among the
kahunas of the island of Oahu for his power and wisdom in the exercise
of his profession, and was known throughout the land as a leader among
the priests. His place of residence was at Waimea, between Koolauloa and
Waialua, Oahu. There he married, and there was born to him a son whom he
named Kahulupue, and whom he instructed during his youth in all priestly
vocations.

In after years when Kumahana, brother of Kahahana of Maui, became the
governing chief (*alii aimoku*) of Oahu, Kahulupue was chosen by him as
his priest. This chief did evil unto his subjects, seizing their
property and beheading and maiming many with the *leiomano* (shark's
tooth weapon) and *pahoa* (dagger), without provocation, so that he
became a reproach to his people. From such treatment Kahulupue
endeavored to dissuade him, assuring him that such a course would fail
to win their support and obedience, whereas the supplying of food and
fish, with covering

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

for the body, and malos, would insure their affectionate regard. The day
of the people was near, for the time of conflict was approaching when he
would meet the enemy. But these counsels of Kahulupue were disregarded,
so he returned to his father at Waimea.

Not long thereafter this chief Kumahana was cast out and rejected by the
lesser chiefs and people, and under cover of night he escaped by canoe
to Molokai, where he was ignored and became lost to further history in
consequence of his wrong-doings.

When Kahekili, King of Maui, heard of the stealthy flight of the
governing chief of Oahu, he placed the young prince Kahahana, his
foster-son, as ruler over Oahu in the place of his deposed relative,
Kumahana. This occurred about the year 1773, and Kahahana took with him
as his intimate friend and companion one Alapai. Kahahana chose as his
place of residence the shade of the kou and cocoanut trees of Ulukou,
Waikiki, where also gathered together the chiefs of the island to
discuss and consider questions of state.

The new ruler being of fine and stalwart form and handsome appearance,
the chiefs and common people maintained that his fame in this respect
induced a celebrated chieftainess of Kauai, named Kekuapoi, to voyage
hither. Her history, it is said, showed that she alone excelled in
maiden charm and beauty; she was handsome beyond all other chiefesses
from Hawaii to Kauai, as "the third brightness of the sun" (*he ekolu
ula o ka la*). In consequence, Kahahana took her as his wife, she being
own sister to Kekuamanoha.

At this time the thought occurred to the King to

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

inquire through the chiefs of Oahu of the whereabouts of Kaopulupulu,
the celebrated priest, of whom he had heard through Kahekili, King of
Maui. In reply to this inquiry of Kahahana, the chiefs told him that his
place of residence was at Waimea, whereupon a messenger was sent to bid
him come up by order of the King. When the messenger reached Kaopulupulu
he delivered the royal order. Upon the priest hearing this word of the
King he assented thereto, with this reply to the messenger: "You return
first and tell him that on the morning after the fourteenth night of the
moon (*po o akua*), I will reach the place of the King."

At the end of the conference the messenger returned and stood before
Kahahana and revealed the words of Kaopulupulu; and the King waited for
the time of his arrival.

It is true, Kaopulupulu made careful preparation for his future. Toward
the time of his departure he was engaged in considering the good or evil
of his approaching journey by the casting of lots, according to the
rites of his profession. He foresaw thereby the purpose of the King in
summoning him to dwell at court. He therefore admonished his son to
attend to all the rites and duties of the priesthood as he had been
taught, and to care for his mother and relatives.

At early dawn Kaopulupulu arose and partook of food till satisfied,
after which he prepared himself for the journey before him. After he had
given his farewell greetings to his household he seized his bundle and,
taking a cocoanut fan in his hand, set out toward Punanue, where was a
temple (*heiau*) for priests only,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

called Kahokuwelowelo. This was crown land at Waialua in ancient times.
Entering the temple he prayed for success in his journey, after which he
proceeded along the plains of Lauhulu till reaching the Anahulu stream,
thence by Kemoo to Kukaniloko, the shelter of whose prominent rock the
chiefesses of Oahu were wont to choose for their place of confinement.

Leaving this place he came to Kalakoa, where Kekiopilo the prophet
priest lived and died, and the scene of his vision at high noon when he
prophesied of the coming of foreigners with a strange language. Here he
stopped and rested with some of the people, and ate food with them,
after which he journeyed on by way of Waipio by the ancient path of that
time till he passed Ewa and reached Kapukaki.

The sun was well up when he reached the water of Lapakea, so he hastened
his steps in ascending Kauwalua, at Moanalua, and paused not till he
came to the mouth of the Apuakehau stream at Waikiki. Proceeding along
the sand at this place he was discerned by the retainers of the King and
greeted with the shout, "Here comes the priest Kaopulupulu."

When the King heard this he was exceedingly pleased (*pihoihoi loa*) at
the time, and on the priest's meeting with King Kahahana he welcomed
Kaopulupulu with loud rejoicing.

Without delay the King set apart a house wherein to meet and discuss
with the priest those things he had in mind, and in the consideration of
questions from first to last, Kaopulupulu replied with great wisdom in
accordance with his knowledge of his profession.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At this time of
their conference he sat within the doorway of the house, and the sun was
near its setting. As he turned to observe this he gazed out into the sky
and noticing the gathering short clouds (*ao poko*) in the heavens, he
exclaimed:

"O heaven, the road is broad for the King, it is full of chiefs and
people; narrow is my path, that of the kahuna; you will not be able to
find it, O King. Even now the short clouds reveal to me the manner of
your reign; it will not be many days. Should you heed my words, O King,
you will live to gray hair. But you will be the king to slay me and my
child."

At these words of the priest the King meditated seriously for some time,
then spoke as follows: "Why should my days be short, and why should your
death be by me, the King?"

Kaopulupulu replied: "O King, let us look into the future. Should you
die, O King, the lands will be desolate; but for me, the kahuna, the
name will live on from one generation to another; but my death will be
before thine, and when I am up on the heaven-feared altar then my words
will gnaw thee, O King, and the rains and the sun will bear witness."

These courageous words of Kaopulupulu, spoken in the presence of
Kahahana without fear, and regardless of the dignity and majesty of the
King, were uttered because of the certainty that the time would come
when his words would be carried into effect. The King remained quiet
without saying a word, keeping his thoughts to himself.

After this conference the King took Kaopulupulu

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

to be his priest, and in course of time he became also an intimate
companion, in constant attendance upon the King, and counselled him in
the care of his subjects, old and young, in all that pertained to their
welfare. The King regarded his words, and in their I circuit of the
island together they found the people contented and holding their ruler
in high esteem. But at the end of three years the King attempted some
wrong to certain of his subjects like unto that of his deposed
predecessor. The priest remonstrated with him continually, but he would
not regard his counsel; therefore, Kaopulupulu left King Kahahana and
returned to his land at Waimea and at once tattooed his knees. This was
done as a sign that the King had turned a deaf ear to his admonitions.

When several days had passed, rumors among certain people of Waialua
reached the priest that he was to be summoned to appear before the King
in consequence of this act, which had greatly angered his august lord.
Kahahana had gone to reside at Waianae, and from there shortly afterward
he sent messengers to fetch Kaopulupulu and his son Kahulupue from
Waimea.

In the early morning of the day of the messenger's arrival, a rainbow
stood directly in the doorway of Kaopulupulu's house, and he asked of
his god its meaning; but his prayer was broken (*ua haki ka pule*). This
boded him ill; therefore he called to his son to stand in prayer; but
the result was the same. Then he said, "This augurs of the day of death;
see! the rising up of,a man in the pass of Hapuu, putting on

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

his kapa with its knot fastening on the left side of the neck, which
means that he is bringing a death message."

Shortly after the priest had ended these words a man was indeed seen
approaching along the mountain pass, with his kapa as indicated; and he
came and stood before the door of their house and delivered the order of
the King for them to go to Waianae, both him and his son.

The priest replied: "Return you first; we will follow later," and the
messenger obeyed. When he had departed Kaopulupulu recalled to his son
the words he had spoken before the advent of the messenger, and said:
"Oh, where are you, my child? Go clothe the body; put on the malo; eat
of the food till satisfied, and we will go as commanded by the King; but
this journey will result in placing us on the altar (*kau i ka lele*).
Fear not death. The name of an idler, if he be beaten to death, is not
passed on to distinction."

At the end of these words of his father, Kahulupue wept for love of his
relatives, though his father bid him to weep not for his family, because
he, Kaopulupulu, saw the end that would befall the King, Kahahana, and
his court of chiefs and retainers. Even at this time the voices of
distress were heard among his family and their tears flowed, but
Kaopulupulu looked on unmoved by their cries.

He then arose and, with his son, gave farewell greetings to their
household, and set forth. In journeying they passed through Waialua,
resting in the house of

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

a kamaaina at Kawaihapai. In passing the night at this place Kahulupue
slept not, but went out to examine the fishing canoes of that
neighborhood. Finding a large one suitable for a voyage, he returned and
awoke his father, that they might flee together that night to Kauai and
dwell on the knoll of Kalalea. But Kaopulupulu declined the idea of
flight. In the morning, ascending a hill, they turned and looked back
over the sea-spray of Waialua to the swimming halas of Kahuku beyond.
Love for the place of his birth so overcame Kaopulupulu for a time that
his tears flowed for that he should see it no more.

Then they proceeded on their way till, passing Kaena Point, they reached
the temple of Puaakanoe. At this sacred boundary Kaopulupulu said to his
son, "Let us swim in the sea and touch along the coast of Makua." At one
of their resting-places, journeying thus, he said, with direct
truthfulness, as his words proved: "Where are you, my son? For this
drenching of the high priests by the sea, seized will be the sacred
lands (*moo-kapu*) from Waianae to Kualoa by the chief from the east."

As they were talking they beheld the King's men, approaching along the
sand of Makua, and shortly afterward these men came before them and
seized them and tied their hands behind their backs and took them to the
place of King Kahahana at Puukea, Waianae, and put them, father and son,
in a new grass hut unfinished of its ridge thatch, and tied them, the
one to the end post (*pouhana*) and the other to the, corner post
(*poumanu*) of the house.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

At the time of the imprisonment of the priest and his son in this new
house Kaopulupulu spake aloud, without fear of dire consequences, so
that the King and all his men heard him, as follows: "Here I am with my
son in this new unfinished house; so will be unfinished the reign of the
King that slays us." At this saying Kahahana, the King, was very angry.

Throughout that day and the night following, till the sun was high with
warmth, the King was directing his soldiers to seize Kahulupue first and
put him to death. Obeying the orders of the King, they took Kahulupue
just outside of the house and stabbed at his eyes with laumake spears
and stoned him with stones before the eyes of his father, with merciless
cruelty. These things, though done by the soldiers, were dodged by
Kahulupue, and the priest, seeing the King had no thought of regard for
his child, spoke up with priestly authority, as follows: "Be strong of
breath, my son, till the body touch the water, for the land indeed is
the sea's."

When Kahulupue heard the voice of his father telling him to flee to the
sea, he turned toward the shore in obedience to these last words to him,
because of the attack by the soldiers of the King. As he ran, he was
struck in the back by a spear, but he persevered and leaped into the sea
at Malae and was drowned, his blood discoloring the water. His dead body
was taken and placed up in the temple at Puehuehu. After the kapu days
therefore the King, with his chiefs and soldiers, moved to Puuloa, Ewa,
bringing with them the priest Kaopulupulu, and after some days

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

he was brought before the King by the soldiers, and without groans for
his injuries was slain in the King's presence. But he spoke fearlessly
of the vengeance that would fall upon the King in consequence of his
death, and during their murderous attack upon him proclaimed with his
dying breath: "You, O King, that kill me here at Puuloa, the time is
near when a direct death will be yours. Above here in this land, and the
spot where my lifeless body will be borne and placed high on the altar
for my flesh to decay and slip to the earth, shall be the burial place
of chiefs and people hereafter, and it shall be called 'the royal sand
of the mistaken'; there will you be placed in the temple." At the end of
these words of Kaopulupulu his spirit took flight, and his body was left
for mockery and abuse, as had been that of his son in the sea of Malae,
at Waianae.

After a while the body of the priest was placed on a double canoe and
brought to Waikiki and placed high in the cocoanut trees at Kukaeunahi,
the place of the temple, for several ten-day periods (*he mau anahulu*)
without decomposition and falling off of the flesh to the sands of
Waikiki.

When King Kahekili of Maui heard of the death of the priest Kaopulupulu
by Kahahana, he sent some of his men thither by canoe, who landed at
Waimanalo, Koolau, where, as spies, they learned from the people
respecting Kaopulupulu and his death, with that of his son; therefore
they returned and told the King the truth of these reports, at which the
affection of Kahekili welled up for the dead priest, and he condemned

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

the King he had established. Coming with an army from Maui, he landed at
Waikiki without meeting Kahahana, and took back the government of Oahu
under his own kingship. The chiefs and people of Oahu all joined under
Kahekili, for Kahahana had been a chief of wrong-doing. This was the
first sea of Kaopulupulu in accordance with his prophetic utterance to
his son, "This land is the sea's."

Upon the arrival here at Oahu of Kahekili, Kahahana fled, with his wife
Kekuapoi, and friend Alapai, and hid in the shrubbery of the hills. They
went to Aliomanu, Moanalua, to a place called Kinimakalehua; then moved
along to Keanapuaa and Kepookala, at the lochs of Puuloa, and from there
to upper Waipio; thence to Wahiawa, Helemano, and on to Lihue; thence
they came to Poohilo, at Honouliuli, where they first showed themselves
to the people and submitted themselves to their care.

While they were living there, report thereof was made to Kahekili, the
King, who thereupon sent Kekuamanoha, elder brother of Kekuapoi, the
wife of Kahahana, with men in double canoes from Waikiki, landing first
at Kupahu, Hanapouli, Waipio, with instructions to capture and put to
death Kahahana, as also his friend Alapai, but to save alive Kekuapoi.
When the canoes touched at Hanapouli, they proceeded thence to Waikele
and Hoaeae, and from there to Poohilo, Honouliuli, where they met in
conference with Kahahana and his party. At the close of the day
Kekuamanoha sought by enticing words to induce his brother-in-law to go
up with him and see the father

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King and be
assured of no death condemnation, and by skilled flattery he induced
Kahahana to consent to his proposition; whereupon preparation was made
for the return. On the following morning, coming along and reaching the
plains of Hoaeae, they fell upon and slew Kahahana and Alapai there, and
bore their lifeless bodies to Halaulani, Waipio, where they were placed
in the canoes and brought up to Waikiki and placed up in the cocoanut
trees by King Kahekili and his priests from Maui, as Kaopulupulu had
been. Thus was fulfilled the famous saying of the Oahu priest in all its
truthfulness.

According to the writings of S. M. Kamakau and David Malo, recognized
authorities, the thought of Kaopulupulu as expressed to his son
Kahulupue, "This land is the sea's," was in keeping with the famous
prophetic vision of Kekiopilo that "the foreigners possess the land," as
the people of Hawaii now realize. The weighty thought of this narration
and the application of the saying of Kaopulupulu to this time of
enlightenment are frequent with certain leaders of thought among the
people, as shown in their papers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Ku-ula, The Fish God Of Hawaii](hft24)
