[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft19)  [Next](hft21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

### XVII

### AI KANAKA

#### A LEGEND OF MOLOKAI

###### REV. A. O. FORBES

ON the leeward side of the island of Molokai, a little to the east of
Kaluaaha lies the beautiful valley of Mapulehu, at the mouth of which is
located the *heiau*, or temple, of Iliiliopae, which was erected by
direction of Ku-pa, the Moi, to look directly out upon the harbor of
Ai-Kanaka, now known as Pukoo. At the time of its construction,
centuries ago, Kupa was the *Moi*, or sovereign, of the district
embracing the *Ahupuaas*, or land divisions, of Mapulehu and Kaluaaha,
and he had his residence in this heiau which was built by him and famed
as the largest throughout the whole Hawaiian group.

Kupa had a priest named Kamalo, who resided at Kaluaaha. This priest had
two boys, embodiments of mischief, who one day while the King was absent
on a fishing expedition, took the opportunity to visit his house at the
heiau. Finding there the *pahu kaeke* <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

belonging to the temple, they commenced drumming on it.

Some evil-minded persons heard Kamalo's boys drumming on the Kaeke and
immediately went and told Kupa that the priest's children were reviling
him in the grossest manner on his own drum. This so enraged the King
that he ordered his servants to put them to death. Forthwith they were
seized and murdered; whereupon Kamalo, their father, set about to secure
revenge on the King.

Taking with him a black pig as a present, he started forth to enlist the
sympathy and services of the celebrated seer, or wizard, Lanikaula,
living some twelve miles distant at the eastern end of Molokai. On the
way thither, at the village of Honouli, Kamalo met a man the lower half
of whose body had been bitten off by a shark, and who promised to avenge
him provided he would slay some man and bring him the lower half of his
body to replace his own. But Kamalo, putting no credence in such an
offer, pressed on to the sacred grove of Lanikaula. Upon arrival there
Lanikaula listened to his grievances but could do nothing for him. He
directed him, however, to another prophet, named Kaneakama, at the west
end of the island, forty miles distant. Poor Kamalo picked up his pig
and travelled back again, past his own home, down the coast to Palaau.
Meeting with Kaneakama the prophet directed him to the heiau of Puukahi,
at the foot of the *pali*, or precipice, of Kalaupapa, on the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

windward side of the island, where he would find the priest
Kahiwakaapuu, who was a *kahu*, or steward, of Kauhuhu, the shark god.
Once more the poor man shouldered his pig, wended his way up the long
ascent of the hills of Kalae to the pali of Kalaupapa, descending which
he presented himself before Kahiwakaapuu, and pleaded his cause. He was
again directed to go still farther along the windward side of the island
till he should come to the *Ana puhi* (eel's cave), a singular cavern at
sea level in the bold cliffs between the valleys of Waikolu and
Pelekunu, where Kauhuhu, the shark god, dwelt, and to him he must apply.
Upon this away went Kamalo and his pig. Arriving at the cave, he found
there Waka and Moo, two kahus of the shark god. "Keep off! Keep off!"
they shouted. "This place is kapu. No man can enter here, on penalty of
death."

"Death or life," answered he, "it is all the same to me if I can only
gain my revenge for my poor boys who have been killed." He then related
his story, and his wanderings, adding that he had come to make his
appeal to Kauhuhu and cared not for his own life.

"Well," said they to him, "Kauhuhu is away now fishing, but if he finds
you here when he returns, our lives as well as yours will pay the
forfeit. However, we will see what we can do to help you. We must hide
you hereabouts, somewhere, and when he returns trust to circumstances to
accomplish your purpose."

But they could find no place to hide him where he would be secure from
the search of the god, except the rubbish pile where the offal and
scrapings of taro were

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

thrown. They therefore thrust him and his pig into the rubbish heap and
covered them over with the taro peelings, enjoining him to keep
perfectly still, and watch till he should see eight heavy breakers roll
in successively from the sea. He then would know that Kauhuhu was
returning from his fishing expedition.

Accordingly, after waiting a while, the eight heavy rollers appeared,
breaking successively against the rocks; and sure enough, as the eighth
dissolved into foam, the great shark god came ashore. Immediately
assuming human form, he began snuffing about the place, and addressing
Waka and Moo, his kahus, said to them, "There is a man here." They
strenuously denied the charge and protested against the possibility of
their allowing such a desecration of the premises. But he was not
satisfied. He insisted that there was a man somewhere about, saying, "I
smell him, and if I find him you are dead men; if not, you escape." He
examined the premises over and over again, never suspecting the rubbish
heap, and was about giving up the search when, unfortunately, Kamalo's
pig sent forth a squeal which revealed the poor fellow's hiding-place.

Now came the dread moment. The enraged Kauhuhu seized Kamalo with both
hands and, lifting him up with the intention of swallowing him,
according to his shark instinct, had already inserted the victim's head
and shoulders into his mouth before he could speak.

"O Kauhuhu, before you eat me, hear my petition; then do as you like."

"Well for you that you spoke as you did,"

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

answered Kauhuhu, setting him down again on the ground. "Now, what have
you to say? Be quick about it."

Kamalo then rehearsed his grievances and his travels in search for
revenge, and presented his pig to the god.

Compassion arose in the breast of Kauhuhu, and he said, "Had you come
for any other purpose I would have eaten you, but as your cause is a
sacred one I espouse it, and will revenge it on Kupa the King. You must,
however, do all that I tell you. Return to the heiau of Puukahi, at the
foot of the pali, and take the priest Kahiwakaapuu on your back, and
carry him up the pali over to the other side of the island, all the way
to your home at Kaluaaha. Erect a sacred fence all around your
dwelling-place, and surround it with the sacred flags of white kapa.
Collect black hogs by the *lau* (four hundred), red fish by the lau,
white fowls by the lau, and bide my coming. Wait and watch till you see
a small cloud the size of a man's hand arise, white as snow, over the
island of Lanai. That cloud will enlarge as it makes its way across the
channel against the wind until it rests on the mountain peaks of Molokai
back of Mapulehu Valley. Then a rainbow will span the valley from side
to side, whereby will know that I am there, and that your time of
revenge has come. Go now, and remember that you are the only man who
ever ventured into the sacred precincts of the great Kauhuhu and
returned alive."

Kamalo returned with a joyful heart and performed all that had been
commanded him. He built the sacred fence around his dwelling; surrounded
the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

inclosure with sacred flags of white kapa; gathered together black hogs,
red fish, and white fowls, each by the lau, as directed, with other
articles sacred to the gods, such as cocoanuts and white *kapas*, and
then sat himself down to watch for the promised signs of his revenge.
Day after day passed until they multiplied into weeks, and the weeks
began to run into months.

Finally, one day, the promised sign appeared. The snow white speck of
cloud, no bigger than a man's hand, arose over the mountains of Lanai
and made its way across the stormy channel in the face of the opposing
gale, increasing as it came, until it settled in a majestic mass on the
mountains at the head of Mapulehu Valley. Then appeared a splendid
rainbow, proudly over-arching the valley, its ends resting on the high
lands on either side. The wind began to blow; the rain began to pour,
and shortly a furious storm came down the doomed valley, filling its bed
from side to side with a mad rushing torrent, which, sweeping everything
before it, spread out upon the belt of lowlands at the mouth of the
valley, overwhelming Kupa and all his people in one common ruin, and
washing them all into the sea, where they were devoured by the sharks.
All were destroyed except Kamalo and his family, who were safe within
their sacred inclosure, which the flood dared not touch, though it
spread terror and ruin on every side of them. Wherefore the harbor of
Pukoo, where this terrible event occurred, was long known as *Ai Kanaka*
(man eater), and it has passed into a proverb among the inhabitants of

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

that region that "when the rainbow spans Mapulehu Valley, then look out
for the *Waiakoloa*,"--a furious storm of rain and wind which sometimes
comes suddenly down that valley.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[186:1](hft20.htm#fr_7) A species of drum made
out of a hollowed section of the trunk of a cocoanut tree and covered
over one end with sharkskin. It was generally used in pairs, one larger
than the other, somewhat after the idea of the bass and tenor drums of
civilized nations. One of these drums was placed on either side of the
performer, and the drumming was performed with both hands by tapping
with the fingers. By peculiar variations of the <span id="page_187">p.
187</span> drumming, known only to the initiated, the performer could
drum out whatever he wished to express in such a way, it is alleged, as
to be intelligible to initiated listeners without uttering a single
syllable with the voice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Kaliuwaa, Scene of the Demigod Kamapuaa's Escape From
Olopana](hft21)
