[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Next](edu01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# TRACT EDUYOTH (TESTIMONIES).

## INTRODUCTION.

THERE is no Gemara to this Tract. However, it forms a part of the
section Jurisprudence, and is usually printed with the commentaries of
both Maimanides and Rabad.

Although these Mishnaioth are almost each of them repeated in some of
the six sections of the Talmud (thus a number of them already translated
by us), yet we could not omit them because of the significance they
attain in view of the fact that the contents of them all were testified
before the Assembly of the sages. The first chapter, however, of this
Tract, which was not testified, is significant for its showing (*a*) the
cases wherein the sages establish the Halakha without adopting the views
of either Shamai or Hillel though expressed by each of them personally;
(*b*) wherein the school of Hillel after deliberations abandoned their
view to adopt that of the school of Shamai; (*c*) the reasons for the
rule that the opinion of an individual is mentioned though the Halakha
prevails with the majority; (*d*) where the school of Shamai do not
agree with Shamai, their master.

We have translated this Tract almost literally, referring the reader who
may be confronted with some difficulties to places where detailed
explanations are found, as to explain these here would necessitate a
whole volume for itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](edu01.md)
