[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](edu03)  [Next](edu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA *I*.: In the following cases the decisions of
[Beth](errata.htm#16) Shamai are lenient, and those of Beth Hillel
rigorous. An egg laid on a holiday is, according to Beth Shamai, allowed
to eat on that day, but is not so according to Beth Hillel. Regarding
the removal of leaven (before Passover) Beth Shamai hold it must be of
the size of an olive and leavened bread of that of a date, while the
Beth Hillel fix the size of each at that of an olive.

MISHNA *II*.: All agree in that a cattle born on a holiday is allowed,
but a fowl out of the eggs is not. If one slaughter game or fowl on a
holiday he is allowed by Beth Shamai to dig up loose ground (the spade
already struck in) and cover the blood, while Beth Hillel do not allow
to kill unless there be earth prepared, admitting, however, that after
one has killed, he may use with the spade the loose ground, and that
ashes from the hearth be regarded as prepared earth.

MISHNA *III*.: The Beth Shamai consider ownerless everything left to the
poor, while according to Beth Hillel, only that is ownerless which is
abandoned to the rich as well, instance Shmitah. If all the sheaves of a
field contain each a Kab and one of them containing four Kab is left,
the Beth Shamai do not regard it forgotten, and Beth Hillel do so.
(Tract Peah, Chapter VI.)

MISHNA *IV*.: Likewise do not Beth Shamai regard forgotten a sheaf left
near a wall, a stag, a bull, or implements; while Beth Hillel do.

MISHNA *V*.: The four-year-old vine is, according to Beth Shamai, not
subject to either the additional fifth or destruction, while according
to Beth Hillel it is. Furthermore, the former hold that it is subject to
both *Peret* and *oilleloth* \[Lev. xix. 10\], and that the poor are to
redeem it themselves; while the latter say it all goes to the winepress.

MISHNA *VI*.: A cask with preserved olives need not have a hole, so Beth
Shamai, while. Beth Hillel find it obligatory, admitting, however, that
if there had been one, but was stopped

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

by the dregs, the cask is clean. If one, having besmeared his body with
sweet oil, became unclean and then took a legal bath, Beth Shamai
declare him clean even when the oil is dripping, but according to Beth
Hillel he is not clean, unless there be left on him no more oil than
would be necessary to besmear a small organ, which last condition the
Beth Shamai require when the oil used before the bath was unclean, while
Beth Hillel in this case require that there be only an inconsiderable
moisture. Said R Jehudah in the name of Beth Hillel: That there be a
moisture sufficient to moist some other thing. (All this will be
explained in Tract Taharath.)

MISHNA *VII*.: According to Beth Shamai one dinar or its worth is
consideration in the marrying of a wife; the Beth Hillel set it down at
a Perutah or its worth, which is one-eighth of the Italic Saar. The
former hold further that one may dismiss his wife on the basis of the
old divorce bill, *i.e.*, a divorce after whose consummation he remained
yet alone with his wife, while the Beth Hillel say he cannot. Similarly,
if a wife who had been divorced, happened to pass a night in the same
inn with her (former) husband, she needs no other bill of divorce
according to Beth Shamai, but the Beth Hillel say she needs one if she
was divorced after they had been wedded, but not after they had been
only betrothed to each other, for in the latter case they were not yet
intimate with each other.

MISHNA *VIII*.: Beth Shamai allow brothers to enter levirate marriage
with their rival-wives (of prohibited kinship degrees), which the Beth
Hillel forbid. If they have performed Chalitzah, Beth Shamai declares
them unmarriageable to a priest and Beth Hillel allows them. The two
schools change their views regarding the case when the wives become
widows after they had been taken in levirate marriage. Notwithstanding
that the one school prohibits what the other allows, the disciples of
the two schools have never refrained from intermarriage with one
another. Likewise as regards cleanness and uncleanness where the two
hold opposite opinions, they have none the less never hesitated to loan
one another objects declared clean by both schools.

MISHNA *IX*.: If of three brothers two are married to two sisters and
the third one is single; if, now, one of the married brothers died and
the unmarried promises the widow to marry her, whereupon the second of
the brothers died, Beth Shamai say: The single brother is to keep his
wife and the other one is

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

to go free as the wife's sister; while Beth Hillel hold that he must
dismiss his wife with both divorce and Chalitzah, and his sister-in-law
with Chalitzah; as the proverb goes: He is to be pitied for both his
wife and his sister-in-law! (Tract Yebamoth, Chapter IV.)

MISHNA *X*.: If one abstain by vow from sexual intercourse with his
wife, he is allowed by Beth Shamai to keep the vow for two weeks, by
Beth Hillel for but one. A woman who bears a miscarriage on the eve of
eighty-one days (after the birth of a daughter) Beth Shamai free from an
offering, and Beth Hillel hold liable. Beth Shamai say a quadrangular
sheet needs no tzitzis, Beth Hillel hold it needs. A basket with figs
prepared for Sabbath is, according to Beth Shamai free from the tithe,
according to Beth Hillel it is not.

MISHNA *XI*.: If one vowed to remain a Nazarite for some time, and after
the expiration of the term comes to the land (of Israel), Beth Shamai
hold he must continue in the state of Nazarite for another thirty days,
while Beth Hillel make him begin the whole term anew. If two parties of
witnesses testify, the one that so and so has vowed to be a Nazarite
twice, the other, five times, Beth Shamai declare this testimony invalid
as conflicting, and he must not be a Nazarite at all, while Beth Hillel
say: Five contains two, hence he must be a Nazarite twice. (Nazir,
Chapter III.)

MISHNA *XII*.: The man who finds himself underneath a crevisse does not,
according to Beth Shamai, transfer the uncleanness from one side to the
other, while Beth Hillel regard the man as hollow, so that his upper
side does transfer the uncleanness (as roofing). (Oheloth, Chapter XI.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](edu05)
