[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](edu06)  [Next](edu08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA *I*.: R. Jehoshua and R. Zadok attested that the priest has no
claim to the assigned redemption of a first-born donkey that died, as
against R. Eliezar, who said: The owner is obliged to indemnify it, as
the five sela redemption of the first-born son. The sages, however,
maintain that there is here no more obligation of indemnifying than in
the case of redemption for the second tithe. (Tract Bechoroth L, Mishna
VI.)

MISHNA *II*.: R. Zadok attested that the brine of the prohibited locusts
is itself clean. For, the preceding Mishna reads: If unclean locusts
have been pressed together with clean ones, they do not render the brine
forbidden.

MISHNA *III*.: The same attested further that if flowing water exceeds
in quantity the rain-water with which it is mingled, it is proper. Such
a case occurred in the capital of Plia and the sages declared it proper.

MISHNA *IV*.: He attested, finally, that flowing water remains proper as
such when made to rush through the green peel of a walnut. A case to
this effect happened at Ohlia and, when brought before the court in the
Hall of hewed stones in the temple, was found proper.

MISHNA *V*.: R. Jehoshua and R. Jakin from Hadar attested that an
earthen pitcher with sin-cleansing ashes placed upon a reptile is
unclean, while R. Eliezar declares it clean. R. Papies attests that he
who, having vowed to be a Nazarite twice, had his hair cut the first
time on the thirtieth day, may have his hair cut the second time on the
sixtieth day; and if he cut his hair on the fifty-ninth day, he kept
sufficiently his vow, since the thirtieth day is counted both ways.
(Nazir, Chapter III.)

MISHNA *VI*.: R. Jehoshua and R. Papies attested that the offspring of a
peace-offering may be offered as a peace-offering; now, as the sages
hold so against R. Eliezar who maintains the opposite, said R. Papies: I
attest that we ourselves had a cow of a peace-offering which we ate on
Passover, and whose offspring we consumed the next Tabernacle likewise
as a peace-offering. (Themura, Chapter III.)

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

MISHNA *VII*.: The same two attested that the flat boards of the bakers
are unclean, as against R. Eliezar, who declared them clean; furthermore
that a baking oven cut in parts between which mortar has been put, is
subject to defilement, as against R. Eliezar, who finds it clean; that
the court of justice has time to declare the year to be a leap-year
during the entire month Ador, for formerly the Purim feast was thought
to be the time limit for this declaration; finally, that the year may be
declared a leap-year on condition. So it once happened that when R.
Gamaliel, having gone to ask leave of the Hegemon of Syria, tarried on
his way, the year was declared a leap-year on the condition that R.
Gamaliel consent to it on his return, which he did upon returning and
the year remained a leap-year. (Kelim, Chapter XV.)

MISHNA *VIII*.: Mena'hem b. Signai attested that the enameled brim of
the (metallic) kettle used by the olive-boilers is subject to
defilement, but that of the painters is clean, for, formerly the
converse was held.

MISHNA *IX*: R. Nehunia b. Gudgada attested that a deaf-mute girl
married off (while under age) by her father may receive a divorce; that
a minor (orphaned) Israel-girl married to a priest may eat Terumah, and
that in case she dies her husband is her heir; furthermore, that the
owner of a beam robbed and immured in a palace can claim only its value;
finally, that a robbed sin-offering not known to the majority is
regarded as atoning for its owner when offered on the altar (in order
not to make the altar unclean).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](edu08.md)
