[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Next](hor01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

# TRACT HORIOTH (DECISIONS).

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

### TRACT HORIOTH (DECISIONS).

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *I*. TO *V*. If, after the court had decreed the transgression of
one of all the commandments prescribed in the Torah, an individual
guided by this decree acted erroneously, etc. If upon issuing the decree
the court becomes aware of its being conceived in error and retracts,
and mean while an individual commits a transgression upon their decree,
etc. If while the court was deciding, one of its members who perceived
their error drew their attention to it, etc. If causing the whole people
to act erroneously, etc. If upon the erroneous decree of the court the
whole people, or its majority, acted, etc., [3](hor01.htm#page_3.md)-12

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNA *I*. TO *VII*. If an anointed priest has erroneously rendered an
unlawful decision against himself and acted accordingly by mistake, etc.
If he (the said priest) both decided and acted for himself, etc. The
court is not liable unless the issued decree concerns Korath and
sin-offering respectively. It is also not liable for a decree concerning
a command or a prohibition with regard to (polluting) the sanctuary.
There is no liability when the decree concerns an adjuring challenge to
testify, a hastily made vow, etc. Concerning a ruler and the high
priest's offerings for their sin, [13](hor02.htm#page_13.md)-18

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *I*. TO *VII*. An anointed priest who has sinned and was removed
from his office, etc. If they were appointed to their respective
positions after they had sinned, etc. Who is the anointed priest? He who
was consecrated to priesthood by the holy ointment, etc. The high priest
rends his garment from below; the common priest, from the top, etc. What
is more common precedes the less common. The man has the preference over
the woman, etc. In captivity his master has the preference over his
father. His mother, however, has the preference over all. The following
precede one

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

another in order of arrangement, etc. Why does the dog know his master,
and the cat does not? Why do all reign over the mice? Five objects are
conducive to one's forgetting his studies, etc. Five are apt to
strengthen one's memory, etc. The following ten objects are cumbrous to
one's studies, etc. When the prince enters, all the people present in
college rise to their feet, without again taking their seats until he
tells them to do so. When the chief justice enters, the people occupying
two rows of seats facing the entrance rise, etc. The legend which
happened to Raban Simon b. Gamaliel with R. Mair and R. Nathan. How the
latter were removed from the college. An erudite scholar and a
dialectician, who has the preference? How Abaye rose to be the chief of
the College of Sura, [18](hor02.htm#page_18.md)-29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](hor01.md)
