[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mac05)  [Next](mac07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT MACCOTH (STRIPES).

The Sanhedrin who executes a person once in seven years, is considered
pernicious. R. Eliezar b. Azariach said: Even one who does so once in
seventy years is considered such. Both R. Tarphon and R. Aqiba said: If
we were among the Sanhedrin, a death sentence would never occur."
(Mishna X.)

## CHAPTER I.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING COLLUSIVE WITNESSES IN BOTH CRIMINAL
AND CIVIL CASES, AND THE APPLICATION THERETO OF CORPOREAL AND OTHER
PUNISHMENTS.

MISHNA *I*.: How should witnesses be made collusive (so that they should
be punished)? If, *e.g.*, they testify that so and so (who is a priest)
is a son of a divorced woman (whom his father had illegally married,
wherefore he lost his priesthood), the court has not to decide that the
witness who has falsely testified shall be regarded such (and shall lose
his priesthood if he is a priest), but he should be punished with forty
stripes; likewise if one testifies that so and so is to be exiled for an
unintentional murder, the court has not to decide that he, the witness,
be exiled for false witnessing, but he is punished with forty stripes.

GEMARA: How should the text of the Mishna be understood? It states, "how
should witnesses be made collusive," and according to the illustration
hereafter adduced it ought to be: How should the witnesses not be made
collusive (as the punishment of a collusive witness is according to the
Scripture that the same which is to be inflicted upon the defendant if
the accusation prove true, and it states that such a punishment does not
apply to the witness; it furthermore states concerning the case of
collusive witnesses, that they are considered collusive only, then, when
another party of witnesses come and say that the witnesses in question
were with them at another place on the same date on which, according to
their testimony, the

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

alleged crime was done. Hence, only in such cases they are considered
collusive, but not otherwise. The Tana of the Mishna refers to this
passage (Sanhedrin, p. 261): "Because all who are to be put to death
biblically, their collusive witnesses and their abuses are punished with
the same, except in the case of the married daughter of a priest," etc.
And he (the Tana) adds that there are another sort of witnesses who are
not subject to the punishment of collusiveness, but who are to suffer
stripes instead, and this are those who testify that so and so is a son
of a divorced woman or of such who has performed the ceremony of
chalitza.

Whence is this deduced? Said R. Jeoshia b. Levy: From here \[Deut. xix.
19\]: "Then shall ye do unto him as he had purposed to do unto his
brother; to him but not to his descendants" (and if the decision were
that he should lose his priesthood, then even his children would be
affected). But let the court affect him only and not his descendants?
This cannot be done, as the law dictates that it shall be done just the
same to him as to the alleged defendant, and if such be the case his
descendants would necessarily be affected. B. Pada, however, says: This
is to be drawn by *a fortiori* reasoning--viz.: he who has transgressed
(by illegal marriage of a divorced woman) does not lose his priesthood,
and only his descendants from this marriage lose it. Much less so should
the witness who falsely testified lose his priesthood. Rabbina opposed:
Were we to use such theory the whole case of collusiveness would be made
illusory. As the same *a fortiori* method could be applied thus: He
through whose false testimony a man was already stoned, is not to be
stoned; so much less so if the accused man was not as yet stoned?
Therefore the best is as it is answered above.

"*Is to be exiled*." Whence is all this deduced? Said Resh Lakish: From
here \[Deut. xix. 5\]: "This one shall flee unto one of these cities,"
etc., *i.e.*, *this one*, but not his collusive witnesses. R. Jochanan,
however, said: This is to be drawn by *a fortiori* reasoning. He who has
done such a crime intention. ally does not become exiled; so much less
so he who is only testifying to such a crime. This statement, however,
cannot be taken into consideration, as the reason why an intentional
murderer is not to be exiled is that he shall not be atoned. But the
witnesses who have not perpetrated such a crime should be exiled, so
that they should expiate; therefore, the best interpretation is that of
Resh Lakish given above.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Ula said: Where do we find a hint in the Scripture that collusive
witnesses shall be punished with stripes (here is quoted from Tract
Sanhedrin, p. 20, l. 39 to p. 21 up to l. 17. See there). The rabbis
taught, "there are four points concerning collusive witnesses: (*a*)
they are not made sons of a divorced woman or of such who has performed
the ceremony of chalitza; (*b*) they are not exiled to the cities of
refuge; (*c*) they do not pay the atoned money, and (*d*) they are not
sold as Hebrew slaves." In the name of R. Aqiba it was said that: Nor do
they pay on self-confession. They are not made sons of a divorced woman,
etc., as said above, nor are they to be exiled as said above, and they
do not pay atoned money, because the rabbis hold that the money which
one has to pay in case his ox has killed a person is not considered as a
recompense for damages, but as an atonement, and collusive witnesses are
not under the category of atonement. And who is the Tana who holds this?
Said R. Hisda: It is R. Ismael, the son of Johanan b. Brokah. (See Baba
Kama, p. 90, l. 2 from bottom, to 91, l. 16.)

"And they are not sold as Hebrew slaves." R. Hamnuna was about to say
that this is only in the case when he, the alleged defendant, has money
to pay for the theft, or if the witnesses have money to pay; but in case
both have not they are to be sold. Said Rabba to him: It reads \[ibid.
xxii. 2\], "he shall be sold for *his theft*, but not for his
collusiveness." The text says in the name of R. Aqiba, etc.: What is his
reason? He holds that this is only a fine, and one does not pay fine
upon his self-confession. Said Rabba: There is a support to R. Aqiba's
theory in the fact that a collusive witness, though he has not committed
the crime manually, is nevertheless responsible, and is to be killed in
case his testimony caused a death-sentence; and likewise in civil cases
he has to pay, although he has done no damage. And similarly said R.
Na'hman.

R. Jehuda in the name of Rabh said: A collusive witness pays his share.
What does this mean? Shall we assume that in the case where two
witnesses were found collusive each of them pays half? This is already
stated further on in a Mishna. Or does it mean that if one of them was
found collusive, he has to pay half? This is not so, as there is a
Boraitha which states that there is no payment imposed unless both are
found collusive. Said Rabha: He speaks of the case when one came before

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the court testifying: I, together with so and so, have testified before
such and such a court, and we, having been found collusive, the court
has decided that we have to pay such and such an amount. And lest one
say that, as his testimony does not make liable his colleague, he
himself should not be responsible either, he comes to teach us that this
is not so.

MISHNA *II*.: We testify that so and so has divorced his wife and has
not paid the amount mentioned in her marriage contract (and that
testimony was false). Although they have not done any damage, as the
husband has to pay the marriage contract at some time, they are
nevertheless not free from the following payment--namely, it is to be
appraised how much one would risk for her marriage contract in case she
should remain a widow or be divorced. However, if she died while her
husband is still alive, he would inherit her (and such an amount they
have to pay).

GEMARA: How should the appraisement be made? (here are two kinds of
risks, one can risk to buy the inheritance of a woman from her husband,
who would inherit her in case of her death when he is still alive; and
one can also risk to buy this from the woman in case her husband die
first. However, there is a great difference concerning the amount one
would risk. As a rule, one would give much more when buying it from the
husband than from the wife). According to R. 'Hisda the appraisement
must be of the husband's, and according to R. Nathan b. Oshia, of the
wife's estate. Said R. Papa: It prevails that the appraisement should be
as of the wife's, and only to the amount mentioned in her marriage
contract, without, however, touching the benefit which her husband has
in the fruit of her estate while she is yet alive.

MISHNA *III*.: We testify that so and so owes to his neighbor a thousand
zuz on the condition to pay him this debt after thirty days from to-day.
He, however, claims that he has to pay the amount at the expiration of
ten years: and such was found to be the case. It remains, then, to
appraise how much one would give for keeping a thousand zuz ten years
instead of thirty days, and such an amount they have to pay.

GEMARA: R. Jehuda in the name of Samuel said: If one made a loan to his
neighbor for ten years the Sabbathic year does not annul it, and
although when the Sabbathic year will arrive, he would transgress the
negative commandment. "He shall not exact it of his neighbor" \[Deut.
xv. 2\], yet at present

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

this commandment does not exist, and we do not care for the later time.
Said R. Kahana: This we have also learned in our Mishna, which states
that the witnesses have to pay only the difference between thirty days
and ten years. And if the Sabbathic year released the whole debt, they
would have to pay the whole thousand zuz. Said Rabha: The Mishna may
refer to one who lends his money on a pledge, or to one who transfers
his documents to the court; and there is a Mishna teaching that in such
cases the Sabbathic year has no effect.

R. Jehuda said again in the name of the same authority: "If one says I
will make you a loan with the stipulation that the Sabbathic year shall
not release me, it nevertheless releases." Shall we assume that Samuel
holds that such is considered a condition against the biblical law, and
it therefore does not hold good? Is it not taught (Baba Metzia, p. 126)
if one says: I sell this article to you on the condition that you shall
not claim any cheating against me, etc.? According to Samuel the
condition holds good, though such a condition is against the written
law? Yea, but to this it was added by R. Anan that Samuel himself has
explained it to him (see continuation, p. 127); and according to this
explanation there is no contradiction here. Now as the case here is
analogous, it follows that he made the condition: "The Sabbathic year
shall not release *me*, it releases nevertheless. But if he says in the
condition that *you* shall not release it, then his condition holds
good."

There is a Boraitha to the effect that if one loans money to his
neighbor without a fixed term of return, he has no right to demand it
before the elapse of thirty days. And Raba b. b. 'Hana was about to
interpret this Boraitha in the presence of Rabh that such is the case
only when he lends on a document, as one would not trouble himself to
write a document for less than thirty days; but if it was a verbal loan,
he may demand it at any time. Said Rabh to him: So said my uncle that
there is no difference between a verbal and a written loan as regards
the thirty days, so long as the loan was made without any term.
Similarly we have learned in a Boraitha. Samuel said to R. Mathna.. You
shall not sit down before you have explained me the courses wherefrom is
based the Halakha that one shall not demand a loan no matter whether it
be verbal or written before the elapse of thirty days? And he answered
from \[ibid., ibid. 9\]: "The seventh year, the year of release," etc.
Is it not self-evident that the seventh year is the year of release? why
then

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the apposition? To tell that there is another release similar, and this
is a loan without a term which cannot be demanded before thirty days, as
the master said that thirty days, a fragment of a year, is considered a
whole year.

MISHNA *IV*.: We testify that so and so owes 200 zuz to his neighbor,
and they were found collusive; they have to suffer both stripes and
payment, because the negative commandment for the trespass of which they
have to receive stripes does not, make them pay. And only another verse
concerning collusiveness makes them to pay. Such is the decree of R.
Mair. The sages, however, maintain that he who pays is not to be
punished with stripes. If they testify that so and so has deserved forty
stripes, and are found collusive, they are to be punished with twice
forty stripes, once on the basis of the negative commandment: "Thou
shalt not bear false witness," and, secondly, on that of the
commandment: "Shall ye do unto him as he had purposed to do unto his
brother"; such is the decree of R. Mair. The sages, however, say: they
suffer stripes only once.

GEMARA: This is in accord with the rabbis' theory, which reads \[ibid.
xxv. 2\]: "According to the degree of his fault," which statement is to
be explained that he is made responsible for one fault, and not for two.
But what is the reason of R. Mair's decree? Said Ula: He bases it upon
the case of an evil name, for which crime the law prescribes the double
punishment of stripes and payment, and analogous is the case here
treated. But is not the payment for an evil name considered a fine? He,
R. Mair, holds with R. Aqiba that the payment of collusive witnesses is
also required as a fine.

There are others who refer the saying of Ula to the following Boraitha:
It reads \[Ex. xii. 10\]; (see Sanhedrin, p. 185, l. 23, to the end of
the par.), and to the question, whence is it known that to a negative
commandment that does not contain manual labor, the punishment of
stripes does not apply, Ula answered from the case of an evil name
stated above. What, then, do the rabbis who do not hold that they shall
be beaten twice infer from "Thou shalt not bear false witness"? They
need this for a warning to the case of collusiveness. And where is to be
found such a warning according to R. Mair? Said R. Jeramaia in \[Deut.
xix. 20\]: "And those who remain shall hear and be, afraid, and shall
henceforth," etc. The rabbis, however, infer from this passage that such
a case must be heralded (see Sanhedrin,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

p\. 256). As to R. Mair, he, too, infers from here heralding, as
according to him the words "and shall be afraid" would be superfluous,
if heralding were not inferred therefrom.

MISHNA *V*.: The fine of money may be divided into two or three shares;
however, this is not to be done with stripes. How so? If they have
falsely testified that one owes to his neighbor 200 zuz, and they were
two or three persons, each of them has to pay his share to complete that
amount. But if they have falsely testified that one deserves forty
stripes, each of them is to get forty stripes in full.

GEMARA: Whence is all this deduced? Said Abaye: Concerning stripes, it
reads \[Deut. xxv. 2\]: "Wicked"; and \[Numb. xxxv. 31\] it reads also
"wicked" concerning capital punishment, and as that cannot be divided,
so stripes are not to be divided either. Rabha, however, said: The
reason is this: The punishment ought to be done to him as he had the
purpose to do it to his brother. And as each one of them intended that
the defendant be beaten with forty stripes, he has to get just the same.
But why should not the same be concerning money fine? Because money if
counted together completes the amount he should suffer, which is not the
case with stripes.

MISHNA *VI*.: Witnesses cannot be made collusive unless the falsehood
lies in their bodies; how so? If, *e.g.*, they testify that so and so
has killed a person and another party of witnesses came to contradict
them, saying: How can you testify so? The killed one or the alleged
murderer was with us at that date in such and such a place. They are,
nevertheless, not considered collusive (so that they should be killed
instead); but if the other party say you yourself were with us at that
date in such a place, consequently you could see neither the murderer
nor the killed one, then they are considered collusive and are to be
killed upon such a testimony. If, thereafter, a third party of witnesses
came and made collusive the second party, and a fourth party made
collusive the third party, even if the number reach to 100 parties they
all are to be killed. R. Jehuda, however, maintains that such parties of
witnesses are to be considered στασις, and only the first party is to be
killed.

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? Said R. Ada: From \[Deut. xix. 18\]:
"And, behold, if the witness be a false witness, he hath testified a
falsehood against his brother," which means that the body of the witness
should be found false. The disciples of R. Ismael taught, it reads
\[ibid., ibid. xix. 16\]:

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Testify against
him for any deviation," <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) which means
the testifying itself should be a deviation.

Rabha said: "If two persons testify that one has killed a man in the
east side of such and such a palace, and another party of witnesses
come, saying that the same witnesses were with them in the west of the
same, it is to be investigated if, while standing on the west side, one
can see what is going on in the east side, they are not to be considered
collusive, otherwise they are." Is this not self-evident? Lest one say
that we have to investigate, perhaps their sight is better than the
usual one, so that they could see, he comes to teach us that this does
not matter. The same said again: "If two have testified that one has
killed a person in the City of Sura Sunday morning, and another party
came and testified that the same persons were with them in the City of
N'hardaia Sunday evening, an investigation is to be made, if it is
possible.

If the investigation shows that it is possible for one to walk during
that time from Sura to N'hardaia, then they are not collusive; otherwise
they are." Is this not self-evident? Lest one say it is to be feared
perhaps the man went to the latter city in a [flying
camel](errata.htm#36) <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) he comes to
teach us that such fear must not be taken into consideration.

And he said again: If they testify that on Sunday one has killed a
person and are contradicted by another party that on Sunday they were
with them, however it is a fact that the same person has killed a man on
Monday; or even if they said that this man killed a person on Friday,
the collusive witnesses are to be put to death, because at the time they
testified the defendant was not as yet sentenced to death. But if they
testified that the death sentence occurred on Sunday, and the other
party testifies that they were with them at that time, the sentence,
however, having occurred on Friday, or even on Monday, the first party
is not to be considered collusive, because at the time they testified,
the defendant was already sentenced to death. And the same is the case
concerning fines. If, for instance, they testify that so and so has
stolen an ox, slaughtered him or sold, on Sunday (for which he has to
pay four and five fold), and the other party says that on Sunday they
were with

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

them, but the defendant did so on Monday, the first party is subject to
the fine, because on Sunday the defendant was not as yet liable.
However, if they say that the accused has done so on Friday; or even if
they say that the decision of the court occurred on Monday the first
party is not considered collusive, because at the time they testified,
the man was already sentenced to a fine.

"*R. Jehuda, however, said*," etc. But according to him that all the
parties are *staçis*, why should the first party be put to death? Said
Rabha: He means to say that if there was only one party of witnesses.
But did he not say the first party only? This difficulty remains. A
woman once brought witnesses, and they were found false. She then
brought another party, who were also found false. She then brought a
third party. Said Resh Lakish: This woman is to be considered suspicious
whose purpose is to use false witnesses. Said R. Alazar to him: Because
she is suspicious should all Israel be suspected of testifying falsely?
Such a case happened also before the court of R. Johanan, and Resh
Lakish said the same as above. But R. Johanan exclaimed: "If she is
suspicious should all Israel be suspected?" He (Resh Lakish) looked at
R. Alazar rebukingly, saying: You have heard your statement from Bar
Naf'ha (R. Johanan), and you have not mentioned his name! Shall we
assume that R. Johanan is in accordance with the rabbis of our Mishna,
and Resh Lakish is in accordance with R. Jehuda? Nay. Resh Lakish may
say: "I am in accordance even with the rabbis, as in that case there was
no one who searched for witnesses. In this case, however, the woman was
searching for them." And R. Johanan may say: "I am in accordance with R.
Jehuda"; however, this case is different, as she may have thought that
the first parties were aware of her case, and she erred. The third
party, however, may be aware of it.

MISHNA *VII*.: Collusive witnesses are not to be killed unless the
sentence of capital punishment for the defendant is rendered. As only
the Saducier declare that the collusive witnesses are put to death after
the defendant was executed. Because it reads \[Ex. xxi. 23\]: "Life for
life," to which the sages answered: Is it not written: "It shall be done
to him as he had purposed to do unto his brother"? which means that his
brother is still alive. Why, then, is it written "Life for life"? Lest
one say that they should be executed as soon as their testimony was
accepted, therefore it reads, "Life for life," to teach

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

that they are to be put to death only, then, when the death sentence for
the defendant was already rendered.

GEMARA: There is a Boraitha Biribi says: If the man who was accused by
them was not executed as yet, the collusive witnesses are put to death;
but if he was already executed, they are not. Said his father: "My son,
can this not be argued by *a fortiori* reasoning that they should be put
to death, if the accused was executed?" And he answered: "My master,
have you not taught me that there is no punishment on the ground of *a
fortiori* conclusions?" And this we have learned in the following
Boraitha: It reads \[Lev. xx. 17\]: "If a man take his sister, the
daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother," from this we
know only about the daughter of his father, not of his mother, and *vice
versa*. But where do we know that he is guilty when she was the daughter
both of his father and mother? To this it reads at the end of this
verse, "The nakedness of his sister hath he uncovered." And this is
written only for the purpose that one should not say that such is to be
drawn by *a fortiori* conclusion, thus: If he is guilty for his sister
who was only from one side, his father's or mother's, how much the more
should he be guilty when she was his sister from both sides? Hence, from
this we have to learn, that there is no punishment based on *a fortiori*
conclusions. Thus far concerning punishment; but whence do we know that
the same is the case concerning warning? To this it reads \[ibid. xviii.
9\]: "The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or the
daughter of thy mother." And it is also repeated \[ibid., ibid. ii.\]:
"She is a sister," etc. Also for this purpose one shall not base this on
*a fortiori* conclusion. All this is concerning capital punishment. But
whence do we know that the same is the case with stripes? From an
analogy of the expression "wicked" stated above ([p. 7](#page_7)) and
whence do we know that the same is the case concerning exile? From the
analogy of expression "murder" as stated above. There is a Boraitha. R.
Jehuda b. Tabai said: "May I not live to see the consolation of our
nation, if I have not killed a collusive witness for the purpose of
removing from the mind of the Saducier, who say that, collusive
witnesses are not put to death, unless their accused were executed. Said
Simeon ben Shata'h to him: I, too, swear by the consolation of our
nation that you had shed innocent blood, as the law dictates that
witnesses should not be put to death unless both of them are found
collusive. Then Jehuda ben Tabai decided that he

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

shall not render any decision before consulting Simeon ben Shatah. And
all his lifetime he used to prostrate himself upon the grave of that
witness. And a voice was heard. People thought that this was the voice
of the dead one. But Jehuda told them that it was his own voice, saying,
"You will see that after my death no voice will be heard."

MISHNA *VIII*.: It reads \[Deut. xvii. 6\]: "Upon the evidence of two or
of three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death," etc. If the
evidence of two persons is sufficient, why does the Scripture mention
three? To compare the evidence of three to that of two in the case of
collusiveness, as another party of two, make the first party of two
collusive, so they make them collusive even if the first is of three.
And whence do we know that, even if they were a hundred persons, the
evidence of two persons is sufficient? To this it reads: "Witnesses." R.
Simeon, however, maintains that as two cannot be put to death, unless
both of them are found collusive, so is it if they were three, all of
them must be found collusive. And even if their number reaches a
hundred, all of them must be found collusive before sentencing one of
them to death. R. Aqiba, however, maintains that the third witness
mentioned in the Scripture was not for the purpose to make for him the
punishment more lenient, but, on the contrary, to make it more
rigorous--viz., lest one say as the testimony of the third one was
superfluous, because the evidence of two suffices, and, therefore, he
should not be punished at all. The Scripture terms the third one in
order to make him equal with the former two. From this we see that the
verse punishes one, an accomplice who conjoins himself to transgressors,
with the same punishment to be inflicted upon the transgressors
themselves. And we may learn from this: That so much the more will he
who conjoins himself to those who are engaged in meritorious acts, be
rewarded equally with them. Three witnesses are also equal to two in
case one of them was found a relative or legally unfit for witnessing,
as it is in the case of two when the testimony is invalidated, so it is
in the case when one of the three was found such. And the same law
applies even when their number reaches a hundred, from the expression
"Witnesses." Said R. Jose: This is said concerning criminal cases only,
but in civil cases, if one was found a relative or unfit, the evidence
of the remainder is to be taken into consideration. Rabh, however, said,
that as regards this there is no difference between civil and criminal

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

cases. However, this rule holds good only when the relatives took part
in warning the trespasser; but if they did not, the evidence of the
others must be taken into consideration, since, if not, what could two
brothers do when both saw that some one has killed a person (and there
were also some other ones who have seen the murder, should then the
testimony of the others be eliminated as void because there were also
two brothers)?

GEMARA: Rabha said: The Mishna treats of a case where all of them have
testified at once. Said R. A'ha of Difti to Rabbina: How could such a
thing be possible with a hundred persons; could all of them testify at
once? And he answered: It means that every one of them has testified
just as his colleague has finished his testimony.

"*What could two brothers do*?" But how shall the court examine them?
Said Rabha: They are to be questioned for what purpose they came here:
to testify, or merely to see? If they say, we came to testify, then, if
there was a relative or an unfit among them, their testimony is void;
but if they say that merely to see, then must be taken into
consideration the testimony of the others, since what could two brothers
do, etc., as illustrated in Mishna.

It was taught: R. Jehuda in the name of Samuel said: The Halakha rules
in accordance with R. Jose. And R. Nachman said: It rules in accordance
with Rabbi.

MISHNA *IX*.: If two persons have seen the crime from one window and two
others have seen it from another window, and there was one standing in
the middle and warning the criminal, if the two parties could see each
other, all of them are considered as one party of witnesses. But if not,
they are considered two parties. And therefore if one of the parties was
found collusive, he (the accused) and they (the collusive) are put to
death, and the other party is free. R. Jose, however, maintains that
there is no capital punishment unless two witnesses have warned this
culprit, as it reads: "Upon the mouth of two witnesses." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) Another explanation of the words upon the
mouth is that the Sanhedrin must not hear the evidence from a
demonstrator (but they themselves must understand the language of the
witness).

GEMARA: R. Zuthra b. Tubia in the name of Rabh said:

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whence do we know
that one witness is not relied upon? From \[ibid., ibid. 6\]: "He shall
not be put to death upon the evidence of one witness." What does the
expression, "one witness," mean? If it means that the testimony of one
witness does not suffice, this is already stated above, "two witnesses";
hence it means that if two witnesses saw the crime separately, each from
another place, and if they themselves could not see each other, such
witnesses are not considered conjoined, so that their testimony should
be taken into consideration. Furthermore, even if this was from one
window, but one has seen it first, and then the other, they are likewise
not to be considered conjoined. Said R. Papa to Abayi: Was it necessary
to state this after the former statement, that even if each of them has
seen the whole crime they are not to be conjoined if they do not see
each other? So much the less so if each of them has seen but half of the
act. And he answered: He speaks of an adultery case. Rabha said: If both
of the witnesses have seen him who warned them, they are considered
conjoined. And he said again that the warning suffices even if it comes
from the mouth of the killed one. And even if a voice of warning was
heard without their knowing whom it is from. R. Na'hman said: The
individual witnesses in question are fit for civil cases, as it reads:
"He shalt not be *put to death* upon the evidence of one witness," from
which we learn about criminal cases only, but in civil cases they are to
be considered.

"*R. Jose said*," etc.: Said R. Papa to Abayi: does R. Jose really hold
such a theory? Have we not learned in a Mishna that if an enemy has
killed unintentionally, he may be put to death because he is considered
vicious, and warned? And he answered: This is not R. Jose from our
Mishna, but R. Jose b. Jehuda from the following Boraitha, who said: A
scholar needs no warning, for the warning is on the whole only for the
purpose, that the court know whether it was done intentionally or
unintentionally.

"*From a demonstrator*," etc. There were two foreigners who appeared in
the court of Rabha, and he appointed an interpreter for them. But why
did he do so? Is it not stated that the judges must not hear the case
through an interpreter? Rabha understood what they said, but he could
not answer them in that language.

Ailea and Tubia were relatives of a surety, and R. Papa was about to say
that they are fit to be witnesses, because they are

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

not relatives of the lender and borrower. Said R. Huna b. R. Joshua to
him: If the borrower should not pay would not the lender demand the debt
from the surety? Hence they are considered relatives in this case, and
are not fit to be witnesses.

MISHNA *X*.: If, after the decision had been rendered the guilty one ran
away, and thereafter he returned to the same court, his case must not be
reconsidered. Everywhere, if two persons standing at any place testify
that a decision was rendered for so and so by such and such a court,
according to the testimony of the witnesses, so and so, the accused may
be put to death upon their testimony.

The court of Sanhedrin is to be established in Palestine as well as in
the countries outside of it.

The Sanhedrin who executes a person once in seven years, is considered
pernicious. R. Eliezar b. Azariach said: Even one who does so once in
seventy years is considered such. Both R. Tarphon and R. Aqiba said: If
we were among the Sanhedrin, a death sentence would never occur. To
which R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: Such scholars would only increase
bloodshed in Israel.

GEMARA: The Mishna states if he return to the same court his case must
not be reconsidered. From which it is to be understood that if he
returns to another court, it is to be reconsidered. And in the latter
part it states that if two testify that such a decision was rendered,
etc., he is to be put to death without any reconsideration? Said Abayi:
This presents no difficulty. If he runs away to a court in Palestine
from outside, it is to be reconsidered. As it is stated in the following
Boraitha, R. Jehuda b. Dusthai said in the name of R. Simeon b. Shatah:
That if one runs from the Palestine court to an outside court, his case
must not be reconsidered. But if *vice versa*, it is to be reversed,
because of the privilege Palestine has.

"*Sanhedrin are to be established*," etc. Whence is this deduced? From
what the rabbis taught. It reads (Numb. xxxv. 29\]: "For a statute of
justice throughout your generations, in all your dwellings." From this
it is inferred that Sanhedrin are to be established in Palestine as well
as in the countries outside. But why is it written elsewhere "in thy
gates"? To say that "in thy gates" in Palestine, you have to establish
courts in every principal city, as well as in the small cities; but in
the countries out of Palestine, you have to establish them in the large
cities but not in the small ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[8:1](mac06.htm#fr_2) [Leeser](errata.htm#37)
translates "wrong"; however, he is wrong according to the sense in the
text.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[8:2](mac06.htm#fr_3)
[*Rodkinson*:](errata.htm#38) The text says it shall be feared that they
went there on a flying camel, We have rendered it a balloon, as the
sense is the same. [*JBH*: I have redacted this as the much more
charming and to the point 'flying camel'](errata.htm#39).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[12:1](mac06.htm#fr_4) The term in the Bible is
*al pe* and the Hebrew term for mouth is *pe*, and he takes it
literally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](mac07)
