[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mac07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

# CHAPTER III.

WHO IS SUBJECT TO THE PUNISHMENT BY STRIPES.--THE DETAILS OF THE
PROCEDURE REGARDING THE EXECUTION THEREOF.--WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES FREE THE
CULPRIT THEREFROM.--THE RESPECTIVE DUTIES OF THE THREE JUDGES WHO MUST
WITNESS THE EXECUTION.

MISHNA *I*.: To the following stripes apply: He who had intercourse with
his own sister, with his sister of his father or his mother, or the
sister of his wife, with the wife of his brother or his father's
brother, or with a woman while menstruating. (To each of these crimes
Korath--shortened life--applies, and according to this Mishna the human
court has a right to punish them also with stripes.) The same is the
case if a high-priest marries a widow; a common priest--a divorced or
her who performed the ceremony of Halitzah; an Israelite--a bastard or a
descendant of the Gibeonites; and the same is, if a daughter of an
Israelite marries the just-mentioned persons. If a high-priest marries a
widow who was previously divorced, he is to be beaten twice, because of
two names ("widow" and "divorced"); if, however, a common priest marries
a widow who has previously performed the ceremony of Halitzah, he is
liable only for the violation of one negative. A high-priest who was
unclean and partook of things belonging to the sanctuary or entered the
sanctuary while unclean; and he who consumed illegal fat, blood, or meat
left overnight from the sacrifice, or *piggul*, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) or unclean meat, and also of such which
was slaughtered and brought outside of the Temple; he who ate leaven on
Passover, ate or labored on the Day of Atonement; who compounded oil
similar to that of the Temple, or compounded the frankincense of the
Temple, or anointed himself with the oil used in the Temple; who ate
carcasses or animals preyed by beasts, or reptiles--to all of them
stripes apply.

It applies also to him who partook of mixture, of first tithe

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

of which the heave-offering was not separated as yet, of second tithe
and eatables belonging to the sanctuary which were not redeemed yet. How
much has one to partake of the mixture to make him liable? According to
R. Simeon, whatsoever; while to the rabbis, not less than the size of an
olive. Said R. Simeon to the sages: Do you not admit that if one
consumed an ant--minute as it is--he is culpable? And he was answered:
Because it is a creature in itself. Rejoined he: One grain of wheat is
also complete as to its creation.

GEMARA: The Mishna treats of those crimes to which Korath applies, but
not of those under the category of capital punishment. Hence it is in
accordance with R. Aqiba of the following Boraitha: Crimes under the
category of Korath, as well as under that of capital punishment, are
also punished with stripes if they were so warned. So R. Ismael. R.
Aqiba, however, maintains: Only that of Korath; because if they repent
after the punishment with stripes, the heavenly court forgives them; but
if they are under capital punishment the human court cannot forgive them
even though they repent. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) What is the
reason of Ismael's theory? \[Deut. xxviii. 59\]: "Then will the Lord
render peculiar thy plagues," etc. What the peculiarity is, is not
stated; however, from \[ibid. xxv. 2\]: "The judge shall cause him to
lie down" (the expression of which has a similarity), we understand that
the peculiarity is stripes; and in \[ibid. xxviii. 58\] it reads: "If
thou wilt not observe," etc.; hence the violation of all negative
commands is punished by stripes. But if so, let them apply also to the
violation transgression of a positive commandment? It reads: "If thou
wilt not observe." R. Aqiba's reason is: concerning stripes the
expression is "according to the degree of his *fault*," which means for
one fault, but not for two faults, to which capital punishment
applies. <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15)

"*Things belonging to the sanctuary*," etc. It is correct, the
transgression of entering the sanctuary of which the punishment as well
as the warning is stated--viz.: the punishment \[Numb. xix. 13\]: "Hath
defiled the tabernacle of the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from
Israel," and the warning \[ibid. v. 3\]:

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "That they defile
not their camp"; but concerning eating sanctity, we find the punishment
\[Lev. vii. 20\]: "The flesh . . . his uncleanness upon him . . . shall
be cut off." But where is the warning to it? According to Resh Lakish
from \[ibid. xii. 4\]: "Any thing hallowed shall she not touch"; and R.
Jehanan said: Bardelah taught: From an analogy of expression "his
uncleanness" here, and the same expression is found in the above
quotation \[Numb. xix.\]. As there the punishment and the warning are
stated, the same also applies to this case.

There is a Boraitha in accordance with Resh Lakish: "Hallowed shall she
not touch" is a warning to the consumer. You say *consumer*, but perhaps
it means literally (touching); therefore it reads further on, "into the
sanctuary shall she not come," etc. Hence hallowed is compared to the
sanctuary. As to the transgression of the sanctuary Korath applies, so
also the warning concerning the hallowed must speak of a similar
punishment (*i.e.*, consuming). But not of touching, to which Korath
does not apply.

Rabba b. b. Hanna in the name of R. Jehanan said: To a negative command
which is preceded by a positive one, stripes apply. There were people
who questioned R. Johanan whether he said so, and he answered: Nay! Said
Rabba: I swear that he said so, and it is also written and taught;
"written" \[Numb. v. 3\]: "Shall ye send out . . . that they defile not
their camps"; and "taught" in our Mishna: A defiled person who enters
the sanctuary gets stripes. But why did R. Johanan retract his previous
statement? Because the case of a seducer was difficult to him--namely, a
seducer who had divorced his seduced wife, if he is a common Israelite,
remarries her, but is not punished with stripes; if he, however, was a
priest (who is forbidden to marry a divorced woman), he gets stripes and
does not remarry. Now, as in this case, the negative command: "That he
must not divorce her all his life" is succeeded by the positive command:
"That he shall marry her," why, then, should not a common Israelite be
punished with stripes for divorcing her? Said Rabha: The reason why he
does not get stripes is that the positive "He shall remarry her" rests
upon him all his life. (This is inferred from the words "all his days,"
which, if they were not explained that in case he has divorced her he
shall remarry her, would he superfluous; with the explanation, however,
the command, "He shall remarry her," is

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

attached to the negative "He shall not divorce her"; and there is a rule
that to a negative command which is succeeded by a positive, no stripes
apply.) And when Rabbin came from Palestine he said the same in the name
of R. Johanan. Said Rabh Papa to Rabha: Why did R. Jehanan say above
that he gets stripes? The negative in question is not similar to the
negative of "muzzling" (which was said that it is placed there to teach
that only to such which is not succeeded by a positive stripes apply)?
Rejoined Rabh Papa: Should the negative become weaker because of the
succeeding positive? Answered Rabha: According to your theory stripes
should apply to each negative which is succeeded by a positive, which is
not the case. Said Rabh Papa again: There it is different, as the
positive usually comes to remove the negative (*i.e.*, one shall *not*
do so, but if he did, *shall* he do so and so). But Rabha's explanation
holds good only according to him who holds that the culprit does not get
stripes unless he abolishes the succeeding positive command. (Le., the
seducer who has divorced his wife may always say: "I will remarry her."
Hence the positive is not abolished, and therefore he is not liable. But
according to him who holds that only then is he free from stripes when
he fulfils the command (*i.e.*, if he comes to the court, which commands
him to marry her immediately, and if he does not listen he gets
stripes). Hence, you cannot say that this positive rests upon all his
life, and consequently it does not modify its preceding negative? Let us
see: this objection applies only to Johanan's foregoing theory, and he
said to the disciple who has repeated before the Boraitha concerning a
positive which succeeds a negative: "Go and teach thus: Only when he has
abolished the succeeding one, but not otherwise." R. Simeon b. Lakish,
however, differs, and says: He is free from stripes only when he has
fulfilled the succeeding one.

What is their point of difference? A doubtful warning--*e.g.*, in the
case in question, if he was warned that he shall not divorce her, it was
still doubtful whether after divorcing he will not remarry her; hence
such a warning is not considered certain. But, nevertheless, according
to R. Johanan it suffices, so that he may be punished; but according to
Resh Lakish he is not. And both differ in the explanation of R.
Jehudah's theory in the following Boraitha: It reads \[Ex. xii. 10\]:
"And ye shall not let anything of it remain until morning; and that
which remaineth of it until morning ye shall burn." We see, then,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

that the verse comes to place a positive after a negative for the
purpose that if one did leave he shall not be punished, and has only to
burn it. Such is the decree of R. Jehudah. R. Johanan explains R.
Jehudah's words thus: The reason why he does not get stripes is the
succeeding positive, but if it were not he would be punished, although
the warning was doubtful, as he could thereafter burn it. Resh Lakish,
however, explains it thus: The reason why he does not get stripes is the
succeeding, but if it were not he would get stripes, as to a negative
command that does not contain manual labor, stripes do apply. But let us
see: Resh Lakish cannot deny that such a warning was a doubtful one, and
R. Johanan cannot deny that such a negative does not concern manual
labor; what, then, is the use of their explanation? Both agree that, if
not for the succeeding, stripes would apply; notwithstanding that there
were both a doubtful warning and a positive of no manual labor. Resh
Lakish shares the opinion of R. Jehudah of another Boraitha (Chulin 82,
b.), in which R. Jehudah admits that a doubtful warning is not
considered; and R. Johanan holds with R. Jehudah of the following: R.
Idi b. Abin in the name of R. Amram and R. Itz'hak, quoting R. Johanan,
said: R. Jehudah in the name of R. Jose the Galilean declared that for
the violation of all the negatives of the Torah, if there be manual
labor implied, the transgressor is punished with stripes, but not if
mental, except in the cases of an oath, exchanging, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) and cursing his neighbor by the Holy name.
But if so, then, R. Johudah contradicts himself? Resh Lakish may say
that there are two Tanaim who said in the name of R. Jehudah
differently, and R. Jehanan may say that in the latter Boraitha R.
Jehudah declared the theory of his master, but his own opinion he
declared in the former Boraitha.

There is a Mishna: He who took the mother-bird with her children gets,
according to R. Jehudah, stripes, but is not obliged to send away the
mother-bird; and according to the sages, he sends away, but is not
punished with stripes; as the rule is: for a negative which is conjoined
with a positive there is no liability. Said R. Johanan: There is only
one more case similar to this. And to the question of R. Elazar, What is
it? he rejoined: Go and find out! He did so and found the following: "If
a seducer has divorced," etc., v. above, [p. 37](#page_37). But this can
be correct only with him who holds that he is released from

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

stripes after the fulfilment of the positive only. But according to him
who holds that stripes do not apply unless the positive is abolished,
such can be done only with the former mother-bird by killing her, as
then the positive he "shall send her away" is abolished. But how can
such be found in the case of the divorce in question; and should you say
that he killed her, then he deserves capital punishment; and there is a
rule that stripes do not apply to him who is to be executed? Said R.
Simi of 'Huznah: "*E.g.*, he accepted betrothal money for her from some
one else, hence she becomes the wife of another, and the positive "he
shall remarry" is abolished. Said Rabh: Such cannot be considered; as in
case she made him her messenger to accept the above, she may ignore the
message; and, if he did it without asking her who gave him the right to
such that it should be considered? Therefore said R. Simi of Nehardea:
If, *e.g.*, he has made a vow publicly that he must not derive any
benefit from her (and such a vow cannot be absolved), hence the positive
is abolished and he is liable. Are there indeed no more similar cases to
those by R. Johanan stated? Is there not robbery to which it reads,
"Thou shalt not steal," and the positive "He shall return it," and also
concerning a pledge to which the negative is, "Thou shalt not come to
pledge," and the positive is "Thou shalt return the pledge at sunset"?
And these two cases also can be explained in both ways: Fulfilled the
positives or not, abolished the positives or not? With these cases it is
different, for he has to pay, and there is a rule: He who pays does not
get stripes. But is there not "Peah," the negative of which "thou shalt
not cut . . . the corners" and the positive "unto the poor . . . leave"
\[Lev. xxiii. 22\], which also may be explained in both ways as said
above? Therefore we must say that R. Jehanan by his statement, There is
only one similar case, meant "Peah" and not a seducer; since concerning
the latter the Law dictates that even if there were a vow on the mind of
the public <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) it can be absolved when
such absolution is necessary to a meritorious act; as it happened with a
children-teacher who struck too much the children and R. A'ha
excommunicated him, Rabbina, however, returned him, because he could not
find as good a teacher.

"*Carcasses preyed*," etc. Said R. A'ha: He who neglects nature's duties
when called, transgresses the negative "ye shall

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

not make your souls abominable" \[Lev. XX. 25\]. And R. Bibi b. Abayi
said: He who drinks water from the horn of a barber transgresses the
same.

"*Partook of mixture, first tithe*," etc. R. Bibi in the name of Resh
Lakish said: They differ only in case he take a grain of it, but as
regards flour all agree that the size of an olive is needed., R. Jeremei
in the name of same authority, however, said: As they differ in respect
of wheat so they do in that of flour too. An objection was raised from
our Mishna. R. Simeon said to them: Do you not agree if he ate an ant,
etc., and to the answer of the rabbis "because it is a creature" he
rejoined, A wheat grain is also complete in its creation, hence we see
that they only differ in respect of the grain, but not in that of flour?
R. Simeon meant to say thus: According to my opinion it is the same with
flour, but to your theory, admit that if he ate a grain of it he shall
be culpable, because of its completeness. The rabbis, however, maintain:
We cannot compare a grain to a living creature. There is a Boraitha in
accordance with R. Jeremei: R. Simeon said concerning stripes: Size does
not count; it counts only concerning sacrifices.

MISHNA *II*.: Stripes also apply to the following: To him who partook of
the first fruit before the ceremony of reading <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) was performed; of the sacrifices under the
category of the most holy outside of the curtains, and of those under
the category of a minor grade or of second tithe outside of the
surrounding wall; and also to him who breaks a bone in the Paschal Lamb
if it was a clean one. However, if he left from a fit one, or broke a
bone of an unfit one, stripes do not apply.

To him who takes a mother-bird with her children from her coop according
to R. Jehudah stripes apply, but he is not obliged to send the mother
away, and according to the sages he must send her away and stripes do
not apply, according to the rule: If a positive succeeds a negative, no
stripes apply.

GEMARA: Said Rabba b. b. Hana in the name of R. Johanan: Our Mishna is
in accordance with R. Aqiba, whose name is omitted, as it is one of the
many anonymous Mishnayoth which bear his opinion without mentioning his
name. The sages, however, maintain that concerning first fruits, their
placing on the Temple is the main thing, but the ceremony of reading

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

is no obstacle. But why not say that it is in accordance with R. Simeon,
to whose opinion, also, most of the Mishnayoth were composed
anonymously? This comes to teach that R. Aqiba is in this respect in
accordance with R. Simeon. Which R. Simeon? Of the following Boraitha:
It reads \[Deut. xii. 17\]: "And the heave-offering of thy hand," which
means the first fruits; said R. Simeon: What does this come to teach us?
If only that they must not be eaten outside the surrounding wall, it was
not necessary at all, as this could be inferred from tithe, regarding
which the law is more lenient, by drawing *a fortiori* conclusion: If
one consumes tithe regarding which the law is lenient, outside of the
wall, he gets stripes, so much the more when he consumes first fruits,
concerning which case the law is more rigorous; therefore we must say
that the verse means to include him who had consumed them before the
ceremony of reading was performed. And "thy freewill-offering" \[ibid.,
ibid.\], means thanks and peace-offerings. R. Simeon, however, said: The
verse does not mean them, as it was not necessary to teach that they
must not consume outside of the wall, for the same reason that they
could be inferred from the leniency in tithe by the same *a fortiori*
reasoning. Therefore it means him who consumed of same sacrifices before
their blood was sprinkled. And "first born" means literally. Said R.
Simeon: If it meant so, it was not necessary either, as this could
likewise be inferred by *a fortiori* reasoning from tithe; and if it
means: who commanded them before blood-sprinkling, it was also not
necessary, as it could be inferred from the above-mentioned sacrifices
by *a fortiori* reasoning, as they are more lenient than the first born.
Therefore we must say that it means to include him who consumes a first
born even after its blood was sprinkled. "Thy herds or of thy flocks"
means sin and transgression-offerings. R. Simeon, however, said: That if
it meant them, it would not be necessary, as they could be inferred by
*a fortiori* reasoning from tithe; thanks and peace-offerings, and first
born, all of which are more lenient than that of sin and transgression.
Therefore it means to include him who consumed from the latter even
after [sprinkling](errata.htm#40) outside of the curtain. "Nor any of
thy vows" means burnt-offerings. Said R. Simeon: It would not be
necessary, as they could be inferred by *a fortiori* reasoning from all
those cases mentioned above, and therefore it means to include him who
consumes from a burnt-offering after sprinkling even inside the
curtains, that he get stripes. Said Rabha:

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Every mother
should bear a son like R. Simeon; although his theory can be objected
to. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

It was taught: R. Gidel in the name of Rabh said: A stranger who had
consumed sin- and transgression-offerings before their blood was
sprinkled, is free from any punishment, because it reads \[Ex. xxix.
33\]: "And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made
to consecrate them, and to sanctify them; but a stranger shall not eat
thereof, because they are holy." Now as the sprinkling of blood only
atones, they can be considered holy only after the sprinkling w
performed, but before this act they are not considered as yet holy; so
that the negative "one shall not eat because they are holy" does not
rest upon the consumer.

R. Elazar said in the name of Hosea: Concerning the first fruit, placing
it in the Temple is the main thing, and not the ceremony of reading, as
it is not considered the final act. In this case the following Tanaim
differ \[Deut. xxvi. 10\]: "Thou shalt set it down before the Lord,"
*i.e.*, lift it up (before the Lord in all four directions). But perhaps
it means literally, to place it? This is already written in verse (9).
So R. Jehudah. R. Eliezer b. Jacob, however, maintains: This means
literally (hence, this is the main act which completes the ceremony
prescribed to first fruit); lifting up, however, he infers from \[ibid.,
ibid. 4\]: "And the priest shall take the basket out of thy hand,"
*i.e.*, that the priest shall lift it up towards all four directions.
His reason is based on the analogy of expression "hand," which is also
mentioned concerning peace-offering \[Lev. vii. 30\]: "His own hands
shall bring it." And as there lifting up is needed by both the ripest
and the owner of the offering, so also here the hands of both are
needed. How so? The priest places his hand under those of the owner, and
the two lift it up together.

Rabha b. Ada in the name of R. Itz'hak said: One is culpable for the
first fruits immediately after they have seen the face of the Temple;
and it is in accordance with the Tana of the following Boraitha: R.
Eliezer said: Of the first fruit, a part of which was outside and a part
inside, that of outside is considered common in all respects, while that
of inside is considered holy in all respects. And R. Shesheth said: Only
the placing is the main act of the ceremony and not the reading.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"*Most holy*," etc. But why the repetition? It has been already stated
with regard to second tithe and things of the sanctuary which were not
as yet redeemed? Said R. Jose b. Hanina: The second part of the Mishna
treats of a case when both were pure--and the man and the second tithes
which were consumed outside of the wall, and the first part speaks of
the case when both were defiled, and that he consumed them within the
city. And whence do we know that one is culpable because of defilement?
From the following Boraitha: R. Simeon said \[Deut. xxvi. 14\]: "Neither
have I removed thereof while unclean," <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) means neither when I was unclean and they
were clean, nor *vice versa*. R. Eliezer said: Whence do we know that
second tithe which became defiled may be redeemed even within Jerusalem!
From \[Deut. xiv. 24\]: "Not able to carry it," which means also when it
was not fit for eating, as the expression for carrying is "sheath" and
in \[Gen. xliii. 34\], a similar expression is used for eatables. R.
Bibbi in the name of R. Assi said: From the just-cited verse is to be
also inferred that even one step outside the wall one may redeem the
second tithe, if it is too heavy for him to carry it further. R. Hanina
and R. Hosea, while sitting together propounded the following question:
How is it if he was already within the gate of the wall in such a
position that he was already inside but his load was outside--may he
redeem it at that place or not? A certain old man then taught them in
the name of R. Simeon b. Jo'hai: It reads \[Deut. xiv. 24\]: "Is too far
from *thee*," means from the full extent of your capacity (and as he is
already within the gate it can, not be considered far any longer, etc.,
and is not to be redeemed). R. Assi said in the name of R. Jehanan: The
culpability for second tithe arises only after it has seen the face of
the wall of Jerusalem, and the reason is \[ibid. xii. 12\]: "But before
the Lord thy God must thou eat them," and (17): "Thou mayest not eat
within thy gates"; hence, only at that time when the positive "before
thy Lord must thou eat them "can be fulfilled, the negative: "Thou
mayest not eat," etc., applies, but not otherwise.

MISHNA *III*.: He who makes a baldness in the hair of his head, or
rounds it; he who destroys the corners of his beard, or makes incisions
in his flesh for his dead, is liable. There is no difference whether he
made one incision for five dead bodies or

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

five incisions for one dead body, as in either case he is liable for
five negatives. For rounding his hair he is also liable for two (one for
one corner on one side, and another for the other corner on the other
side; and for his beard five, for there are five corners. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) R. Eliezer, however, maintains that if he
took off the whole beard at one time he is culpable only for one. The
culpability arises only, then, when he took it off with a razor. R.
Eliezer, however, maintains that the same is the case if he took it off
with snuffers or a scraper (an instrument with which the hairs are
removed singly).

GEMARA: The rabbis taught \[Lev. xxi. 5\]: "They shall not make any
baldness," lest one say that if one made several baldnesses in his head
he is culpable only for one, therefore it reads, "any baldness" (*i.e.*,
culpable for each one). And to what purpose is it written "upon their
head"? Because \[Deut. xiv. i\], "Ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make
any baldness between your eyes for the dead." Lest one say that be is
culpable only when he did so between the eyes, therefore "their head" to
include any place of the head. From here, however, we know that priests
only are forbidden to do so, as they are subject to many commands which
do not apply to a common Israelite; whence do we know that the same is
the case with the latter? From the analogy of expression "baldness" in
both verses; as in the first he is culpable for each baldness in the
head as for that between the eyes, the same is the case with an
Israelite. And as in \[Deut. xiv.\] it says plainly "for the dead," so
also in \[Lev.\] it means for the dead only.

What should be the size of the bald spot which would make him culpable?
The size of a bean according to R. Jehanan in the name of R. Eliezer b.
R. Simeon. R. Huna, however, said: Such a size which could be discerned.
R. Jehudah b. 'Habibah said: In this three Tanaim differ. According to
one it is the size of a bean, according to the other it is a discernible
size, and the third, however, maintains that he is culpable even for two
hairs. Some, however, say: Instead of two hairs, it must be of the size
of a lentil.

"*He who rounds*," etc. The rabbis taught \[Lev. xix. 27\]: "Ye shall
not cut round the corners of your head" means the end of his head,
*i.e.*, who makes his temple as hairless as the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

spot back of his cars to the nape of his neck. A disciple taught before
R. Hisda: Both are culpable, he who rounds, and the rounded one. To
which R. Hisda answered: Should he who eats dates from a sieve be
culpable? Your Boraitha is in accordance with R. Jehudah, who holds that
to a negative which does not contain manual labor, stripes apply (with
whom the Halakha does not prevail). Rabha, however, says: It speaks that
he himself has rounded his hair, which case all agree that he is
culpable. And R. Ashi said: Even if he only assists the one who rounds
his hair.

"*And he who destroys the corners of his beard*." The rabbis taught:
"The corners of his beard," means the end of it; and what is meant by
the end? The Shibboleth (sheaves).

"*Incisions*," etc. The rabbis taught \[Lev. xix. 28\]: "For the dead .
. . any incision," lest one say that he made such because of the fall of
his house or because the ship sank, therefore "for the dead," to teach
that he is culpable only if he did so for a dead. And whence do we know
that if he made five incisions for one dead he is culpable for each one?
From "any incision" which makes him culpable for each of them. R. Jose
said: Whence do we know that if he made one incision for five dead he is
culpable for five? From the expression "l'Nefesh" <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) (soul) *i.e.*, he is culpable for each
soul. But does not the same passage exclude the case when he did so for
"his house" or "ship," etc.?

R. Jose holds that "cut" in Deut. iv. and incision is one and the same,
and there also reads "for the dead," hence this also may be inferred.

Samuel said: If one made an incision with an instrument he is culpable.
An objection was raised from the following: Incision and cutting is one
and the same (but incision means with the hand and cutting with an
instrument), hence for an incision with an instrument he should not be
culpable? Samuel holds in this respect with R. Jose that there is no
difference at all.

A disciple taught before R. Jehanan: For dead he is culpable at all
courts whether 'by hand or instrument, but if for an idol, by an
instrument he is culpable, but not by hand; as it reads \[I Kings,.
xviii 28\]: "And cut themselves after their custom with knives."

"*Culpable only for one*," because he holds that he transgressed only
one negative command.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "*With a razor*."
The rabbis taught \[Lev. xxi. 5\]:"The corner of their beard shall they
not shave off," *i.e.*, with a razor. But lest one say even with
scissors he shall be culpable, therefore it reads \[ibid. xix.\], "thou
shalt not destroy." But if so let him be culpable for destroying it even
with snuffers or scrapers? therefore the expression "shave off," and
destroying by shaving is brought about by a razor.

"*R. Eliezer*," etc. From whatever opinion he start: if he cares for the
analogy of expression, then it is with a razor only; and if he does not,
let him be culpable even if he did it with scissors? He cares for the
analogy, but to his opinion snuffers and scrapers are equivalent to a
razor.

MISHNA *IV*.: The culpability for etching-in \[Lev. xix. 28\] arises
only when he has done both, wrote and etched-in with dye or any other
indelible thing, but to one of them no culpability attaches. R. Simeon
b. Jehudah in the name of R. Simeon said: He is not culpable unless he
etched-in the holy name; as the above-cited verse reads, "and any
etched-in writing shall you not fix on yourselves: I am the Lord."

GEMARA: Said R. Aha b. Rabha to R. Ashi: Does it mean unless he etch-in
the words "I am the Lord"? And he answered, Nay! It is as Bar Kapara
taught: "He is not culpable unless he writes the name of an idol, as the
words "I am the Lord" mean *I* am the Lord, but not another one.

R. Malkhiya in the name of R. Ada b. Ahaba said: One is forbidden to put
ashes upon his wound in the flesh, because it looks like a tattooing.
\[Said R. Papa: Throughout both Mishna and Boraitha, the name Malkhiya
when mentioned is Malkhiyah, but in Halakhas it is Malkhiyoo\]. R. Ashi,
however, said: It does not matter, as the wound shows there is no
tattooing.

MISHNA *V*.: A Nazarite who was drinking wine the whole day, is culpable
only for one negative. If, however, he was warned, Do not drink, do not
drink! he is culpable for each time he does not listen to. The same is
the case if he had defiled himself by touching dead the whole day, he is
culpable for one only; but if he was warned, You must not do so! etc.,
he is culpable for each one. The same is also the case with shaving
himself. If he did so the whole day without warning he is culpable for
one only, if with warning, for each time warned. A similar case this: If
one was dressed with Kelaim, he is culpable for the whole day only once;
but if he was told not to dress himself with it, and he undresses and
redresses, he is liable for

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

each time. There is an instance that one may plough only one bed and
shall be culpable for eight negatives--viz: If he ploughs with an ox and
an ass both of which were from the sanctuary, if there was Kelaim in a
vineyard, if that occurs in the Sabbatical year and on a legal holiday,
and, finally, if he is a priest or a Nazarite in a legally unclean
place. Hanania b. 'Hakhinai said: It can be added to that "who at the
same time was dressed with Kelaim." And he was answered: This is not
under the category of ploughing. Rejoined he: Does, then, a Nazarite
belong to this category?

GEMARA: Said R. Bibi in the name of Rabh Assi: Not only when he
undresses and redresses himself entirely, but even when he put his
sleeve in and out. And R. Aha b. R. Aika has shown that he puts in the
sleeve and puts it out. But R. Ashi maintains that it means the time
during which he could put in and out.

"*Ploughing one bed*," etc. Said R. Yanai: At a meeting there was voted
and resolved that he who protects Kelaim is liable to stripes. Said R.
Jehanan to him: Is this not explained in our Mishna, which mentions that
there was Kelaim in the vineyard? And if one were not culpable for
protection what would have the ploughing to do with it? You must, then,
say that while ploughing he protects it, and the Mishna makes him
culpable. Rejoined R. Yanai: If I had not uncovered for you the broken
clay pot, you would surely not have the pearl which was lying under it.
Said Resh Lakish to R. Jehanan: Would not such a great man praise your
statement? I would say that our Mishna is in accordance with R. Aqiba,
who holds that one is liable even for keeping it. Said Ula to R.
Na'hman: After it was decided that protecting is the same transgression
as sowing, let him also be culpable for sowing on a legal holiday? And
he answered: It was left out by the Tana of the Mishna. Rejoined he
(Ula): It numbers eight, consequently nothing was left. Said Rabha: The
different kinds of labor in one article are considered with respect to
Sabbath only, but not to holidays. And Ula said: (I also think) so it
is.

MISHNA *VI*.: The number of stripes is forty less one, as it reads
\[Deut. xxv. 2, 3\]: "By a number, forty," *i.e.*, near forty. R.
Jehudah, however, said: Forty in full, and the fortieth is between his
shoulders. The examination (by the physicians of the court) as to the
number of stripes he can receive and remain alive, must be such that can
be equally divided by three. If

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the decision was that he is able to receive forty, but after receiving a
part of them they saw he cannot stand any more, he is free. However, if
the decision was, he can stand eighteen only, and after he was stricken
they saw he is able to receive more, he is nevertheless free.

GEMARA: The reason of the statement of the Mishna is the expression
"number," which is before the word "forty," and is to be interpreted
"about" forty; for if it meant forty in full, it would state forty in
number. Said Rabha: How foolish are those who arise before the Holy
Scrolls, but do not do so before a great man. We see that in the Holy
Scrolls it reads forty, and the rabbis came and reduced one.

"*R. Jehudah said*," etc. What is his reason? Said R. Itz'hak \[Zech.
xiii. 6\]: "What are these wounds between thy hands," etc. The rabbis,
however, maintain that this passage speaks of school-children.

"*After he was stricken*," etc. Is that so? Does not a Boraitha state
that if the first decision of the physicians was that he can receive
forty and thereafter they decided again that he can not, or the first
decision was for eighteen, and the second states that he is able to
receive forty, he is free. (Hence we see that even if he was not
stricken but only examined, he is free.)

Said R. Shesheth: This presents no difficulty. Our Mishna speaks of the
decision rendered on the very same day on which he ought to be beaten,
and by acting accordingly it was found that they erred; hence in the
first instance he is freed because he cannot stand, and in the second,
because he was already disgraced and freed we do not care to disgrace
him again. The Boraitha, however, speaks that the examination was
several days before, and when the day of punishment came, the decision
was changed because of his health.

MISHNA *VII*.: If one commits a sin to which two negatives apply, if the
decision was rendered once for both negatives, he is punished once only,
but if for one negative, he is punished again after he has recovered.

GEMARA: Is there not a Boraitha that one must not be appraised for two
negatives? Said R. Shesheth: It presents no difficulty. Our Mishna
speaks, if he was appraised for forty-one, *i.e.*, for two negatives,
and because it cannot be divided into three, their appraisement is
annulled, and he receives only thirty-nine for both; and the Boraitha
speaks of the case when be was appraised to receive forty-two for two
negatives, and as

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

it can be divided into three, the three over the thirty-nine are counted
for the second negative. Hence he is beaten once, and after recovery is
to be appraised again and beaten accordingly.

MISHNA *VIII*.: How is the punishment with stripes to be performed? He
ties his both hands to the pillar, and the messenger of the court takes
hold of his clothes, without care whether they tear or disjoin, until he
uncovers the breast. The stone on which the messenger is to stand is
placed behind him, upon which he stands with a strap of calf leather
compounded of two, which, folded again, constitutes four, with two small
stripes attached to it.

The size of its handle was a span, and of the same size was the width of
it, and the top of it reaches his belly. He strikes him one-third in
front and two-thirds on the back. He is not beaten while standing nor
sitting, but while bending; as it reads \[Deut. xxv. 2\]: "The judge
shall cause him to lie down," and the striker strikes him with one hand
with all his force. And the reader reads from \[ibid. xxviii. 58-59\]:
"If thou wilt not. . . . Then will the Lord render peculiar thy
plagues," etc., to the end of the verse. And if the striker has not
finished yet, he begins \[ibid. xxix. 8\]: "Keep ye therefore," etc.,
and finishes with \[Psalm lxxviii. 38\]: "But he, being merciful,
forgave the iniquity." And if the act was not finished as yet, he
returns to the beginning. If it happens that he dies under the
messenger's hand, the latter is free. If, however, he added one stripe
which caused death, he is exiled. If while beaten he collapsed and
became incontinent of urine or excrement, he is freed. R. Jehudah
maintains: A male, when incontinent of feces; and a female, of urine.

GEMARA: What is the reason that he shall be freed if he collapsed, etc.?
His having been already disgraced.

R. Shesheth said in the name of R. Eliezer b. Azaria: Whence do we know
that the strap must be of calf leather? Because immediately after "forty
stripes" it reads, "thou shalt muzzle the ox." (See appendix.)

"*Two small stripes*," etc. In a Boraitha it is written from ass
leather, and it is as a certain Galilean preached in the presence of R.
Hisda \[Isaiah, i. 3\]: "The ox knoweth his owner and the ass his
master's crib: Israel doth not," etc. The Holy One, blessed be He, said:
"He that knoweth the master's crib shall take revenge from him who does
not want to know it."

"*One-third in front*," etc. Whence is this deduced? Said

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

be beaten before his face according to R. Kahana: From "to the degree of
his fault," which means for one fault in the front and for two in the
back.

"*The striker strikes him with one hand*," etc. The rabbis taught: The
court appoints messengers who are weak in force but strong in wisdom. R.
Jehudah, however, said: Even *vice versa*. Said Rabha: It seems to me
that R. Jehudah is correct, because it reads "not more"; now if the
messenger were weak in wisdom he must be warned, but if strong in
wisdom, why warning? The rabbis, however, maintain the contrary, that
warning is of consequence only to him who is learned to be careful.
There is a Boraitha: When he lifts up, he does it with both hands, but
strikes with one hand, so that the strokes shall become weaker.

"*And the reader reads*," etc. The rabbis taught: The chief of the
judges reads; the second numbers, and the third says, strike! When the
stripes are many he prolongs, and when less he shortens. But does not
the Mishna state "he returns to the beginning of the passage"? It is
better that the reading should be finished with the stripes; but if it
was not, he returns. The rabbis taught: It reads \[Deut. xxv. 3\]: "Too
many stripes"; but lest one say that one or two does not matter?
Therefore is "not more"--not even one. But if so, to what purpose "too
many stripes"? To teach that if it happen so, even the stripes which
were given rightly are to be considered too many (in force).

"*Collapsed*," etc. The rabbis taught: A male as well as a female "in
feces," but not "in urine." So R. Mair. R. Jehuda said: A male "in
feces" and a female "in urine." The sages, however, maintain: There is
no difference between male and female, and between feces and urine; at
all events the beaten is to be freed. But is there not a Boraitha: R.
Jehudah said: Male and female in feces? He meant to say that in such a
case all agree, but concerning incontinence of urine there is a
difference of opinion.

Samuel said: If after he has been tied, he succeeds to run away from the
court, he is free. An objection was raised from the following:
Collapsing frees one whether it happen at the first stroke or the
second, but if the strap broke he is free only if it happened at the
second, but not at the first. Now, why should this not be equivalent to
running away, which frees even before the first strike? This is no
objection, when he runs away

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

he could not be beaten (and as he was already disgraced, he is not taken
to be disgraced again), but here he is still present.

The rabbis taught: If it was concluded by the examination that he will
collapse in case he is beaten, he is to be freed; but if the conclusion
is that he will collapse after having been beaten, it does not free him.
Furthermore, if it happen that he collapse before he was taken to be
beaten, it does not prevent after recovery; because it reads \[Deut.
xxv. 2, 3\]: "And to be beaten . . . and . . . thus rendered vile," but
not rendered vile before beaten.

MISHNA *IX*.: All who are liable to Korath, if beaten, are freed from
it, as it reads \[ibid., ibid. 3\]: "Thy brother rendered vile," *i.e.*,
as soon as he was rendered vile, he is thy brother. So R. Hananye b.
Gamaliel; the same also said: If one loses his soul for one sin, so much
the more his soul should be saved because of one meritorious act! Said
R. Simeon: This may be inferred from the very place which treats of
Korath \[Lev. xviii. 29\]: "Even the souls that commit them shall be cut
off," and \[ibid., ibid. 5\]: "Ordinances, which, if a man do, he shall
live in them." As the whole portion is of negative commands, it is to be
inferred that if one only abstains from committing a crime, he is
rewarded as if he acted meritoriously. R. Simeon b. Rabbi said: It reads
\[Deut. xii. 23\]: "Be firm so as not to eat the blood; for the blood is
the life." Now, for rejecting blood which is disgusting to one, he is
rewarded; from money and women, to which the nature of man is inclined,
so much the more should he be rewarded if he separates himself; and not
only he, but all his descendants to the end of the generations, may be
rewarded. R. Hanania b. Akasiha said: The Holy One, blessed be He,
wanted to make Israel blissful and therefore he multiplied to them his
commands in the Torah, as it reads \[Isaiah, xlii. 21\]: "The Lord
willed (to do this) for the sake of his righteousness: (therefore) he
magnifieth the law, and maketh it honorable."

GEMARA: Said R. Jehanan: The colleagues of R. 'Hananye differ with him
(as according to them stripes do not substitute Korath). Said R. Ada b.
A'haba in the name of Rabh: The Halakha nevertheless prevails with R.
Hananye. Said R, Joseph: Who, then, ascended to heaven, returned, saying
that the Halakha prevails with him? Said Abayi to him: According to You,
that which was said by R. Jehoshua b. Levi, "three things were done by
the human court, and the heavenly court

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

agreed with it," is also to be questioned: who ascended to heaven and
convinced himself that it was so? but such is inferred from the
Scripture; well, the same is here, too. What are the three things in
question? The following: The reading of the Book of Esther on Purim,
greeting with the Holy Name, and placing the tithe belonging to the
Levites in the treasury of the sanctuary. The first (Book of Esther)
from \[Esther, ix. 27\]: "The Jews took it upon themselves as a duty and
accepted," means, they took upon themselves in their human court, and it
was accepted in the heavenly court. "Greeting" from \[Ruth, ii. 4\]:
"And he said unto the reapers, the Lord be with you," and also \[Judges,
vi. 12\]: "The Lord is with thee." To what purpose is the second
quotation? Lest one say that Boas did it according to his own opinion
and without the admission by heaven, therefore the other quotation which
was said by an angel. And concerning tithe from \[Malachi, iii. 10\]:
"Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
provision in my house, and prove me but herewith, saith the Lord of
hosts, if I will not open for you the windows of heaven, and pour out
for you a blessing, until it be more than enough."

R. Elazar said: At three places the Holy Spirit appeared: At the court
of Shem, of the prophet Samuel, and in the court of King Solomon. At the
court of Shem \[Gen. xxxviii. 26\]: "And Judah acknowledged them and
said, She hath been more righteous than I." And whence did he know it?
Perhaps as he was with her, so was some one else? Therefore a heavenly
voice was heard: I have decided that so is it to be. In the court of
Samuel \[I Samuel, xii. 5\]: "And he <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)
answered, He is witness." He? *they* ought to be! Hence a heavenly voice
was heard, I witness that so it is. And \[I Kings, iii. 27\]: "The king
then answered and said, Give her the living child and do not slay it.
she is its mother." And whence do we know it is so; perhaps she
nevertheless deceived him? Hence the last words, "she is its mother,"
were said by a heavenly voice. Said Rabha: If it were inferred from the
Scripture only, all of them could be objected to, but this is known by
tradition.

R. Simlayi lectured: Six hundred and thirteen commands were said to
Moses; three hundred and sixty-five of them negatives, corresponding to
the number of days in a year counting according to sunrise; and two
hundred and forty-eight positives,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

corresponding to the members of a man's body. Said R. Hamnunah: Where is
there an allusion thereto in the Scripture? \[Deut. xxxiii. 4\]: "The
Torah which Moses commanded us." The letters of the word Torah number
six hundred and eleven (Tav is 400; Vov, 6; Reish, 200, and Hei, 5), and
the two first commandments, however, of the ten, we ourselves have heard
from Heaven. However, David came and reduced their number to eleven
\[Psalm xv. 2-5\]: "He that walketh uprightly" means Abraham, to whom
such an expression was said in \[Gen. xvii. 1\]: "Worketh righteously"
means Aba A'helqiah (see Tainith, p. 66-68). "Speaketh the truth" as,
*e.g.*, R. Saphra. "Uttereth no calumny," *i.e.*, Jacob, our father.
"That doth no evil to his neighbor," *i.e.*, he who takes care not to
compete with his neighbor's business. "No reproach on his fellow man"
means him who approaches his relatives. "Despicable is despised" means
the king, who carried his father's bones on a bed of ropes. "Honoreth
those who fear the Lord" means King Jehoshofath, who used to arise from
his throne on seeing a scholar, kissed him, and called him, my father,
my master, etc. "That sweareth to his own injury, and changeth not,"
*i.e.*, as R. Jehanan said: If one says I will fast until I will come
home, it is to be considered. "Money for interest," *i.e.*, him who does
not accept usury even from an idolator. "Taketh no bribe" means, *e.g.*,
R. Ismael b. Jose, who does not accept even his own goods from his
gardener for the purpose that he shall try his case. "He that doth these
things shall not be moved to eternity." \[When R. Gamaliel used to come
to this passage, he used to weep, saying: Who performed *all* this shall
not be moved, but one of them does not suffice (see Sanhedrin, p.
237).\]

Isaiah, then came and reduced them (the 613 commands) to six \[xxxiii.
15\]: "He that (*a*) walketh in righteousness, (*b*) speaketh uprightly,
(*c*) despiseth the gain of oppressions, (*d*) shaketh his hands against
taking hold of bribes, (e) stoppeth his ears against hearing of blood,
and (f) shutteth his eyes against looking on evil." (*a*) Means Abraham,
of whom it reads \[Gen. xviii. 19\]: "For I know him, that he will
command," etc. (*b*) Means him who does not anger his colleague in
public. (*c*) Means R. Ishmael b. Elisha. (*d*) R. Ishmael b. Jose.
(*e*) R. Eliezar b. Simeon, and (*f*) means as R. Hiya b. Aba said: Who
does not look on women washing near the bank of the river. (See last
gate, p. 137.)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Michah came and reduced them to three \[vi. 8\]: "He hath told thee, O
man, what is good; and what the Lord doth re quire of thee: (nothing)
but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy
God." "To do justice" means judgment; "love kindness" bestowing of
favors; and "walk humbly," providing for burial of the dead and marriage
of poor maidens.

Isaiah (the second) again reduced them to two \[lvi. 1\]: "Thus hath
said the Lord, Keep ye justice and do equity."

Amos then came and reduced them to one \[v. 4\]: "Seek ye for me, and ye
shall live."

R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak opposed: Perhaps he means seek for me to perform
everything that is written in the Law? Therefore Habakkuk was the one
who reduced them to one \[ii. 4\]: "The righteous should live with his
faith." Said R. Jose b. Hanina: Four decrees Moses has decreed upon
Israel, and four prophets came and abolished them. Moses said \[Deut.
xxxiii. 28\]: "And then dwelt Israel in safety, alone," etc. Amos
abolished it \[vii. 5\]: "How should Jacob be able to endure," then
immediately in (6) "The Lord bethought . . . this shall not be." Moses
said \[Deut. xxviii. 65\]: "And among these nations shalt thou find no
ease." Jeremiah abolished it, saying \[xxxi. 2\]: "He is going to give
rest to Israel." <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) Moses said \[Ex.
xxxiv. 7\]: "Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children."
Ezekiel abolished it by saying \[xviii. 4\]: "The soul which sinneth,
that alone shall die." Moses said \[Lev. xxvi. 38\]: "And ye shall be
lost among the nations." Isaiah abolished it by saying \[xxvii. 13\]:
"The great cornet shall be blown," etc. Said Rabh, I am nevertheless
afraid of the passage "ye shall be lost among the nations," and of the
end of same, "the land of your enemies shall consume you." Marzutrah
opposed, relating the following: It happened with Rabban Gamaliel, R.
Elazar b. Azariah, R. Jehoshua, and R. Aqiba, who were on the road, and
heard the noise of the city of Rome at Patlus, a distance of 120 miles,
and they began to weep; but R. Aqiba smiled. And to the question, Why
are you smiling, he returned the question, Why do you weep; rejoined
they: Those idolators who bow themselves to images and smoke
frankincense to the idols are resting in peace, the contrary is with us,
that even our holy Temple is burned by fire,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and we should not weep? Rejoined he: For the same reason I am smiling.
If such is done to them who act against His will so much the more will
be done in the future to them who act in accordance with His will. It
happened again that the same were going to Jerusalem, when they arrived
to the Mount Zerphim, they tore their garments; and when they approached
the Mount of the Temple and saw a fox running from the place where the
Holy of Holies had been situated, they began to weep; but R. Aqiba
smiled. To their question why he smiled, he answered: It reads \[Isaiah,
Viii. 2\]: "Witnesses, Uriyah the priest, and Zecharyahu," etc. Why is
Uriyah conjoined with Zecharyahu? Was not the former at the first Temple
and the latter at the second? It was because the passage bases the
prophecy of Zecharyahu upon the prophecy of Uriyah. Uriyah said \[Micha
iii. 12\]: "Therefore for your sake shall Zion be ploughed up as a
field," etc. Zechariah said \[viii. 4\]: "Again shall there sit old men
and old women in the streets of Jerusalem," etc. Until the prophecy of
Uriyah was not fulfilled I feared lest the prophecy of Zechariah will
come to be realized but now since I see that Uriyah's prophecy is
fulfilled I am sure that Zechariah's prophecy will also be fulfilled in
the near future. Upon this version they said to him: Aqiba, thou hast
condoled us, thou hast condoled us!

APPENDIX TO PAGE 50.

R. Shesheth said in the name of R. Eliezer b. Azariah: He who disgraces
the festivals is regarded as if he worshipped idols, as it reads \[Exod.
xxxiv. 17\]: "Thou shall not make unto thyself any molten gods," and
immediately follows the verse "The feast," etc, The same said again in
the name of the said authority: He who speaks evil of his neighbor, he
who listens to such evil-speaking, finally he who bears false testimony
deserves to be thrown to the dogs, as \[ibid. xxii. 30\] "to the dogs
shall ye cast it," is immediately followed by \[xxiii. 1\] "Ye shall not
spread (thisso) false report," which should be read also thassi, *i.e.*,
ye shall not excite one against the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[35:1](mac08.htm#fr_13) *I. e.*, meat of a
sacrifice illegally slaughtered.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[36:1](mac08.htm#fr_14) The text contains also
what Itz'hak said, repeated from Kherithoth,--the proper place.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[36:2](mac08.htm#fr_15) The text contains a long
discussion about this subject, which is repeated in many places of the
Talmud; here, however, this is very complicated and not important, and
therefore omitted.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[39:1](mac08.htm#fr_16) Lev. xxvii., 10.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[40:1](mac08.htm#fr_17) This will be explained
in Tract Gittin.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[41:1](mac08.htm#fr_18) Deut. xxv, 15.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[43:1](mac08.htm#fr_19) The text argues as to
how the theory can be objected to by a very complicated process of
reasoning, and from things entirely irrelevant to the subject, and
therefore omitted.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[44:1](mac08.htm#fr_20) Leeser's translation
does not correspond.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[45:1](mac08.htm#fr_21) For an illustration of
the five corners, see Rashi, as we do not deem it necessary to
illustrate them for the English reader.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[46:1](mac08.htm#fr_22) The term "for dead" is
"l'Nefesh," which means for a dead soul.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[53:1](mac08.htm#fr_23) Leeser's translation
does not correspond.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[55:1](mac08.htm#fr_24) Leeser's translation
does not correspond.
