[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mac02)  [Next](mac04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# CONCLUDING WORDS

##### TO THE COMPLETION OF SECTIONS FESTIVAL AND JURISPRUDENCE.

With the benediction to the Almighty, who prolonged our life to see the
completion of our translation the above two large sections of the
Talmud, we deem it necessary to say a few words concerning the
criticisms which have recently appeared, and to which we are grateful
for having called our attention to some important matters. However,
before we will come to the point we beg to say that we were anxious
during the whole time to see a true criticism to our entire work,
pointing out the mistakes or errors which must be found in the editing
as well as in the translating itself of such a difficult and voluminous
work. But to our knowledge such has not appeared anywhere as yet,
although reviews and notices of different kinds were given in more than
a hundred leading papers in both the old and the new world. The praises
encouraged us but little, and some of the criticisms did not discourage
us at all, for the reason that both were only phrases, without giving
any evidence or important facts to which our proper attention should be
called. And we would still be grateful indeed to those who would give
such criticisms in compliance with our wishes, as this would be a great
help to us in the continuation of the translation of the four remaining
sections, which may take about twelve volumes or so more. Now to the
point. There was a criticism in the "Open Court" of Chicago, Vol. XVI.,
pp. 425-427, accusing us that we have omitted the discussion of some
sages concerning "evangelium." How it should be written ‏עןנ-גליון‎ or
‏אונ-גליון‎  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

and for such an omission he exclaimed that we have no translation of the
whole Talmud. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) We have received also
some private letters from educated people, asking why they do not find
any mention of Jesus of Nazareth. And in answer to the criticism as well
as to the many letters we have received, we beg to give some letters of
an editor of a scientific paper of this country, which we think will
throw some light on this matter.

June I, 1901.

REV. MICHAEL RODKINSON,

New York City.

Dear Sir:--The receipt of Volume XII. of the Talmud brings back
recollections of a pleasant hour spent with you in my office, and the
information which you so kindly gave me on several very obscure points.
Perhaps you will pardon a personal letter of inquiry on a point or two
in "Sabbath" that have especially interested me.

You will remember where the subject is discussed as to whether it was
lawful to rescue books from the flames, the point turning especially, as
I read it, that on the one hand the books of unbelievers should be
allowed to perish, while on the other hand, these same books also
contain the Sacred Name.

R. Abuha is asked if the books of the Be Abhidon should be saved, and
gives an equivocal reply. It is stated that Rabh went to neither the Be
Abhidon nor the Be Nitzrephe. Samuel went to the Abhidon, and Mar Bar
Joseph "was of their society."

Your note on the passage leaves it conjectural who the people were. To
me it seems altogether likely that they were Christian sects (possibly
Jewish Christians and Gentile Christians). I should infer this because,
first, R. Tarphon's statement immediately precedes it, and Christian
tradition at least connects him with disputes with Christians. Second,
the story of Ema Shalom and her brother Gamaliel II., and the
philosopher and judge follows it. It seems to me that there are at least
three implied quotations in this story from Matthew's Gospel or some
other Christian document: "Let your light shine," "I came not to destroy
but fulfill the law," and the statement about son and daughter
inheriting alike.

Do Hebrew scholars think that Christians are indicated by Be Abhidon and
Be Nitzrephe? And if so, how is the fact explained that Samuel went to
one of them, unless it be that Samuel is Saul (Paul), and how could Mar
Bar Joseph be of their society?

It seems to me that I find a number of places where Christian usages or

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

doctrines are referred to, and I wish I were informed as to the names
would show this. If you could give me some and other indications which
light, without trespassing too much on your time, I would be very
grateful indeed.

June 12, 1901.

My Dear Sir: Your kind favor of the 9th at hand and carefully noted. I
assume that you have good and sufficient reasons for your hesitation in
such a matter, although they may not be apparent to me. Therefore it
only remains for me to assure you as strongly as I know how, that the
information I seek is only for myself, that it will not be published,
that it will not be quoted even in conversation as your opinion.

1 simply wish to read understandingly the fine work you are placing
before English readers; I want to get into the atmosphere of the times
as much as possible. Judaism and Christianity must have touched elbows a
good deal in the first three centuries, and there must be some evidences
of it in the Talmud to those who can read between the lines. I think I
can see references. For instance, were there Saducees after the final
overthrow, and is not the term, at least occasionally, applied to
Christians?

My own conviction, which of course, is based on very superficial
knowledge mostly gleaned from the early Christian Fathers, is that at
first, the line of demarcation between the Jewish Christians and the
Jews was not so strong as it became afterwards. But at any rate, there
must be more references to them than appear on the surface, it seems to
me, and that is what I want to know. But I have no theory to vindicate
and seek the knowledge only for myself.

July 2, 1901.

My Dear Sir: I wish to acknowledge the receipt of your very kind and
instructive letter of two weeks ago. It covers substantially the points
I wished to know, and saved me much research that might in the end prove
barren of results. I shall remember your kindness. Again thanking you, I
am,

And to these letters we may add a paragraph of Tract Sabbath, p. 119.
"R. Aqiba said: 'The wood-gatherer was Zelophchad.' To which R. Jehudah
b. Bathyra exclaimed: 'Aqiba! Whether your statement be true or false,
you will have to answer for it at the time of the divine judgment; for
if it be true, you disclosed the name of the man whom the Scriptures
direct to shield, and thus you brought him unto infamy, and if it be
false, you slandered a man who was upright,'" etc. (See there.) And this
rule we adopted while engaged in this translation--namely, not to give
hypotheses to the reader, as there is not one line in the whole Mishna
which speaks clearly of Jesus and his beliefs. In our book on
"Phylacteries" we have alluded to the reason why the editor of the
Mishna did so. And the same reason prevented us from *interpreting*
passages or paragraphs which seemed to us to treat about Jesus and his

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

followers, as after all these are only hypotheses, and we do not like to
throw our suppositions in a translation which ought to be more or less
authentic. This is all that we can say in answer to the "Open Court."

There has appeared in the "Baltimore Sun," April 17, 1903, a notice
which, in the main, is very flattering, but gives also some criticisms
that are of interest, and correct from the standpoint of the writer.
They concern the remarks sub 3 and 4 of the "Explanatory Remarks"
published in each volume on the other side of the title-page. Concerning
the fourth he says: "There are many who would be glad to verify
references who may not have a copy of the new Hebrew text, or unable to
use it, if they had it." Concerning the third remark he says: "This
seems unfortunate. The alternative interpretation is often of very
considerable value, and may be used for historical purposes even if not
so important theologically." To this we may say that we were very
careful when omitting the first version, and where we found it important
we translated both, as the reader will find in our Talmud in many
places, "If you wish, it may be said so, and if you wish, it may be said
so and so." And we did not fail even to translate a third "if you wish"
when we saw that they all were of importance. In general, however, only
the last versions are of great account, and the decisions of the
post-talmudical rabbis were only in accordance with those. And only they
are the guides of the Schul'han Arush (Jewish Code).

Concerning the fourth we may confess that the critic is perfectly right
in his contention. However, it is not our fault but that of the
circumstances which deceived us in the beginning of our undertaking. We
previously thought that we would find subscribers for the Hebrew text
also, and so give the Hebrew with the English together, and then there
would have certainly been no need of separately marking the pages of the
text. Unfortunately, there was no demand for the text at all, so that we
were unable to furnish it with the translation, and in reality, for the
general English reader who is not able to read Hebrew the page of the
text is immaterial. And for the Hebrew students, who are very few, we
could not afford to go to such expense, as a separate column for each
page would be necessary for this purpose, for such could not be inserted
in the text even in parentheses.

Concerning the last Tract Horioth, which speaks of sacrifices

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

and offerings only, we are at a loss to understand why it was inserted
in the section Jurisprudence, unless the reason be the treatment of
whether the expenses of the offerings must be carried by the judges of
the court themselves or by the treasury of the congregation, which may
belong to the category of damages.

However, the whole tract treats almost of one and the same point, so
that we could not give the contents of each chapter separately, and
confined ourselves by giving the synopsis of the beginning of each
Mishna and some important matters from the Gemara, of the last.

M. L. R.

NEW YORK, *May* 25, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](mac03.htm#fr_0) The meaning of the first
two words is one and the same. And the [*aleph*](errata.htm#35) here is
the same as the *ayen*. The same differ also about the same letters
concerning the word "Eidehen," Abuda Zara, p.1. (see foot-note there);
hence, as it is without any importance for the English reader, we have
to omit it, according to our method. But that what was said in the name
of Jesus by Jacob (James) we have translated, although we do not believe
that this was so (see foot-note, ibid. p. 27).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vi:1](mac03.htm#fr_1) Some one has called our
attention to this article being in the public library about a year ago
and we only glanced at it for lack of time. And for the same reason we
could not have the original before us when we are writing our answer. By
the way, we like to say that there is published a booklet,
"Chasronoth-Hashas," containing the omission made by the censor about
Jesus and his disciples, to which we do not pay any attention, as its
contents are nonsense and we are sure that these were not said or
written by the talmudic scholars. We also possess a letter from the late
lamented Dr. Mielziner, who agrees with us on this point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](mac04)
