[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shb00)  [Next](shb02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

#### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# TRACT SHEBUOTH (OATHS).

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *I*. There are two kinds of oaths which are subdivided into four.
The he-goat makes it pending. How is this to be understood? If it does
not atone, what is the use of making it pending? It means, *i.e.*, if
the transgressor dies then it may be considered that if he dies before
he becomes aware of it, this sin is not reckoned to him any more. Said
Rabha to him: "In case he dies, the death itself completes the
atonement; it is the he-goat that saves him from chastisement before he
becomes aware by making it pending. All the above-mentioned persons are
atoned for by the exported he-goats for all other transgressions without
any difference, etc. Such is the custom of the divine attribute of
justice, that the righteous atone for the wicked and not that the wicked
atone for another wicked, [1](shb02.htm#page_1.md)-16

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNA *I*. The cognition of uncleanness is of two kinds subdivided into
four. The courtyard was sanctified with the remains of a meal-offering
only, in order to make it equal to the City of Jerusalem itself, etc.
The orchestra of the thanks-offering consisted of violins, fifes,
trumpets on every corner as well as on every elevated stone in
Jerusalem, and used to play, etc. It was taught, R. Huna says: "All the
details in the Mishna were essential in the construction, etc. If one
enters a leprous house backwards, although all his body was already in
the house except his nose, he remains clean. And ye shall separate the
children of Israel from their uncleanness," whence you derive the
warning that the children of Israel should separate themselves from
their wives near the period of menstruation, etc. If there were two
paths one of which was unclean (but it was not certain which one), and
one passed through one of them entering, etc. [17](shb03.htm#page_17.md)-26

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *I*. TO *VII*. There are two kinds of oaths subdivided into four.
I swear that I will eat, or I will not eat, etc. Where do we find that
one must bring an offering for mere talk, as this one does talk and
brings an offering. What is Issor mentioned in the Torah? If one says:
"I take upon myself not to eat meat," etc. Vain (Shakve) and false
(Shekker) are identical. Stripes apply to all negatives of the Torah
implying manual labor, but not to those without manual labor, excepting,
however, an oath. There is a moth, which is but a minimum in size, and
yet one is liable for

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

consuming it. I swear that I will not eat, and thereafter eats and
drinks, he is guilty but once. I will drink neither wine, oil nor honey,
and then drinks, he is guilty for each severally. If he swore not to eat
and thereafter ate carcasses or illegal cattle, reptiles and vermin, he
is guilty. R. Simeon declares him free. The reason of him who holds that
one is liable for an inclusion is that he compares it to an additional
prohibition. It is immaterial whether the things sworn off concern
himself or others, whether they are or are not of some essential nature.
One is guilty only for an oath made with reference to the future, etc. I
swear that I know something to testify for you, and it is found
hereafter that he knows nothing, etc. There is a rule that, if to
something that was included in the general a new law be applied, only by
the new one must guide one's self, etc. To exclude compulsion what could
illustrate this? As it happened to R. Kahana and R. Assi after the
lectures at Rabh's college, etc. Suppose one swear not to eat this
bread, and then he is in danger if he does not eat it, how is it, etc.?
If one swears to ignore some commandment and does not carry out his
oath, etc. If one says I swear not to eat *this* bread, in case I eat
the other, etc. Which is false swearing? If one swears that something is
different from what it is known by everybody to be. The provisions
regarding uttered swearing apply to males, females, to kindred,
non-kindred, etc. [27](shb04.htm#page_27.md)-46

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA *I*. TO *VI*. The witness-oath applies to men but not to women,
to unrelated but not to kindred, etc. If a scholar was aware of a case,
but it was a humiliation to him to go to that particular court he may
remain at home, etc., concerning civil cases only. The many things
inferred from Exod. xxiii. 7. Keep thyself far from a false speech. How
does a witness-oath come about? If some one said to two, etc. If there
were two parties of witnesses and both denied successively, etc. There
is also a case concerning a witness who refuses to testify to the death
of a husband, etc. If one of them denies and the other confesses, etc. I
adjure you that you come and bear me witness, that I have in the
possession of so and so, etc. I adjure you to testify that so and so has
spread abroad an evil name on my daughter, etc. We swear that we know
nothing for you, while in reality they do know, etc. I adjure you, I
impose upon you, I bind you (by oath) so they are guilty, etc. If one
writes Aleph Lamed (the first letters from Eloim), etc. It must not be
erased, etc. All the divine names found in the Torah in connection with
Abraham are holy, etc. Amen embraces oath, acceptance and confidence,
etc. Nay means oath and yea means also an oath, etc. R. Kama, while
sitting before R. Jehudah, repeated the Mishna in its own language, and
he said to him: "Change the language and use it in the third person,
[46](shb04.htm#page_46.md)-65

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNA *I*. TO *VI*. The depository oath concerns men and women
non-kindred and kindred, those fit to testify and those unfit, etc. What
is the law, when one has intentionally made a depository oath in spite
of a warning, is he liable to a sin-offering or not? If the depository
claims that the

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

deposit has been stolen from him, swears, but thereafter confesses, etc.
If one denies money when there are witnesses, he is subject to an oath,
but is free from such if there is a document. How is it if five persons
claim the four articles and he says to one of them I swear that thou
hast not with me a deposit, etc., and not thou and not thou, etc.
[66](shb05.htm#page_66.md)-74

### CHAPTER VI.

MISHNA *I*. TO *III*. In the case of an oath before court, the claim
must amount to two silver, and the confession to one peruta, etc. If one
requires movables and real estate, and the other admits movables but
denies real estate or *vice versa*, he is free, etc. One must stand when
taking the oath; a scholar, however, may do it while sitting. An oath
taken by one before the court must be uttered in a language he
understands, and the court must say to him the following introduction.
Be aware that the whole world was trembling when the Lord spake on the
Mount Sinai: "Thou shalt not bear the name of the Lord thy God falsely."
I have with you a gold dinar in gold. Nay you have with me only a silver
dinar, he is liable. If one was about to claim wheat, and the defendant
hastened to confess barley, etc. What is the difference between a
biblical and a rabbinical oath. I have a mana with you. Yea, you shall
not return it to me without the presence of witnesses, etc. In another
case one demanded a hundred zuz, etc. A borrower said to the lender:
"You are trusted so long as you will say that I have not paid you";
thereafter he paid him in the presence of witnesses, etc. One does not
swear to the following: To slaves written documents, etc. One swears but
to things capable of being measured, weighed and counted. How so? If one
lends to his neighbor on a pledge, and the pledge got lost, etc. If one
lends to his neighbor 1,000 zuz, and pledges them the handle of a scythe
only, etc. [75](shb06.htm#page_75.md)-93

### CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA *I*. All those who are subject to a biblical oath swear and do
not pay, etc. Give me change for a dinar. Give the dinar. I have given
it to you already, etc. You have hired me for two zuz to repair
something, while the employer says that he hired him only for one zuz,
etc. If witnesses saw one concealing utensils under his garments when
coming out from a house, and he claims that he had bought them, etc. The
oath returns to its place--the Mount Sinai. If there were two parties of
witnesses contradicting each other, each party may appear and testify
for itself. Let the master conjoin with us in nullifying the statement
of Rabh and Samuel. It once happened that B, who had borrowed money of A
through a surety and on a document died, etc.
[93](shb08.htm#page_93.md)-105

### CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNA I. There are four kinds of bailees, gratuitous, on hire, borrower
and hirer, etc. This is the rule: "Whoever tends to commutate, by his
oath liability to liability, unliability to unability, or unability to
liability is free, etc. Appendix, [106](shb09.htm#page_106.md)-108.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](shb02.md)
