[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shb06)  [Next](shb08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE COURT
GIVES AN OATH TO ONE OF THE CONTESTANTS.--THE NATURE OF THE CLAIM AND OF
ITS PARTIAL ADMISSION.--WHICH ADMISSION IS OR IS NOT REGARDED AS
CORRESPONDING WITH THE CLAIM.--THE CASES WHERE THE CLAIM IS FOR
MOVEABLES AND THE ADMISSION FOR IMMOVABLES, OR *vice versa*.--WHO ARE OR
ARE NOT FIT TO ENTER A CLAIM WHICH ENTAILS AN OATH.--THE FORM OF THE
OATH AND THE INTRODUCTION THERETO USED BY THE COURT, AS WELL AS THE KIND
OF SACRED OBJECT ONE MUST HOLD WHEN TAKING THE OATH.--ARTICLES THE CLAIM
TO WHICH ENTAILS NO OATH.--THE CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH EITHER AN OATH
MUST BE TAKEN FOR A LOST PLEDGE OR THE VALUE THEREOF MUST BE PAID.

MISHNA *I*.: In the case of an oath before court, the claim must amount
to two silver, and the confession, to one peruta; and if the confession
is not of the same kind with the claim, he is free. How so? I have with
you two silver. You have by me only one peruta; he is free. I have with
you two silver and one peruta. You have by me but one peruta; he is
liable. I have with you one mana. You have nothing by me; he is free. I
have one mana with you. You have by me only fifty dinar; he is liable.
My father has a mana with you. You have by me only fifty dinar; he is
free, for he is in this case like to him who returns a thing lost. I
have with you a mana. Yea. Next day the plaintiff says: Give it to me. I
have given it to you already; he is free; but if his answer be: You have
nothing by me, he is liable. I have with you a mana. Yea. Give it to me
only in presence of witnesses. Next day he requires the money, whereupon
the defendant says: I have given it to you already; he is liable, as he
was to pay it before witnesses. I have in your possession a litra of
gold. Nay; you have by me only a litra of silver; he is free. But if
plaintiff says: I have with you a *gold* dinar. Nay; you have by me only
a silver dinar, a trecissis, a fundion and a perutah, he is liable,
since all the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

mentioned coins are of the same kind. I have in your possession a kur of
grain. Nay; you have only a lethech of legume; he is free. I have with
you a kur of fruit. Nay; you have by me only a lethech of legume; he is
liable, since legume is in the category of fruit. If the claim was wheat
and the defendant admits barley, he is free. Raban Gamaliel, however,
finds him liable. If one requires from another tankards of oil, and
latter admits pitchers, he must, according to Admon, take the oath,
since it is a case of partial admission; but the sages say: The
confession is not of the same kind with the claim. Said R. Gamaliel:
Admon's decision appears to me to be correct. If one requires movables
and real estate and the other admits movables but denies real estate or
*vice versa*, he is free. If he admits but a part of the real estate he
is likewise free; but if he admits but a part of the movables, he is
liable, for property that is not subject to loss necessitates the taking
of the oath with reference to property that is subject thereto. There is
no oath to the claim of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor; nor is a
minor to take an oath, but there is an oath to the claim of a minor or
of the sanctuary.

GEMARA: How is an oath given? Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: One
is made to swear with the oath of the Scripture \[Gen. xxiv. 3\]: "And
he will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven." Said Rabina to
R. Ashi: Is this in accordance with R. Hanina b. Aidi, who said that the
unique holy name is required?" Answered he: Nay; this may be even in
accordance with the rabbis, who say that a divine attribute is
sufficient, and the difference between the two is that he (who takes the
oath) must keep in his hand a holy object; and this is in accordance
with Rabha, who said that a judge who gives one the oath in the name of
the Lord the God of heaven should be considered as he who erred in what
was written plainly in a Mishna, so that the oath must be given again.
And R. Papa says that a judge who gives one the oath by making him keep
the *Tephilin*, is likewise considered erring, as the object kept must
be the holy scrolls. (Says the Gemara): The Halakha prevails with Rabha,
as there is no oath made without one's holding some holy object; and not
with R. Papa, as after all there was a holy object in the hand of the
one who took the oath.

One must stand when taking the oath; a scholar, however, may do it while
sitting. Furthermore. the oath must originally

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

be performed with the holy scrolls; a scholar, however, may take the
oath even originally with *Tephilin*.

The rabbis taught: Also an oath taken by one before the court must be
uttered in a language he understands, and the court must say to him the
following introduction to the oath: Be aware that the whole world was
trembling when the Holy One, blessed be He, spake on the Mount Sinai:
"Thou shalt not bear the name of the Lord thy God falsely"; likewise
concerning all transgressions mentioned in the Torah it reads:
"*Venakkei*" (literally, he will forgive), and concerning a false oath
it reads further, "*Lo ienakei*" (literally, he will not forgive);
again, for all other transgressions only the sinner himself is punished,
while here (in case of oath) the punishment extends also to his family,
as it reads \[Eccl. v. 5\]: "Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin," and by the expression "flesh" one's family is meant, as \[Isa.
lviii. 7\]: "From thy own flesh." Furthermore, for all other
transgressions the sinner himself is alone punished, while here the
whole world is punished, as \[Hosea, iv. 2, 3\]: "There is false
swearing, etc. . . . therefore shall the land mourn." (But perhaps it
means that only when the sinner committed *all* the transgressions
mentioned here in Hosea? This cannot be borne in mind, as it reads in
\[Jerem. xxiii. 10\]: "For because of false swearing mourneth the
land.") Again, the punishment for all other transgression is, because of
the merits of the sinner's forefathers, postponed for some two or three
generations, but here he is punished immediately, as it reads \[Zech. v.
4\]: "I bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into
the house of the thief, and in to the house of him that sweareth falsely
by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with its timber and its stones"; "I bring it forth" means
immediately; "it shall enter into the house of the thief" means who
steal the mind of the people, *e.g.*, he who has no money with his
neighbor, claims such and makes latter swear; "into the house of him who
sweareth falsely" means literally; "it shall remain in the midst of his
house," etc., to learn from this that things indestructible by fire or
water are destroyed by false swearing. If after having listened to all
this introduction, he says: "I will not take the oath," the court sends
him away immediately (that he might not reconsider and take it); but if
he says: "I will nevertheless swear," the people present say \[Numb.
xvi. 26\]: "Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked."

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Again, when he is ready to take the oath, the court says again to him:
Be aware that the oath which you take is not according to your own mind,
but to the mind of the Omnipotent and of the court, as we find by Moses,
our master, when he made the Israelites swear, he said: You shall be
aware that your oath is not by your own mind, but by that of the
Omnipotent, as it reads \[Deut. xxix. 13, 14\]: "And not with you alone,
etc. . . . But with him that is standing here," etc., and it is not
meant only those were at the Mount Sinai, but all future generations,
and all proselytes who will embrace Judaism in the future; and not only
regarding the commandments given on that Mount, but also regarding all
commandments that will be established in the future and be they lenient,
such as the reading of the Book of Esther, as it reads there \[Est. ix.
27\]: "The Jews confirmed it as a duty," etc., which means they
confirmed a duty imposed upon them in the past.

The text above states "also an oath," etc. Why also? It is an addition
to a Mishna in Tract Benedictions--viz.: the following are uttered in
any language: The portion said to a suspected woman, the confession on
tithe, the reading of *Shema*, the saying of the prayer, of the
benediction after meals, the witness-oath, and the oath of a depository.
So that the "also" from here comes to add yet the oath given by the
court.

The master says: The whole world was trembling, etc. But why? Was it
because it was ordained on Sinai? Then, all the ten commandments were
given there; and if because it is more rigorous, is it indeed so? Is
there not a Mishna: Lenient means positive and negative, except "Thou
shalt not bear the holy name," etc.; rigorous are those under the
category of capital punishment and *Korath*, and the commandment "Thou
shalt not bear," etc. belongs to these (hence, we see that it belongs to
the same category with these)? The answer is that to all other
transgressions *Venakkei* applies, while here *Lo ienakkei* applies, as
above. But does it not read together *Venakkei lo ienakkei*? This is
explained by R. Elazar, who said: It is impossible to say *Venakkei* (he
will forgive) as it is followed by *lo ienakkei* (he will not forgive),
nor is it possible to say "he will not forgive" after it reads "he will
forgive," therefore it must mean, he will forgive the repenters, but not
those who do not repent. (The master says there) further: For all
transgressions, etc., while here (in the case of oath) the punishment
extends also to his family. But does it not read \[Lev. xx. 5\]: "Then I
will set

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

my face against this man and against his family." And there is a
Boraitha: R. Simeon says, If he has sinned, what has his family done; to
teach that a family, where there is a contractor or a robber, is all
considered robbers because it supports him? There *he* is punished with
the punishment attached to his transgression, but the family with a
lenient one; while here the family suffers the same punishment with the
perjuror. As we have learned in the following Boraitha: Rabbi said, to
what purpose is it written in the above-cited verse, "I will cut him
off," after it reads "I will set my face," etc,? To teach that only
*him* I will cut off but not the whole family.

Concerning the punishment of the whole world (mentioned before), does it
not read \[ibid. xxvi. 37\]: "And they shall stumble one over the
other," which is explained elsewhere to mean "one because of the sin of
the other," as all the children of Israel are mutually responsible one
for the other? The reason then is that they could have prevented the sin
by protesting, but did not do so. But is not one's family included in
the "whole world"? There is a difference in the nature of the
punishment--viz.: his family is punished more rigorously than the rest
of the world.

The text says: If he says, "I will swear, the people say: Depart," etc.
Why are both the parties called wicked? Let only him who swears have
this name. It is in accordance with R. Simeon b. Tarfon, who says in the
following Boraitha \[Exod. xxii. 10\]: "Then shall an oath of the Lord
be between them both," infer from this that the oath rests upon them
both. It states there further on: "Not according to your own mind." To
what purpose is this? Because of a case that happened in Rabha's court
(where the defendant put up the money claimed from him in a case and,
while going to swear, he gave it to the plaintiff to hold, and swore
then that he has returned the money, thus convinced that he had made a
true oath).

"*I have with you two silver*," etc. According to Rabh the denial must
be for two silver; according to Samuel the claim must amount to two
silver, while the denial or the confession may be even for one *peruta*.
Said Rabha: Our Mishna seems to be in accordance with Rabh, as it states
that the claim must amount to two silver and the confession to one
*peruta*, but it does not state the denial to be of one *peruta*; the
Scripture, however, seems to be in accordance with Samuel, as it reads
\[ibid. ibid. 6\]: "If a man do deliver unto his neighbor money

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

or vessels to keep," and as "vessels" is used in the plural, so is money
(silvers) here in the plural; and as silver is a valuable, so everything
that is a valuable; and \[ibid. 8\]: "Of which he can says this it is"
signifies however little it may be, hence, the confession must be to a
claim that is no less than two silver.

There is an objection from the following Mishna: I have with you two
silver. Nay; you have only one peruta; he is free from an oath. Now, is
it not because the denial here is less than of two silver, and it is an
objection to Samuel? Nay; it means particularly: He claims two *silver*,
and the answer is, *peruta*, which is in *copper*, consequently the
confession was not of the same kind with the claim. But if so, how is
the second part to be understood--viz.: I have with you two silver and a
*peruta*. Nay; you have with me only one *peruta*; he is liable. Now, if
the claim was for the *value* of two silver, it is correct that he is
liable, for the confession concerned the same kind as the claim; but if
it is a claim particular on silver, then the other confessed to what was
not claimed, and what this one claimed was not confessed? But is not the
objection concerning Samuel, and R. Na'hman said that Samuel holds one
liable for confessing one of the articles embraced in the claim; and it
seems to be that the Mishna was particular regarding the kind, and not
the value, of the metal, as it states in its last part: I have with you
a *litra* gold. Nay; you have with me a *litra* silver; he is free. Now,
if it is particular with regard to the kind of metal, then it is
correct; but if it means the value of the metal, why should he be free,
when the value of gold is so many times more than that of the same
quantity of silver? Hence, as this last part is indisputably particular
with regard to the kind of metal, so also is the first part. But if so,
let this be an objection to Rabh? Rabh may say: All the Mishna treats of
the value, but in the case of the *litra* gold it is different, as here
the main point is the weight; and a support to this view may be found in
its concluding part, which states: "I have with you a golden dinar."
Nay; you have with me only a silver dinar, a trissis, a pundium and a
peruta, he is liable, as they all are coins. Now, if it speaks of value,
it is right that he is liable, as the claim was for coins and the
confession, too, was for coins; but if it is particular, why should he
be liable when he confesses to silver or copper, the claim being for
gold? Said R. Elazar: It treats of a claim that is made for coins
amounting to the value of a dinar, and this is stated to teach that a
peruta is also considered a coin.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

And so it seems to be, since it adds that "they all are each a kind of
coin." But Rabh reads the Mishna to mean "to them all the law of a coin
applies."

Come and hear: "I have with you a gold dinar in gold." Nay; you have
with me only a silver dinar; he is liable. Now, we see that only because
the claimant added specifically "in gold," the kind of the metal is
particular; but if this were not added, the value of the metal would be
understood? Said R. Ashi.. Nay; the Boraitha intends to teach that if
one says "a gold dinar," it means a dinar in gold.

R. Hyya taught a Boraitha in support of Rabh: I have with you a *sela*.
Nay; a *sela* less two silver; he is liable. But if the answer is. A
sela less a *maäh* (= 2½ silver), he is free (because the denial was for
more than two silver).

Said R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak in the name of Samuel: All that was said
hitherto concerns only the claim of the lender and the confession of the
borrower, but if there was one witness, the borrower is liable even if
the claim amounted only to one peruta; as it reads \[Deut. xix. 15\]:
"There shall not be one witness to any sin or transgression," which
signifies that to a transgression one witness shall not be considered,
but concerning an oath one witness may be considered; and there is a
Boraitha that whereever two witnesses cause the payment of money, one
witness causes an oath.

R. Na'hman said again in the name of the same authority: If the claim
was for wheat and barley, and the confession was to either one, he is
liable. Said R. Itz'hak to him: Thanks, so also said R. Johanan. Was he
thanking because someone differed with R. Johanan? Yea., it was Resh
Lakish who kept silent when R. Johanan said so, only because he was
drinking at that time.

An objection was raised; come and hear: If the claim comprised both
personal and real estate, and the confession was to either, he is free;
if, however, the confession was regarding but a part of the real estate,
he is free; but if to a part of the personal estate, he is liable. We
see, then, that only in a case of real estate to which an oath does not
apply, he is free; but if the claim were for vessels of two kinds
similar to personal and real estate respectively, and he would confess
to either kind he would be liable? Nay; he would be free in this case
also; and the case of personal and real estate is to teach that, when
the confession was only to a part of the personal, he has to swear

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

even for the real estate, too. But what is there new in this teaching:
that one can include in the oath also another claim? This has been
already stated in Middle: Gate? Here is the main teaching, while in
Middle Gate the point is touched on merely by the! way. R. Hyya b. Aba,
however, said in the name of R. Johanan: If the claim was wheat and
barley, and the confession was only to either of them, he is free. But
has not R. Itz'hak expressed his thanks to one for quoting R. Johanan as
saying the very opposite? The Amoraim differ regarding R. Johanan's
statement.

R. Aba b. Mamal objected to R. Hyya: If the claim was for an ox, and the
confession was for a lamb or *vice versa*, he is free; but if the claim
was for an ox and a lamb, and the confession only for one of them, he is
liable? And he answered: This Boraitha is in accordance with Admon; and
you shall not take this answer as mere argument, since it is a fact that
R. Johanan taught so explicitly.

R. Anan said in the name of Samuel: If one was about to claim wheat and
the defendant hastened to confess barley, if it seems to the court that
he did so with a view to elude the court, thereby escaping an oath, he
is liable; but if only to justify the claim, he is free. He said further
in the name of the same authority: If the claim was for two needles, and
the confession was to one, he is liable; as for this purpose the
Scripture mentions vessels, that they remain what they are. R. Papa
said: If the claim was for vessels and a peruta and the confession was
for the vessels and the denial for the peruta, he is free; but if *vice
versa* he is liable. The one case is in accordance with Rabh, who holds
that the denial must be of a claim of two silver, while the other case
is in accordance with Samuel, who holds that of the claim comprised two
articles and the confession was to but one, he is liable.

"*I have a mana with you*," etc. Said R. Na'hman: He is free from a
biblical oath, but he is subject to a rabbinical one. (Here follows a
repetition from Middle Gate and also from First Gate concerning the law
that he who denies a loan is fit to be a witness, while he who denies a
deposit is unfit.) According to others the saying of R. Na'hman
concerned the latter part of the Mishna--viz.: I have a mana with you.
Yea. And the next day when he refuses it, he says: "I have already given
it to you"; he is free, to which R. Na'hman said: He must, however, take
a rabbinical oath. To him who teaches this regarding the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

first part of the Mishna, is obvious that it belongs also to its latter
part; but he who limits this to the latter part reasons thus: In this
latter part money was avowedly involved, but in the first it is
doubtful.

What is the difference between a biblical and a rabbinical oath? The
reversibility of the oath: a biblical oath we do not transfer from one
contestant to the other, while a rabbinical we do. And according to Mar
b. R. Ashi, who says that a biblical oath is also reversible, what is
the difference between the two oaths? The collecting from the property:
where there is a biblical oath, the collection may be made from his
property, which is not the case with a rabbinical oath if he refuses to
take such.

And according to R. Jose who says that a rabbinical oath is also
attended with collection, what is the difference between the two? In the
case where one of the parties was suspected of an oath: if this was a
biblical oath it is transferable to the other party, but if it is a
rabbinical oath, which is only an enactment by the sages, it is not
transferable, for the transferring is itself but an enactment and we do
not impose one enactment upon another.

Now, what is to be done according to the rabbis, the opponents of R.
Jose, who hold that in case of a rabbinical oath no collecting from the
property takes place? We place him under ban. Said Rabina to R. Ashi:
This is like holding one up for his throat till he takes off his clothes
(*i.e.*, it is still worse than collecting from his estate, as he
remains under ban until he pays)! But what shall be done? Place him
under ban for one month, and if he does not come then for absolving he
is, as it is customary, punished according to Rabh's practice, after
which punishment he is left alone.

R. Papa said: If one holds a document in his hand and the defendant
says: the document is already paid up, he is not trusted and must pay.
But if he requires that the plaintiff take an oath that it has not been
paid, the court is to give him an oath. Said R. A'ha b. Rabha to R.
Ashi: Why should this case be different from a marriage contract where
she has to take an oath only when she impairs the contract (*i.e.*, she
claims that only one mana has been paid on it)? And he answered: In that
case where the document is impaired, and the defendant does not require
an oath, the court requires such; in this case, however, the court would
tell him to pay and not exact an oath, but execute the requirement of
the defendant that the plaintiff take

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

an oath; and if the plaintiff was a scholar no oath is to be given. Said
R. Yemer to R. Ashi: Is a young scholar given the liberty to strip men
of their clothes? Say only that if he was a scholar, we do not compel
him to swear, so that it should not seem that the court suspects him,
and on the other hand if he refuses to swear we do not collect his claim
from the defendant.

Again: "*I have a mana with you*." Said R. Jehudah in the name of R.
Assi: If one has made a loan in the presence of witnesses, he must also
return it in presence of witnesses. And when, he continued, I recited
this before Samuel, he told me that the defendant can claim, "I have
paid you in the presence of such and such witnesses, who are now away in
the sea-countries." An objection was raised from our Mishna: "I have
with you a mana. Yea. . . . I have returned it to you," he is free; now,
if he required the money in presence of witnesses, it is a case similar
to making a loan in the presence of witnesses, and nevertheless he is
free, which contradicts R. Assi's statement? R. Assi may say: This is no
comparison, as I speak of a case where the plaintiff has never reposed
on confidence in the defendant, as he did not trust him without
witnesses; but here he trusted him money without witnesses.

R. Joseph taught the same in the name of the above, as follows: If one
makes a loan in presence of witnesses, the borrower is not obliged to
return it in presence of witnesses, unless he was told not to repay
otherwise than in presence of witnesses; and it is to this that Samuel
told me: the defendant may none the less claim to have paid the debt in
presence of such and such who are now in the sea-countries.

An objection was raised from the following. I have a mana with you. Yea.
You shall not return it to me without the presence of witnesses. The
next day, on being asked to return the money, he answered: I have
returned it, the defendant is liable, for he had to return it as he was
told, *i.e.*, in the presence of witnesses; and this contradicts
Samuel's statement? Samuel may say that concerning this law Tanaim
differ in the following Boraitha: I have given to you my money in
presence of witnesses, and you must return it under the same conditions;
then the defendant must either pay or adduce evidence that he has paid
already; R. Jehudah b. Bathina, however, says: He may claim to have
returned the money in presence of witnesses that are now in the
sea-countries. R. A'ha (one of the Saburaërs) overthrew all this
argument by saying: Whence do we know that

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the above Tanaim differ in case he lent him before witnesses, perhaps it
means in case of demanding when he says to him: Have I not lent you in
presence of witnesses, so that you ought to pay me also in the presence
of witnesses; but in case he told him when making the loan that he
should return it in presence of witnesses, all agree that he is liable?
Said R. Papi in the name of Rabha: The Halakha prevails that he who
borrows in the presence of witnesses must pay also in the same manner.
R. Papa, however, said in the name of the same authority that be is not
obliged to do so, unless he was expressly told not to pay otherwise but
in the presence of witnesses; and if the defendant claims to have paid
it in the presence of such and such who are now in the sea-countries, he
is trusted (Maimanides, however, reads: He is not trusted).

There was one who told his neighbor: When you will pay me my debt, you
shall do so in the presence of Rubin and Simon; he, however, has paid it
in presence of two other witnesses (and thereafter the plaintiff says
that they are false witnesses). Said Abayi: What is the difference, he
was told to pay before two witnesses, and so he did? Said Rabha to him:
The plaintiff has purposely specified two witnesses by name that the
defendant may not be able to say that he paid in presence of some other
witnesses!

There was one who said to the borrower: You shall pay me only before two
persons who are able to learn Halakhas; he, however, paid him without
any witnesses present. It then happened that this money was violently
taken away from the plaintiff, and he came to R. Na'hman saying: It is
true, I have received. the money not as a return of the loan, but as a
deposit, until there will happen two witnesses who learn Halakhas and
then he will repay me. Said R. Na'hman to him: As soon as you admit to
have taken the money it is a repayment, and if you want the defendant to
comply with the stipulation regarding the -witnesses, go and bring the
money here in the presence of myself and R. Sheshith, who are learned
not only in Halakhas but also, in *Siphra*, *Siphri*, *Tosephtha* and in
all the *Gemara*.

In another case one demanded a 100 zuz which he lent to him, to which
the defendant answered that such a case has never taken place; the other
party, however, brought witnesses that the loan took place, but that it
was returned; said Abayi: What is to be done, as the same witnesses who
testify that the loan took place, testify also that it has been
returned? Said Rabba

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to him (follow this rule): If one asserts not to have borrowed, it means
he asserts not to have paid (hence, as the statement "that it has never
taken place" is false, according to the evidence of these witnesses, we
must take his word as though meaning: "I have never paid," which must be
taken for granted in spite of all witnesses).

In still another case the plaintiff claimed 100 zuz, and the defendant
answered: Have I not paid you in the presence of so and so? And so an so
upon being quoted said: They know of no such case; and R. Sheshith was
about to say that this defendant must be declared a liar; said Rabha to
him: He was not obliged to repay in the presence of witnesses, and
therefore he was not heedful enough to know the names of them in whose
presence he repaid.

In another case the plaintiff was claiming 600 zuz, and the defendant
answered: Have I not repaid this claim with 100 kabs of gall-nut, the
value of each kab being six zuz? To which the plaintiff said: Nay; each
was worth only four zuz, and brought witnesses to this effect, demanding
the remaining 200 zuz. The defendant, however, said: I have paid you all
the same, if not with this said stuff, then I gave you 200 zuz in cash.
Rabha decided that the defendant in this case be recognized as a liar.
Said Rami b. Hama to him: Have you not said that a thing to which one
pays little attention, may easily escape one's memory (why not say that
he paid him the 600 zuz but did not remember the price)? Whereupon Rabha
answered: A fixed price can never be forgotten.

In another case one demanded 100 zuz on a document, whereto the
defendant answered: "Have I not paid you"? Whereupon the plaintiff
claimed that this payment was made to meet another claim. According to
R. Na'hman the document lost its value, according to R. Papa, it did
not. But why should R. Papa's decision here differ from what he decided
in the following similar case, where the defendant's answer was: Have
you not given me that money to buy oxen for slaughtering, and I returned
you that money in the slaughter-house? And where the plaintiff asserts
that this was for another debt; in which case R. Papa declared the
document invalid? In this case R. Papa thus, decided, because the money
was actually taken to buy oxen and then received in that very place
where they were slaughtered; in our case, however, the plaintiff may be
right in his claim. But how should such a case be ultimately decided?
According

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

to R. Papi the document is valid, and according to R. Sheshith b. R.
Aidi it is invalid, and so the Halakha prevails, provided the defendant
paid in presence of witnesses and the document was not mentioned at all;
but if the payment was made between themselves, the plaintiff may be
trusted when he says that it was to cover another debt, because were he
willing to tell a lie he would simply deny the payment.

A borrower said to the lender: "You are trusted so long as you will say
that I have not paid you"; thereafter he paid him in the presence of
witnesses, but the plaintiff continued his claim, saying that this
payment was for another debt. Both Abayi and Rabha said that the
defendant himself has trusted him, hence, he is to be trusted; R. Papa,
however, opposed, saying: The defendant trusted in this case more to the
plaintiff than to one's self, but did he trust him more than two
witnesses?

In another case the defendant said to the plaintiff: "You are trusted
like two so long you say that I have not paid you;" thereafter he paid
in the presence of three, and the plaintiff still claimed his debt; in
which case R. Papa said: He was trusted as two, whereas here there are
three witnesses. R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua, however, opposed, saying that
concerning witnesses their number whether two or 100 matters not
(according to the biblical law); however, if he said to him: "You are
trusted like three," and then paid him in the presence of four, it is
different, as the number three was intended here not for witnesses but
for the *minds*, and in this respect four minds are more than three.

"*There is no oath to the claim of a deaf-mute*," etc. For \[Exod. xxii.
6\]: "Unto his neighbors," etc.; and the delivery by a minor is not
considered.

"*But there is an oath to the claim of a minor*." But has it not just
been said that there is no oath to such? Said Rabh: It means the minor
claims that his father has given this or that to the defendant, and it
is in accordance with R. Eliezar b. Jacob, who said in the following
Boraitha: There is a case where one has to swear for his own
claim--viz.: "Your father had with me a mana, but I paid him a half,"
then he has to swear for his own claim; the sages, however, say that
here he is but returning a lost thing, hence, he is free. And to the
question, Does not R. Eilezar agree that the defendant here is returning
a lost thing, Rabh said: It treats here of a claim made by a minor after
the death of his father. But again, the Mishna states expressly that
there is no oath to the claim of minors? Rabh

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

meant to say: He was as a minor in his father's business, but already of
age when putting in the claim. But then how is the expression above "for
his own claim" to be understood, as here it is not his claim but that of
the plaintiff? It must, therefore, be said that they differ concerning
what was said by Rabha (Middle Gate, p. 4) with regard to a biblical
oath that "one is not so bold as to deny the whole," etc.: R. Eliezar
holds that one is not bold concerning the son (of the deceased) also,
and therefore he is not regarded as returning a loss, while the rabbis
hold that one is not bold only in face of the party himself, but is so
with relation to the son of same, and therefore he is considered as
returning a loss.

But how can you explain the Mishna in accordance with R. Eliezar b.
Jacob, does not the Mishna state in its first part: If one claims, my
father had with you a mana, and the answer is, I have no more than 50
dinar, he is free because he only returns a loss? There it speaks of a
case when the heir did not claim: "I am certain," while in the case of
our Mishna the minor is supposed to claim that he is certain. Samuel,
however, says: Our Mishna's case is when the minor has real estate and
one puts in a claim that his father owes him money, in this case even if
the plaintiff has a document, he must swear that the minor's father has
not paid it; the same is the case with the sanctuary. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md)

MISHNA *II*.: One does not swear to the following: To slaves, written
documents, arable lands, and sanctified objects; nor is thereto applied
the payment of double amount, or of four and five-fold. The gratuitous
bailee need not swear, the bailee on payment need not pay damages. R.
Simeon holds that one is obliged to swear to objects of the sanctuary,
for whose security he is liable, but not to those for which he is not
responsible. R. Mair says: There are things attached to the land and yet
not considered land; but the sages do not agree with him therein. How
so? I have transferred to you ten vines laden with grapes. Nay; there
were only five; and he must swear according to R. Mair, while the sages
hold that everything attached to the soil is to be regarded as the land
itself.

One swears but to things capable of being measured, weighed, and
counted. How so? I have transferred to you a house full of fruit, or, I
have handed you a purse full of money. I know

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

not how much there was, but you are at liberty to take back whatever you
left there; he is free; but if plaintiff says: They were reaching the
cornice, and the defendant rejoins: Only up to the window, latter is
liable.

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? From \[Exod. xxii. 8\]: "For all manner
of trespass": general, "ox, ass, lamb, raiment"; particulars, "for any
manner of lost thing"; again general, and there is a rule that wherever
particulars appear between generals. it must be judged in the sense of
the particulars: and as these are movables each having in body a value,
so also all other cases must be equal to these; except real estate,
which is not movable, slave, who are equalled to real estate, documents
which though movable are in body of no value, and finally the sanctuary
which is excluded because of the verse "his neighbor."

"*Double-amount, four and five-fold*," etc. The reason here is that the
Scripture speaks of four and five-fold, and as in the case of
double-amount an oath does not apply; it remains only the case of three
and four-fold which is not mentioned in the Scripture.

"*A gratuitous bailee need not swear*." Whence is this deduced? From
what the rabbis taught \[Exod. xxii. 9\]: "If a man deliver unto his
neighbor": general, "an ass," etc.; particular, "to keep"; general, and
on the basis of the above-mentioned rule the particulars appearing
between generals render the whole to be judged in their sense: as the
particulars here are movables each having in body a value, etc. (as
above).

"*A bailee on pay*." Also this is deduced from the just-cited verse and
on the basis of the same rule regarding particulars appearing between
generals.

"*R. Mair says: There are things attached*," etc. From this we see that
R. Mair does not hold that what is attached to the land is itself
considered land. Now, why is here the point of difference illustrated by
laden vines, and not by vines as such? Said R. Jose b. Hanina: The
Mishna speaks of grapes that were ready for the press. R. Mair holds: As
they are ready for pressing they are no longer considered attached to
the soil, but as already pressed in which case an oath applies, while
the sages do not share this opinion.

"*One swears but to things capable of being measured*," etc. Said Abayi:
Provided he says "a house full," etc., but if he says, "*this* house was
full," then his claim is definite and recognized. Said Rabha to him: If
this were so, why the illustration

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

in the last part of the Mishna with "cornice" and "window" stated by
plaintiff and defendant respectively, and not with it *a* house "and"
*this* house"? Therefore, says Rabba, there is no liability of an oath
unless the claim concerned a certain measure or weight, and the
confession was made also to measure or weight. There is a Boraitha in
accordance with Rabba: "I have a kur of grain with you." Nay; you have
nothing with me; he is free. "I have with you a big chandelier." Nay;
you have only a small one; he is free. However, if he says: "I have with
you a kur of grain," and the answer is: Only a lethech; "or a chandelier
of ten pounds," and the answer is: One of only five pounds, he is
liable. Because the rule underlying this judging is: One is not liable
unless the claim was for a certain measure, weight or number, and the
confession was to the same effect. Now, what is the addition of the rule
for in the Boraitha? To indicate that "this house full" means also a
measure. But why is it not a partial confession if he confesses to a
small chandelier when the claim is for a big one? Because to the claim
as it is, there is here no confession, nor is the claim made for what is
confessed (as the big and small chandelier are two different things);
but is not the same the case when the claim is for one of ten pounds,
and the confession for one of five pounds? Said R. Samuel b. R. Itz'hak:
It speaks of a chandelier made of separable pieces, and the confession
was to five pounds of the same chandelier; why, then, is not the same
the case with the girdle that may have been of separable pieces? And as
this is not so, we must say that it does not speak of pieces in the
other case of the chandelier either! Therefore, said R. Aba b. Mama\],
it speaks of a whole chandelier, but when the claim is for a big and the
confession for a small one, then are two wholly different things
involved; but if it speaks of the weight, one could by rubbing reduce
the weight of such from ten to five pounds, the only object thus
remaining the same.

MISHNA *III*.: If one lends to his neighbor on a pledge, and the pledge
got lost, whereupon the plaintiff says: I lent you on it a sela, but it
was worth only a shekkel; the other party says: No, truly, you lent me a
sela. on it, but it was worth a sela, he is free. But if the plaintiff
claims: I lent you on it a sela, but it was worth only a shekkel;
whereto the other replies: Nay; you did lend me on it a sela, and it was
worth three dinar, he is liable. If the debtor says: You lent me on it a
sela, while it was worth two selas, whereto the creditor: Nay; I gave

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

you on it one sela, its value only, he is free. But if the former says:
You lent me a sela on it, it was, however, worth two, and latter says:
Nay; I lent you thereon a sela, and it was worth only five dinar, he is
liable. Who is to take the oath? The depository, as he could meanwhile
produce the pledge if the other one were to swear.

GEMARA: The concluding sentence of the Mishna belongs to which part? If
to the last, there is a rule that the oath rests with the lender? Said
Samuel and also R. Hyya b. Rabh and also R. Johanan, it belongs to the
middle part: I lent you a sela and it was worth a shekkel, and the other
says it was worth three dinars, in which case the borrower confesses to
owe yet one dinar, hence, it is a partial admission to which an oath
applies; the rabbis, however, have transferred this oath from the
borrower to the lender. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) And now that
R. Ashi has decided that both depositor and depositary must each take an
oath, he latter: that he does not have the pledge any more, and the
former: that its value amounted to so and so much, the Mishna is to be
explained thus: Who is to take the oath first? The depositary, since if
the depositor swore first the other could meanwhile reconsider and
produce the pledge.

Samuel said: <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md) If one lends to his
neighbor 1,000 zuz, and pledges for them the handle of a scythe only, if
the handle is lost the 1,000 zuz are lost, but if the pledge consisted
of such two handles the case is different, as we do not assume that he
gave 500 zuz for each handle, but for the whole, and as only one of them
was lost the lender loses nothing; R. Na'hman, however, maintains that
the same is the case with two, *i.e.*, if one is lost the lender loses
500 zuz, and if both are lost he loses the whole 1,000; but the same is
not the case if the pledge consisted of a scythe handle and a piece of
metal. The opinion of the sages from Nahardea is that the same is the
case with the last mentioned pledge: If either the metal or the handle
is lost, 500 zuz are lost, and the loss of both entails the loss of all
the 1,000.

An objection was raised from our Mishna--viz.: From the case where
defendant says it was worth but three dinar. Why is he liable in this
case? Let the depositor say: You have taken it for a sela? The Mishna
has in view the case where the depositary

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

expressly took upon him responsibility for its value only, which is not
so in Samuel's case. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

Concerning the last mentioned case shall we assume that the following
Tanaim differ: If one had made a loan on a pledge and the Sabbathic year
entered, the pledge, though worth only the half value of the loan, the
year does not release the loan \[Deut. xv. 2\]; R. Jehudah the Nassi,
however, maintains that if the pledge amounted to the value of the whole
debt, the year does not release, but if not to this value, the year does
release. Now, let us see what does the first Tana mean by his saying "it
does not release"? If he means, it does not release the half debt and R.
Jehudah comes to teach that it releases even this half, then of what use
is a pledge? We must then say that the first Tana means it releases the
entire debt, as he agrees with Samuel's theory that as soon as it was
accepted for this amount it must be considered only as such, while R.
Jehudah differs! Nay; they differ with regard to the worth of the pledge
and still R. Jehudah maintains that the entire debt is released, for the
pledge which is not worth the amount of the debt he considers as mere
memorandum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[88:1](shb07.htm#fr_24.md) The further discussion
on this point appears in its proper places.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[91:1](shb07.htm#fr_25.md) A Talmudic sela was of
two shekkels, each shekkel of two dinars; hence 3 dinar = 1½ shekkel.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[91:2](shb07.htm#fr_26.md) This is a repetition
from Tract Middle Gate, p. 206, which is reproduced here because R.
Na'hman's part is not mentioned there.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[92:1](shb07.htm#fr_27.md) Here follows the
discussion from Middle Gate, p. 206:

"*On a pledge*," which paragraph is followed by the statement of R.
Itz'hak that a creditor acquires title in a pledge (ibid., p. 207). Also
the discussion concerning the question as to whether he who takes care
of a found object is considered a gratuitous bailee, or a bailee for
hire (ibid., p. 65), all which we deem unnecessary to repeat here

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](shb08.md)
