[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zar02)  [Next](zar04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT ABUDA ZARA (IDOLATRY).

### CHAPTER I.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS WITH HEATHENS
ON THEIR FESTIVAL DAYS; WHICH FESTIVALS ARE CONSIDERED, AND WHAT REAL
ESTATE MAY BE SOLD AND RENTED, AND AT WHAT PLACES.

MISHNA *I*.: Three days before the festivals <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) of the heathens it is forbidden to have any
business with them. One must not lend them anything (which can be useful
to them) nor borrow such from them. And the same is the case with cash
money, even to pay or to receive payment is forbidden. R. Jehuda,
however, maintains: To receive payment is allowed, because it is a
displeasure to the payers. And he was answered: Although it is *now* a
displeasure, it pleases them, in the future.

GEMARA: R. Hanina b. Papa, according to others, R. Simlai, lectured: In
the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will take the Holy Scroll in
hand, saying: "He who was occupied with it shall appear and receive his
reward." The nations then at once will gather themselves and come motley
crowded as it reads \[Is. xliii. 9\]: "All the people were gathered
together." The Holy One, blessed be He, however, tells them: "Do not
enter in such confusion, but let each nation with her scribes enter
Separately," as it reads further on: "Let the people <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) be assembled." And by the term people
kingdoms are meant. \[Can there be such a thing as motley before the
Holy

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One, blessed be
He? It means they themselves shall not come in confusion, so that they
shall understand what will be said to them.\] The kingdom of Rome will
then enter first on account of its greatness. As concerning it \[Dan.
vii. 23\]: "And will devour all the earth, and will tread it down, and
grind it up." And R. Jochanan said: Rome is thereby meant, whose fame is
respected throughout the whole world. But whence do we know that the
more distinguished come first to judgment? It is as R. Hisda said (Rosh
Hashana, p. 13). The Holy One, blessed be He, questioned her: "What was
your occupation in the world?" To which she answered: "Lord of the
Universe! we have established many markets, we have constructed many
bath-houses, we have multiplied in great mass gold and silver, and all
this was done for the sake of Israel, to enable *them* to study the
Law." The Lord's answer will be: It is foolish of ye to state that all
you have done was for the sake of Israel, while in reality it was but
for yourselves. The construction of markets was for the purpose of
prostitution. The establishment of bath-houses was for your own
pleasure, and as to gold and silver, it is mine, as \[Hos. ii. 8\]:
"Mine is the silver, mine," etc. But, are there, then, among ye those
who have studied the Law? They went out in despair.

After Rome has departed, Persia enters. Because she is considered second
to Rome, as \[Dan. vii. 5\]: "And behold, there was another, a second
beast, like a bear." To which R. Joseph taught: Thereby, Persia is
meant, the people of which are fleshy like bears, eat and drink like
bears, are overgrown with hair, and have no rest, like bears. And to the
question of the Holy One, "What was your occupation?" They will answer:
We have constructed many bridges, conquered many great cities, we were
engaged in many wars, all for the sake of Israel to enable them to study
the Law. The reply to which will be: "All that was done by you was for
your own sake." Bridges, for the collection of duties. Great cities, to
establish *angaria*. And as to wars, I have conducted them. As it reads
\[Ex. xv. 3.\]: "The Eternal is the lord of war." But are there among ye
those who have studied this Law? And they also went out in despair.
\[But, why did Persia enter, after seeing that Rome was disappointed?
They thought: We may have more chance than Rome, as the latter has
destroyed the holy Temple, while we have rebuilt it.\] And a similar
answer will be given to the other nations. But why should the other

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

nations enter after seeing the disappointment of the first two? They
thought: The first two made slaves of Israel, which was not the case
with them. But, if so, why should Rome and Persia be more honored than
the other nations? They are distinguished by the permanence of their
kingdoms, which will exist until the time of Messia. Finally they will
say before Him: Lord of the Universe, didst thou give us the Torah and
we did not accept it? But how could they say so? Is it not written
\[Deut. xxxiii. 2\]: "The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Sa'ir
unto them: he shone forth from Mount Paran." And it also reads \[Habak.
iii. 3\]: "(When) God from Theman came, and the Holy One from Mount
Paran." And to the question: What has the Law to do in Sa'ir and Paran?
Said R. Jochanan: From this it is inferred that the Lord has presented
his Torah to every nation, but it was not accepted until it came to
Israel. Therefore, it is supposed that they said to Him: "Have we then
accepted the Torah, and not fulfilled its commandments?" \[But what
answer is this. Could they not be accused because they have not accepted
it?\] They said thus: Lord of the Universe, hast thou inclined the
mountain toward us as thou didst toward the children of Israel? (See
Sabbath, p. 167, par. Ex. xix., etc.) To this the answer will come: "Let
the former things shew us." \[Isaiah xliii. 91 The Holy One, blessed be
He, will say to them: "The seven commandments which were *given* to the
descendants of Noah, have ye observed them?" And whence do we know that
they have not? From that which R. Joseph taught. It reads \[Hab. iii.
6\]: "He stood forward, and made the earth tremble; he looked, and
dispersed nations." What did He see? That the seven commandments
accepted by the descendants of Noah, were not observed. And therefore He
absolved the nations of them. Absolved. Should then the sinner be
benefited? Said Mar b. Rabbina: It means that even should they absolve
them, they would not be rewarded. Is that so? Did not R. Mair say:
"Whence do we know that even a Gentile who is occupied with the study of
the Law, is likened to a high-priest from \[Levit. xviii. 5\] "Which if
a man do, shall live on it," where it does not specify priest, Levite,
or Israelite, but states in general if a man, whence it may be inferred
that a Gentile, too, who occupies himself with the study of the Law is
equal to a high-priest." It means that they will not be rewarded for the
observance equally with those who observe in accordance

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

with the commandments. As R. Hanina said: The reward for him who
observes that which he is commanded, is greater than to him who observes
same without being commanded. The nations will then exclaim: "Lord of
the Universe, has then Israel, who has accepted the Torah, observed it?"
And to the answer of the Holy One: "I testify that he did," they
exclaim: "Lord of the Universe, is then a father fit to be a witness in
the case of his son? Is not Israel called the son of the Eternal \[Ex.
iv. 22\] "My son, my first-born, is Israel." He will then say: "Let
heaven and earth testify that the Torah was observed by Israel." They,
however, object in saying that heaven and earth are interested in this
case, and therefore are not fit to be witnesses--viz: \[Jer. xxxiii.
25\]: "If my covenant be not . . . the appointment with heaven and
earth, would not be established." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) And
Resh Lakish said: It reads \[Gen. i. 31\]: "And it was evening, and it
was morning," and this justifies the inference that the Lord made a
stipulation with all that had been created in the six days to the effect
that if Israel will accept the Torah, well and good, but if not I will
return all of you to chaos and ruin. Then the Holy One, blessed be He,
will say: "Men of ye nations may come and testify that Israel has
observed the Torah. Nimrod may testify that Abraham has not worshipped
idols. Laban may testify that Jacob was not suspected of robbery. The
wife of Potiphar may testify that Joseph was not suspicious of sin.
Nebuchadnezzar may testify that Chananyah, Mishaël and Azaryah had not
bowed themselves to the image; Darius of Daniel, that he had not
abolished prayer; Eliphaz the Themanite, and Bildad the Shuchite, and
Zophar the Na'amathite may say of all Israel that they have observed all
the Laws." They will then exclaim: "Lord of the Universe, give it to us
now, and we will observe it." To which they will be answered: "He who
has prepared on the Eve of Sabbath, for the Sabbath, will have what to
eat. But he who has not prepared, what then will he have to eat on
Sabbath? However, I have one easy, meritorious act, it is the *Sukka*,
go and perform it. \[Why is it called easy? Because it requires no
expense.\] Everyone of them will then prepare a *Sukka* on his roof, but
as soon as the sun heats it, they abandon it, and go away. But did not
Rabha say that he who is afflicted by performing the command of *Sukka*,
is free from this obligation? Yea, but not to reject.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Holy One,
blessed be He, will then smile upon them. Said R. Itzchak: "There is no
smiling with the Holy One, but on that day."

There are others who taught the saying of R. Itzchak in the following
connection: R. Jose said: In the future heathens will come to convert
themselves with the *Tephilin* on their heads and arms, *tchitches* on
their dresses, *mazuzas* on their doors. But, as soon as they will see
the war of Gog and Magog, and will question them: "With whom do you want
to fight?" Whereto the answer will be: With the Lord and his Messiah
\[as it reads \[Psalm ii. 2\]: "Against the Lord and his anointed"\],
each of the nations will remove the above, and go away; and the Holy One
will smile upon them. It is here that R. Itzchak said: There is no
smiling with the Lord, but on that day. But did not R. Jehudah say in
the name of Rabh: There are twelve hours in a day, three hours of which
the Holy One, blessed be He, is occupied with the Torah. The next three
hours, He judges the whole world, and seeing that it is liable to be
destroyed, He rises from the chair of judgment and sits down on the
chair of mercy. The third three hours, He supports the whole world with
food, from the very largest creature to the smallest one. And the last
three hours, He plays <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) with the
*leviathan*, as it reads \[Psalm civ. 26\]: "Leviathan, whom thou hast
made to sport therein." Said R. Nachman b. Itzchak: "With His creatures
He smiles, but not upon them." R. Aha said to R. Nachman: There is no
smiling by the Holy One, since the Temple was destroyed. As it reads
\[Is. xlii. i4\]. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) But in the fourth
three hours, he teaches the Torah to the school-children. As it reads
\[ibid. xxviii. 9\]: "Whom shall he teach knowledge? And whom shall he
give to understand doctrine? (to) those that are weaned from the milk,
(to) those that are taken from the breasts." And what does He do in the
night-time? If you wish, it may be said that He does the same as in the
day-time. And if you wish, it may be said that He rides upon His light
cloud and moves in all directions upon 18,000 worlds. As it reads
\[Psalm lxviii. 18\]: "The chariots of God are two myriads; thousands of
angels (follow him)." And if you wish, it may be said that He is sitting
and

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

listening to the song of the angels, as \[ibid. xlii. 9\]: "And in the
night his song shall be with me."

R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: It reads \[Hab. i. 14\]: "And
(why) makest thou men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things,
that have no ruler over them?" Why are men compared with fish of the
sea? To wit: even as the fish die as soon as they are taken on land, so
do men die when they separate themselves from the law of the Torah.
Another explanation: as fish die from the strong heat of the sun, so
also do men. If you wish it may be said in this world, and this would be
in accordance with R. Hanina, who said: "Everything is decreed by
heaven, except cold" (see Middle Gate, p. 285). And if you wish it may
be said, in the world to come, and this is in accordance with Resh
Lakish, who says: There is no *Gehenna* in the future. But the Holy One,
blessed be He, will take out the sun from its sheath. The wicked will be
punished with its heat, and the upright be cured by it. As it reads
\[Malachi, iii. 19\]: "For, behold, the day is coming, which shall burn
as an oven; and all the presumptuous, yea, and all who practice
wickedness shall be stubble: and the day that is coming shall see them
on fire, . . . who will not leave them root or bough. (20) But there
shall rise unto you that fear my name, the sun of righteousness with
healing in his wings." Furthermore, the latter will have pleasure and
become fat from it, as the end reads, "And ye will go forth, and grown
fat as calves of the stall."

There is another explanation, "as fish in the sea," the larger one
swallows the smaller, so also is it with men, since if not for the fear
for government the stronger would swallow the weaker. And this is what a
Mishna states: "Pray for the peace of the government," etc. (See Aboth,
p. 72.)

R. Hinna b. Papa propounded a contradiction to the following \[Job,
xxxvii. 23\]: "The Almighty we do not find him out excellent in power."
And \[Ex. xv. 6\]: "Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in
power." <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) And also \[Psalm cxlvii. 5\]:
"Great is our Lord, and abundant in power"? This presents no difficulty:
At the time of judgment, He does not use his might; but in time of war,
He uses it.

Rabha said \[Job, XXX. 24\]: "But doth not a man stretch out

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

his hand among *ruins*? or doth one not cry out therefrom when he
meeteth his downfall?" So said the Holy One, blessed be He, to Israel.
By judging Israel, I do not treat them in the same manner as I do
heathens, which is mentioned in \[Is. xxi. 32\]: "Overthrown,
overthrown. . . . I will render it." But I punished them as the picking
of a chicken. And according to others: "Even if Israel do but small good
deeds, as the picking of chickens in the dunghill, I will combine them
into one large sum." Another explanation: "I help them because of their
praying to me. And this is what R. Aba said: It reads \[Hos. vii. 13\]:
"Though I desired to redeem them, they yet spoke lies against me."
*I.e.*, I thought: I will redeem them by loss of money in this world,
for the purpose of rewarding them in the world to come. And they told
lies about me. And the same said R. Papa in the name of Rabha: The
inferring it from \[ibid., ibid. 15\].

R. Abuhuh introduced R. Safra to the *minim* (who were appointed by the
government to collect duties) as a great man. And they freed him from
duty for thirteen years. Once they met him and asked him to explain the
following \[Amos, iii. 2\]: "Only you have I loved out of all the
families of the earth: therefore will I visit upon you all your
iniquities." If one is in bad humor, will he let it out on his friend?
He kept silent, as he was ignorant of the answer. And they inflicted
upon him. R. Abuhuh then met them, to ask for the reason. And they
answered: You introduced him as a great man, while he does not even know
the explanation of a passage. Rejoined he: "I told you he was a scholar,
but did I say that he was a master in the study of the Bible?" And to
their question: Why are *you* familiar with it? He answered: "Because we
have to discuss with you frequently, we give our attention to it." They
say: It is for you, then, to explain the above-mentioned passage. And he
answered thus: I will do it in the form of a parable. There was once a
creditor of two persons, one a friend, and the other an enemy of his.
From his friend, he demands to be paid in small sums, while from his
enemy he demands the whole debt at once. (And the same is the case with
Israel: He clears them of all their iniquities by small punishments in
this world, so that they shall not have to suffer in the world to come.)

The rabbis taught: The Lord becomes angry every day, but only during one
instant, which is the fifty-three thousand eight hundred and
forty-eighth part in one hour; and there is

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

no creature in the world who is able to guess this moment, except
Bil'am, about whom it reads \[Numb. xxiv. 16\]: "Knoweth the knowledge
of the Most High." Which means that he knew how to guess the second in
which the Lord becomes angered. (See Sanhedrin, p. 339.)

R. Joseph said: It is advisable for one not to pray singly the
additional benediction in the first three hours at the first day of new
year, for, the heavenly judgment takes place at that time, and because
of his praying attention may be given to his deeds, and he may get an
unfavorable decree. But if so, one should not do it even with the
congregation together? With the congregation is different, as the
attention is given to their deeds in average. But was it not said above
that in the first three hours the Lord is engaged in the Law? Yea,
however, by the Torah, in which truth is mentioned \[Prov. xxiii. 23\]:
"Buy the truth," judgment cannot be modified. But concerning judgment,
truth is not mentioned, and therefore the Holy One, blessed be He,
modifies it.

R. Joshua b. Levi said \[Deut. vii. 11\]: "Which I command thee *this
day*, to do them," means *to do* it to-day, but not to be rewarded for
it to-day. He said again: "All the performance of the commandments which
Israel observed in this world, will come and testify for them in the
world to come." He said again: The crime of the golden calf was
committed only to give a chance to the repenter. As it reads \[ibid. v.
26\]: "Who would grant that this their heart might remain in them to
fear me at all times." (Hence, they were not fit to commit a crime.)
Similarly said Johanan in the name of R. Simeon b. Jo'hai: David was not
fit to commit the crime with Bath Shaba, as concerning him it reads
\[Psalm, cviii. 22\]: "My heart is deeply wounded within me." And also
Israel was not fit for the above crime, for the reason said above. And
why was it committed? For the benefit of sinners. If it happens to be an
individual, it may be said to him: Repent, as the individual David did.
And if it happens to be a congregation, they also may be told to repent,
as the congregation of the desert did. And this is what R. Samuel b.
Nachman in the name of Jonathan said: It reads \[II Sam. xxiii. 1\]:
"And thus saith the man who was raised up on high" (the term in Hebrew
for high is *ol*, which means also yoke), and is to be interpreted thus:
The man who had raised the yoke of repentance The same said again in the
name of the same authority: When one performs a meritorious act in this
world, it precedes

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

him in the world to come. As it reads \[Is. lviii. 8\]: "And before thee
shall go thy righteousness, the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward."
And the same is the case with him who commits a crime in this world,
that it clings to him and goes before him on the day of judgment. As it
reads \[Job, vi. 18\]. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

The rabbis taught: Concerning the above-cited verse \[Deut. v. 26\]:
Moses said to Israel: Ye are ungrateful my children, as at the time, the
Holy One, blessed be He, said to you: "Who would grant," etc., ye ought
to say: Thou, Lord, grant it to us. Your ungratefulness is also marked
from \[Numb. xxi. 5\]: "And our soul loathed this miserable bread." Ye
are also children of an ungrateful, as it reads \[Gen. iii. 12\]: "The
woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree," etc.
Moses, however, hinted this to Israel only after the forty years in
which he led them in the desert. As in respect of that time it reads
\[Deut. xxix. 3\]: "And yet the Lord gave you not a heart to perceive,"
etc. Said Rabba: "Infer from this that one cannot know the real mind of
his master, until the elapse of forty years."

R. Johanan said in the name of R. B'naha: It reads \[Is. xxxii. 20\]:
"Happy are ye that sow beside all waters, freely sending forth the feet
of the ox and the ass." Happy is Israel at the time when he is occupied
with the Torah and with bestowing of favors; as his evil spirit is then
transferred into his hands, and not *vice versa*. And this is inferred
from the just-cited verse, "that sow," which means charity, as \[Hos. x.
12\]. And "by water" it means the Torah, as in \[Is. lv. 1\] means the
Torah. And "by freely sending forth," etc., is meant, what the disciple
of Elijah taught. One should always consider himself in his relation to
the laws of the Torah, as an ox to its yoke, and an ass to its load.

"*Three days*," etc. Is such a long time needed? Does not a Mishna
state: At four periods in the year, he who sells a cow to his neighbor
must notify him thus: I have sold her mother or her daughter to be
slaughtered. (It is biblically forbidden to slaughter the mother and her
child on one and the same day), and they are: the Eve of the second
festival of Tabernacles, the Eve of the first day of Passover, the Eve
of Pentecost, and the Eve of New Year. According to R. Jose the
Galilean: Also

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the Eve of the day of Atonement in Galilee. (Hence, we see that only one
day is sufficient.) Where eating is treated of, one day suffices, but
where sacrificing is treated of three days are needed. Are, then, three
days sufficient for sacrificing? Is there not a rule that thirty days
before Passover are needed to study the laws of this festival?
Concerning our sacrifices, which even a blemish in the eye-lash makes
invalid, thirty days are needed for studying the Law. But concerning the
heathens, that only a missing limb of an animal makes it invalid. But
not a blemish, three days suffice.

The schoolman propounded a question as to whether or not the statement
of the Mishna, "three days," include the festival day also? Come and
hear. R. Ismael said: "Three days before and three days after their
festivals." Now, should it mean to include the festival day, would,
then, R. Ismael count *it* twice, to the first and to the last days?
This is no objection, as the number three, mentioned last, may be used
merely because of the first. Come and hear the following: R. Tachlipha
b. Abdimi in the name of Samuel said: If their festival occurs in the
middle of the week, it is forbidden to do business with them the whole
week. Now, if that day were included, one day of the week would be
allowed. There is no question, according to R. Ismael, as he certainly
excludes that day, but how is it the question is according to the
rabbis? Come and hear: The following are the festivals of the heathens:
*kalends*, *Saturnalia* and *kratsim*. And R. Hanin b. Rabha said:
*Kalends* occurs eight days after the solstice, and the *Saturnalia*
eight days before. Now, if the festivals were included, it would be said
ten days? Perhaps the Tana counts the whole festival of *kalends* for
one day. Said R. Ashi: From the expression of the Mishna, "before," it
may be inferred that it means to exclude the day in question. For if
not, it would state three days of their festivals, etc. Infer from this
that so it is.

The schoolmen propounded a question: Is this forbidden because a Jew
must not interfere with the idols, or because of the commandment, "Thou
shalt not put a stone for the blind"? And the difference is in whether
or not the heathen has his own animal for sacrificing. If because of
interfering, it is forbidden, but if because of the latter, it is not,
as he has his own. But even if he has his own, the above negative rests
upon him, as R. Nathan states in a Boraitha: Whence do we know that one
must not serve a goblet of wine to a Nazerite nor a member

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

of a live animal to a descendant of Noah? from \[Levit. xix. 14\], "Nor
put a stumbling-block before the blind." We see then, that though these
two would each take the forbidden even if not offered, nevertheless he
who serves therewith commits a transgression, it speaks of a case when
the two, giver and receiver, are separated, by *e.g.*, a river, so that
if not served he could not take it himself; and the word serve instead
of give seems to corroborate this view. The schoolman propounded another
question: How is it if he had done business with him in the prohibited
days? According to R. Johanan: The benefit which he derived from the
business is forbidden, and according to Resh Lakish, it is not. Resh
Lakish objected to R. Jochanan from the following: In the festivals of
heathens, if one had business with them, the derived benefit is
forbidden. We see that thus the festivals, as such are meant, but not
the time before. R. Jochanan, however, maintains: That in the expression
"festivals" the days before are also meant.

There is a Boraitha in accordance with Resh Lakish: The prohibition to
do business with them refers only to a thing which can be kept in good
order until the festival day, but not otherwise. And even concerning the
former, if it was already done, the benefit is allowed.

R. Zabid taught in a Boraitha of R. Osia: A thing which cannot be kept
in good order may be sold to, but not bought from, them. There was a
minn who, in his festival, sent a new *dinar* to R. Jehudah the second.
Resh Lakish was then at the latter's house, and Jehudah consulted him as
to the acceptance of it. If he accepted he would transgress the rule of
interfering, while his refusal would cause animosity. Said Resh Lakish
to him: Accept, and throw it away in the presence of the donor. To which
R. Jehudah rejoined: Then I will cause still more animosity. Rejoined
Resh Lakish: I mean that you should throw it in such a manner that he
should think it was done unintentionally.

"*To lend them or to borrow*." The prohibition to lend them is correct,
because it pleases them. But why is it forbidden to receive payment from
them; does it not diminish their property? Said Abai: If it were
permitted to receive from them, one would be led also to lend them.
Rabha, however, maintains: Both are prohibited only because of
interfering.

"*Because it is a displeasure*." Does not R. Jehudah hold the view: That
it pleases him in the future. We have heard

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

him say elsewhere that he upholds such a theory concerning Jewish
festivals? Said R. Na'hman b. Itzchak: Leave alone the Halakhas of minor
festivals, as they are allowed only upon the basis of "it pleases him in
the future, although it is a displeasure to him while performing it."
Rabbina, however, maintains: A heathen is always displeased at a
payment.. Our Mishna is not in accordance with R. Joshua b. Karcha of
the following Boraitha, who said: If the lender had a document, he must
not receive payment at that day. But if it was a verbal loan, he may, as
it is a rescue. (Here is repeated from the First Gate, 229 par., "R.
Jehudah says," to p. 30 next par.) <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md)

MISHNA. *II*.: R. Ismael said: Three days before and three days after it
is prohibited. The sages, however, say: Before the festivals, but not
after them.

GEMARA: What new views do the sages of this Mishna advance. Was same not
said by the first Tana of the first Mishna? They differ in what was said
by Samuel: "In exile, the prohibition refers to the day of the festival
only." The first Tana upholds the theory of Samuel, which the sages of
the latter Mishna do not. It may also be said that they differ in that
which was said by Na'hum the Modaite. The prohibition is imposed only
upon one day before their festival. And in this case, the Tana of the
first Mishna does not agree with him, while the sages of the second do.
There is a Boraitha which states that as regards the decision of Na'hum
the Modaite, it was said: It is better that such should be dropped and
not repeated. There is another Boraitha; Na'hum the Modaite said: An old
male horse may be sold to them in case of war. And he was also answered:
Such may be dropped, etc. And there is another Boraitha: That the same
declared a Halakha concerning tithe, seeds and herbs, and was also
answered: It may be dropped, etc. Said R. Aha b. Minumi to Abai: Is it
right that everything declared by so great a man who comes into our
country be annulled by mere exclamation such as above? And he answered:
There is one thing of the following Boraitha, on which we act according
to his decision--namely, Na'hum the Modaite says: One may pray for his
necessities the benediction of, "He listens to prayer." Rejoined R. Aba:
Leave alone this Halakha which relies not upon Na'hum the Modaite only,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

but upon the discussion of great men in the following Boraitha: R,
Eliezar said: One should beg for his necessities first, and thereafter
he shall recite the daily benediction. As \[Psalms, cii. 1\]: "A prayer
of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out before the
Lord his complaint." <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) R. Joshua,
however, maintains: One has to recite his benediction previously, and
thereafter pray for his necessities. As \[Psalms, cxlii. 2\]: "I poured
out my *shicho* before him, I relate before him my trouble." (Hence, the
trouble is related after the benediction.)

Let us see: The passages do not correspond with either of them; hence,
there must be some other reason. Wherein, then, is their point of
difference? In that which was lectured upon by R. Simlai: It is
advisable for one to always arrange the praises of the Omnipotent first,
and thereafter to recite the daily eighteen benedictions. And this can
be inferred from Moses, our master \[Deut. iii. 24\]: "Thou hast begun
to show," etc., and thereafter (25): "Let me go over, I pray thee." R.
Joshua maintains: We may learn it from Moses, but R. Eliezar holds that
we cannot compare ourselves to Moses, and must not dare to do like him.
The sages, however, maintain differently from both: As according to
them, one may pray for his necessities in the benediction of, "He
listens to prayer." Said R. Jehudah b. R. Samuel b. Shilath in the name
of Rabh: Although it was decided that one may pray for his necessities
in the benediction of "listen to prayer," yet if he understands how to
express his desire at the end of each benediction (conjoined in the
daily eighteen benedictions), he may do so.

MISHNA *III*.: The following are the festivals of the heathens:
*Kalends, Saturnalia, kratsin*. The accession of their kings upon the
throne, their birthday, and the day of their death. So R. Mair. The
sages, however, maintain that only such a death on which burning
(dresses) is used, is conjoined with worshipping the idols. But in such
on which it is not used, there is no .idolatry. All, however, agree
concerning the following days: That of shaving his beard and hair, that
in which he lauds, that on which he was released from prison, and that
on which is celebrated a marriage of his son that the prohibition
concerns only one day, and the only one man engaged in this affair.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: Adam the first, when he saw

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

that each day of the week became shortened, cried: Woe is to me, the
world becomes dark to me because of my sin, and it seems to be returned
to chaos and ruin. And this is my death which was decreed by heaven. He
arose and fasted and prayed eight days. Thereafter, when he lived to see
the solstice of the month of *Tabit*, when the days become longer, he
understood that such is the cycle of the world, and therefore
established eight holidays. The next year, he also proclaimed the eight
days on which he had fasted as holidays. He has established them to laud
heaven; his descendants, however, made them holidays for the idols.

The rabbis taught: Adam the first, on the first day of his creation,
when he saw the sun set, cried: Woe is to me, the world is to be
returned to chaos, because of my sin, etc. He wept all night, and Eve
did the same opposite him. However, when the morning star appeared, he
understood that such was the order of the world. He arose and sacrificed
an ox, whose horns were like its hoofs.

R. Mathna questioned: Are the small towns under the dominion of Rome and
near to the capital, prohibited, at the time Rome celebrates its
*kalends*, or not? According to R. Jehoshua b. Levi, the festival
*kalandes* is forbidden to everyone. And according to R. Johanan, it is
forbidden to interfere with those who worship her only. There is a
Boraitha in accordance with R. Johanan as follows: Although it was said
that if Rome established a *kalandes*, and all the near cities which are
under her dominion supported her, the prohibition of interfering
concerns only its worshippers. On *Saturnalia, kratsin*, the day of the
throne and the day in which he ascends to reign, only one day before,
interfering is prohibited; but not the day after. During the celebration
of the son's marriage the interfering is forbidden to this man, and on
that day only. Said R. Ashi: The statement of R. Johanan is also hinted
at in our Mishna by the expression "and that man," which excludes those
who are under his dominion. (Here is repeated from Aboth, p. 94. R.
Simeon b. Eliezar said the whole par.; here, however, it is said in the
name of R. Ismael. (The Gemara adds): It is therefore decided that if a
heathen invites one during thirty days from his son's wedding, the
invitation being special to the wedding, or anonymous, it is considered
a wedding day, and the interfering is not allowed. At the elapse of
thirty days, if the invitation was specific of the wedding, it is so
considered; and

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

if anonymous, it is not. Until what time is it considered wedding time
in the case of a special invitation? Said R. Papa: Twelve months. And
previous to the wedding, at what time is to be considered? From the time
when they put the barley in the pestle for preparing beer.

"*Kratsin*." What festival is this? Said R. Jehudah in the name of
Samuel: It is the day on which Rome has established her kingdom. But is
there not a Boraitha: *Kratsin* and the day on which Rome has
established her kingdom? (Hence *kratsin* must be something else.) Said
R. Joseph: Rome has established her kingdom twice. Once in the days of
the Queen Cleopatra and the second time in the day of the Greeks. As R.
Dimi told when he came from Palestine: Thirty-two battles the Romans
fought with the Greeks, and could not conquer them until they had
conjoined the Israelites with them, under the stipulation that if the
kings were of one nation, the great officers of the government should be
taken from the others. And then the Romans sent a message to the Greeks:
Until now we have tried to conquer you by battles, but now we will try
to do it by a discussion. We may ask you, if one likes to conjoin a
pearl with a diamond, which of them shall be the basis? And they
answered: The pearl to the diamond. A diamond and an onyx? The diamond
as a basis, was the answer. An onyx and the Holy Scrolls? The onyx to
the Holy Scrolls, was the answer. Then they sent to them: "Now, the Holy
Scrolls with the Israelites are with us." (And the Greeks were
conquered.) Twenty-six years the Romans kept their promise to Israel,
and thereafter they failed, and took the Israelites under their
dominion. Whence do we know that they were true to their promise
twenty-six years? From what was said by R. Ka'hana. When R. Ismael b.
Jose was sick, it was sent to him that he should recite a few things
which he related in the name of his father. And his answer was this: A
hundred and eighty years before the Temple was destroyed, Rome had
thrust her dominion upon Israel. Eighty years before the destruction, it
was decreed by the sages that the land of the nations outside of
Palestine should be subject to defilement. Forty years before, the
Sanhedrin were exiled from their place and settled in shops. (Here is
repeated from Sanhedrin, p. 121, concerning the establishment of fine.)
The text says 180 years, and not more? Does not a Boraitha state in the
name of R. Jose the great: Palestine was under the dominion of Persia
430 years; under the Greek, 180

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

years; the house of the Makabaius reigned 103 years and the house of
Herod reigned likewise 103 years. Now, according to this chronology
there will be 206 years for the dominion of Rome over Israel. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) Therefore, we must say that the 26 years in
which they were true to their promise are not counted under their
dominion. There is a Tosephtha: The disciples of Elijah taught: The
world will continue for six thousand years, the first two thousand of
which were a chaos (*Tahu*), the second two thousand were of Torah, and
the third two thousand are the days of the Messiah, and because of our
sins many years of these have elapsed, and still he has not come. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10.md) Let us see from what time the two thousand
of Torah are reckoned. Shall we assume it to be the time when the Torah
was given to Israel? Two thousand years have not elapsed as yet
since. <span id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11.md) We must therefore say that it
means the time mentioned in \[Gen. xii. 5\]: "And the persons that they
had obtained in Charan." And it is known by tradition that Abraham was
then fifty-two years of age. And from his fifty-second year until the
Torah was given, 448 years elapsed, and that number will complete the
number of 2,000 which were less at the time the Tana taught about the
2,000 years of wisdom. <span id="fr_12"></span>[4](#fn_12.md)

"*The accession to the throne*." Whose accession? If it means the
king's, how should the following Boraitha be understood? "The ascending
to the throne, and the day on which they select the king," which seems
to be one and the same. We must say therefore, that by accession that of
the king's *son* is meant. And the objection that it was not customary
in Rome the son should inherit the throne, may be thus meant: That upon
the request of the king, they were now to affiliate it to the son. As it
happened with Antoninus (the Cæsar of Rome), who said to Rabbi: I would
like that Asurius, my son, should reign after me, and also that Tiberius
should be free from duty. But I am aware that if I will ask my people to
do me one favor, they will, but not two.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What have I to do?
Rabbi, who did not want to answer his question in words, told a man to
mount upon the shoulders of another one, and having given him a dove,
said to the other one, tell him who is mounted upon you to let the dove
free. From this Antoninus understood that he had to request his people
to proclaim his son king after him, and to instruct his son that he
should set Tiberius free. Once the same said to Rabbi: The officers of
Rome irritate me. (What shall I do?) Rabbi asked him to walk with him in
the garden, and began to tear out the large radishes of the beds,
planting smaller ones instead, by which Antoninus understood that he
intimates the necessity of removing the old officers little by little
and not all at once, so as to prevent a rebellion. But why did not Rabbi
answer him in words? He was afraid that the officers of Rome would get
wind of it and would harm him. The same Caesar had a daughter by the
name Girah, and it happened that she sinned. Antoninus then sent to
Rabbi white mustard, which is called in Aramaic *gargira* (whence Rabbi
understood that something happened with Girah). He sent him in answer a
seed by the name of *khusbratha*, the meaning of which in Aramaic is
*khus bratha* (remove the daughter). Antoninus again sent him garlic,
named in Aramaic *karthi*, from which Rabbi understood that he
questioned him: Shall I cut off my child? And in answer he sent him
lettuce, which is named *chassa*, which means have mercy with her.

Antoninus used to send to Rabbi frequently pieces of pure gold in
leather sacks covered with wheat. And to the objection of Rabbi: I have
too much of my own, he exclaimed: Leave them to him who will substitute
thee, that he shall spend it to please those who will reign after me.
From the house of Antoninus, there was a cave which reached the house of
Rabbi, and each time that he went to the house of Rabbi through this
cave, he would take with him two slaves. One he used to kill at the gate
of Rabbi, and the other when he returned, at his own gate. He, however,
told Rabbi that at the time of his visit no one should be found with
him. It once happened that he found Hanina b. Hamana with him, and to
his question: Did not I say that no one should be found with you during
my visit? Rabbi answered: This is not a human being. Said Antoninus to
Hanina: Go and call for me the slave who sleeps at the gate.

Hanina, however, found him dead, and he deliberated what to do: shall he
go to tell him that he is dead? There is a rule that

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

one must not answer with degradation; should he leave him and go away?
This would be a disgrace to a king. He therefore prayed, and the dead
became alive, and he then sent him to his master. Said Antoninus to
Rabbi: I am aware that even the smallest of you is able to bring the
dead to life. However, I want that when I come here, I should not find a
living soul with you. He used to serve Rabbi in all his needs, and he
once questioned him if he would have a share in the world to come. To
which Rabbi answered, "yea." Said he: Does it not read \[Ab. i. 18\]:
"And there shall not be anyone remaining of the house of 'Eseau." It
means he who acts like 'Eseau. But, it reads \[Ezek. xxxii. 29\]: "There
are Edom, her kings, and all her princes," etc. The answer was, it reads
kings, but not all her kings. Princes, but not all of them. So also we
have learned in the following: "Her kings, and not all of them, *i.e.*,
exclude Antoninus b. Asudius. Her princes and not all of them, excluding
K'tiha b. Shalum."

What happened with the latter? There was a Cæsar who disliked the Jews,
and he asked the advice of his officers: Should he who has a fibre in
his foot cut it off and be at ease, or should he leave it and be
afflicted? And the advice of them all was, that he should cut it off and
remain at rest. K'tiha, however, who was one of them, objected, saying:
First you cannot get rid of all the Jews, as it reads \[Zech. ii. 10\]:
"For as the four winds of the heaven have I spread you abroad, saith the
Lord." <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) And secondly, your kingdom
will be considered mutilated, and one that kills its own subjects. The
king then said: Thy advice is true, but there is a law that he who
concurs the king, must be thrown into the furnace. When they took him to
be slain, he said: I bequeath all my property to R. Aqiba and his
colleagues. A heavenly voice was then heard: K'tiha b. Shalum has a
share in the world to come. Rabbi then wept and said: Here we have a man
who has bought his world in one moment, while another one has to work
for it all his life.

Antoninus served Rabbi; Adarkhan (a Persian Prince) served Rabh. When
Antoninus departed, said Rabbi: Our union broke, and the same said Rabh
when Adarkhan departed.

Unklus b. Klenimus embraced Judaism, and the Cæsar sent militia to take
him. He, however, persuaded them, and they also became proselytes. He
then sent other militia, warning

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

them that they should not converse with him. When they took him and were
going, he said to them: I will tell you something; usually the
torch-bearer carries the light in front of the litter, the chief
*lecticarius* (behind the litter, carries the light) for the *dux*, the
*dux* for the *hegemon*, the *hegemon* for the *comes*; but does the
comes carry the light before the people? And they answered, No. Said he:
The Holy One, blessed be He, carries light before Israel as it reads
\[Ex. Xiii. 21\]: "And the Lord went before them in a pillar of cloud,"
etc. And they also became proselytes. The Cæsar then sent other ones
after him, telling them not to talk to him at all. But when they took
him, he saw a *mazuzah* on the doorpost, and said to them: Do you know
what this is? They answered: No, but you may tell us. He then said: It
is customary with a human king that while he is sitting inside of his
palace his servants guard him outside. With the Holy One, blessed be He,
it is the contrary. His servants are inside, and He guards them from the
outside, as it reads \[Psalm cxxi. 8\]: "The Lord will guard thy going
out and thy coming in," etc. Then these became proselytes, too, and the
Cæsar did not send any more after him. It reads \[Gen. xxv. 23\]: "And
the Lord said to her, two nations are in thy womb." Said R. Jehudah in
the name of Rabh: This means Antoninus and Rabbi, upon whose tables were
not missing lettuces, cucumbers and radishes, summer as well as winter.
As the master said: The radishes masticate the food in the stomach,
lettuces overturn it, and cucumbers extend the gut. But have not the
disciples of Ismael taught that cucumbers are as harmful to the body as
swords? This presents no difficulty, as one speaks of large ones, and
the other of small ones.

"*The day of death*," etc. From this we see that R. Mair makes no
difference between a death, to which burning is, and that to which it is
not, used; in both cases as according to him, idols are worshipped
there. Hence the burning is not a custom of the Amorites, which the
Israelites are prohibited from. And the rabbis who oppose R. Mair hold
that it is a custom. Why then do *we* use burning? As there is a
Boraitha that one may burn things for the death of kings. Therefore, as
to burning, we must say, all agree that it is not considered a custom,
but an act of honor. The rabbis, however, hold that worship of idols
takes place only in cases where there is burning. While according to R.
Mair, it is worship in both cases. Where do we find that burning is used
for kings? \[Jer. xxxiv. 5\]: "In peace

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

shalt thou die and as burnings were made for thy fathers," etc. And as
they burn for kings, so also do they for princes. What they used to burn
upon kings? Their beds and all the utensils which were used by the
deceased. And it happened on the death of Raban Gamaliel the elder, that
Unclus the proselyte burned clothing worth seventy *manas* coined in
Zur.

"*The day of shaving his beard*," etc. The schoolman propounded a
question: Does the Mishna mean the shaving of his beard and the
surrounding of the hair (which they used as a worship for the whole
year, and at the end they used to remove for the same purpose) or do
they mean the removing of the hair? Come and hear the following: The day
of shaving the beard and leaving the hair and also the day of removing
it.

R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: There was still another festival
in Rome which occurs once in seventy years, on which they would make a
well man ride on a lame man, dress him in the garments of Adam, and
place on his head the scalp of R. Ismael, etc.; on his neck was
suspended gold of the weight of four *zuz*. And they cover the markets
with it, heralding before him: *sakh quiriphlaster*. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) The brother of our Lord is a deceiver.
(They mean Jacob, the brother of Eseau, who deceived the latter by
taking away the blessing of Isaac to himself.) He who saw this now may
be rejoiced, as if not to-day, he will not see it any more (because it
was once in seventy years), and they would finish with: Woe will be to
him at the time the other will arise. But why does not the Tana of our
Mishna count this feast? Because he counts only what is usual each year,
and not what happens once in seventy.

R. Hanan b. R. 'Hisda or R. Hanan b. Rabha in the name of Rabh said:
There are five houses of idols; the house of Beil in Babylon, the house
of Nebu in Khursi, of Tharetha in Mapag, Zripha in Askkilon, and Nishra
in Arabia. When R. Dimi came, he said: It was added to them the yared of
An Bekhi of Ekha of the town of N'dbkah. All these houses were standard,
and were worshipped the whole year. So said R. 'Hisda in the name of his
father-in-law.

It is said above, that according to Samuel: In exile it is forbidden

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

only the very day of the festival, not the day before and after. But
even on that day did not R. Jehudah allow R. Brona to buy wine and R.
Giddle to buy wheat in the festival of the merchants? Such a festival is
different, as it is not standard.

MISHNA *IV*.: In a city where the idol is placed, interfering is
forbidden inside, but not outside. And if outside, the inside is not
forbidden. May one go to the city at that time? If the way leads to the
idol only, it is forbidden, but if it leads also to another place, it is
not.

GEMARA: What is meant by outside is, *e.g.*, the bazaar of Gaza. Resh
Lakish questioned R. Hanina: Is indeed the bazaar of Gaza permitted? And
he answered: Did it not happen to you to be in Zur where you could see
an Israelite and a Gentile putting their pots upon -one stove, and the
sages did not object. The same is the case with the bazaar of Gaza; the
sages did not care to forbid this because of these festivals.

"*May one go to the city*," etc. The rabbis taught: A city in which an
idol is placed, one must not enter, nor pass from it into another city.
So R. Mair. The sages, however, say: The prohibition lies when the way
is specified to that place only, but not otherwise. If a thorn sticks in
one's foot at that place where the idol is standing, he must not bend to
take it out, because it would seem as bowing to the idol; but if it does
not seem so, he may. And the same is the case if one's money scattered
near that place. From a spring which runs before the idol, one must not
bend to drink for the same reason, unless it does not seem as if bowing
to the idol. If an aqueduct is placed in the idol, one must not put his
mouth to it, as it would seem like kissing it. However, it is not
advisable to put one's mouth to any duct, as one may swallow a leech.

The rabbis taught: One may not drink water from rivers or ponds either
with his mouth or with one hand (as he cannot discern anything in it
with both hands; however, he can keep the water, and examine it). And if
he did so, he would be responsible in case he swallowed a leech, which
is dangerous, and this is a support to R. Hanina, who said: That for
such an accident it is allowed to violate the Sabbath by warming water;
and also R. Ne'hamaia allowed to do same in such a case. And R. Huna b.
Jehoshua said: That if such happened, he may drink vinegar until the
water is warmed. R. Idi b. Abin said: He who has swallowed a bee, cannot
be cured. However, he may drink some strong vinegar, perhaps this will
give him time to make his will.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

MISHNA V.: If, during an idol festival in the city, some stores were
there decorated, one must not buy from these stores, while he may from
the others, as such a case happened in the city of Beth Shean, and the
sages have so decided.

GEMARA: Said Resh Lakish: The prohibition lies only on those which are
decorated with roses and myrtles, because the odor pleases him, but not
to those which were decorated with some other fruit. And the reason is
\[Deut. xiii. 18\]: "And there shall not cleave to thy hand aught of the
devoted things." Which signifies that it is prohibited only to derive
any benefit for himself, but not to benefit others. R. Johanan, however,
maintains that the prohibition lies also on those which are decorated
with fruit, as such conclusion can be drawn *a fortiori*. If deriving
benefit from them is forbidden, so much the more should it be, to
benefit them. An objection was raised from the following: R. Nathan
said: It is usual in the day of the idol to herald: everyone who will
decorate his head and the heads of his animals for the honor of the idol
will be freed from duties for such and such a time. What had then a Jew
to do? Should he decorate, then he derives benefit from the idols;
should he not, then he benefits them. From this it was said: He who is
doing business in the market established for the idol, his property must
be destroyed in such a manner that no one should be able to derive any
benefit of it. We see, then, that to benefit is also prohibited, and
this contradicts Resh Lakish's above statement. Said R. Mesharshia b. R.
Idi: Resh Lakish hold that the rabbis differ with R. Nathan, and the
Halakha prevails with the majority, while R. Johanan holds that they do
not differ. (Here is repeated from tract Minor Festivals and Abel
Rabbathi, which we deem not necessary to translate.)

R. Jacob bought shoes on such a market day, and R. Jeremiah bought
bread. Each of them bought from a private man, not from a storekeeper.
However, each one thought that his colleague bought from a storekeeper,
and rebuked each other because of the statement of Aba b. R. 'Higya b.
Aba: That the prohibition to buy lies only from a storekeeper, but not
from a private, as a private does not pay any duties. He also said that
if R. Johanan were in such a place where they take duties from a private
also, he would forbid to buy even from a private. The above-mentioned
sages, however, bought their goods from such a private who was not
established at that city, and, therefore, they were sure that he does
not pay duties,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

MISHNA *VI*.: The following are forbidden to be sold to the heathens:
Fir-cones, white figs on their stems, frankincense, and a white cock. R.
Jehudah, however, said: That a white cock may be sold among other cocks,
and if singly, he has to cut off a finger of it, because the heathens do
not sacrifice an animal of which an organ is missing. All other things
may be sold anonymously, but if they say that they buy it for
worshipping, one must not sell. R. Mair, however, forbids to sell them
fine date trees, sugar-canes, and a variety of dates.

GEMARA: "*Frankincense*," said R. Itzchak in the name of Resh Lakish:
Only the best frankincense which is used for worshipping, and there is a
Boraitha: That from all the things mentioned above, one bundle may be
sold; and what is to be considered a bundle? Explained R. Jehudah b.
Bathyra: No less than three manas worth. But why not fear perhaps the
buyer will sell of it for worshipping? Said Abayi: We are told not to
put a stone before the blind, ourselves, but we are not told that we
should fear some other one should do same with our stone. (The
prohibition is, because one must not assist a sinner, and worshipping
idols is a sin even to the heathens.)

"*A white cock*," etc. R. Jonna in the name of R. Zara according to
others quoting R. Zebid, said: If the buyer is searching for a cock
anonymously, even a white one may be sold to him. But if he asks for a
white cock, then such must not be sold. There is an objection from our
Mishna. R. Jehudah said: It may be sold among others. Now, let us see
the nature of the case. If the buyer ask for a white cock, then
certainly it must not be sold even among others; we must then say that
he asks for a cock in general, and notwithstanding this, is allowed to
sell it among the others, but not singly, even according to R. Jehudah.
And according to the first Tana, not even among the others? Said R.
Nahman b. Itzhak: The Tanaim of our Mishna speaks of a case when the
buyer mentioned a black, red and white one. According to the first Tana,
as soon as white is mentioned, it must not be sold even among others,
and according to R. Jehudah, it may, on the supposition that as the
other colors are not for sacrificing, the white is not either. But if
color was not mentioned at all, even according to the first Tana, the
white may be sold among other colors. And there is a Boraitha in
accordance with R. Na'hman b. Itzchak, as follows: R. Jehudah said: The
prohibition is in force only when the buyer says, Sell me this white
cock; but if he said, Sell me this

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and other colors you have, it is not. And even in the former case, if
the buyer has a sick person in his house; or he is preparing a banquet
for his son, it is permitted. But does not our Mishna state above: That
in such a case *that* man as well as that day *is* prohibited? Said R.
Itzchak b. R. Mesharshia: R. Jehudah, by the word banquet means a
dancing banquet, on which sacrificing is not used, and not a wedding
banquet. R. Ashi propounded a question: If the buyer asks for a
blemished white cock (which is not used for sacrificing), may one sell
him a good white cock, or is it to be feared that because he knows that
an Israelite would not sell him a white cock, he deceives him by asking
for a blemished one; and should you decide that such is prohibited?
Furthermore, how is the law in case he asks for a white one and,
nevertheless, takes also a black and a red one; may one then sell him a
white one also, as it is to be supposed that he does not take them for
sacrificing; or here, also, it may be feared that he bought the other
colors only because he needs the white one? This question remains
undecided.

"*R. Mair said*," etc. Said R. 'Hisda to Abimi: We have a tradition that
the tract Aboda Zara of Abraham the patriarch contained four hundred
chapters. We, however, have only five of them, and even these we do not
quite understand. What is the difficulty? R. Mair said: "A fine date
tree," from which it is to be understood that a simple one *may* be
sold. And there is a Mishna: Nothing must be sold of that which is
attached to the ground. Answered Abimi: By a "fine date tree" the fruit
of it is meant; and so also said R. Huna: *e.g.*, (*'Hazal nkshba
nklas*) the species or variety of dates. When R. Dimi came from
Palestine, he said in the name of Hamma b. Joseph: *Quryti* (that which
is fit for a drink, made of cariota \[cariotum\]). Said Abayi to him: We
have learned *nklas*, and we do not know what it is, and now you say
*quryti*, and we do not know what it is either. Of what use is it, then,
to us? And he answered: If you happened to be in Palestine and say
*nklas*, no one would understand you, but if you said there *quryti*,
they would understand, and show you what it means.

MISHNA *VII*.: In places where it is customary to sell small cattle
(sheep, goats, etc.) to heathens, it is lawful to do so, but not in
places where this is not customary. Large cattle must not be sold to
them at all, nor calves nor foals of asses, either sound or
broken-legged. R. Jehudah permits

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the sale of the latter, and Ben Bathyra permits the sale of a
horse. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

GEMARA: From this Mishna it seems that it relies only upon a custom, but
there is no prohibition, and in the first Mishna of the second chapter,
we see that one must not place an animal in the inns of the heathens,
etc. Said R. Eleazar: Even at those places where it is forbidden to
place the animals in their inns, it is allowed to sell them. As usual
the heathen takes care that his animals should riot be uprooted. And so
also said R. Tachlipha in the name of Shila b. Abimi, quoting Rabh. As
the latter retracted his first statement "that it must not."

"*Large cattle*," etc. R. Ada permitted to sell an ass through a
middleman (also an Israelite). R. Huna sold a cow to a heathen. Said R.
'Hisda to him: Why did the master do so? And he answered: Because it
seems to me that he bought it for the purpose of slaughtering. And
whence do we know that such is permitted? From (Shebüth, v. 8), where
the school of Shamai says: One must not sell a ploughing cow on the
Sabbathical year. The school of Hillel, however, permits it, because one
may buy it for slaughtering.

Said Rabba: What comparison is this? Concerning the Sabbathical year,
there is no obligation that cattle shall rest then, while on the Sabbath
one is obliged to give his cattle rest. Said Abayi to him. But where do
we find that such is forbidden, even when there is an obligation? There
is a Tosephta: The school of Hillel permits to sell a ploughing field in
the Sabbathic year, because it may be supposed that one buys it to rest
this year, but to plough it the next, and one is certainly obliged not
to plough his field on the Sabbathic year. R. Ashi opposed: On the
contrary, there is a Mishna \[Shebüth, v. 6\]: "Ploughing vessels must
not be sold on the Sabbathic year," and we know of no obligation that
one must give rest to his ploughing vessels. And therefore, says he:
When there is a supposition that it can be used for another purpose, we
may do so, even, when there is an obligation; but when there is no such
supposition, it must not be done, even when there is no obligation.

Rabba sold an ass to an Israelite, who was suspected of selling it to a
heathen. Said Abayi to him: Why have the masters

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

done so? And he answered: I sold it to an Israelite. And to Abayi's
question: But he will sell it to a heathen, he answered: Does he sell to
heathens only, if an Israelite will give him a good price will he not
sell it? Abayi then objected to him from the following: In places where
it is customary to sell small cattle to Samaritans, one may do so, but
not in places where it is not customary; and this is only because they
are suspected of selling it to the heathens, as all other reasons
advanced were denied. (Hence, we see that one must not sell to a
suspected one.) Rabba then ran after him three miles to return him, but
failed to overtake him. Said R. Dimi b. Aba: As it is not allowed to
sell to a heathen, so it is not allowed to sell to an Israelite either,
who is a robber. What does the expression "robber" mean? If he is
suspected that in case of an opposition, he would slay, then it is
self-evident, for he is worse than a heathen; and if he is not suspected
of such, why not sell to him? It speaks of one who is suspected of
slaying only, then, when the owner runs after him to persecute. The
rabbis taught: Shields must not be sold to those; others, however,
taught they may. The reason of those who forbid is, that if they are
short in weapons they use the shields instead; and the reason of those
who permit is, that if they are short in weapons they run away. Said R.
Na'hman in the name of Rabba b. Abuhu: The Halakha prevails with the
latter. R. Ada b. Aba said: Lumps of wrought iron must not be sold to
them, because they make weapons of it; but if so, should not spades be
forbidden, too? Said R. Zabid: It means of Indian iron, which is useful
for weapons. And now that we do sell to them is because the Persians are
protecting us with their weapons. So said R. Ashi.

MISHNA *VIII*.: One must not sell to them bears, lions, and all such
things by which the people can be injured. One must not conjoin himself
in building their court houses (from the roofs of which they usually
throw the one who is sentenced to death, to be killed), *gradus*, arenas
and scaffolds. However, in building monuments and bath-houses, one may.
But when they reached that chamber in which their idols should be
placed, be must stop.

GEMARA: Rabbina propounded a contradiction. Our Mishna states: That only
things which may be injurious to the people, whence it is to be
understood that if not injurious, it does not matter, from the
following: As one must not sell to them large cattle, so also must he
not do with large beasts.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

And even in those places where small cattle may be sold, large beasts
must not. (We see, then, that even such that are harm. less must not be
sold either.) And he explains that our Mishna speaks of a lame lion, and
it is in accordance with R. Jehudah, who holds that such may be sold. R.
Na'hman opposed: Who can say that the lion is placed under the category
of large beasts; perhaps he is placed under the category of small
ones. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

"*Himself in building*." Said Rabba b. b. Hanna in the name of R.
Johanan: There were three such palaces: for kings, for bath-houses, and
for treasuries. Said Rabba: All of them are permitted.

The rabbis taught: When R. Eleazar was captured by the government,
accusing him of being a *min*, he was brought to the *gradus*, and the
*hegemon* (chief judge) said to him: A sage like yourself should engage
himself in such a valueless thing. And he answered: The judge himself
may testify that such is not the case. \[The *hegemon* thought that he
means him; he, however, meant the heavenly judge.\] And he said: Because
you trust in me, I swear by *Dimus* (his idol) that you are free from
this accusation. When R. Eleazar returned home, his disciples surrounded
him to condole him, but he did not accept it. Said R. Aqiba to him:
"Rabbi, allow me to say before you one of the things you taught me," and
he allowed him. Said he to him: "Rabbi, probably some explanations of
the minim pleased you and you have accepted them, and therefore you were
suspected and captured." Answered he: "Aqiba, you have reminded me; it
happened once that I walked in the upper market of Ciporas, and I met
one of the minim, named Jacob, of the village of Zachania and he said to
me": It reads \[Deut. xxiii. 19\]: "Thou shalt not bring the hire of a
harlot," etc. May then a retiring room for the high priest be built from
such money? And I kept silent. Said he to me: So taught Jeshu. b.
Panthyra. <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md) It reads \[Mich. i. 7\]:
"For from harlot's wages she gathered them, and for harlot's wages shall
they be used again"; hence, money that comes from a dirty place, may be
expended

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

on a dirty place, which explanation pleased me. It is for this that I
was suspected and captured. And I confess that I have transgressed
\[Prov. v. 8\]: "Remove far from her thy way, and come not nigh to the
door of her house." "Remove from her," means from minunism and "come not
nigh" means to government. Others, however, interpret same "remove far"
etc. as to mean minunism, and "come not nigh" etc., prostitution, which
place, according to R. 'Hisda, is prohibited to approach from a distance
of four yards.

Mar. Uqba said: it reads \[Ps. xxx. 15\]: "The leech hath two daughters
(crying) Give, give," *i.e.*, minunism and the government, which are
never satisfied, the first of catching men to her belief, and the
second, duties. R. 'Hisda in the name of Mar. Uqba said: The *Gehenna*
cries, saying, "bring me in the two daughters, who always cry in this
world": "Bring in to me, bring in to me." It reads \[Prov. ii. 19\]:
"All that come unto her return not again, and they will not reach the
paths of life." If they do not return again, they will certainly not
reach the paths of life? It means, therefore, that they who repent and
return from minunism, die that they might not return to minunism again.
Does one die who repents minunism only and not other sins; is there not
a Boraitha: It was said of Elazar b. Durdia who left not out one
prostitute. He was once informed that there was a prostitute in one of
the sea countries, who received a pocketful of dinars in reward, and he
took this amount and passed seven rivers until he reached her. She,
however, caused him to repent. He then placed himself between two
mountains saying; "O ye mountains, pray for me," to which they answered:
"Instead of praying for thee, we must pray for ourselves" \[Is. liv.
10\]: For the mountain may depart, and the hills may be removed. He then
said: "Heaven and earth, pray for me," and they also answered: "We have
to pray for ourselves," as it reads \[ibid. li. 6\]: "For the heavens
shall vanish," etc. The same answer he got from the sun and the moon of
which it reads \[ibid. xxiv. 23\]: "And the moon shall be put to the
blush and the sun be made ashamed." A similar answer he got from the
stars and planets of which it reads in \[ibid. xxxiv. 4\]: "And all the
host of heaven shall be dissolved." He then exclaimed: "I see that I can
rely only upon myself," and having put his head between his knees, he
wept until his soul departed. A heavenly voice was then heard, saying,
"R. Elazar b. Durdia is prepared for life in the world to come."

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabbi, when he
heard this, wept, saying, "there is again one who bought his world in
one moment while another one must work for it all his life." And again,
it is not enough for those who repent, that they get a share in the
world to come, but they are named also rabbis, as the heavenly voice
said: Rabbi Eliazar, etc. \[hence we see that he who has repented from
sin, also died? Because he, Elazar was involved in such, it is similar
to minunism\].

R. Hanina and R. Jonathan were on the road and they met two
thoroughfares, one leading to the gate of an idol and thc other to the
gate of the prostitutes. Said one to his colleague: Let us go on that
which leads to the idol as the evil spirit of idolators is killed.
Answered his colleague: On the contrary, let us go on to that which
leads to the prostitute so that we should overrule the evil spirit, and
be rewarded. When they arrived to the prostitutes, the latter ran away
to their homes. And his colleague asked him: "What was the reason you
relied upon--\[Prov. ii. 11\]: 'Discretion <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) will watch over thee, understanding will
keep thee.'"

The rabbis taught: When R. Elazar b. Partha and R. Hanina b. Tradian
were captured by the government, said the former to the latter: "Happy
are you, that you were captured because of one thing only, and woe is to
me that I am captured for five things." Said he: Happy are you who are
accused of five things and will be saved, woe is to me who am accused
only of one thing shall be sentenced. The reason is, that you were
occupied with both the Torah and with bestowing of favors, while I was
occupied with the Torah only. This is in accordance with R. Huna who
said elsewhere: He who is occupied with the Torah only, is similar to
him who denies God. As it reads \[II Chron. xv. 3\]: "And many days (had
elapsed) for Israel, (they being) without the true God." What does the
expression "without the true God" mean? He who occupies himself with the
Torah, but does not observe bestowing of favors, which is the main point
of humanity. Was indeed R. Hanina b. Tradial not occupied in bestowing
of favors? Is it not stated further on that he did? Yea, but not so as
it was fit for his dignity. Elazar b. Partha was brought before the
judges and they asked: "Why are you studying, and stealing? And he
answered: If

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

one is a scholar, he is no warrior (robber) and if a warrior, he is no
scholar, and as it is not true that I am a warrior, so is it also untrue
that I am a scholar. Why then are you named master? And he answered: "I
am the master of embroidering." They brought two coils before him and
said to him: "Which is warp and which is woof?" A miracle occurred and a
female bee set on the warp while a male bee on the woof and he said:
This is a warp and this is a woof. "Why did you not visit the *Bee
abidon* (the house of discussion)?" And he answered: "I am too old, and
feared perhaps I would be trodden down under the feet of the crowd."
"Has it ever happened that old men should be trodden down in the
mentioned house? Again a miracle occurred, and just at that time they
were notified that an old man was trodden down in the house in question.
"And why then have you freed your slave (which is forbidden)?" This
never occurred. One of the crowd, however, arose to testify against him.
Elijah then disguised himself as one of the consuls of the government
and said to the witness: As in all the other things a miracle occurred,
the same would occur also in this case and you would be considered an
enemy of his and a liar. The alleged witness, however, did not listen
and rose to bear his testimony. Meanwhile, a letter from one of the
great officers which was to be sent to the Cæsar was handed to this man
as messenger. While he was going, Elijah caught and threw him four
hundred *parsas*, so that he did not return any more. Hanina b. Tradian
was then brought before them and questioned why he occupied himself with
the Torah, and he answered: Because I am so commanded by the Lord my
God. The decree was then rendered that he should be burned, his wife
killed, and his daughter to be taken to the house of prostitutes. \[He
to be burned, because he used to express the name Jehovah as it is
written (and not Adonai as it is to be read instead), but why did he so?
Did not Aba Shaul say (Sanhedrin, p. 265) that he who does so has no
share in the world to come? He did so to learn which is allowed
privately, but he did it also publicly. His wife to be killed, because
she has not prevented his doing so by protesting; from this it is to be
inferred that he who feels that his protests would effect and does not
protest, is punished therefor. And his daughter to prostitution;
because, according to R. Johanan, it happened once that she walked in
the presence of the great people of Rome, and they exclaimed: How nice
are the steps of this girl!

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And from that time
she took care of her steps to please the spectators.\] When all the
three went out from the court, they justified the decrees upon them.
Hanina said \[Deut. xxxii. 4\]: "He is the Rock, his work is perfect,"
etc. His wife said: "The God of truth and without iniquity"; and his
daughter said \[Jer. xxxii. 19\]: "Great in council, and mighty in
execution (thou) whose eyes are open over all the ways of the sons of
man." Said Rabbi: How great are these upright that to justify their
decrees, the three verses of justification came to their mouths, at the
time of so great a trouble.

The rabbis taught: When R. Jose b. Kisma became sick, R. Hanina b.
Tradian called on him; the former said to him: Hanina, my brother, are
you not aware that this nation is reigning by heavenly decree, and
notwithstanding that she has destroyed the Temple, burned the palaces,
killed the pious and put out of the way all the best of Israel, she is
still in force. About you, however, I heard that notwithstanding the
decree of the government, you occupy yourself with the Torah publicly,
and you bear with you the Holy Scrolls at all time. Hanina then
answered: The heavens shall have mercy with us. Exclaimed Jose: I am
relating to you reasons, and you say, the heavens shall have mercy. I
wonder whether the government will not burn you with the Holy Scrolls on
fire? Hanina then said: Rabbi, what will become of me in the world to
come? And Jose asked him: Did not some of the meritorious acts come to
your hand? And he answered: The money which I prepared to celebrate
Purim, I erred, thinking that it was of the charity treasury; I have
distributed it to the poor, and thereafter I have not collected from the
charity. If so, answered Jose, I wish that my share should be like
yours, and my fate similar.

It was said that a few days later R. Jose ben Kisma departed, and all
the great men of Rome were going after his coffin, lamenting him
greatly. On their return, they found Hanina b. Tradian studying the
Torah publicly with the Holy Scrolls in his bosom; he was enwrapped in
the Holy Scrolls and surrounded with branches of trees, which were
kindled. And two woollen towels, soaked in water, were placed on his
heart that his soul might not depart so quickly, and when his daughter
said to him: Father, is it just, what I see done with you? He answered:
If I were burned alone, it would be hard for me, but now that I am
burned in conjunction with the Holy Scrolls, I am sure that He who will
take revenge for the Holy Scrolls

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

will take revenge for me also. His disciples questioned him: What do you
see now? And he answered: I see the letters are flying away from the
parchment while they burned. They said to him: Rabbi, open your mouth,
so that the fire should catch you, and he answered: It is better that my
soul be taken by Him who gave it and not I myself shall cause it an
earlier death. The executioner then said to him: Rabbi, if I will
increase this fire and will take off the woollen towels from your heart,
would you bring me to life in the world to come? To which he answered,
Yea. He then asked him to swear, which he did. Immediately he increased
the fire, took off the towels, and his soul departed. The executioner
himself then jumped into the fire. A heavenly voice was then heard:
Hanina and the executioner are prepared for life in the world to come.
Rabbi then wept, saying: There is one again who bought his world in one
moment, etc.

Bruria, the wife of R. Mair, was a daughter of Hanina b. Tradian, and
she said to her husband: It is a disgrace for me that my sister should
be in the house of prostitution. He then took with him a τριχαβος; full
with *dinars*, and said: I will go there, and if she is yet pure, a
miracle will occur. He disguised himself as a military rider, visited
her, asking her to listen to him. She, however, gives him many reasons,
and finally tells him that in this place he will find many who are more
beautiful than she. He then convinced himself that she answered the same
to everyone, and went to her guardian asking him to accept the money he
brought for transferring her to him, saying: The half of the *dinars*
will be sufficient to bribe the officers of the government, and the
other half will remain for you. And to his question: What should I do
when the half will be spent and they will still persecute me? he
answered: You will then say, God of Mair, help me, and you will be
saved. And whence do I know that so it is? Mair answered: I will
convince you immediately. There were dogs who devoured people, and the
guard stimulated them upon Mair, and he pronounced God of Mair, answer
me, and they kept aloof from him. The guard then delivered to Mair his
sister-in-law. Finally, the government got wind of it, and the guardian
was brought to the gallows to be hanged, and as soon as he pronounced,
God of Mair, help me, he was thrown down uninjured. And to the question,
What is it? he related before all what happened. The government then
engraved the picture of R. Mair on the gate of Rome,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

commanding that he who should see such a face should deliver him to the
officers. It happened that he was once seen, and they ran after him; he
then ran away to a place of prostitution, and Elijah disguised himself
as one of the prostitutes and embraced him. The officers then said that
it must be someone else, as Mair would not do so. Thereafter, Mair ran
away to Babylon, according to some, because of this occasion, and
according to others, because of that which happened to Brura. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md)

(Concerning arenas and circuses) Tanaim differ in the following: An
Israelite must not visit arenas, because they are considered a place of
scorners. R. Nathan, however, permits it for two reasons: first, one
should be able to save an Israelite if it happened that he was placed
there by animosity; and secondly, if it happened that an Israelite
should die there, the visitor may then be a witness, so that the widow
of the deceased should be allowed to remarry.

The rabbis taught: One must not go to the theatres and circuses, because
at those places they gather up money for the idols; so R. Mair. The
sages, however, say: In the places where they gather, it is prohibited
because of the suspicion of idolatry. And in those where they are not
gathering, it is prohibited, because they are considered places of
scorners. R. Simeon b. Pazi lectured \[Psalm i. 1\]: "Happy is the man
who walketh not in the council of the wicked, and standeth not in the
way of sinners, and sitteth not in the seat of scorners." If he had not
walked how could he stand, and if he did not stand how could he sit, and
if he did not sit, how could he scorn? It means as follows: That if he
had walked, he will finally stand, and if stood, he will finally sit and
scorn, and concerning him it is said \[Prov. ix. 12\]: "But if thou art
a scorner, thou alone will have to bear it." Said R. Eliezar: He who
scorns brings chastisements upon himself as \[IS. xxviii. 22\]: "And now
be ye no longer scornful, lest your bonds be made strong." And Rabha
said to the rabbis (his disciples): I beg you not to scorn so that
chastisements shall not come upon ye. And R. Ktina said: Even his food
becomes lessened, as it reads \[Hos. vii. 5\]: "(Because) he joineth his
hand with scorners." (Here is repeated about the same matter from Last
Gate, p. 30.) R. Simeon b. Pazi lectured again: "Happy is the man who
walketh not" to

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the theatres and circuses of the heathens, "standeth not in the way of
sinners," that is, he who does not stand as a spectator at bestial
contests (arranged by the Romans). And "the sitting of scorners" beget
contention. And lest one say: As all the above I have not done, I may
engage my time in sleeping, therefore, "But whose delight is in the law
of the Lord."

R. Samuel b. Na'hman in the name of R. Jonathan said: "Happy is the man
who walketh not," etc., means Abraham our father, who was not conjoined
with the generation of separation, who were wicked, as \[Gen. xi. 3\]:
"Let us make bricks," etc. "In the way of sinners," etc.--he did not
stand with Sodomites of whom it reads \[ibid. xiii. 13\]: "But the men
of I Sodom were wicked and sinners," etc.--"with scorners"--he did not
associate himself with the Philistines, who were "scorners," as \[Judges
xvi. 25\]: "Call for Samson that he may make sport of us."

It reads \[Psalms, cxii. 1\]: "Happy is the man that feareth the Lord."
Man, and not woman? Said R. Amram in the name of Rabh: Happy is he who
repents when he is still young. And R.. Jehoshua b. Levi said: Happy is
he who conquers his evil spirit, as a heroic man; "that greatly
delighteth in his commandments." Said R. Eliezar: In his commandments,
but not in the reward for them. And this is what a Mishna in Aboth
states: Be not like slaves who serve their master because of reward, but
as the one who serves him not to receive any reward. "In the law of the
Lord is his delight," said Rabh: *i.e.*, one should always study the law
to which his heart is inclined. Levi and R. Simeon, the son of Rabbi,
were sitting before Rabbi reading one book of the Bible, and after
finishing Levi said: Bring us "Proverbs." And R. Simeon said: Bring us
"Psalms." He overruled Levi, and "Psalms" was brought. When they came to
the verse, "In the law of the Lord is his delight," Rabbi stopped and
said: One has to study only what his heart is inclined to. Said Levi to
him: Rabbi, with this you have given us permission to stop studying. R.
Abdimi b. Hama said: Him who occupies himself with the Torah, the Holy
One, blessed be He, grants his desire. Rabha said: At the time one
begins to study, the Torah is named the Holy One's, but after studying,
it is considered to be his (the student's); as first it is written the
law of the Lord, and thereafter, in his law. And be said again: One
shall first study, and thereafter deliberate, as the above-cited verse
reads. The same said again: One shall study,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

although he forgets; shall study, although he does not understand it
well. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) (Here is repeated from
Sanhedrin, p. 369, and from Erubin, p. 126. See there.) It reads \[Psalm
i. 3\]: "And he shall be like a tree replanted by rivulets," etc. Said
the disciple of Janai: "Replanted and not planted" signifies that he who
receives his knowledge from one master, does not see any blessing in his
studies. Said R. 'Hisda to his disciples: I would like to tell you
something, but I am afraid you will leave me: He who studies always from
one master, does not see any blessing. They then left him and went to
the college of Rabba, who, when he heard the above reason, said to them:
This is true only concerning reasons and ingenuity; but as for
traditions, it is better to learn them from one master, so that they
should not be metamorphosed in different versions. Tanhum b. Hanilai
said: It is advisable to divide one's years into three parts: one-third
for the study of Scripture, the second, Mishna, and the third, Talmud.
But does one know how long he has to live? It means, he should do it
every day.

"The fruit in its season . . . does not wither," said Rabha: It
signifies that if the fruit is given in its season, then its leaves will
not wither; but if not, the succeeding verse (4) applies to both the
teacher and pupil.

R. Aba in the name of R. Hunna, quoting Rabh, said \[Prov. vii. 26\]:
"For many deadly wounded hath she caused to fall," means a disciple who,
though not as yet fit, decides questions; "very numerous were slain by
her," means the contrary: he who is fit to do so and does not. And until
what age? Till he reaches his fortieth year. But has not Rabha decided
questions in his youth? It was because there was no greater scholar than
he. Aba b. Ada in the name of Rabh, or b. Aba in the name of R. Hamnuna,
quoting Rabh, said: Even the gossip of a scholar is to be studied, as it
reads: "And its leaves shall not wither."

R. Joshua b. Levi said: The following is written in the Pentateuch,
repeated in the Prophets, and thirdly in the Hagiographa: He who
occupies himself with the Torah is prosperous in all his undertakings.
In the Pentateuch \[Deut. xxix. 8\]: "Keep ye therefore the words of
this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do,"
repeated in Prophets \[Jos. i. 8\]:

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "This book of the
book shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt mediate therein
day and night, in order that thou mayest observe to do according to all
that is written therein; for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous,
and then shalt thou have good success." And thirdly in Hagiographa
\[Psalm i. 2, 3\]: "But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and who
doth meditate in his law by day and night. (3) And he shall be like a
tree planted by rivulets of water, that yieldeth its fruit in its
season, and the leaf of which doth not wither; and all that he may do
shall prosper."

R, Alexander heralded: Who wants to live, who wants to live? And a big
crowd surrounded him. He then referred them to \[ibid. xxxiv. 14-16\].

"*Where the idols should be placed*," etc. Said R. Eliezar in the name
of R. Johanan: If however, he has built, the reward of it is valid. Is
this not self-evident? It is only the preparation for the idol to which
both R. Ismael and R. Aqiba agree that they are not forbidden, unless
the idol is already worshipped? Said R. Jeremiah: The Mishna means that
even if he has made the idol itself, the reward is valued. But this is
correct only to him, who holds that when an Israelite made an idol for
himself, it is forbidden even before it was worshipped; but of a
heathen, it is not, unless worshipped. But to him who holds that the
same is the case with the idol of a heathen, what can be said? Said
Rabba b. Ula: The Mishna refers to the finishing touch, which completes
the idol, and the reason is: what made the idol ready? The last touch,
which in itself is not worth the smallest coin (*a perutha*), and
therefore it is not forbidden. From this it may be inferred that the
Tana holds the obligation to pay a laborer, counts from the beginning
till the very end of the labor, and not only after its completion.

MISHNA *IX*.: One must not manufacture ornaments for an idol--*e.g.*,
necklaces, nose-bands and rings. R. Eliezar, however, maintains that for
reward one may. Nothing must be sold to them while attached to the
ground, but after it was cut off, one may. R. Jehudah said: He may also
sell with the stipulation to cut it off afterward.

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? Said R. Jose, from \[Deut. Vii. 2\]:
"Nor favor them," <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) means, he shall
not give

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

him a rest in the land; we have learned similarly in a Boraitha, with
the addition that it also means: You shall not give him such which shall
make them merciful in the eyes of others. (Here is repeated from Chulin,
p. 114 b.) The above statement is a support to that which Rabh said: It
is forbidden to say: How nice is this female heathen? An objection was
raised. R. Simeon b. Gamalien, being once on the steps of the Temple
mountain, happened to see a female heathen who was a great beauty, and
he exclaimed: "How great is thy work O Lord!" And it happened also to R.
Aqiba that, when he saw the wife of Tornus Rupus, he laughed and wept.
Laughed, because he saw that she would become a proselyte, and he would
marry her; wept, that such a beauty must be buried under earth? This
does not contradict Rabh, as it was only a benediction, which one has to
recite by seeing nice creatures. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) R.
Joshua b. Levi said: Modesty is the greatest of them all, as it reads
\[Is. lxi. 1\]: "Hath anointed me to announce good tidings unto the
meek," it does not read to announce pious men, but meek; hence modesty
is greatest.

"*One must not sell*." The rabbis taught: One may sell them a tree with
the stipulation to cut it off, and he cuts it immediately, so R.
Jehudah. R. Mair, however, says: Only that which is already cut. The
same is the case with hay, and also with flour. According to R. Jehudah,
it may be sold to harvest, and according to R. Mair that which is
already harvested. It was necessary to learn their points of differing
in all the three, as one from the other could not be inferred (we omit
the reasons, as of little importance). The schoolman propounded a
question.. May one sell them a cow with the stipulation to slaughter it?
Shall we assume that the above things R. Jehudah permits, because they
are not under the control of the heathen so that he is not able to
prolong time? But in the case of a cow which he takes immediately, he
may prolong the time a good deal until slaughtering, and this even R.
Jehudah will not allow. Come and hear the following: One may sell a cow
with the stipulation of slaughtering, and the heathen has to do it
immediately. So R. Jehudah, while R. Mair permits only the sale of the
slaughtered.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

MISHNA *X*: Houses must not be rented to the heathens in Palestine, not
to speak of fields. In Syria, however, houses are permitted to be sold,
but not fields, and out of Syria houses may be sold and fields rented.
So R. Mair. R. Jose, however, said: In Palestine, houses may be rented,
but not fields, in Syria houses sold, and fields rented; out of Syria,
everything may be sold. However, even in the places where renting is
allowed, it must not be for residence, as the idol is brought there,
which is against \[Deut. Vii. 26\]: "And thou shalt not bring an
abomination in thy house." A bath-house must not be rented at any place
because it is named after the owner, who is an Israelite (and he can be
suspected of heating it himself on the Sabbath).

GEMARA: What is meant by the expression "not to speak of fields"; is it
because two things would be neglected, resting the fields and tithe from
the growth? The same would be with the houses also, resting, and the
neglect of a *mazuza*? Said R. Mesharshia: The *mazuza* is not an
obligation upon the house, but upon him who lives in it.

"*In Syria houses*," etc. Let us see; why is selling forbidden? Because
it is considered as the land of Israel. Why, then, is renting permitted?
Renting even in Palestine is only as a safeguard that one should not
come to sell; and a safeguard to a safeguard we do not decree. But is
not renting fields in Syria also a safeguard to a safeguard, and is
nevertheless forbidden? This is not considered a safeguard, as the Tana
holds that the land which was taken away by an individual (not by the
people of Israel at large) is considered, nevertheless, to be the land
of Israel. Hence, against fields upon which two things would be
neglected, as said above, the rabbis decreed; but this is not the case
with houses.

"*In Syria houses are permitted*," etc. For the just-mentioned reasons.
"*R. Jose . . . in Palestine, houses*," etc. Also for the same reason.

"*In Syria houses sold*," etc. It is because he holds that the land
which was taken by an individual is not considered the land of Israel,
and, therefore, only against fields they decreed for the reasons adduced
above, but not against houses.

"*Everything maybe sold*," etc. Because it is far from Palestine, no
decree was rendered. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The Halakha
prevails with R. Jose. Said R. Joseph: Provided it does not make a whole
neighborhood of heathens,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And there is a
Boraitha: That less than three families is not considered a
neighborhood.

"*Where renting is allowed*," etc. From this we infer that not in every
place renting is allowed. Hence, the unnamed Mishna is according to R.
Mair; as according to R. Jose, renting is permitted in every place.

"*Put not a bath-house*," etc. There is a Boraitha: R. Simeon b. Gimalia
said: One must not rent his bath-house to a heathen because the bath is
named after the owner and the heathen does his labor on Sabbath and
holidays (and people may think that the Israelites themselves do this).
But how is it to a Samaritan? It may be rented, although he works on the
minor festivals? On minor festivals, we Israelites also are permitted to
heat baths. But let us see why it is permitted to rent a field to a
heathen, although he does labor on Sabbath? Because people know that the
gardener is doing work for himself. Why not say the same concerning a
bath-house? It is because usually a field is hired to a gardener, which
is not the case with bathhouses. There is another Boraitha: R. Simeon b.
Eliezar: One must not rent his field to a Samaritan because it is named
after him, and the Samaritan works the field during the minor festivals.
But how is it with a heathen? It is allowed, because people know that he
does it for himself; why not say the same concerning a Samaritan? R.
Simeon b. Eliezar does not consider the reason of a gardener at all, and
his reason why it is allowed to a heathen is that if we tell him that be
should not work, he will listen to, which is not the case with a
Samaritan, who thinks that he knows better than woe do. There were
fields of safran in partnership of an Israelite and a heathen; the
heathen worked on Sabbath and the Israelite on Sunday, and Rabha has
permitted to do so. Rabbina questioned him from the following: "An
Israelite and a heathen who have hired a field in partnership, the
Israelite must not say to the heathen: You take your share on Sabbath
and I on a week day, unless it was so stipulated at the time they
started. However, when they come to make their accounts, it is not
permitted to the Israelite that he should take his share from the
Sabbath labor." Rabha became ashamed; thereafter, however, it was
announced that such was stipulated when the partnership was started.

The schoolman propounded a question: How is it if there was no
stipulation? Come and hear: "If such a stipulation was made at the time
when started, it is allowed"; whence it may

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

be inferred, that if there was no stipulation, it is prohibited. But if
so, how is the latter part to be understood? "When they come to make the
account, the Israelite must not take his share of Sabbath," from which
it may be inferred that without an account, he may accept it, although
there was no stipulation. In view of this, from this Boraitha nothing
can be taken for a support.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](zar03.htm#fr_0.md) The term for festivals in
the Mishna, is "*Aidehen*" and Rabh and Samuel are discussing this term
at some length. According to one it is *Aidehen* and means misfortune
while to the other it is "*Edihen*," and means "witnesses." It is
because the sages of the Mishna hesitate to name the holidays of the
idolaters with the term "festivals." We, however, deem it not necessary
to translate this discussion, as it is unimportant.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](zar03.htm#fr_1.md) The term for people here,
is *Leum* and by an analogy of expression it is inferred to mean
kingdom.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](zar03.htm#fr_2.md) Leeser's translation does
not correspond.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](zar03.htm#fr_3.md) The term for this word is
*sh'hok*, which means both sport and smile, hence the objection.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:2](zar03.htm#fr_4.md) The translation of this
verse does not correspond at all, it is therefore of no use to quote it.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6:1](zar03.htm#fr_5.md) Leeser's translation,
according to the sense, does not correspond with the Talmud who takes it
literally.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:1](zar03.htm#fr_6.md) We do not quote the
passage, as the translation of it does not at all correspond.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:1](zar03.htm#fr_7.md) In text many things on
which the Halakha prevails according to R. Jehoshua b. Kar'ha are
gathered, though they do not belong to this tract at all; and as all of
them are mentioned, each in its proper place, they are omitted here.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[13:1](zar03.htm#fr_8.md) The word complaint is
termed by *shicho*, which means "prior" according to the Talmud
concerning Isaac in \[Gen. xxiv. 63\] where the same term is used.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[16:1](zar03.htm#fr_9.md) We do not quite understand
how to make out 206 years according to this account. Rashi's explanation
does not suffice, and all other commentators keep silent. The Gamara
itself was in doubt, concerning this account, as R. Papa said in text.
We have, however, omitted it, leaving the whole affair to the historian.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[16:2](zar03.htm#fr_10.md) There are a few lines
repeated here from Sanhedrin, p. 303, to which we could not refer
because of the continuation in text.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[16:3](zar03.htm#fr_11.md) The reader must not
forget that this was said fourteen centuries ago.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[16:4](zar03.htm#fr_12.md) This account remains
very complicated, notwithstanding Rashi's attempt to explain it. And as
it seems to us unimportant, we have omitted the whole discussion.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[18:1](zar03.htm#fr_13.md) For the explanation, see
Taanith, p. 4.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[20:1](zar03.htm#fr_14.md) To the explanation of
these peculiar words, we give the following of Jastrow Dictionary: an
alleged proclamation made in Rome on the occasion of a sort of secular
game, and intended as a satire of Eseau (Rome) on his brother Jacob
(Judaism). The interpretations of commentaries (sakh *number* of years
predicted for the coming of the Messiah, or sakh *brother*) are
unsatisfactory.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[25:1](zar03.htm#fr_15.md) This Mishna is repeated
from tract Passover, p. 90. We did not omit because it is a Mishna and
because of the discussions of the Gemara here.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[27:1](zar03.htm#fr_16.md) The text discusses here
whether an animal in convulsive movement before death is considered
alive or dead, which is inserted here not in its proper place, nor is it
of importance and therefore omitted.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[27:2](zar03.htm#fr_17.md) In Tosaphta Chulin (ii.
24) it states that Eliazar said: Jacob has related to me things of minim
in the name of Jeshu b. Panthyra, and I was pleased with them. But it is
not mentioned what it was, and we are in doubt whether it means the joke
in text. This may serve as an answer to the criticism of the "Open
court" Vol. 16, pp. 475-477.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[29:1](zar03.htm#fr_18.md) The term for discretion
in Hebrew is *me zema* the last word is the term for prostitution and
the Talmud explains it as it would be written *men zema* which means
from prostitution.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[33:1](zar03.htm#fr_19.md) The text does not say
what happened to her. Rashi explains that she committed suicide because
of a discussion between her and her husband, who finally conquered her.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[35:1](zar03.htm#fr_20.md) In text it is inferred
from (Ps. cxix. 20). However, the translation does not correspond and
therefore the quotation is omitted.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[36:1](zar03.htm#fr_21.md) The term for favor in
Hebrew is *chanina*. *Chanina* means also rest. Hence the deduction.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[37:1](zar03.htm#fr_22.md) Here is repeated from
many tracts, especially from Middle Gate, p. 227, and a whole Mishna
front Tract Shekalim vi, which we have omitted. The statement of R.
Joshua b. Levi in text belongs to the Mishna Shekalim vi, which states
that piety is greater than all other good things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](zar04.md)
