[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040030)  [Next](0040032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I'

Appendix, p. 127.

About these versifications, which are "poems" only as mules are horses,
it is enough to say of them, with Dupin, "They are no more Tertullian's
than they are Virgil's or Homer's. The poem called *Genesis* seems to be
that which Gennadius attributes to Salvian, Bishop of Marseilles. That
concerning the *Judgment of God* was, perhaps, composed by Verecundus,
an African bishop. In the books *Against Marcion* there are some
opinions different from those of Tertullian. There is likewise a poem
*To a Senator* in Pamelius' edition, one of Sodom, and in the
*Bibliotheca Patrum* one of *Jonas and Nineve*; the first of which is
ancient, and the other two seem to be by the same author."

It is worth while to observe that this rhymester makes two bishops out
of one.<sup>[357](footnote/fn54)</sup> Cletus and Anacletus he supposes
different persons, which brings Clement into the fourth place in the see
of Rome. Our author elsewhere makes St. Clement the immediate successor
of the apostles.<sup>[358](footnote/fn54.htm#P5482_798652)</sup>

II

Or is there ought, etc., l. 136, p. 137.

In taking leave of Tertullian, it may be well to say a word of his
famous saying, Cerlum est quia impossibile est. It occurs in the tract
De Carne Chrisli,<sup>[359](footnote/fn54.htm#P5487_798906)</sup> and is
one of those startling epigrammatic dicta of our author which is no more
to be pressed in argument than any other bon-mot of a wit or a poet. It
is evidently designed as a rhetorical climax, to enforce the same idea
which we find in the hymn of Aquinas: -

Sola fides sufficit."

As Jeremy Taylor<sup>[360](footnote/fn54.htm#P5492_799286)</sup> argues,
the condition is, that holy Scripture affirms it. If that be the case,
then "all things are possible with God: "I believe; but I do not argue,
for it is impossible with men. This is the plain sense of the great
Carthaginian doctor's pithy rhetoric. But Dr. Bunsen sets it on
all-fours, and treats it as if it were soberly designed to defy reason,
-that reason to which Tertullian constantly makes his appeal against
Marcion, and in many of his
sayings<sup>[361](footnote/fn54.htm#P5493_799791)</sup> hardly less
witty. Speaking of Hippolytus, that writer
remarks,<sup>[362](footnote/fn54.htm#P5494_799883)</sup> "He might have
said on some points, Credibile licet ineptum: he would never have
exclaimed with Tertullian, \`Credibile *quia* ineptum.'"Why attempt to
prove the absurdity of such a reflection? As well attempt to defend St.
John's hyperbole<sup>[363](footnote/fn54.htm#P5495_800144)</sup> against
a mind incapable of comprehending a figure of speech.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Minucius Felix](0040032)
