[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040032)  [Next](0040034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO MINUCIUS FELIX.

\[a.d. 210.\] Though Tertullian is the founder of Latin Christianity,
his contemporary Minucius Felix gives to Christian thought its earliest
clothing in Latinity. The harshness and provincialism, with the
Graecisms, if not the mere *Tertullianism*, of Tertullian, deprive him
of high claims to be classed among Latin writers, as such; but in
Minucius we find, at the very fountain-head of Christian Latinity, a
disciple of Cicero and a precursor of Lactantius in the graces of style.
The question of his originality is earnestly debated among moderns, as
it was in some degree with the ancients. It turns upon the doubt as to
his place with respect to Tertullian, whose *Apology* he seems to quote,
or rather to abridge. But to me it seems evident that his argument
reflects so strikingly that of Tertullian's *Testimony of the Soul*,
coincident though it be with portions of the Apology, that we must make
the date of the *Testimony* the pivot of our inquiry concerning
Minucius. Now, Tertullian's *Apology* preceded the *Testimony*, and the
latter preceded the essay on the *Flesh of Christ*. If the *Testimony*
was quoted or employed by Minucius, therefore, he could not have written
before<sup>[1](footnote/fn55.htm#P5508_801461)</sup> a.d. 205; and the
statement of Jerome is confirmed, which makes our author, and not
Tertullian, the copyist. The modern discussion of the matter is an
interesting literary controversy; not yet settled, perhaps, though the
dip of the balance just now sustains my own
impressions.<sup>[2](footnote/fn55.htm#P5509_801808)</sup> But it is a
very unimportant matter in itself, the primary place in Latin
Christianity being necessarily adjudged to the commanding genius and
fertile mind of Tertullian, while it is no discredit to assign to
Minucius his proper but secondary credit, Of showing, at the very outset
of the literature of Western Christianity, that believers were not all
illiterate men, nor destitute of polite erudition, and that the language
of the Tusculan philosopher was not degraded by its new destination to
the higher and holier service of the faith.

Like Tertullian, our author appears to have been a jurisconsult, at
Rome, at some period of his history. Beautiful glimpses of his life and
character and surroundings are gained from his own pages, and nearly all
we know about him is to be found therein. So far, he is his own
biographer. He probably continued a layman, and may have lived, as some
suppose, till the middle of the third century.

It is not unimportant to note that we are still dealing with "the
North-African school," and that Rome has nothing to do with the birth of
Latin Christianity, as such. We have entered upon the third Christian
century, and as yet the venerable apostolic see of the West has made no
movement whatever towards the creation of a Latin literature among
Christians. So far from being "the mother and mistress" of the churches,
she is yet voiceless in Christendom; while Africa holds the mastery of
Christian thought alike in her schools of Alexandria Carthage. This,
although it is our fourth volume, contains nothing to modify this fact;
and yet the whole literature of early Christianity is contained in our
series. Well said Aeneas Sylvius, who afterwards became Pope Pius the
Second, "Verily, before the Council of Nice, some regard there was unto
the Bishops of Rome, *although but small*." Holy men as most of them
were, they are invisible and unfelt in the formation of Christian
theology.<sup>[3](footnote/fn55.htm#P5512_803847)</sup>

In our author's style and thought there is a charm and a fragrance which
associate him, in my mind, with the pure spirit of "Mathetes," with
whose *Epistle to Diognetus*, written nearly a hundred years before, it
may be profitably compared. See also my prefatory remarks to Mathetes,
and the reference to Bunsen which I have suffixed to the Notice of the
Edinburgh editors.<sup>[4](footnote/fn55.htm#P5514_804287)</sup>

In the Edinburgh series, Minucius comes into view after Cyprian, and not
till the end of the thirteenth volume of that edition. It will gratify
the scholar to find it here where it belongs, and not less to note that
it has an index of its own, while in the Edinburgh edition its contents
are indexed with those of Cyprian. Consequently, the joint index is
rendered nearly worthless, and the injury and confusion resulting to the
Contents of Cyprian are not inconsiderable.

Here follows the valuable Prefatory Notice of Dr. Wallis:

Minucius Felix is said by
Jerome<sup>[5](footnote/fn55.htm#P5518_804925)</sup> to have been an
advocate at Rome prior to his conversion to
Christianity.<sup>[6](footnote/fn55.htm#P5519_805031)</sup> Very little
else is known, however, of his history; and of his writings nothing with
any certainty, except the following dialogue; although Jerome speaks of
another tract as having, probably without reason, been ascribed to him.

The *Octavius*, which is here translated, is a supposed argument between
the heathen Caecilius and the Christian Octavius-the writer being
requested to arbitrate between the disputants. The date of its
composition is still a matter of keen dispute. The settlement of the
point hinges upon the answer to the question-Whether, in the numerous
passages which are strikingly similar, occurring in the *Apologeticus*
and the *Octavius*, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, or Minucius
borrowed from Tertullian? If Minucius borrowed from Tertullian, he must
have flourished in the commencement of the third century, as the
*Apologeticus* was written about the year I98 a.d. If, on the other
hand, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, the *Octavius* was written
probably about the year 166, and Minucius flourished in the reign of
Marcus Aurelius. The later date was the one adopted by earlier critics,
and the reasons for it are well given by Mr. Holden in his introduction.
The earlier date was suggested by Roster, maintained by Niebuhr, and
elaborately defended by Muralto. An exhaustive exhibition of arguments
in favour of the earlier date has been given by Adolf Ebert in his
paper, *Tertullian's Verhaltniss zu Minucius Felix*, Leipzig, 1868.

Of the literary character of the dialogue, it is sufficient to quote the
testimony of the late Dean Milman: "Perhaps no late work, either Pagan
or Christian, reminds us of the golden days of Latin prose so much as
the *Octavius* of Minucius
Felix."<sup>[7](footnote/fn55.htm#P5522_806809)</sup>

In considering the claim of the dialogue to such praise as this, it must
be borne in mind that the text as we have it is very uncertain, and
often certainly corrupt; so that many passages seem to us confused, and
some hopelessly obscure. Only one manuscript of the work has come down
to us; which is now in the Imperial Library in Paris. It is beautifully
written. Some editors have spoken of two other mss.; but it is now known
that they were wrong. They supposed that the first edition was taken
from a different ms. than the Codex Regius, and they were not aware that
a codex in Brussels was merely a transcript of the one in Paris.

The *Octavius* appears in the ms. as the eighth book of Arnobius, and at
first it was published as such. To Franciscus Balduinus (1560) is due
the merit of having discovered the real author.

There are very many editions of the *Octavius*. Among the earlier, those
of Gronovius (1709) and Davies (1712) are valuable. Among the later,
Lindner (1760), Eduard de Muralto (1836), and Oehler (1847) may be
mentioned. There is a very good English edition by the Rev. H. A.
Holden, M.A., Cambridge, 1853. The most recent edition is that of Carl
Halm, published under the auspices of the Imperial Academy of Letters in
Vienna; Vindobonae, 1867. Both Holden and Halm give new recensions of
the Codex Regius.<sup>[8](footnote/fn55.htm#P5526_808202)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Octavius of Minucius Felix.](0040034)
