[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040017)  [Next](0040019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

About 160 years having elapsed, pp. 59, 61.

If the First Epistle to the Corinthians was written a.d. 57, and if our
author speaks with designed precision, and not in round numbers, the
date of this treatise should be a.d. 217-a date which I should prefer to
accept. Bishop Kaye,<sup>[120](footnote/fn12.htm#P1263_346469)</sup>
however, instances capp. 7 and 9 in the Ad Nationes as proving his
disposition to give his numbers in loose rhetoric, and not with
arithmetical accuracy. Pamelius, on the other hand, gives a.d. 213.

On the general subject Kaye bids us read cap. 3, with cap. 14, to grasp
the argument of our
enthusiast.<sup>[121](footnote/fn12.htm#P1265_346804)</sup> In few
words, our author holds that St. Paul condescends to human infirmity in
permitting any marriage whatever, pointing to a better
way.<sup>[122](footnote/fn12.htm#P1266_346976)</sup> The apostle himself
says, "The time is short; "but a hundred and sixty years have passed
since then, and why may not the Spirit of truth and righteousness now,
after so long a time, be given to animate the adult Church to that which
is pronounced the better way in Scripture itself?

Our author seems struggling here, according to my view, with his own
rule of *prescription*. He would free the doctrine from the charge of
novelty by pointing it out in the Scripture of a hundred and sixty years
before. But how instinctively the Church ruled against this sophistry,
condemning in advance that whole system of "development" which a modern
Tertullian defends on grounds quite as specious, under a Montanistic
subjection that makes a Priscilla of the Roman pontiff. Let me commend
the reader to the remarks upon Tertullian of the "judicious Hooker," in
book ii. capp. v. 5, 6; also book iv. cap. vii. 4, 5, and elsewhere.

II

Abrogated indulgence (comp. capp. 2 and 3), p. 70.

Poor Tertullian is at war with himself in all the works which he indites
against Catholic orthodoxy. In the tract *De Exhort Castitatis* he gives
one construction to 1 Corinthians 9:5, which in this he explains
away;<sup>[123](footnote/fn12.htm#P1272_348226)</sup> and now he patches
up his conclusion by referring to his Montanistic "Paraclete." In
fighting Marcion, how thoroughly he agrees with Clement of Alexandria as
to the sanctity of marriage. In the second epistle to his wife, how
beautiful his tribute to the married state, blessed by the Church, and
enjoyed in chastity. But
here<sup>[124](footnote/fn12.htm#P1273_348646)</sup> how fanatically he
would make out that marriage is but tolerated adultery! From Tertullian
himself we may prove the marriage of the clergy, and that (*de Exhort
Cast*., last chapter) abstinence was voluntary and exceptional, however
praiseworthy. Also, if he here urges that (cap. 12) even laymen should
abstain from second marriages, he allows the liberty of the clergy to
marry once. He admits St. Peter's marriage. Eusebius proves the marriage
of St. Jude. Concerning "the gave dignity" of a single marriage, we may
concede that Tertullian proves his point, but no further.

In England the principles of the *Monogamia* were revived by the
eccentric Whiston (circa A.D. 1750), and attracted considerable
attention among the orthodox,-a fact pleasantly satirized by Goldsmith
in his *Vicar of Wakefield*.

On the general subject comp. Chrysost., tom. iii. p. 226: "Laus Maximi,
et quales ducendae sint uxores?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. On Modesty.](0040019)
