[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040021)  [Next](0040023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

Greater licence, p. 104.

In this treatise, which is designed to justify the extremes of
Montanistic fasts, Tertullian's genius often surprises us by his
ingenuity. This is one of the instances where the forensic orator comes
out, trying to outflank and turn the position of an antagonist who has
gained an advantage. The fallacy is obvious. Kaye cites, in comparison,
a passage<sup>[125](footnote/fn19.htm#P1904_563211.md)</sup> from "The
Apparel of Women," and
another<sup>[126](footnote/fn19.htm#P1905_563286.md)</sup> from "The
Exhortation to Chastity." He remarks, "Were we required to produce an
instance \[i.e. to prove the tendency of mankind to run into extremes\],
we should without hesitation refer the reader to this treatise."

Fasting was ordained of Christ Himself as a means to an end. It is here
reduced from its instrumental character, and made an excuse for dividing
the household of faith, and for cruel accusations against brethren.

In our age of an entire relaxation of discipline, the enthusiast may
nevertheless awaken us, perhaps, to honest self-examination as to our
manner of life, in view of the example of Christ and His apostles, and
their holy precepts.

II

Provinces of Greece, p. 111.

We have here an interesting hint as to the a0rkai=a e !qh to which the
Council of Nice<sup>[127](footnote/fn19.htm#P1912_564089.md)</sup> refers
in one of her most important canons. Provinces, synods, and the charges
or pastoral letters of the bishops are referred to as established
institutions. And note the emphasis given to "Greece" as the mother of
churches, and of laws and customs. He looks Eastward, and not by any
means to the West, for high examples of the Catholic usages by which he
was endeavouring to justify his own.

III

An over-fed Christian, p. 114.

"Are we not carnal" (psychics) in our days? May not the very excesses of
Tertullian sting and reproach us with the charge of excessive indulgence
(Matt. ix. 15)? The "over-fed Christians" whom he here reproaches are
proved by this very treatise to have observed a system of fasting which
is little practised anywhere in our times-for a mere change to luxurious
fish-diet is the very mockery of fasting. We learn that the customary
fasts of these *psychics* were as follows: (1) the annual Paschal
fast,<sup>[128](footnote/fn19.htm#P1917_565049.md)</sup> from Friday till
Easter-Day; (2) Wednesdays and Fridays (stationary
days<sup>[129](footnote/fn19.htm#P1918_565153)</sup> .md)every week; and
(3) the "dry-food days,"<sup>[130](footnote/fn19.htm#P1919_565242.md)</sup>
-abstinence from "pleasant bread" (Dan. x. 2),-though some Catholics
objected to these voluntary abstinences.

IV

Practise emaciation, p. 114.

Think of our Master's fast among the wild beasts! Let us condescend to
go back to Clement, to Origen, and to Tertullian to learn the practical
laws of the Gospel against avarice, luxury, and "the deceitfulness of
sin." I am emboldened to say this by some remarkable words which I find,
to my surprise, thrown out *in a scientific
work*<sup>[131](footnote/fn19.htm#P1924_565755.md)</sup> proceeding from
Harvard University. It is with exceeding gratitude that I quote as
follows: "*It is well to go away at times, that we may see another
aspect of human life* which still survives in the East, and to feel that
influence which led even the Christ into the wilderness to prepare for
the struggle with the animal nature of
man.<sup>[132](footnote/fn19.htm#P1925_566179.md)</sup> We need something
of the experience of the Anchorites of Egypt, to impress us with the
great truth that the distinction between the spiritual and the material
remains broad and clear, even if with the scalpel of our modern
philosophy we cannot completely dissect the two; and this experience
will give us courage to cherish our aspirations, keep bright our hopes,
and hold fast our Christian faith until the consummation comes."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. De Fuga in Persecutione.](0040023.md)
