[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040000)  [Next](0040002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  VOLUME IV

FATHERS OF THE THIRD CENTURY:

TERTULLIAN, PART FOURTH; MINUCIUS FELIX; COMMODIAN; ORIGEN, PARTS FIRST
AND SECOND.

----------

*AMERICAN EDITION*

Ta a0rxai=a e!qh kratei/tw.

**Volume IV**

Introductory Notice

**Tertullian**

*I. On the Pallium*

*II. On the Apparel of Women*

*III. On the Veiling of Virgins*

*IV. To His Wife*

*V. On Exhortation to Chastity*

*VI. On Monogamy*

*VII. On Modesty*

*VIII. On Fasting. In Opposition to the Psychics*

*IX. De Fuga in Persecutione*

*X. Appendix*

**Minucius Felix**

Introductory Note to Minucius Felix

*The Octavius of Minucius Felix*

Introductory Note to the Instructions of Commodianus

*The Instructions of Commodianus in Favour of Christian Discipline.
Against the Gods of the Heathens. (Expressed in Acrostics.)*

**Origen**

Prefatory Notice to Origen's Works

*Prologue of Rufinus*

*Origen de Principiis*

*A Letter to Origen from Africanus About the History of Susanna*

*A Letter from Origen to Africanus*

*A Letter from Origen to Gregory*

*Origen Against Celsus*

Book VIII

Introductory Notice.

\[a.d.200-250.\] This fourth volume of our series is an exceptional one.
It presents, under one cover, specimens of two of the noblest of the
Christian Fathers; both of them exceptionally great in their influence
upon the ages; both of them justly censurable for pitiable faults; each
of them, in spite of such failings, endeared to the heart of Christendom
by their great services to the Church; both of them geographically of
Africa, but the one essentially Greek and the other a Latin; the one a
builder upon the great Clementine foundations, the other himself a
founder, the brilliant pioneer of Latin Christianity. The contrasts and
the concurrences of such minds, and in them of the Alexandrian and
Carthaginian schools, are most suggestive, and should be edifying.The
works of both, as here given, are fractional. Tertullian overflows into
this volume, after filling one before; the vast proportions of Origen's
labours forced the Edinburgh publishers to give specimens only.Minucius
Felix and Commodian are thrown in as a sort of appendix to Tertullian,
and illustrate the school and the Church of the same country. The
Italian type does not yet appear Latin Christianity is essentially
North-African, and is destined to continue such, conspicuously, till it
has culminated in the genius of Augustine. From the first, the Orientals
speculate concerning God; the Westerns deal with man Both schools
"contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints." And,
once for all, it may be said, that if their language necessarily lacks
the precision of technical theology, and enables those who have little
sympathy with them to set them one against another on some points, and
so to impair their value as witnesses, it is quite as easy, and far more
just, to show the harmony of their ideas, even when they differ in their
forms of speech. This has been triumphantly done by Bull, just as the
same writer harmonizes St. James and St. Paul, working down to their
common base in the Rock of Ages. The test of Ante-Nicene unity is the
Nicene Symbol, in which the primitive writings find their ultimate
expression. That Clement and Tertullian alike would have recognized as
the faith; for the earlier Fathers were, in fact, its authors. The
Nicene Fathers were compilers only, and professed only to embody in the
Symbol what their predecessors had established and maintained.Let it be
borne in mind that there is only one Oecumenical Symbol. The Creed
called the Apostles' is unknown to the East save as an orthodox
confession of their Western brethren. The "Athanasian Creed" is only a
Western hymn, like the *Te Deum* and has no oecumenical warrant as a
symbol, though it embodies the common doctrine. The Filioque, wherever
it appears, is apocryphal, and has no oecumenical force; while it is
heretical (in Catholic theology) if it be held in a sense which destroys
the *One Source* of divinity in the Father, its *fons et origo*. Surely,
it is a noble exercise of mind and heart to see, in the splendid result
of the Ante-Nicene conflicts with error, and in the enduring truth and
perennial freshness of the Nicene Creed, the fulfilment of the promise
of the Great Head of the Church, that the Spirit should abide with them
for ever, and guide them into all truth.

The editor-in-chief, who has been forced to labour unassisted in the
preceding volumes, has been so happy as to find a valued collaborator in
editing the works of Origen, who has also relieved him of the task of
proof-reading almost entirely throughout this volume, excepting on his
own pages of prefaces or annotations. In spite' of the fact that a
necessity for despatch requires the printing to be done from single
proofs, it is believed that this volume excels its predecessors in
typographical accuracy,-a merit largely due to the eminent skill of the
Boston press from which it proceeds, but primarily to the pains of the
Rev. Dr. Spencer, an expert in such operations.

For the favour and generous spirit with which his Christian brethren
have welcomed and encouraged this undertaking, the editor is grateful to
them, and to the common Lord and Master of us all.October, 1885.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TERTULLIAN](0040002.md)
