[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040013)  [Next](0040015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidation.

Marriage lawful, p. 39.

St. Peter was a married apostle, and the traditions of his wife which
connect her married life with Rome itself render it most surprising that
those who claim to be St. Peter's successors should denounce the
marriage of the clergy as if it were crime. The touching story, borrowed
from Clement of Alexandria, is related by Eusebius. "And will they,"
says Clement, "reject even the apostles? Peter and Philip, indeed, had
children; Philip also gave his daughters in marriage. to husbands; and
Paul does not demur, in a certain Epistle, to mention his own wife, whom
he did not take about with him, in order to expedite his ministry the
better." Of St. Peter and his wife, Eusebius subjoins, "Such was the
marriage of these blessed ones, and such was their perfect
affection."<sup>[68](footnote/fn9.htm#P939_227714.md)</sup>

The Easterns to this day perpetuate the marriage of the clergy, and
enjoin it; but unmarried men only are chosen to be bishops. Even Rome
relaxes her discipline for the *Uniats*, and hundreds of her priesthood,
therefore, live in honourable marriage. Thousands live in secret
marriage, but their wives are dishonoured as "concubines." It was not
till the eleventh century that the celibate was enforced. In England it
was *never* successfully imposed; and, though the "*priest's leman*" was
not called his *wife* (to the disgrace of the whole system), she was yet
honoured (see Chaucer), and often carried herself too proudly.

The enormous evils of an enforced celibacy need not here be remarked
upon. The history of *Sacerdotal Celibacy*, by Henry C.
Lea<sup>[69](footnote/fn9.htm#P942_228497.md)</sup> of Philadelphia, is
compendious, and can be readily procured by all who wish to understand
what it is that this treatise of Tertullian's orthodoxy may best be used
to teach; viz., that we must not be wiser than God, even in our zeal for
His service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. On Exhortation to Chastity.](0040015.md)
