[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yvhf09)  [Next](yvhf11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432515268/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, \[1930\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### KING JANAK

"We must understand, in the words of Muni-Kacha, that this universe in
reality IS NOT, and that it is formed only by the varying intensities of
the flow of consciousness. Consciousness may be compared to a powerful
revolving light which leaves in darkness, that which it illumined so
brightly the instant before. Therefore, when the light of consciousness
reveals this universe, the universe seems real. Take away the light and
the world loses reality. So it is that from conscious knowledge and
Atmic wisdom the universe becomes real to us.

"To the seekers after name, fame and pleasure, the house of the mind is
founded on the delusion of birth and death. But the adherents of truth
will be free from these delusions, for birth is but death (or cessation
of consciousness) to former life, and death is birth (or renewed
consciousness) into another period of life.

"All is Brahma and the 'I' is Brahma,—relinquish

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the idea that the universe is something outside the 'I'. The objects of
creation arising from Brahmic wisdom do not really exist, but are as the
foamy spray cast up by the ocean. One principle alone Brahma is
constant, enduring and eternally IS. Pleasure nor pain, nor the
whirlpool of birth and death do not really exist. Brahma alone exists.

"Experience and inference teach the transient nature of fleeting
pleasure and pain. Why then dwell upon them? Forget the past and the
future and rest in the neutral state of truth, putting aside the duality
of love and hate. Look equally upon all, steadfast in the certainty of
Atmic wisdom, secure in the stronghold of mind withheld from
[worldly](errata.htm#13) objects.

"So may you, O lotus-eyed Ram, be the crystal, which mirrors pain but
does not suffer it.

"Thus Atmic wisdom will flush the dawn of the final birth. For where
shall one seek the lustrous bamboo pearl, but in the bamboo clusters?
For in these blessed ones, nobility, love, benevolence and clarity of
intellect find residence, and these qualities of Atmic wisdom draw to
them the people of the world like the melodious

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

flute brings rapture even to the hearts of kine. "Two paths lead to
liberation. On one, the faithful following of the precepts laid down by
a Guru shall let delusion fall away, to be replaced with emancipation.
Peace shall come either in the immediate birth or in a succeeding birth.
The other path is open to one whose mind is already bulwarked by
knowledge, and who will, by meditation, cultivate the fertile seed into
the full blossom of wisdom.

"Of the second path this story is related: An emperor, fearless,
generous and of untold wealth once reigned over this universe. Into his
domain never a taint of jealousy or envy entered. This King, Janak by
name, and Videha by reputation, whose noble heart embraced the world,
was a true protector of his people.

"In the first days of vernal spring King Janak walked in his charming
garden among his [fragrant](errata.htm#14) flowers. Without its gates
the guards were stationed. Strolling about, the King heard the murmuring
voices of the Sidhas (they who have attained the One-ness) from the
hills. Hear attentively, O Ram, the songs of the Sidhas—they who have
withdrawn from the pleasures of the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

visible.

"Chanted a Sidha…

"'In the union of the Knower and the Known lies the bliss or wisdom.
Seek this wisdom, so that the unreal many become the real.'

"Another sang…

"'Desire will destroy the visible. Contemplate Atmic reality—the beacon
to the eagle vision of higher spirituality.'

"From the chorus of voices…

"'Having become all-pervading, like he who sits between truth and
untruth, meditate always upon Atmic wisdom, the Light of Lights.

"'To seek without for God, is like one who goes in quest of bright bits
of glass, unmindful of the jewel blazing his own hand.

"'Atma is attained only by those who have controlled their desires.
Those who recklessly entangle themselves in the quick sands of human
experience, knowing better, can only be called asses.

"'The hissing serpents of the desirous organs must be slain by the mind;
just as the great god Indra levelled the mountains to dust by his
thunderbolt.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

"The mind, free from delusion which calmly surveys all as one, will
attain Atmic Reality—the plenum of complete bliss. This is liberation.

"The sage counsels of the Sidhas, awoke consternation in the mind of
King Janak. He left behind his cool scented garden, entered his palace
and dismissed his attendants.

"Seeking a quiet apartment on the top floor of his palace, he gave
himself to meditation upon the wise utterances of the Sidhas. In
contemplation he hoped to discover the true meaning of these blissful
counsellors. He thought how the people of the world were like birds
forever on the wing, fluttering hither and thither from this bush to
that flower, only to drop at last with weariness, and perish. The good
King cried out in his anguish of mind.

"'Annoyances beset me. Worries, doubts and circumstances enmesh me in
this uncertain world. I spin about like a leaf in a whirlpool. When I
reflect that time in its true nature is eternal. I cannot but deem the
one hundred years of my life, as a moment in eternity. Why, then,

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

do I value my life so greatly and allow my strong desires to throw me
into confusion and dejection? What greater debasement than a mind
despoiled of tranquility? That I should consider for a moment this
unsettled existence. This world of pain I rule is but an atom among the
countless universes. Search as I will, I can find nothing which remains
constant and beneficent, even for a fleeting moment. Behold the
incongruities of this world. The greatest shall be dust, even as the
lowliest. Wealth! Have I fancied riches real? Name and fame! The great
men of ancient times and their valorous deeds have vanished. Where,
then, is the certainty that the achievements of my time shall persist?

"'The myriad worlds with their rulers and wealth have perished, like
sand washed into the sea. Where, O my distraught mind, have these
universes gone? So shall this, my world, go the way of eternity. My
desires and my illusions have led me to believe in a permanency, which
does not exist. My many deaths have taught me nothing. When shall the
blessed time come when I shall seek and find **THAT**, which has no end?
About me the objects of the world wear

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the shrouds of destruction. Every instant of every day, the ignorant
walk the paths of perdition their bodies enacting the baneful deeds of
pleasure and pain. In youth they are unwise; maturity finds them
entangled in the meshes of passion and the burden of the world bows them
down in old age.

"'Harassed from birth to death, doing the deeds of desire, how can they
find time to pursue virtue and seek the eternal truth? Illusion dances
in this world like a will-o-wisp, and my mind dances in unison with
illusion—both specters of the Real in this unreal theatre.

"'Untruth is an excrescence upon the Crown of Truth, and pain thrusts
its talons into the side of Virtue. Since pain is the accompaniment of
pure and impure pleasure alike, how may we discern the difference
between them? If between the opening and closing of my eyes many Brahmas
are created and destroyed, what is my puny self before them? Great
wealth breeds pain in the mind of its owner, but a thing fraught with
peril, becomes a source of 'happiness, for a mind which controls it
rightly. It is only the worldly life which is the source of pain. Can
happiness

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

enter a life submerged in worldliness? The tree of the ignorant mind
sprouts from the root of delusion and its branches bear poison fruits.

"'Mind is the thinking principle. By the discipline of thought, the mind
itself can easily be controlled. The extinction of delusion controls
birth and death. Oh, I know at last the thief who has robbed me of the
Atmic jewel of my Self. His name is Mind. Long and grievously I have
suffered, I shall impale him with his own bright sword of thought.

"'Until now I have not been able to pierce the pearl of mind. Now I will
string this pearl upon the strand of experience, and with it adorn my
person. I have listened well to the wise counsels of the omniscient
Sidhas. At last I rest in the bliss in which the great Brahma floats.
The unrealities of me and thee have dropped away, and I will never
permit them to return.

Victory is mine over the mighty adversary of mind, who despoiled me of
Atmic wisdom, and pain has ceased its affliction. I have attained the
life of sustained peace. Great wisdom has rolled

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

back the ponderous door to freedom; my adoration is thine.'

"Thus did King Janak rest motionless in Samadhi, having controlled the
fluctuation and vacillation of his mind. After a long period of Samadhic
bliss he looked anew upon his world, his vision cleared of the fog of
desire. He reflected that he had no objective for which to strive in
this world. His clear sight scrutinized the world for illusion and found
pure wisdom.

"'I know nothing,' he rejoiced, 'but my immaculate divine wisdom, the
realization of my Self. I shall neither seek nor turn from any object in
this world. I shall remain constant in my divine Self. Events will
transpire as pre-ordained.' So saying, the King was enveloped in Brahmic
bliss.

"As the warm sun in the sky, without volition or desire, causes the
growth of seeds in the ground, so King Janak performed the duties, which
arise daily without exultation or longing. Giving heed neither to the
past nor the future, productive as such cogitation is of discontent,.
King Janak met the present serenely, with an undivided heart and mind.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

"The Atmic enquiry engendered by the words of the Sidhas, brought
quiescence of mind, O Ram, to the ruler of the world, King Janak; for
the wisdom of Atma can be attained only by the pure and beautiful Atmic
enquiry, and not by following the ways of the worldly. For worldlings
long for other goals than Atma, and realization comes only to those who
have sought it faithfully. Therefore, O Ram, destroy ignorance, which
slinks like a hungry wolf on the desert, that is the world.

"To the wise, the precious jewel of wisdom enthroned in their minds,
will bring in a moment whatsoever they wish, like the Kalpa tree which
produced any fruit one desired. Love and hate cannot dent the armour of
those who dwell in Atmic bliss. The dense mist of egoism screening the
Sun of Brahma obscures the intelligence, and will be cleared only by the
heavenly wind of divine wisdom. He who aspires to the Supreme Brahmic
throne must banish desires from his mind, for is not the ground
well-tilled before the planting of the seed?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Suragho, the King of Hunters, attained realization of
self](yvhf11)
