[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09001)  [Next](cc09003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>PSALM 37

<span id="iii-p2"></span>This psalm, the title of which shows it to have
been composed by David, contains most profitable instruction. Since the
faithful, so long as they pursue their earthly pilgrimage through life,
see things strangely confused in the world, unless they assuaged their
grief with the hope of a better issue, their courage would soon fail
them. The more boldly any man despises God, and runs to every excess in
wickedness, so much the more happily he seems to live. And since
prosperity appears to be a token of God’s favor towards the ungodly,
what conclusion, it may be said, can be drawn from this, but either that
the world is governed by chance, and that fortune bears the sovereignty,
or else that God makes no difference between the good and the bad? The
Spirit of God accordingly confirms and strengthens us in this psalm
against the assaults of such a temptation. However great the prosperity
which the wicked enjoy for a time, he declares their felicity to be
transient and evanescent, and that, therefore, they are miserable, while
the happiness of which they boast is cursed; whereas the pious and
devoted servants of God never cease to be happy, even in the midst of
their greatest calamities, because God takes care of them, and at length
comes to their aid in due season. This, indeed, is paradoxical, and
wholly repugnant to human reason. For as good men often suffer extreme
poverty, and languish long under many troubles, and are loaded with
reproaches and wrongs, while the wicked and profligate triumph, and are
regaled with pleasures, might we not suppose that God cares not for the
things that are done on earth? It is on this account that, as I have
already said, the doctrine of this psalm is so much the more profitable;
because, withdrawing our thoughts from the present aspect of things, it
enjoins us to confide in the providence of God, until he stretch forth
his hand to help those who are his servants, and demand of the ungodly a
strict account of their lives, as of thieves and robbers who have foully
abused his bounty and paternal goodness.

<span id="iii-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Fret not thyself because of the
wicked, and be not envious at the workers of iniquity: **2**. For they
shall soon be cut down like grass; and they shall wither as the green
and tender herb. **3**. Put thy trust in Jehovah, and do good; dwell in
the land, and be fed in truth, \[or faithfully.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) \] **4**. And delight thyself in Jehovah,
and he will give thee the desires of thy heart. **5**. Roll \[or
devolve\] thy ways on Jehovah, and trust in him, and he will bring it to
pass. **6**. And he will bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgments  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) as the noon day.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span><span id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Fret not thyself because of the
wicked.* David lays down this as a general principle, that the
prosperity of the wicked, in which they greatly rejoice, should on no
account vex or disquiet the children of God, because it will soon fade
away. On the other hand, although the people of God are afflicted for a
time, yet the issue of their afflictions shall be such, that they have
every reason to be contented with their lot. Now all this depends upon
the providence of God; for unless we are persuaded that the world is
governed by him in righteousness and truth, our minds will soon stagger,
and at length entirely fail us. David then condemns two sinful
affections of the mind, which are indeed closely allied, and the one of
which is generated by the other. He first enjoins the faithful not to
fret on account of the wicked; and, secondly, that they should not
indulge an envious spirit towards them. For, in the first place, when
they see the wicked enjoying prosperity, from which it might naturally
be supposed that God regards not the affairs of men, there is a danger
lest they should shake off the fear of God, and apostatise from the
faith. Then another temptation follows, namely, that the influence of
the example of the wicked excites in them a desire to involve themselves
in the same wickedness with them. This is the natural sense. The Hebrew
words, <span id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>אל-תתחר, *al-tithechar,* which we
have rendered, *Fret not thyself,* are by some translated, *Do not
mingle thyself with.*  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) But this
interpretation is too forced, and may be disproved by the context; for
in the eighth verse, where mention is expressly made of *wrath* and
*anger,* it would surely be absurd to interpret in another sense the
same verb which immediately follows these two words, and which is there
used in the same sense and for the same end as in this first verse. In
the second place, the order which David observes is very natural; for
when the prosperity of the wicked has irritated our minds, we very soon
begin to envy them their happiness and ease. First, then, he exhorts us
to be on our guard, lest a happiness which is only transitory, or rather
imaginary, should vex or disquiet us; and, secondly, lest envy should
lead us to commit sin. The reason by which he enforces this exhortation
is added in the following verse: for if the wicked flourish to-day like
the grass of the field, to-morrow they shall be cut down and wither. We
need not wonder that this similitude is often to be met with in the
sacred writings, since it is so very appropriate; for we see how soon
the strength of the grass decays, and that when cast down by a blast of
wind, or parched with the heat of the sun, even without being cut by the
hand of man, it withers away.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) In
like manner, David tells us that the judgment of God, like a scythe in
the hand of man, shall cut down the wicked, so that they shall suddenly
perish.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span><span id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Put thy trust in Jehovah, and do
good.* The inspired writer now goes on, in the second place, to say,
that every thing in the end shall be well with the righteous, because
they are under the protection of God. But as there is nothing better or
more desirable than to enjoy the fostering and protecting care of God,
he exhorts them to put their trust in him, and at the same time to
follow after goodness and truth. It is not without good reason that he
begins with the doctrine of faith, or trust in God; for there is nothing
more difficult for men than to preserve their minds in a state of peace
and tranquillity, undisturbed by any disquieting fears, whilst they are
in this world, which is subject to so many changes. On the other hand,
while they see the wicked becoming rich by unjust means, extending their
influence, and acquiring power by unrestrained indulgence in sin, it is
no less difficult for them steadily to persevere in a life of piety and
virtue. Nor is it sufficient merely to disregard those things that are
commonly sought after with the greatest eagerness. Some of the
philosophers of antiquity were so noble-minded, that they despised
riches unjustly acquired, and abstained from fraud and robbery; nay,
they held up to ridicule the vain pomp and splendor of the wicked, which
the common people look upon with such high admiration. But as they were
destitute of faith, they defrauded God of his honor, and so it happened
that they never knew what it was to be truly happy. Now, as David places
faith first in order, to show that God is the author of all good, and
that by his blessing alone prosperity is to be looked for; so it ought
to be observed that he connects this with a holy life: for the man who
places his whole confidence in God, and gives himself up to be governed
by him, will live uprightly and innocently, and will devote himself to
doing good.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>*Dwell in the land* This language is much
more expressive than if he had promised that the righteous should dwell
securely in the land.  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) It is just
as if he had led them to the place, and put them in possession of it.
Moreover, by these words he declares that they shall long enjoy it. They
are, it is true, only strangers or sojourners in this world, yet the
hand of the Lord is stretched forth to protect them, so that they live
in security and peace. This David again confirms by the following
clause, *Thou shalt be fed in truth* Assured of the protection of God,
he exhorts them to place entire and unsuspecting confidence in him. It
is surprising to find how interpreters have wrested, and as it were
mangled this clause, by the different meanings they have put upon it.
Some take the verb *to feed* in an active signification; and others
understand the expression *to feed on faith* as denoting to cherish
within the heart the promises of God. Others are of opinion that David
exhorts us to feed our brethren with faith by ministering to them the
pure word of God, which is the spiritual food of the soul. Others render
the term for *faith* in the sense of *sincerity,* so that the expression
*to feed on faith* would signify to behave in an upright and honest
manner among men. But the scope and connection of the passage
necessarily require, and it is quite in accordance with the nature of
the Hebrew language, that the verb <span id="iii.i-p13.2"></span>רעה,
*re-eh,* should be taken in a passive signification, *Be fed* This, too,
is the opinion of the greater part of commentators, who,
notwithstanding, afterwards differ in explaining its meaning. Some of
them adopt the interpretation, that we are fed with faith, when the
promises of God suffice us, and we are satisfied with them. Others give
this explanation, *Feed thyself with the fruit of faith,* because God
will indeed show that we have not believed his word in vain. Others
explain it in this way, *Let truth be thy food,* and let nothing give
thee greater pleasure than to converse sincerely and frankly with thy
neighbors. There is still another interpretation which, although in some
respects different, is similar to the preceding, namely, Live not upon
spoil, but be content with lawful sustenance; that is to say, with that
which is lawfully acquired.  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) It is
certainly a shameful and disgraceful thing that so many learned men
should have erred in a matter so plain and obvious.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) Had not every one been led by his own
ambition to seek for something new, the true and natural meaning of the
prophet would have occurred at once, which is this, Dwell in the land,
that thou mayest enjoy it in sure and lasting repose. The Hebrew word
<span id="iii.i-p15.4"></span>אמונה, *emunah,* not only signifies
*truth* or *faith,* but also *secure continuance for a long period.* And
who does not see that since the possession of the land was given to the
righteous, this latter clause was added by way of exposition?

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span><span id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**4.** *And delight thyself in Jehovah* This
delight is set in opposition to the vain and deceitful allurements of
the world, which so intoxicate the ungodly, that despising the blessing
of God, they dream of no other happiness than what presents itself for
the time before their eyes. This contrast between the vain and fickle
joys with which the world is deluded, and the true repose enjoyed by the
godly, ought to be carefully observed; for whether all things smile upon
us, or whether the Lord exercise us with adversities, we ought always to
hold fast this principle, that as the Lord is the portion of our
inheritance, our lot has fallen in pleasant places,  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) as we have seen in <span
id="iii.i-p18.2"></span>[Ps. 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span id="iii.i-p18.2"></span>. We
must therefore constantly recall to our minds this truth, that it can
never be well with us except in so far as God is gracious to us, so that
the joy we derive from his paternal favor towards us may surpass all the
pleasures of the world. To this injunction a promise is added, that, if
we are satisfied in the enjoyment of God alone, he will liberally bestow
upon us all that we shall desire: *He will give thee the desires of thy
heart.* This does not imply that the godly immediately obtain whatever
their fancy may suggest to them; nor would it be for their profit that
God should grant them all their vain desires. The meaning simply is,
that if we stay our minds wholly upon God, instead of allowing our
imaginations like others to roam after idle and frivolous fancies, all
other things will be bestowed upon us in due season.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span><span id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**5.** *Roll*  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) *thy ways upon Jehovah.* Here David
illustrates and confirms the doctrine contained in the preceding verse.
In order that God may accomplish our desires, it behoves us to cast all
our cares upon him in the exercise of hope and patience. Accordingly, we
are taught from this passage how to preserve our minds in tranquillity
amidst anxieties, dangers, and floods of trouble. There can be no doubt,
that by the term *ways* we are here to understand all *affairs* or
*businesses.* The man, therefore, who, leaving the issue of all his
affairs to the will of God, and who, patiently waiting to receive from
his hand whatever he may be pleased to send, whether prosperity or
adversity, casts all his cares, and every other burden which he bears,
into his bosom; or, in other words, commits to him all his affairs, —
such a person *rolls his ways upon Jehovah* Hence, David again
inculcates the duty of hope and confidence in God: *And trust in him* By
this he intimates, that we render to him the honor to which he is
entitled only when we intrust to him the government and direction of our
lives; and thus he provides a remedy for a disease with which almost all
men are infected. Whence is it that the children of God are envious of
the wicked, and are often in trouble and perplexity, and yield to excess
of sorrow, and sometimes even murmur and repine, but because, by
involving themselves immoderately in endless cares, and cherishing too
eagerly a desire to provide for themselves irrespective of God, they
plunge, as it were, into an abyss, or at least accumulate to themselves
such a vast load of cares, that they are forced at last to sink under
them? Desirous to provide a remedy for this evil, David warns us, that
in presuming to take upon us the government of our own life, and to
provide for all our affairs as if we were able to bear so great a
burden, we are greatly deceived, and that, therefore, our only remedy is
to fix our eyes upon the providence of God, and to draw from it
consolation in all our sorrows. Those who obey this counsel shall escape
that horrible labyrinth in which all men labor in vain; for when God
shall once have taken the management of our affairs into his own hand,
there is no reason to fear that prosperity shall ever fail us. Whence is
it that he forsakes us and disappoints our expectations, if it is not
because we provoke him, by pretending to greater wisdom and
understanding than we possess? If, therefore, we would only permit him,
he will perform his part, and will not disappoint our expectations,
which he sometimes does as a just punishment for our unbelief.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span><span id="iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>**6.** *And he will bring forth thy
righteousness as the light* This David says, in order to anticipate the
misgivings which often trouble us when we seem to lose our labor in
faithfully serving God, and in dealing uprightly with our neighbors;
nay, when our integrity is either exposed to the calumnies of the
wicked, or is the occasion of injury to us from men; for then it is
thought to be of no account in the sight of God. David, therefore,
declares, that God will not suffer our righteousness to be always hid in
darkness, but that he will maintain it and bring it forth to the light;
namely, when he will bestow upon us such a reward as we desire. He
alludes to the darkness of the night, which is soon dispelled by the
dawning of the day; as if he had said, We may be often grievously
oppressed, and God may not seem to approve our innocence, yet this
vicissitude should no more disturb our minds than the darkness of the
night which covers the earth; for then the expectation of the light of
day sustains our hope.

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**7**. Be silent to Jehovah, and wait for
him; fret not because of the man who prospereth in his way, against the
man who commits wickedness.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) **8**.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself so as to do evil,
**9**. For the wicked shall be cut off; but those that wait upon Jehovah
shall inherit the earth. **10**. Yet a little while; and the wicked
shall not be; and thou shalt look upon his place, and shalt not find
him. **11**. But the meek shall inherit the earth,  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span><span id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** *Be silent to Jehovah.* The Psalmist
continues the illustration of the same doctrine, namely, that we should
patiently and meekly bear those things that usually disquiet our minds;
for amid innumerable sources of disquietude and conflict there is need
of no small patience. By the similitude of *silence,* which often occurs
in the sacred writings, he declares most aptly the nature of faith; for
as our affections rise in rebellion against the will of God, so faith,
restoring us to a state of humble and peaceful submission, appeases all
the tumults of our hearts. By this expression,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) therefore, David commands us not to yield
to the tumultuous passions of the soul, as the unbelieving do, nor
fretfully to set ourselves in opposition to the authority of God, but
rather to submit peacefully to him, that he may execute his work in
silence. Moreover, as the Hebrew word <span id="iii.ii-p8.3"></span>חול,
*chul,* which we have rendered *to wait,* sometimes signifies to
*mourn,* and sometimes to *wait,* the word <span
id="iii.ii-p8.4"></span>התחולל, *hithcholel,* in this place is
understood by some as meaning *to mourn moderately,* or *to bear sorrow
patiently.* It might also be rendered more simply *to mourn before God,*
in order that he might be a witness of all our sorrows; for when the
unbelieving give way to doubt and suspense, they rather murmur against
him than utter their complaints before him. As, however, the other
interpretation is more generally received, namely, that David is
exhorting us to hope and patience, I adhere to it. The prophet Isaiah
also connects hope with silence in the same sense, (<span
id="iii.ii-p8.5"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span id="iii.ii-p8.5"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>David next repeats what he had said in the
first verse, *Fret not because of the man who prospereth in his way,* or
who brings his ways to a happy issue; nor *against the man who behaveth
himself wickedly,* or *who accomplishes his devices* Of these two
interpretations of this last clause, the latter is more in accordance
with the scope of the psalm. I confess, indeed, that the word <span
id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>מזמות *mezimmoth,* is commonly taken in a bad
sense for fraud and stratagem. But as <span id="iii.ii-p9.2"></span>זמם
*zamam,* sometimes signifies in general *to meditate*, the nature of the
Hebrew language will bear this meaning, that *to execute his devices* is
of the same import as to effect what he has purposed. Now we see that
these two things are connected, namely *to dispose his ways according to
his desires,* or *to prosper in his way,* and *to accomplish his
devices* It is a very great temptation to us and difficult to bear, when
we see fortune smiling upon the ungodly, as if God approved of their
wickedness; nay, it excites our wrath and indignation. David, therefore,
not contented with a short admonition, insists at some length upon this
point.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span><span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>The accumulation of terms which occurs in
the next verse, in which he lays a restraint as with a bridle upon
anger, allays wrath and assuages passion, it is not superfluous; but, as
in necessary, he rather prescribes numerous remedies for a disease which
it is difficult to cure. By this means, he reminds us how easily we are
provoked, and how ready we are to take offence, unless we lay a powerful
restraint upon our tumultuous passions, and keep them under control. And
although the faithful are not able to subdue the lusts of the flesh
without much trouble and labour, whilst the prosperity of the wicked
excites their impatience, yet this repetition teaches us that we ought
unceasingly to wrestle against them; for if we steadily persevere, we
know that our endeavors shall not be in vain in the end. I differ from
other commentators in the exposition of the last clause. They translate
it, *at least to do evil;* as if David meant that we should appease our
anger lest it should lead us to do mischief. But as the particle <span
id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>אך, *ach,* which they translate *at least,* is
often used affirmatively in Hebrew, I have no doubt that David here
teaches, that it cannot be otherwise than that the offense which we take
at the prosperity of the wicked should lead us to sin, unless we
speedily check it; as it is said in another Psalm,

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>“God will break the cords of the ungodly,
lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity,” (<span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)<span id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>**9.** *For the wicked shall be cut off.*
It is not without cause that he repeatedly inculcates the same thing,
namely, that the happiness and prosperity which the ungodly enjoy is
only a mask or phantom; for the first sight of it so dazzles our senses,
that we are unable to form a proper estimate of what will be its issue,
in the light of which alone we ought to judge of the value of all that
has preceded. But the contrast between the two clauses of the verse
ought to be observed. First, in saying that *the wicked shall be cut
off,* he intimates that they shall flourish fresh and green till the
time of their destruction shall arrive; and, secondly, in allotting the
earth to the godly, saying, *They shall inherit the earth,* he means
that they shall live in such a manner as that the blessing of God shall
follow them, even to the grave. Now, as I have already said, the present
condition of men is to be estimated by the state in which it will
terminate. From the epithet by which he distinguishes the children of
God, we learn that they are exercised by a severe conflict for the trial
of their faith; for he speaks of them, not as *righteous* or *godly,*
but as those that *wait upon the Lord.* What purpose would this waiting
serve, unless they groaned under the burden of the cross? Moreover, the
possession of the earth which he promises to the children of God is not
always realised to them; because it is the will of the Lord that they
should live as strangers and pilgrims in it; neither does he permit them
to have any fixed abode in it, but rather tries them with frequent
troubles, that they may desire with greater alacrity the everlasting
dwelling-place of heaven. The flesh is always seeking to build its nest
for ever here; and were we not tossed hither and thither, and not
suffered to rest, we would by and by forget heaven and the everlasting
inheritance. Yet, in the midst of this disquietude, the possession of
the earth, of which David here speaks, is not taken away from the
children of God; for they know most certainly that they are the rightful
heirs of the world. Hence it is that they eat their bread with a quiet
conscience, and although they suffer want, yet God provides for their
necessities in due season. Finally, although the ungodly labor to effect
their destruction, and reckon them unworthy to live upon the earth, yet
God stretches forth his hand and protects them; nay, he so upholds them
by his power, that they live more securely in a state of exile, than the
wicked do in their nests to which they are attached. And thus the
blessing, of which David speaks, is in part secret and hidden, because
our reason is so dull, that we cannot comprehend what it is to possess
the earth; and yet the faithful truly feel and understand that this
promise is not made to them in vain, since, having fixed the anchor of
their faith in God, they pass their life every day in peace, while God
makes it manifest in their experience, that the shadow of his hand is
sufficient to protect them.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>**10** *Yet a little while, and the wicked
shall not be.* This is a confirmation of the preceding verse. It might
well have been objected, that the actual state of things in the world is
very different from what David here represents it, since the ungodly
riot in their pleasures, and the people of God pine away in sickness and
poverty. David, therefore, wishing to guard us against a rash and hasty
judgment, exhorts us to be quiet for a little while, till the Lord cut
off the wicked entirely, and show the efficacy of his grace towards his
own people. What he requires then on the part of the true believers is,
that in the exercise of their wisdom they should suspend their judgment
for a time, and not stop at every trifle, but exercise their thoughts in
meditation upon divine providence, until God show out of heaven that the
full time is come. Instead, however, of describing them as *those who
wait upon the Lord,* he now speaks of them as *the meek;* and this he
does not without good reason: for unless a man believe that God
preserves his own people in a wonderful manner, as if they were like
sheep among wolves, he will be always endeavoring to repel force by
force.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) It is hope alone,
therefore, which of itself produces meekness; for, by restraining the
impetuosity of the flesh, and allaying its vehemence, it trains to
equanimity and patience those who submit themselves to God. From this
passage it would seem, that Christ has taken that which is written in
<span id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Mt
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>.
The word *peace* is generally employed in the Hebrew to denote the
prosperous and happy issue of things; yet another sense will agree
better with this place, namely, that while the ungodly shall be agitated
with inward trouble, and God shall encompass them on every side with
terror, the faithful shall rejoice in the abundance of peace. It is not
meant that they are exempted from trouble, but they are sustained by the
tranquillity of their minds; so that accounting all the trials which
they endure to be only temporary, they now rejoice in hope of the
promised rest.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**12**. The wicked plotteth against the
righteous, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. **13**. But the Lord
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) shall laugh at him; for he seeth
that his day is coming. **14**. The wicked draw their sword, and bend
their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay those that are
of upright ways. **15**. But their sword shall enter into their own
heart, and their bow shall be broken.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** *The wicked plotteth against the
righteous.* David here anticipates an objection which might have been
taken to the preceding verse. Where, it might be said, can tranquillity
and joy be found when the wicked are mad with rage, and plot every kind
of mischief against the children of God? And how shall they cherish good
hope for the future who see themselves surrounded with innumerable
sources of death? David therefore replies, That although the life of the
godly should be assailed by many dangers, yet they are secure in the aid
and protection of God; and that however much the wicked should plot
against them, they shall be continually preserved. Thus, the design of
David is to obviate our fears, lest the malice of the ungodly should
terrify us above measure, as if they had the power of doing with us
according to their pleasure.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) He
indeed confesses that they are not only full of fraud, and expert in
deceiving, but also that they burn with anger, and a raging desire of
doing mischief, when he says, *that they plot mischief deceitfully
against the righteous, and gnash upon them with their teeth* But after
making this statement, he immediately adds, that their endeavors shall
be vain. Yet he seems to provide very coldly for our consolation under
sorrow, for he represents God as merely *laughing* But if God values
highly our salvation, why does he not set himself to resist the fury of
our enemies, and vigorously oppose them? We know that this, as has been
said in <span id="iii.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p7.2"></span>, is
a proper trial of our patience, when God does not come forth at once,
armed for the discomfiture of the ungodly, but connives for a time and
withholds his hand. But as the eye of sense in such circumstances
reckons that he delays his coming too long, and from that delay
concludes that he indulges in ease, and feels no interest in the affairs
of men, it is no small consolation to be able by the eye of faith to
behold him laughing; for then we are assured that he is not seated idly
in heaven, nor closes his eyes, resigning to chance the government of
the world, but purposely delays and keeps silence because he despises
their vanity and folly.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>And lest the flesh should still murmur and
complain, demanding why God should only laugh at the wicked, and not
rather take vengeance upon them, the reason is added, that he sees the
day of their destruction at hand: *For he seeth that his day*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) *is coming.* Whence is it that the
injuries we sustain from the wickedness of man so trouble us, if it be
not that, when not obtaining a speedy redress, we begin to despair of
ever seeing a better state of things? But he who sees the executioner
standing behind the aggressor with drawn sword no longer desires
revenge, but rather exults in the prospect of speedy retribution. David,
therefore, teaches us that it is not meet that God, who sees the
destruction of the wicked to be at hand, should rage and fret after the
manner of men. There is then a tacit distinction here made between God
and men, who, amidst the troubles and confusions of the world, do not
see the day of the wicked coming, and who, oppressed by cares and fears,
cannot laugh, but because vengeance is delayed, rather become so
impatient that they murmur and fret. It is not, however, enough for us
to know that God acts in a manner altogether different from us, unless
we learn to weep patiently whilst he laughs, so that our tears may be a
sacrifice of obedience. In the meantime, let us pray that he would
enlighten us by his light, for by this means alone will we, by beholding
with the eye of faith his laughter, become partakers thereof, even in
the midst of sorrow. Some, indeed, explain these two verses in another
sense; as if David meant to say, that the faithful live so happily that
the wicked envy them. But the reader will now perceive that this is far
from the design of the prophet.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span><span id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>**14.** *The wicked draw their sword, and
bend their bow.* David now goes on to say, that the ungodly, being armed
with sword and bow, threaten with death the children of God; and this he
does in order to meet the temptation which would otherwise overwhelm
them. The promises of God do not have place in a time of quietness and
peace, but in the midst of severe and terrible conflicts. And,
therefore, David now teaches us that the righteous are not deprived of
that peace of which he had spoken a little before, although the wicked
should threaten them with instant death. The sentence ought to be
explained in this way: Although the wicked draw their swords and bend
their bows to destroy the righteous, yet all their efforts shall return
upon their own heads, and shall tend to their own destruction. But it is
necessary to notice the particular terms in which the miserable
condition of the righteous is here described, until God at length
vouchsafe to help them. First, *they are called poor and needy;* and,
secondly, they are compared to sheep devoted to destruction,  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) because they have no power to withstand
the violence of their enemies, but rather lie oppressed under their
feet. Whence it follows, that a uniform state of enjoyment here is not
promised to them in this psalm, but there is only set before them the
hope of a blessed issue to their miseries and afflictions, in order to
console them under them. But as it often happens that the wicked are
hated and treated with severity for their iniquity, the Psalmist adds,
that those who thus suffered were *those who were of upright ways;*
meaning by this, that they were afflicted without cause. Formerly he
described them as *the upright in heart*, by which he commended the
inward purity of the heart; but now he commends uprightness in the
conduct, and in fulfilling every duty towards our neighbor; and thus he
shows not only that they are unjustly persecuted, because they have done
no evil to their enemies, and have given them no cause of offense, but
also, that though provoked by injuries, they nevertheless do not turn
aside from the path of duty.

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span><span id="iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>In the 15th verse, David is not speaking
of the laughter of God, but is denouncing vengeance against the ungodly,
just as we have already seen in the second psalm, at the fourth verse,
that although God, by conniving at the wicked, has often suffered them
for a time to run to every excess in mirth and rioting, yet he at length
speaks to them in his anger to overthrow them. The amount of what is
stated is, that the ungodly should prevail so little, that the sword
which they had drawn should return into their own bowels, and that their
bow should be broken in pieces.

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**16**. Better is the little of the
righteous than the abundance of many wicked.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) **17**. For the arms of the wicked shall
be broken; but Jehovah upholdeth the righteous. **18**. Jehovah knoweth
the days of the upright, and their inheritance shall be everlasting.
**19**. They shall not be ashamed in the season of adversity; and in the
days of famine they shall be satisfied.

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** *Better is the little of the
righteous, etc* This verse, without any sufficient reason, has been
variously rendered. The word <span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>המון*,
hamon,*  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) which is rendered
*abundance,* indeed, sometimes signifies a great multitude of men, and
sometimes abundance of things; sometimes, too, an adjective of the
plural number is joined to a substantive of the singular number. But
those who wrest David’s words to this sense, that a few righteous
persons are better than a great multitude of the ungodly,  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) plainly destroy their import, and pervert
the meaning of the whole sentence. Nor can I receive the explanation
which others have given, that the little which the just man possesses is
better than the great abundance of the wicked; for I see no necessity
for connecting, contrary to the rules of grammar, the word <span
id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>המון, *hamon,* which denotes *abundance,* with
the word <span id="iii.iv-p11.2"></span>רבים, *rabbim.* which signifies
*many* or *great,* and not with the word <span
id="iii.iv-p11.3"></span>רשעים, *reshaim,* which means *wicked* I have
therefore no doubt; that David here contrasts the limited possessions of
one righteous man with the riches and wealth of many wicked men. The
Hebrew word <span id="iii.iv-p11.4"></span>רבים, *rabbim,* however,
which I have rendered *many,* may also be properly taken to denote
persons of great authority and power. Certainly, it is not difficult to
understand that David means to say, that although the wicked excel in
this world, and are enriched with its possessions in great abundance and
trust in their riches, yet the little which the just man possesses is
far better than all their treasures. From this we learn, that David is
here speaking, not so much of external grandeur and wealth, as of the
secret blessing of God which truly enriches the righteous; for although
they live from hand to mouth, yet are they fed from heaven as it were
with manna; while the ungodly are always hungry, or else waste away in
the very midst of their abundance.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>To this also belongs the reason which is
added in the next verse, namely, that there is nothing stable in the
world except it be sustained by the power of God; but we are plainly
told that *the righteous* only are *upheld by him,* and that *the power
of the ungodly shall be broken* Here again we see, that in order to form
a right and proper estimate of true felicity, we must look forward to
the future, or contemplate by the eye of faith the secret grace of God,
and his hidden judgments. Unless we are persuaded by faith that God
cherishes us in his bosom as a father does his children, our poverty
will always be a source of trouble to us; and, on the other hand, unless
we bear in mind what is here said concerning the wicked, that *their
arms shall be broken,* we will make too great account of their present
condition. But if this doctrine be deeply fixed in the hearts of the
faithful, as soon as they shall have learned to rely upon the divine
blessing, the delight and joy which they will experience from their
little store shall be equal to the magnanimity with which they shall
look down, as it were from an eminence, upon the vast treasures in which
the ungodly glory. At the same time, we are here admonished, that whilst
the ungodly rely upon their own strength, and proudly boast of it, we
ought to wait patiently till God arise and break their arms in pieces.
As for us, the best consolation which we could have in our infirmity is,
that God himself upholds and strengthens us.

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span><span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>**18** *Jehovah knoweth the days of the
upright*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) It is not without good
reason that David so frequently inculcates this doctrine, that the
righteous are blessed because God provides for their necessities. We see
how prone the minds of men are to distrust, and how much they are vexed
by an excess of cares and anxieties from which they are unable to
extricate themselves, while, on the other hand, they fall into another
error in being more anxious regarding the future than there is any
reason for; and yet, however active and industrious in the formation of
their plans, they are often disappointed in their expectations, and not
unfrequently fail altogether of success. Nothing, therefore, is more
profitable for us than to have our eyes continually set upon the
providence of God, which alone can best provide for us every thing we
need. On this account, David now says, that *God knoweth the days of the
righteous;* that is to say, he is not ignorant of the dangers to which
they are exposed, and the help which they need. This doctrine we ought
to improve as a source of consolation under every vicissitude which may
seem to threaten us with destruction. We may be harassed in various
ways, and distracted by many dangers, which every moment threaten us
with death, but this consideration ought to prove to us a sufficient
ground of comfort, that not only are our days numbered by God, but that
he also knows all the vicissitudes of our lot on earth. Since God then
so carefully watches over us for the maintenance of our welfare, we
ought to enjoy, in this our pilgrimage on earth, as much peace and
satisfaction as if we were put in full possession of our paternal
inheritance and home. Because we are regarded by God, David from this
concludes, that our inheritance is everlasting. Moreover, in declaring
that those who are upright are thus carefully protected by God, he
exhorts us to the sincere pursuit of truth and uprightness; and if we
desire to be placed in safety under the protection of God, let us
cultivate meekness, and reject with detestation this hellish proverb,
“We must howl among wolves.”

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>**19** *They shall not be ashamed in the
season of adversity* This verse also shows us, that the faithful have no
right to expect such exemption as the flesh would desire from affliction
and trial, but they are assured of deliverance in the end; which, though
it be indeed obtained, yet it is of such a nature as can be realised
only by faith. We must regard these two things as inseparably connected,
namely, that as the faithful are mingled among the wicked in this world,
so hunger and adversity are common to both. The only difference betwixt
them is, that God stretches forth his hand towards his own people in the
time of their need, while he abandons the ungodly, and takes no care of
them. If it should be objected, that the wicked often fare sumptuously
in the time of famine, and gratify all their desires, whilst the
faithful are oppressed with poverty and want, I answer, that the
fullness of which mention is here made consists chiefly in this, that
the faithful, though they live sparingly, and often labor hard to
acquire the means of subsistence, are nevertheless fed by God as truly
as if they had a greater abundance of this world’s goods than the
ungodly, who greedily devour the good things of this life in all their
variety and abundance, and yet are never satisfied. Besides, as I have
elsewhere said, these temporal blessings are not always seen flowing in
one uniform course. The hand of God is indeed always open, but we are
straitened and limited in our desires, so that our own unbelief is no
small hinderance to his liberality. Moreover, as our corrupt nature
would soon break forth into excess, God deals with us more sparingly;
and lest he might corrupt us by too great indulgence, he trains us to
frugality by bestowing with a sparing hand what he was ready otherwise
to lavish upon us in full abundance. And, indeed, whoever shall consider
how much addicted we are to sensuality and pleasure, will not be
surprised that God should exercise his own people with poverty and want.
But although God may not bestow upon us what is necessary for our
gratification, yet, unless our own ingratitude prevent us, we shall
experience, even in famine and want, that be nourishes us graciously and
liberally.

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**20**. For the wicked shalt perish, and the
enemies of Jehovah shall be consumed as the preciousness  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) of lambs; they shalt be consumed into
smoke.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) **21.** The wicked
borroweth, and payeth not again; but the righteous is merciful, and
giveth. **22**. For those who are blessed by him shall inherit the
earth; and those who are cursed of him shall be cut off.

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span><span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>**20** *For the wicked shall perish.* The
causal particle <span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>כי, ki, which is here
translated *for,* might also be rendered as if used adversatively by
*but* or *although,* unless, perhaps, some would prefer to expound the
sentence as of much higher import. But the preferable interpretation is,
that there is here a contrast between the subjects spoken of, namely,
that the righteous are satisfied in the time of famine, whereas the
ungodly shall perish in the midst of their affluence; for, while they
trust in their abundance, God brings them to nought by the use of means
that are secret and hidden. In calling them the *enemies of Jehovah,* he
teaches us, that they are justly overwhelmed by his vengeance, which
they bring upon themselves by their own wickedness. When he says, that
they *shall be consumed as the excellency of lambs,* this is understood
by some to refer to the fat of them. But as <span
id="iii.v-p7.2"></span>יכר, *yakar,* signifies *excellency,* as I have
said elsewhere, I have no doubt that this expression denotes the very
best of lambs, and such as are of extraordinary fatness: and this is
very suitable to the contrast here stated. We learn from this what
another prophet likewise teaches, that the ungodly are fattened for the
day of slaughter; so that the more sumptuously they shall have lived,
the more suddenly shall their destruction come upon them. *To be
consumed into smoke* is of the same import as *to vanish away quickly;*
as if it had been said, There is no stability or substance in them.
Those who understand the term <span id="iii.v-p7.3"></span>יקר, *yakar,*
to mean *fat,* explain this latter clause in this sense: that the wicked
are consumed into smoke as fat melts or wastes away.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) But the reader will see that the first
interpretation is better.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span><span id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>**21** *The wicked borroweth, and payeth not
again* Those are mistaken who suppose that the wicked are here blamed
for their treachery in carrying off the goods of others by fraud and
deception; and that, on the other hand, the children of God are
commended for their kindness in being always ready to relieve the wants
of their poorer brethren. The prophet rather extols, on the one hand,
the blessing of God towards the godly; and declares, on the other, that
the ungodly never have enough. The meaning therefore is, that God deals
bountifully with his own people, that they may be able to aid others;
but that the ungodly are always in want, so that their poverty leads
them to have recourse to fraud and rapine. And were we not blinded by
insensibility and indifference, we could not fail to perceive the many
proofs of this which are daily presented to our view. However great the
abundance of the ungodly, yet their covetousness is so insatiable, that,
like robbers, they plunder right and left, and yet are never able to
pay;  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) while God bestows upon his
own people a sufficiency not only for the supply of their own ordinary
wants, but also to enable them to aid others. I do not indeed deny, that
the wicked are reproved for wasteful extravagance, by which they defraud
their creditors of what is their due, and also that the righteous are
praised for applying to a proper use the bounty of God; but the design
of the prophet is to show the high value of the divine blessing. This is
confirmed by the following verse, in which he illustrates the difference
resulting from the blessing and the curse of God. It then it is asked,
whence the children of God are able to relieve the wants of the needy,
and to exercise liberality towards them? and why it is that the ungodly
are continually contracting debts from which they are never able to
extricate themselves? David answers, that the former are blessed of the
Lord, and that the latter are brought to utter ruin by his curse. Some
expound the word <span id="iii.v-p11.2"></span>מברכיו, *meborakayv,*
actively, as if it were, *Those who bless the righteous shall possess,*
etc.;  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) but this is constrained and
absurd. The meaning is simply this, that whatever we need for the
preservation and maintenance of life, and for the exercise of humanity
towards others, comes to us neither from the heavens nor from the earth,
but only from the favor and blessing of God; and that if he once
withdraw his grace, the abundance of the whole world would not satisfy
us.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**23.** The footsteps of a man are directed
by Jehovah, and he will delight \[or, take pleasure\] in his way.
**24.** Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for Jehovah
upholdeth him with his hand. **25.** I have been young, I am also become
old; and yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread. **26.** He is daily merciful, and lendeth, and his seed
is for blessing.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span><span id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>**23** *The footsteps of a man are directed
by Jehovah* Some join together these two things, first, that the
footsteps of the godly are ordered by the grace of God, since men do not
in their own strength follow what is just and right, but only in so far
as the Spirit of God directs them; and hence the second follows, namely,
that God favors and approves what is his own. But David simply continues
his commendation of the divine blessing towards the faithful, of whom
this is especially worthy of being remembered, that whatever they
undertake always has a favorable and happy result. At the same time, the
reason why God crowns with prosperity and success all our efforts
throughout the course of our life is to be observed, namely, because we
attempt nothing which is not pleasing to him. For I consider the copula
*and,* in the second clause of the verse, to be used instead of the
causal particle *because,* and resolve the whole verse in this way:
Because the way of the godly is acceptable to God, he directs their
footsteps to a happy issue; so that the meaning is, As God sees that the
faithful act conscientiously, and do not turn aside from the way which
he has appointed, he blesses their efforts. And, certainly, since the
prophet speaks generally — and yet it is certain that the faithful only
are here spoken of — the second clause must necessarily be considered as
spoken by way of exposition. Accordingly, the term *way* denotes their
manner and course of living; as if he had said, that the godly have no
other object in view but to frame their lives agreeably to the will of
God, and to obey what he commands. The term *footsteps* I consider as
referring to external success.

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span><span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>**24** *Though he fall, he shall not be
utterly cast down* This verse has generally been interpreted
proverbially, and as meaning, that though the righteous may fall into
sin, his fall is not deadly; but this is not at all in accordance with
the design of the prophet, who is discoursing of the happiness of the
godly. The simple meaning is, that when God visits his servants with
severe afflictions, he at the same time mitigates them that they may not
faint under them;  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) as Paul
declares,

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span>“We are persecuted, but not forsaken;  
cast down, but not destroyed.”— (<span id="iii.vi-p9.2"></span>[2Co
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)<span id="iii.vi-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>Some say that the righteous are not utterly
cast down, because they lose not their courage, but rather bear with
invincible fortitude whatever burden is laid upon them. I readily admit
that the reason why they are not overwhelmed is, that they are not so
tender and delicate as to sink under the burden. I, however, understand
the words in a more extensive sense, and explain them thus: That the
miseries of the godly are so tempered with God’s fatherly mercy, that
they fail not under their burden, and even when they fall, sink not into
destruction. From these words we learn that the godly, although they
serve God sincerely, and study to lead a blameless life, are not
suffered to continue unmoved, and always in the same condition, but are
often afflicted and cast down by various trials; and that the only
difference between them and the unbelieving is, that their falls are not
deadly. We know that if God smite the reprobate, though it be but very
slightly, it becomes the cause of their final destruction. Solomon
speaks still more expressly when he says,

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>“For a just man falleth seven times, and
riseth up again,”  
(<span id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>[Pr
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016)<span id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>and by these words he teaches us, that the
godly are not only subjected to frequent afflictions in this life, but
that they are visited with daily trials, and yet are never forsaken of
the Lord. We must also shortly observe, that even the slightest fall
would be enough to destroy us utterly, did not God uphold us by his
hand.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>**25** *I have been young, I am also become
old.* The meaning of these words is not in the least doubtful, namely,
that David, even when he was become an old man, had not seen any of the
righteous, or any of their children, begging their bread. But here there
arises a question of some difficulty with respect to the fact stated;
for it is certain that many righteous men have been reduced to beggary.
And what David here declares as the result of his own experience
pertains to all ages. Besides, he refers in this verse to the writings
of Moses, for in <span id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>[De
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004)<span id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>,
begging is reckoned among the curses of God; and the law, in that place,
expressly exempts from it those who fear and serve God. How then does
the consistency of this appear, that none of the righteous ever begged
his bread, since Christ placed Lazarus among the most abject of them?
(<span id="iii.vi-p14.2"></span>[Lu
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020)<span id="iii.vi-p14.2"></span>.)
I answer, that we must bear in mind what I have before said upon this
subject, that with respect to the temporal blessings which God confers
upon his people, no certain or uniform rule can be established. There
are various reasons why God does not manifest his favor equally to all
the godly in this world. He chastises some, while he spares others: he
heals the secret maladies of some, and passes by others, because they
have no need of a like remedy: he exercises the patience of some,
according as he has given them the spirit of fortitude; and, finally, he
sets forth others by way of example. But in general, he humbles all of
them by the tokens of his anger, that by secret warnings they may be
brought to repentance. Besides, he leads them, by a variety of
afflictions, to fix their thoughts in meditation upon the heavenly life;
and yet it is not a vain or imaginary thing, that, as is set forth in
the Law, God vouchsafes earthly blessings to his servants as proofs of
his favor toward them. I confess, I say, that it is not in vain, or for
nought, that an abundance of earthly blessings, sufficient for the
supply of all their wants, is promised to the godly. This, however, is
always to be understood with this limitation, that God will bestow these
blessings only in so far as he shall consider it expedient: and,
accordingly, it may happen that the blessing of God may be manifested in
the life of men in general, and yet some of the godly be pinched with
poverty, because it is for their good. But if it happen that any of the
faithful are brought to beggary, they should lift up their minds on
high, to that blessed state in which God will largely recompense them
for all that is now wanting in the blessings of this transitory life. We
must also bear this in mind, that if God sometimes involve the faithful
in the same punishments by which he takes vengeance upon the ungodly —
seeing them, for example, affected with the same diseases, — in doing so
there is no inconsistency; for although they do not come the length of
contemning God, nor are devoted to wickedness, nor even act according to
their own inclination, nor yield themselves wholly to the influence of
sin like the wicked, yet are they not free of all blame; and, therefore,
it need not surprise us though they are sometimes subjected to temporal
punishments. We are, however, certain of this, that God makes such
provision for his own people, that, being contented with their lot, they
are never in want; because, by living sparingly, they always have
enough, as Paul says, <span id="iii.vi-p14.3"></span>Philippians
6:12<span id="iii.vi-p14.3"></span>,

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span>“I am instructed both to abound and to
suffer need.”

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span><span id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span>**26** *He is daily merciful* The Psalmist
here repeats what he had already said, that the grace of God is a
fountain of all blessings which can never be exhausted; and, therefore,
while it is displayed towards the faithful, they not only have enough
for the supply of their own wants, but are able also liberally to assist
others. What he adds concerning *their seed* is variously expounded.
That he is speaking of the children of the godly, there can be no doubt;
and this is evident from the preceding verse. But when he says that they
*shall be for blessing,*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) some
understand it as if he had said, They shall be the ministers of God’s
liberality: so that, according to them, the sense would be, that they
shall follow the good example of their fathers in helping the poor, and
in exercising liberality towards all men. But I fear that this
exposition is too refined. Nor do I admit the interpretation which has
been given by others, that the meaning is, that the grace of God shall
be so signally manifested towards the children of the godly, that their
names shall be employed in a form of prayer, when prosperity and success
are prayed for. This mode of expression, I allow, is to be so understood
in various places; but here, in my opinion, David designs nothing more
than to extol the continuation of God’s favor from the fathers to their
children: as if he had said, God’s blessing does not terminate with the
death of the righteous man, but it extends even to his children.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) And there is indeed no inheritance more
certain to which our children may succeed us, than when God, receiving
them in like manner into his fatherly favor, makes them partakers of his
blessing.

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027)<span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**27**. Depart from evil, and do good, and
dwell for ever. **28**. For Jehovah loveth judgment, and forsaketh not
his meek ones: they shall be preserved for ever: and the seed of the
wicked shall be cut off. **29**. The righteous shall inherit the earth,
and shall dwell for ever upon it.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span><span id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>**27** *Depart from evil, and do good.* In
this verse David argues, that, in order to realize the blessedness of
which he has spoken, we must abstain from all evil, perform the duties
of humanity, and exert ourselves in doing good to our neighbors. This
doctrine is at variance with the dictates of corrupt human nature; but
it is, notwithstanding, certain that many of the troubles and distresses
in which the whole human race are involved, proceed from no other cause
than this, that every man respectively, in his own sphere, being given
to injustice, fraud, extortion, and evil-dealing, contemptuously rejects
the blessing of God. Thus, it is in consequence of the barriers which
men throw in their own way, that they do not attain happiness in this
world, and that every man in his own place does not possess the peace
and quietness which belong to him. It is then with the highest propriety
that David passes from the doctrine of the preceding context to this
exhortation: for if the meek possess the earth, then every one, as he
regards his own happiness and peace, ought also to endeavor to walk
uprightly, and to apply himself to works of beneficence. It should also
be observed, that he connects these two things, first, that the faithful
should strictly do good; and, secondly, that they should restrain
themselves from doing evil: and this he does not without good reason:
for as we have seen in the thirty-fourth psalm, it often happens that
the same person who not only acts kindly towards certain persons, but
even with a bountiful hand deals out largely of his own, is yet all the
while plundering others, and amassing by extortion the resources by
means of which he displays his liberality. Whoever, therefore, is
desirous to have his good offices approved by God, let him endeavor to
relieve his brethren who have need of his help, but let him not injure
one in order to help another, or afflict and grieve one in order to make
another glad. Now David, under these two expressions, has briefly
comprised the duties of the second table of the law: first, that the
godly should keep their hands free from all mischief, and give no
occasion of complaint to any man; and, secondly, that they should not
live to themselves, and to the promotion merely of their own private
interests, but should endeavor to promote the common good of all
according to their opportunities, and as far as they are able. But we
have already said, that the blessing which is promised to the righteous,
that “they shall inherit the earth,” is not always realised in an equal
degree as to all the people of God; and the reason we assigned for this
is, that God cannot find among men an example of such great uprightness,
but that even the most perfect procure to themselves much misery by
their own fault: and therefore it need not surprise us though God
withdraw, at least in some measure, his blessing even from his own. We
know too to what excess the lusts of the flesh run riot, unless the Lord
lay a restraint upon them. Besides, there is no one who is ready
cheerfully to engage in meditation upon the divine life, who is not
urged and encouraged to it by various motives. Hence it is that the
possession of the earth, which David here assigns to the children of
God, does not (as the lawyers would define the term) always consist in
having the feet planted within it, and in being securely established in
it; for there are many sources of disquietude and affliction here to
trouble them. And yet it does not follow that it is a mere fiction or
imaginary thing which he promises. For although daily experience shows
us that the children of God do not as yet inherit the earth, yet,
according to the measure of our faith, we feel how efficacious the
blessing of God is, which, like a spring that cannot be drained, flows
continually. They are indeed more than blind who do not perceive that
the righteous have at present this reward, that God defends and upholds
them by his power.

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span><span id="iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>**28** *For Jehovah loveth judgement.*
This, it ought to be observed, is a confirmation of the doctrine
contained in the preceding sentence; and it is here made to rest upon a
higher principle, namely, that God takes pleasure in righteousness and
truth. The argument indeed appears to be incomplete; but as David takes
for granted — what ought to be deeply fixed in the hearts of all the
faithful — that the world is directed by the providence of God, his
conclusion is admirable. In the first place, then, it must be admitted
that the condition of the human race is not under the direction of
chance, but of the providence of God, and that the world is conducted
and governed by his counsel: so that he regulates according to his
pleasure the issue of all things, and controls them by his power; and,
secondly, to this it must be added what David here states, that
righteousness and truth are pleasing to God. Hence it follows, that all
who lead an upright and blameless life among men shall be happy,
because, enjoying the favor of God, every thing at length must in regard
to them have a happy and successful result. But let us bear in mind,
that the promise which is spoken of in this verse is to be understood in
this sense, that while God has undertaken the preservation of the godly,
it is not to cherish them continually in retirement and ease, but after
he has for a time exercised them under the cross, at length to come to
their help: for the language here employed, *Jehovah forsaketh not his
meek ones,* is tacitly very emphatic. Those, therefore, who separate the
exercise of patience from the favor which God bestows upon the godly in
this life, misinterpret this psalm. On the contrary, lest any one should
hastily and rashly pronounce judgment, the prophet entreats the faithful
to suspend their judgment, until God manifest his displeasure after the
death of the wicked, in inflicting punishment upon their posterity: *The
seed of the wicked shall be cut off* This is of the same import as if he
had again asserted, that although the judgements of God are not
immediately executed upon the wicked and ungodly, yet they are not on
that account anything the better of it, since the punishment justly due
to them will extend to their children. If then the curse of God is not
forthwith inflicted upon them, it need not surprise us if he delay for a
time to manifest the favor which he bears towards the faithful.

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span><span id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>**29** *The righteous shall inherit the
earth* The repetition of the same doctrine here is not superfluous,
since it is so very difficult to impress it deeply upon our minds. For
while all men seek after happiness, scarcely one in a hundred looks for
it from God, but rather all, on the contrary, in making provision for
themselves, provoke the vengeance of God, as it were deliberately, and
strive to excel each other in doing so, so that some of them stain
themselves with fraud and perjury, some indulge in robbery and
extortion, some practice all sorts of cruelty, and others commit
violence and outrage even with the sword and poison. Moreover, I have
just now, and on several other occasions, stated the sense in which this
everlasting habitation upon the earth, which is here promised to the
righteous, is to be understood, namely, that although they are
surrounded by the troubles and changes which occur in this world, yet
God preserves them under his wings; and although there is nothing
lasting or stable under heaven, yet he keeps them in safety as if they
were sheltered in a secure haven. And, finally, they enjoy in addition
to this that inward peace of mind which is better than a hundred lives,
and which is therefore justly regarded as a privilege surpassing in
value and importance all others.

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030)<span
id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>**30**. The mouth of the righteous will
speak wisdom, and his tongue will utter judgment. **31**. The law of his
God is in his heart: his steps shall not slide. **32**. The wicked
watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him. **33**. Jehovah will
not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span><span id="iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span>**30** *The mouth of the righteous will
speak wisdom* As it is customary with hypocrites confidently to draw to
their own advantage whatever the Spirit of God declares concerning the
just and upright, David here gives a definition of the righteousness
which God requires on the part of his children, and divides it into
three principal parts — that their speech should be in sincerity and
truth; that the law of God should reign in their heart; and that they
should order their conversation aright. Some give a different exposition
of the first part from what we have given: they say that the righteous
serve as teachers and guides, by instructing others to live well, and
leading them in the way; and, therefore, *to speak wisdom,* and *to
utter judgment,* is, in their view, of the same import as to instruct
others in holy doctrine, and to train them to the fear of God. I do not
altogether disapprove of this exposition, but I fear it is too
restricted. Wisdom and uprightness are here opposed as much to the
profane and filthy language by which the wicked endeavor to blot out the
name of God, as to cunning and fraud, and every species of stratagem and
deceit; and also to the threats and terrors by which they endeavor to
frighten the simple.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) The meaning
therefore is, first, that the righteous speak honourably and reverently
of the righteousness of God, that they may cherish in themselves and
others, to a large extent, the knowledge and the fear of God;  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) secondly, that both in their own affairs
and those of others, they approve, without disguise or deceit, of what
is just and reasonable, and are not given to justify what is wrong under
the color and varnish of sophistry; and, finally, that they never depart
from the truth.

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span><span id="iii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>To this there is added integrity of heart:
*The law of the Lord is in his heart.* This, though it should precede in
point of order, is not improperly put in the second place here. For the
Scriptures are not particular in observing an exact arrangement in the
enumeration of virtues and vices. Besides, the source whence this
integrity of heart proceeds is, that the Law of God has its seat in the
heart; and it is it alone which prescribes the best rule of life,
restrains all the depraved affections and lusts, and imbues the minds of
men with the love of righteousness. No man will constantly and steadily
devote himself to a life of uprightness, exert himself in behalf of
others in preference to his own personal interests, renounce
covetousness, subdue pride, and maintain a constant warfare with his own
nature, unless he is endued with the fear of God. There next follows the
third division, which relates to the external conduct: *His steps shall
not slide* Some, indeed, think that this is a promise; but I have no
doubt, that in this clause David still continues the definition of
righteousness. The meaning therefore is, that although the children of
God are tempted in a variety of ways to commit sin, and many things
occur urging them to it, — and although men, for the most part, too,
endeavor, as far as in them lies, by their maliciousness to turn them
aside from the fear of God, — yet, because the Law of God rules and
reigns in their hearts, they *do not slide,* but stand to their purpose
with firm and determined resolution, or at least adhere to the right
course.

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span><span id="iii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span>**32.** and **33.** *The wicked watcheth
the righteous, etc.* David here illustrates more plainly the nature of
the possession of the earth, of which he had spoken, namely, that God
preserves his own people, though they are beset with enemies round
about. And hence we are again taught, that the faithful are not promised
in the preceding context a quiet state of life, and one free from all
trouble and distress. If so, these two statements would be
contradictory: first, that the faithful possessing an inheritance, enjoy
repose and pleasure; and, secondly, that yet they are daily delivered as
sheep out of the mouth of wolves. These two verses, however, contain
this special ground of consolation, that the faithful, though surrounded
by such a variety of dangers, shall notwithstanding escape, and be
preserved in safety by the help of God. Accordingly, David here teaches
them, that when they shall see their enemies lying in wait for them, and
seeking by every means in their power to annoy them, they, on the
contrary, ought to consider how deeply interested God is in the welfare
of his own people, and how carefully he watches over them to preserve
them in safety. David indeed confesses that the stratagems to which the
wicked have recourse in seeking not only to deprive good men of their
property, but even to take away their lives, are terrible in themselves,
because they cruelly plot their destruction; but still he teaches us at
the same time, that we ought to continue to preserve firm and undaunted
courage, because God has promised that he will be our guardian and
defender: *Jehovah will not leave him in his hand* This circumstance,
however, ought to be considered, that God does not always grant us
deliverance at the first, but often delays it till we seem to be even at
the point of death. In the last clause of the verse, we are also
admonished, that however carefully good men may guard against giving
offense to any, and endeavor to secure the good-will of all, and shun
debate and strife, yet they shall not be exempted from false
accusations: *Jehovah will not condemn them when they are judged* David
does not say that they shall receive the applause of the world, and that
their virtues shall be celebrated in such praises as they deserve; but
he exhorts them, when they shall be haled to judgment, and as it were
overwhelmed with slander, so that they already resemble those who are
condemned, to rest contented with the protection of God, who will at
length manifest their innocence, and maintain it against the unrighteous
judgments of men. If any one object, that, on the contrary, many of the
children of God, after having been condemned, have suffered a cruel and
bitter death, I answer, that their avenger nevertheless is in heaven.
Christ was put to death in the most cruel form, and in circumstances of
the deepest ignominy, but notwithstanding, as the prophet Isaiah says,
<span id="iii.viii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iii.viii-p11.1"></span>,
“he was taken from that distress and condemnation;” and in the same
manner God is still acting daily towards those who are his members. If
it may still be objected, that David is here discoursing not of the life
to come, but of the state of the godly in the present life, I must again
repeat in answer to this, the explanation which I have given before,
namely, that earthly blessings are at God’s disposal, and are regulated
entirely according to his will; and hence it is that he never bestows
them in an equal measure upon all, but according to his wisdom, and as
he sees meet, sometimes withdrawing them either in whole or in part, and
at other times displaying them to the view of all. Accordingly, it may
happen, that the holy martyrs, after they have been condemned, may also
be put to death, as if God had forsaken them; but this is only because
it is better for themselves, and because they desire nothing more than
to glorify God by their death. Yet he who permits the ungodly to
exercise their cruelty, ceases not to be the assertor of the
righteousness of his servants: for he openly shows before his angels,
and before his whole Church, that he approves it, and declares that he
will make inquisition for it; nay, more, raising them from the darkness
in which they have been hid, he makes their ashes yield a sweet and
pleasant odour. Finally, after the Lord has suffered them to be
overwhelmed by reproach and violence, he will pronounce the judgment by
which he will vindicate their righteous cause from wicked calumnies and
false accusations.

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>**34**. Wait upon Jehovah, and keep his way,
and he shall exalt thee, that thou mayest inherit the earth: when the
wicked are cut off thou shalt see it. **35**. I have seen the wicked
terrible,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) and spreading himself
like a green bay tree:  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) **36**. And
he passed away,  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) and, lo! he was
not: and I sought for his place, and he was not found.

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span>**34** *Wait upon Jehovah, and keep his way*
David again returns to the style of exhortation, in order that the
faithful, trusting to God’s promises and sustained by them, may not
suffer themselves to be drawn hither and thither by any temptations
through devious and sinful ways, but may persevere steadfastly in the
service of God. In the first place, he exhorts them to hope and
patience, as if he wished them, amidst the tumults and troubles of life,
to trust in God, and hold their peace till he again show them his
countenance, which for a time he had hid from them. Hence arises, in the
second place, another exhortation, that they should not turn aside from
the way of the Lord; for wherever hope and patience prevail, they will
so restrain the minds of men that they will not break out into any thing
unlawful and wicked. It will doubtless be found, that the reason why
every man endeavors to promote his own advantage by wicked practices is,
that no one depends upon God, or else that he thinks, if fortune do not
quickly smile upon him, that it is vain for him to persevere in the
practice of equity and uprightness. Moreover, we may learn from this
place, that if many, even of the good and the upright, are subjected to
poverty, and lead a life of protracted affliction and trial, they suffer
their punishment justly, because, so far from being firmly persuaded
that it belongs to God as his proper office not only to lift up his
servants from the dunghill, but also to bring them forth even from their
graves, scarcely one in a hundred of them patiently waits upon God, and
continues perseveringly in the right course. Nor is it without good
reason that David makes use of the word *exalt,* that we may know that
God often stretches forth his hand to the faithful when they appear to
be overwhelmed by the weight of their calamities. He then adds, that the
*wicked* shall perish before the eyes of the godly. If their end were
not very different from that of the righteous, the state in which the
reprobate now rejoice for a time would easily allure even the best of
men to evil. And, indeed, God would make us daily to behold such sights
if we had eyes to behold his judgments. And yet, although the whole
world were blinded, God does not cease to render a just reward to the
wickedness of men; but by punishing them in a more private manner, he
withdraws from us that fruit of which our own dulness deprives us.

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span><span id="iii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p10"></span>**35.** and **36** *I have seen the wicked
terrible, etc.* David here confirms from his own experience what I have
just said, namely, that although the wicked are intoxicated with their
prosperity, and held in admiration by all on account of it, yet their
happiness is transitory and evanescent, and, therefore, nothing else
than a mere illusion. In the 35th verse he tells us, that it is no
strange or unwonted thing for the ungodly, puffed up with their
prosperity, to spread themselves far and wide, and to give occasion of
terror to the innocent. Then he adds, that their greatness, which had
been regarded with so much wonder, disappears in a moment. As to the
meaning of the words, <span id="iii.ix-p10.1"></span>עריף, *arits,*
which we have rendered *terrible,* might also be translated *strong,*
because the word from which it is derived signifies sometimes *to
terrify,* and sometimes *to strengthen.* The word <span
id="iii.ix-p10.2"></span>מתערה, *mithareh,* is taken by some for
*green,* but it rather means *discovering* or *spreading himself out,*
as high and broad trees spread out their branches. David, I have no
doubt, here rebukes the insolence of those who vaunt themselves
immoderately. *To pass away,* in the 36th verse, is used for *to vanish
away;* and thus he admonishes us to sit still for a time, in order that
it may appear, after it has passed away, that all that the world admires
in the prosperity of the wicked has been only a mist.

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
37:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037)<span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>**37**. Observe the perfect man, and consider
the just for the end of that man is peace. **38**. But the transgressors
shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off.
**39**. The salvation of the righteous is from Jehovah: he is their
strength in the time of trouble. **40**. Jehovah shall help them, and
deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked: he shall preserve
them, because they trust in him.

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span><span id="iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span>**37** *Observe the perfect man* David
exhorts the faithful diligently to consider every instance they may meet
with of the grace of God, as well as of his judgment; but he teaches, at
the same time, that it is in vain for any to sit in judgment upon the
first aspect of things. When men do not wait patiently and quietly the
time which God has appointed in his good pleasure, it often happens that
faith is extinguished, and trust in the promises of God, at the same
time, perishes with it. This is the reason why David exhorts us to
observe and consider, for when our minds are preoccupied by the
temptation which is once presented to our view, hasty judgment is then
the cause of our being deceived. But if a man extend his view, as if it
were from a watch-tower, to a great distance, he will find that it has
been said with truth, that *the end* of the reprobate and *the end* of
the righteous respectively are at length very different. This clause,
with respect to the end of these two classes of men, seems to be added
by way of caution, that we may learn to suspend our judgment, if God
should not immediately accomplish what he has spoken. If we should
become impatient in our desires, let us moderate our minds by the
reflection, that the end is not yet come, and that it behoves us to give
God time to restore to order the confused state of things. Some explain
the word <span id="iii.x-p5.1"></span>אחרית, *acharith,* which we have
rendered the end of the wicked, of their posterity. This, however, is
incorrect. David refers only to the difference which subsists between
them and the righteous in the end; for God, after he has severely tried
his servants, and exercised their patience, in the end converts their
adversity into a blessing, while he turns the mirth of the ungodly into
mourning.

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span><span id="iii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span>**39** *The salvation of the righteous is
from Jehovah* The sum of the whole is, that whatever may happen, the
righteous shall be saved, because they are in the hand of God, and can
never be forgotten by him. This ought to be particularly noticed, that
those who are greatly afflicted may be sustained by the assurance that
the salvation which they expect from God is infallibly certain, because
God is eternal, and governs the world by his power; as Christ said,

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span>“My Father, who gave them me, is greater than
all,”  
(<span id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>[Joh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span>David still inculcates this principle, that
as righteousness is approved of God, it can never happen that he should
forsake his faithful servants, and deprive them of his help. He,
therefore, exhorts true believers to depend upon God, not only when
things prosper according to their desires, but even when they are sorely
afflicted. By these words he teaches that it is enough, if God only
impart strength to his servants, so that, when severely afflicted and
oppressed with anguish, they may not faint under it, or that, when
groaning under the weight of severe afflictions, they may not sink under
the burden. To the same purpose also is the expression which David uses
twice in the last verse, that *God will deliver* By this he admonishes
the children of God to learn patiently to endure afflictions, and that,
if God should prolong them, they should often recall this to their
remembrance, that after he has tried their patience, he will in the end
deliver them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc09002.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>C’est, jouy
des biens d’icelle en repos ferme et asseure.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is,
enjoy the good things of it in quietness and security.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc09002.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>C’est, ton bon
droict.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, thy just cause, or thy rectitude.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc09002.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span> That is, do not enter into fellowship with.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc09002.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> The fitness of this figure to express the
transient and short-lived character of the prosperity of the wicked,
will appear in a still more striking light when we take into
consideration the great heat of the climate of Palestine.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc09002.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span> Some read, “Thou shalt dwell in the land.”
The Hebrew verb is in the imperative mood; but the imperative in Hebrew
is sometimes used for the future of the indicative. — *Glass*. tom. 1,
can. 40, p. 285.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc09002.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span> ”<span id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>C’est dire,
qui te vient loyaument.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc09002.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span> Modern critics have varied as much in their
interpretations of this clause of the verse as those who preceded
Calvin, of whom he complains. For example, Ainsworth reads, “Thou shalt
be fed by faith;” Archbishop Secker,” Thou shalt be fed in plenty;”
Parkhurst, “Thou shalt be fed in security;” Dathe, “<span
id="iii.i-p15.2"></span>Tunc terram inhabitabis et secure vivas,”
assigning the reason for this translation to be, that “<span
id="iii.i-p15.3"></span>*pascere securitatem*, sive si malis, *in*
*securitate*, nihil aliud est quam *secure* *vivere*;” and Gesenius
reads, “Follow after truth,” or, “seek to be faithful,” deriving the
verb from a root which signifies *to take delight in*, or *to follow
after*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc09002.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p18.1"></span>D’autant que
Dieu est la part de nostre heritage, que nostre lot est escheu en lieux
plaisan,.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc09002.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>Calvin here gives the exact sense of the
Hebrew verb <span id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>גלל, *galal*. It literally
signifies *to roll*, or *to devolve*; and in this passage it evidently
means, Roll or devolve all thy concerns upon God; “cast thy burden upon
him,” as it is in <span id="iii.i-p21.2"></span>[Ps
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022)<span id="iii.i-p21.2"></span>;
“the metaphor being taken,” says Cresswell, “from a burden put by one
who is unequal to it upon a stronger man.” But Dr Adam Clarke thinks
that the idea may be taken from the camel who lies down till his load be
rolled upon him.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc09002.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, qui
vient a bont de ses entreprises.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, who accomplishes
his devices.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc09002.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>C’est, y
auront leurs plaisirs avec grande prosperite.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is,
shall have their enjoyment in it with great prosperity.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc09002.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> The Hebrew verb rendered *silent* is <span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>דום, *dom*, from which the English word *dumb*
appears to be derived. The silence here enjoined is opposed to murmuring
or complaining. The word is rendered by the Septuagint, <span
id="iii.ii-p8.2"></span>ὑποταγνθι, *be subject*; which is not an exact
translation of the original term: but it well expresses the meaning; for
this silence implies the entire subjection of ourselves to the will of
God.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc09002.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>De se
venger, et de rendre mal pour mal.” — *Fr*. “To take revenge, and to
render evil for evil.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc09002.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> <span id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>Dominus.
Heb. <span id="iii.iii-p3.2"></span>אתי, *Adonai*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc09002.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>Comme
s’ils avoyent puissance de faire de nous a leur plaisir.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc09002.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span> “Day is often used," says Ainsworth, “for
the time of punishment; as, ‘the posterity shall be astonied at his
day,’ <span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Job
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>;
‘Woe unto them, for their day is come!’ <span
id="iii.iii-p9.2"></span>[Jer
50:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#027)<span id="iii.iii-p9.2"></span>.
So ‘the day of Midian,’ <span id="iii.iii-p9.3"></span>[Isa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p9.3"></span>;
‘the day of Jezreel,’ <span id="iii.iii-p9.4"></span>[Ho
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011)<span id="iii.iii-p9.4"></span>;
‘the day of Jerusalem,’ <span id="iii.iii-p9.5"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii-p9.5"></span>.”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc09002.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>De
brebis destinees au sacrifice.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc09002.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, aux
grans qui sont meschans.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, to the great who are
wicked.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc09002.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span> Ainsworth renders this word, “plenteous
mammon,” which, he remarks, “signifieth multitude, plenty, or store of
riches, or any other thing.” The Septuagint renders it *riches*. The
English word *mammon* is derived from this Hebrew word.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc09002.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span> This is the view taken by Fry, who renders
the words,

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>“Better are the few of the Just one,  
Than the great multitude of the wicked.”

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>By the Just One, he understands Christ.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc09002.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span> “‘Depositeth the days of the upright,” —
lays them up in safety for them: for such is the original idea of <span
id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>ירע.” — *Fry*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc09002.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>Ou,
l’excellence, c’est, les agneaux plus beaux et plus gras.” — *Fr*.
*marg*. “Or, the excellency, that is, the finest and fattest lambs.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc09002.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>C’est,
s’esvanouiront en brief.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, shall speedily
vanish away.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc09002.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.v-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span> It is generally supposed that there is here
an allusion to the sacrificial services of the former dispensation.
Lambs were then offered in large numbers as burnt-offerings; and if the
allusion is to these sacrifices, as is highly probable, the doctrine
taught is, that as the fat of them melted away, and was wholly and
rapidly consumed by the fire of the altar of burnt-offering, so the
wicked shall melt away and be quickly consumed in the fire of Jehovah’s
wrath. The Chaldee paraphrases the last clause thus: — “They shall be
consumed in the smoke of Gehenna,” or of hell.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc09002.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>Comme
escumeurs de mer sans jamais avoir de quoy satisfaire.” — *Fr*. “Like
pirates, without ever having any thing to pay.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc09002.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.v-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>Comme s’il y
avoit, Ceux qui beniront les justes, possederont,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc09002.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span> “Neither the text,” says Dr Adam Clarke,
“nor any of the versions, intimate that a falling into sin is meant; but
a falling into *trouble*, *difficulty*,” etc.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc09002.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span> This is also the reading of the
Septuagint, <span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>Τὸ σπέζμα αὐτου εἰς εὐλογίαν
ἕσται

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc09002.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span> Ainsworth reads, “And his seed are in the
blessing,” and understands the words as meaning, that the children of
the just man “are in the blessing, or are appointed to the blessing, as
the heirs thereof,” <span id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>[Ge
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003)<span id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.vi-p19.2"></span>[1Pe
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)<span id="iii.vi-p19.2"></span>;
and that they have still abundance, notwithstanding the liberality of
their parents; for “the blessing of the Lord maketh rich,” <span
id="iii.vi-p19.3"></span>[Pr
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022)<span id="iii.vi-p19.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc09002.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.viii-p6.1"></span>Par
lesquelles ils taschent d’espouvanter les simples.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc09002.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.viii-p7.1"></span>En
toutes les parties de la cognoissance et crainte de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc09002.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span> Striking terror in all around.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc09002.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span> The proper signification of the word <span
id="iii.ix-p4.1"></span>אזרח, *azrach*, has been controverted among
interpreters, and it has been variously rendered. Most of the Rabbins,
and many modern commentators, as Mudge, Waterland, Gesenius, and others,
are of opinion, that the preferable reading is, “like an indigenous or
native tree;” that is, a tree which flourishes in its native soil, where
it grows most vigorously, and acquires its largest and most luxuriant
growth. The Septuagint translates it, <span id="iii.ix-p4.2"></span>ὼς
τὰς χέδρους του Λιβάνου, “as the cedars of Lebanon;” being self-growing,
spreading, and lofty trees. Some suppose that the translators of this
version must have had a different reading in their Hebrew Bibles from
what is in our present copies; and others that, as is common with them,
they paraphrase the original words, the more clearly to express their
meaning. The translation of the Septuagint is followed by the Vulgate,
Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, by Houbigant, Boothroyd, Geddes, and
other good authorities. Ainsworth reads, “as a green self-growing
laurel.” Bythner says he is at a loss for the reason of translating the
word *laurel*. “For the reading of *bay tree*,” says the illustrated
Commentary upon the Bible, “we are not aware of any authority, except
the very feeble one which is offered by some of the older of the modern
versions in this country and on the Continent.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc09002.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.ix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span> The Suptuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic
versions, Jerome, Houbigant, Horsley, and Walford, read the verb in the
first person, “But I passed by.” The Chaldee adheres to the Hebrew, “And
he passed, *or* failed, from the age, *or* world, and, lo! he was not.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 38](cc09003)
