[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09024)  [Next](cc09026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p1"></span>PSALM 60

<span id="xxvi-p2"></span>David, who was now settled upon the throne,
and had gained several signal victories, tending to confirm him in the
kingdom, in this Psalm exalts the goodness of God, that he might at once
express his gratitude, and by conciliating the favor of such as still
stood out against his interests, unite the community, which had been
rent into factions. Having first adverted to the clear indications of
the Divine favor, which proved that God had chosen him to be king, he
more particularly calls the attention of the faithful to the oracle
itself, in order to convince them that they could only comply with the
mind of God, by yielding their consent and approbation to the anointing
which he had received from Samuel. Prayers also are offered up
throughout the psalm, urging God to perfect what he had begun.

<span id="xxvi-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Shushan-eduth,
Michtam  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) of David, to teach;
when he strove with the Syrians of Mesopotamia, and with the Syrians of
Zoba, and when Joab returned, and smote of the Edomites in the valley of
Salt twelve thousand.

<span id="xxvi-p5"></span>Of the first part of this title I have spoken
in another place, and shall not insist upon it further than to repeat,
that *Shushan-eduth, the lily of witness,*  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) *or of beauty,* seem to have been the
first words of some song which was commonly known at the time. It is
added, *to teach;* and this, as some have thought, because the psalm was
given to the Levites, that they might learn it. But others have very
properly rejected this idea, as we cannot suppose that a title, which is
equally applicable to all the psalms, would have been here used as a
term of distinction. More probably it points at a particular instruction
or doctrine, which would be taught by the following psalm. We may
suppose that David, who had gained so many decisive victories, but had
not the satisfaction, as yet, of seeing the kingdom finally settled
under him, employs the word to denote that he had a special lesson to
enforce, which was, the duty of all who had hitherto opposed him to put
an end to factions, and, after such convincing evidences, acknowledge
that he was their divinely-appointed king. Let experience, at least, as
if he had said, prove that the sovereignty which I hold meets with the
approbation of God, crowned, as it is, in the eyes of all, with so many
tokens of his favor. The psalm is described as being a kind of triumphal
song for victories obtained over the Syrians and other allied nations.
As the Jews reckon Mesopotamia, and other countries, to be included in
Syria, which they call Aram, they are forced subsequently to distinguish
it into different parts, as here we find *Syria Naharim* put for
Mesopotamia, which some of the Latins have named Interamnis, (or,
*between two rivers,)* following the Greek etymology; for Mesopotamia in
Greek means between two rivers, that is, between the Tigris and
Euphrates.  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) Next, we have *Syria
Soba* mentioned, which some have considered upon good grounds to be
Sophene, because adjacent to the bank of the Euphrates; and David is
said (<span id="xxvi-p7.2"></span>[2Sa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)<span id="xxvi-p7.2"></span>) to
have smitten Rehob, king of Soba, as he went to recover his border at
the river. In the same passage, we read of a third Syria, that of
Damascus, nearer to Judea, and almost touching upon it. Syria is, in
other places of Scripture, represented as still more extensive, and has
epithets attached to it according to the different territories which are
meant to be pointed out. As David had war with the more adjacent part of
Syria, and routed the army which had come out from it to the assistance
of the Ammonites, it may be asked why he speaks only of the inhabitants
of Mesopotamia and Soba. I think it probable that he specifies the more
distant nations, as being the most formidable, and as affording a more
illustrious proof of the Divine favor which accompanied his arms. For
this reason, he passes over the more neighboring nations, and mentions
those which were situated at a distance, the terror of which was known
only by report, and whose overthrow was something unheard of, and almost
incredible. In the inspired history, two-and-twenty thousand are said to
have been slain,  <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) (<span
id="xxvi-p8.1"></span>[1Ch 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012)<span
id="xxvi-p8.1"></span>,) in the title of this psalm only twelve
thousand; but the apparent inconsistency is easily explained. It is
Abishai whom the history represents as defeating the forces, which are
here said to have been overthrown by Joab. We are to consider that the
army was divided between the two brothers. Abishai being inferior in
rank and authority, we need not wonder that the praise of the victory is
ascribed to him who was the chief commander, although both had a share
in gaining it; as in <span id="xxvi-p8.2"></span>[1Sa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007)<span id="xxvi-p8.2"></span>,
David is described as having the whole honor of the victory, because he
was the individual under whose auspices it had been accomplished. It is
probable that about half the number mentioned in the history fell during
the main engagement, and that the rest having fled from the field, were
put to the sword by Joab in their retreat.  <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380)

<span id="xxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p2"></span>**1**. O God! thou hast cast us off; thou
hast scattered us; thou hast been displeased: O turn thyself to us
again! **2**. Thou hast made the earth \[or the land\] to tremble; thou
hast caused it to open wide: heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh.
**3**. Thou hast showed thy people hard things: thou hast made us drunk
with the wine of astonishment.  <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381)

<span id="xxvi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.i-p5"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p6"></span>**1.** *O God! thou hast cast us off.* With
the view of exciting both himself and others to a more serious
consideration of the goodness of God, which they presently experienced,
he begins the psalm with prayer; and a comparison is instituted,
designed to show that the government of Saul had been under the divine
reprobation. He complains of the sad confusions into which the nation
had been thrown, and prays that God would return to it in mercy, and
re-establish its affairs. Some have thought that David here adverts to
his own distressed condition: this is not probable. I grant that, before
coming to the throne, he underwent severe afflictions; but in this place
he evidently speaks of the whole people as well as himself. The
calamities which he describes are such as extended to the whole kingdom;
and I have not the least doubt, therefore, that he is to be considered
as drawing a comparison which might illustrate the favor of God, as it
had been shown so remarkably, from the first, to his own government.
With this view, he deplores the long-continued and heavy disasters which
had fallen upon the people of God under Saul’s administration. It is
particularly noticeable, that though he had found his own countrymen his
worst and bitterest foes, now that he sat upon the throne, he forgets
all the injuries which they had done him, and, mindful only of the
situation which he occupied, associates himself with the rest of them in
his addresses to God. The *scattered* condition of the nation is what he
insists upon as the main calamity. In consequence of the dispersion of
Saul’s forces, the country lay completely exposed to the incursions of
enemies; not a man was safe in his own house, and no relief remained but
in flight or banishment. He next describes the confusions which reigned
by a metaphor, representing the country as *opened,* or *cleft asunder;*
not that there had been a literal earthquake, but that the kingdom, in
its rent and shattered condition, presented that calamitous aspect which
generally follows upon an earthquake. The affairs of Saul ceased to
prosper from the time that he forsook God; and when he perished at last,
he left the nation in a state little short of ruin. The greatest
apprehension must have been felt throughout it; it was become the scorn
of its enemies, and was ready to submit to any yoke, however degrading,
which promised tolerable conditions. Such is the manner in which David
intimates that the divine favor had been alienated by Saul, pointing,
when he says that God was *displeased,* at the radical source of all the
evils which prevailed; and he prays that the same physician who had
broken would heal.

<span id="xxvi.i-p7"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p8"></span>**3.** *Thou hast showed thy people hard
things* He says, first, that the nation had been dealt with severely,
and then adds a figure which may additionally represent the grievousness
of its calamities, speaking of it as drunk with the wine of stupor or
astonishment. Even the Hebraist interpreters are not agreed among
themselves as to the meaning of <span id="xxvi.i-p8.1"></span>תרעלה,
*tarelah,* which I have rendered *astonishment.* Several of them
translate it *poison.* But it is evident that the Psalmist alludes to
some kind of poisoned drink, which deprives a person of his senses,
insinuating that the Jews were stupified by their calamities.  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) He would place, in short, before their
eyes the curse of God, which had pressed upon the government of Saul,
and induce them to abandon their obstinate attempts to maintain the
interests of a throne which lay under the divine reprobation.

<span id="xxvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
60:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004)<span id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Thou hast given a banner to them
that fear thee, that it may be displayed before the truth. Selah. **5**.
That thy beloved may be delivered,  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) save with thy right hand, and hear me.
**6**. God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice: I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. **7**. Gilead is mine, and
Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is mine strength of my head; Judah is my
lawgiver.  <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) **8**. Moab is my
washpot; over Edom will I cast my shoe: Palestina, triumph over me.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p7"></span>**4** *Thou hast given a banner to them
that fear thee.* Some interpreters would change the past tense, and read
the words as if they formed a continuation of the prayers which precede
— *O that thou wouldst give a banner to them that fear thee!*  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) But it is better to suppose that David
diverges to the language of congratulation, and, by pointing to the
change which had taken place, calls attention to the evident appearances
of the divine favor. He returns thanks to God, in the name of all the
people, for having raised a standard which might at once cheer their
hearts, and unite their divided numbers.  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) It is a poor and meagre interpretation
which some have attached to the words, *before the truth,* that God
showed favor to the Jews because he had found them true-hearted, and
sound in his cause. Those in the higher ranks had, as is well known,
proved eminently disloyal; the common people had, along with their king,
broken their divine allegiance: from the highest to the lowest in the
kingdom all had conspired to overthrow the gracious purpose of God. It
is evident, then, that David refers to the truth of God as having
emerged in a signal manner, now that the Church began to be restored.
This was an event which had not been expected. Indeed, who did not
imagine, in the desperate circumstances, that God’s promises had
altogether failed? But when David mounted the throne, his truth, which
had been so long obscured, again shone forth. The advantage which ensued
extended to the whole nation; but David intimates that God had a special
respect to his own people, whose deliverance, however few they might be
in number, he particularly contemplated.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p10"></span>He next proceeds to address God again in
prayer; although, I may observe in passing, the words which follow,
*that thy beloved may be delivered,* are read by some in connection with
the preceding verse. I am myself inclined to adopt that construction;
for David would seem to magnify the illustration which had been given of
the divine favor, by adverting to the change which had taken place,
 <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) God having inspirited his
people so far as to display a banner; where, formerly, they were reduced
to a state of extremity, from which it seemed impossible to escape
without a miracle. In the previous verse he calls them *fearers* of the
Lord, and now his *beloved;* implying that, when God rewards such as
fear and worship him, it is always with a respect to his own free love.
And prayer is subjoined: for however great may be the favors which God
has bestowed upon us, modesty and humility will teach us always to pray
that he would perfect what his goodness has begun.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p13"></span>**6.** *God hath spoken in his holiness; I
will rejoice.* Hitherto he has adverted to the proofs which had come
under their own observation, and from which they might easily see that
God had manifested his favor in a manner new, and for many years
unprecedented. He had raised the nation from a state of deep distress to
prosperity, and had changed the aspect of affairs so far, that one
victory was following another in rapid succession. But now he calls
their attention to a point of still greater importance, the divine
promise — the fact that God had previously declared all this with his
own mouth. However numerous and striking may be the practical
demonstrations we receive of the favor of God, we can never recognize
them, except in connection with his previously revealed promise. What
follows, although spoken by David as of himself individually, may be
considered as the language adopted by the people generally, of whom he
was the political head. Accordingly, he enjoins them, provided they were
not satisfied with the sensible proofs of divine favor, to reflect upon
the oracle by which he had been made king in terms the most distinct and
remarkable.  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) He says that God
had spoken *in his holiness,* not *by his Holy Spirit,* as some, with an
over-refinement of interpretation, have rendered it, nor *by* *his holy
place, the sanctuary;*  <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) for we
read of no response having been given from it to the prophet Samuel. It
is best to retain the term *holiness,* as he adverts to the fact of the
truth of the oracle having been confirmed, and the constancy and
efficacy of the promise having been placed beyond all doubt by numerous
proof, of a practical kind. As no room had been left for question upon
the point, he employs this epithet to put honor upon the words which had
been spoken by Samuel. He immediately adds, that this word of God was
the chief ground upon which he placed his trust. It might be true that
he had gained many victories, and that these had tended to encourage his
heart; but he intimates, that no testimony which he had received of this
kind gave him so much satisfaction as the word. This accords with the
general experience of the Lord’s people. Cheered, as they unquestionably
are, by every expression of the divine goodness, still faith must ever
be considered as holding the highest place — as being that which
dissipates their worst sorrows, and quickens them even when dead to a
happiness which is not of this world. Nor does David mean that he merely
rejoiced himself. He includes, in general, all who feared the Lord in
that Kingdom. And now he proceeds to give the sum of the oracle, which
it is observable that he does in such a way as to show, in the very
narration of it, how firmly he believed in its truth: for he speaks of
it as something which admitted of no doubt whatsoever, and boasts that
he would do what God had promised. *I will divide Shechem, he says, and
mete out the valley of Succoth*  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)
The parts which he names are those that were more late of coming into
his possession, and which would appear to have been yet in the hands of
Saul’s son, when this psalm was written. A severe struggle being
necessary for their acquisition, he asserts that, though late of being
subdued, they would certainly be brought under his subjection in due
time, as God had condescended to engage this by his word. So with
*Gilead and Manasseh*  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) As
*Ephraim* was the most populous of all the tribes, he appropriately
terms it the *strength of his head,* that is, of his dominions.  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) To procure the greater credit to the
oracle, by showing that it derived a sanction from antiquity, he adds,
that *Judah* would be *his lawgiver,* or *chief;* which was equivalent
to saying, that the posterity of Abraham could never prosper unless, in
agreeableness to the prediction of the patriarch Jacob, they were
brought under the government of Judah, or of one who was sprung from
that tribe. He evidently alludes to what is narrated by Moses, (<span
id="xxvi.ii-p18.4"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="xxvi.ii-p18.4"></span>,) “The scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come.” The same word
is there used, <span id="xxvi.ii-p18.5"></span>מחוקק, *Mechokek,* or
legislator. It followed, that no government could stand which was not
resident in the tribe of Judah, this being the decree and the good
pleasure of God. The words are more appropriate in the mouth of the
people than of David; and, as already remarked, he does not speak in his
own name, but in that of the Church at large.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p19"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p20"></span>**8** *Moab is my wash-pot* In proceeding
to speak of foreigners, he observes a wide distinction between them and
his own countrymen. The posterity of Abraham he would govern as
brethren, and not as slaves; but it was allowable for him to exercise
greater severities upon the profane and the uncircumcised, in order to
their being brought under forcible subjection. In this he affords no
precedent to conquerors who would inflict lawless oppression upon
nations taken in war; for they want the divine warrant and commission
which David had, invested as he was not only with the authority of a
king, but with the character of an avenger of the Church, especially of
its more implacable enemies, such as had thrown off every feeling of
humanity, and persisted in harassing a people descended from the same
stock with themselves. He remarks, in contempt of the Moabites, that
they would be a vessel in which he should wash his feet, the washing of
the feet being, as is well known, a customary practice in Eastern
nations.  <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) With the same view he
speaks of casting his shoe over Edom. This is expressive of reproach,
and intimates, that as it had once insulted over the chosen people of
God, so now it should be reduced to servitude.  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) What follows concerning Palestina is
ambiguous. By some the words are taken ironically, as if David would
deride the vain boastings of the Philistines, who were constantly
assaulting him with all the petulance which they could command.  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) And the Hebrew verb <span
id="xxvi.ii-p23.2"></span>רוע, *ruang,* though it means in general *to
shout with triumph,* signifies also to make a tumult, as soldiers when
they rush to battle. Others, without supposing any ironical allusion,
take the words as they stand, and interpret them as meaning servile
plaudits; that much and obstinately as they hated his dominion, they
would be forced to hail and applaud him as conqueror. Thus in <span
id="xxvi.ii-p23.3"></span>[Ps
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)<span id="xxvi.ii-p23.3"></span>,
it is said, “The sons of the strangers shall feign submission to me.”
 <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396)

<span id="xxvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
60:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009)<span
id="xxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p2"></span>**9**. Who will bring me into the
fortified city? who will lead me into Edom? **10**. Wilt not thou, O
God! who hadst cast us off, and thou, O God! who didst not go out with
our armies? **11**. Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of
man.  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) **12**. Through God we
shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.

<span id="xxvi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p6"></span>**9** *Who will bring me into the
fortified city?* Anticipating an objection which might be alleged, he
proceeds to state that he looked to God for the accomplishment of what
remained to be done in the capture of the fortified places of his
enemies, and the consolidation of his victories. It might be said, that
as a considerable number continued to resist his claims, the confident
terms which he had used were premature. God, however, had pledged his
word that every nation which set itself in opposition to him would be
brought under his power, and in the face of remaining difficulties and
dangers he advances with certainty of success. By the *fortified city,*
 <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) some understand Rabbah, the
capital of the Moabites. Others, with more probability, consider that
the singular is used for the plural number, and that David alludes in
general to the different cities under protection of which his enemies
were determined to stand out. He declares, that the same God who had
crowned his arms with victory in the open field would lead him on to the
siege of these cities. With a view to prove his legitimate call to the
government, he amplifies a second time the marks of the divine favor
which it had received, by contrasting it with that which preceded. “The
God,” he says, “who had formerly cast us off, and abandoned us to
unsuccessful warfare, will now lay open before me the gates of hostile
cities, and enable me to break through all their fortifications.”

<span id="xxvi.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p9"></span>**11** *Give us help from trouble: for
vain is the help of man.* Again he reverts to the exercise of prayer, or
rather is led to it naturally by the very confidence of hope, which we
have seen that he entertained. He expresses his conviction, that should
God extend his help, it would be sufficient of itself, although no
assistance should be received from any other quarter. Literally it
reads, *Give us help from trouble, and vain is the help of man* “O God,”
as if he had said, “when pleased to put forth thy might, thou needest
none to help thee; and when, therefore, once assured of an interest in
thy favor, there is no reason why we should desire the aid of man. All
other resources of a worldly nature vanish before the brightness of thy
power.” The copulative in the verse, however, has been generally
resolved into the causal particle, and I have not scrupled to follow the
common practice. It were well if the sentiment expressed were
effectually engraven upon our hearts. Why is it almost universally the
case with men that they are either staggered in their resolution, or
buoy themselves up with confidences, vain, because not derived from God,
but just because they have no apprehension of that salvation which he
can extend, which is of itself sufficient, and without which, any
earthly succor is entirely ineffectual? In contrasting the help of God
with that of man, he employs language not strictly correct, for, in
reality, there is no such thing as a power in man to deliver at all.
But, in our ignorance, we conceive as if there were various kinds of
help in the world, and he uses the word in accommodation to our false
ideas. God, in accomplishing our preservation, may use the agency of
man, but he reserves it to himself, as his peculiar prerogative, to
deliver, and will not suffer them to rob him of his glory. The
deliverance which comes to us in this manner through human agency must
properly be ascribed to God. All that David meant to assert is, that
such confidences as are not derived from God are worthless and vain. And
to confirm this position, he declares in the last verse of the psalm,
that as, on the one hand, we can do nothing without him, so, on the
other, we can do all things by his help. Two things are implied in the
expression, *through God we shall do valiantly;*  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) first, that if God withdraw his favor,
any supposed strength which is in man will soon fail; and, on the other
hand, that those whose sufficiency is derived from God only are armed
with courage to overcome every difficulty. To show that it is no mere
half credit which he gives God, he adds, in words which ascribe the
whole work to him, that *it is he who shall tread down our enemies*
Thus, even in our controversy with creatures like ourselves, we are not
at liberty to share the honor of success with God; and must it not be
accounted greater sacrilege still when men set free will in opposition
to divine grace, and speak of their concurring equally with God in the
matter of procuring eternal salvation? Those who arrogate the least
fraction of strength to themselves apart from God, only ruin themselves
through their own pride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc09025.htm#fr_376) <span
id="xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p4"></span> *Michtam* is prefixed to six psalms, of which
this is the last. The others are, the 16th, 56th, 57th, 58th, and 59th.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc09025.htm#fr_377) <span
id="xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p6"></span> What that means it is not easy to ascertain:
from the lily being a six-leafed flower, it has been supposed that the
word may also mean a six-stringed instrument.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc09025.htm#fr_378) <span
id="xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p7"></span> We have here adopted the French version,
which is fuller than the Latin, “<span id="xxvi-p7.1"></span>laquelle
aucuns des Latins a l’imitation des Grecs (car Mesopotamie en Grec
signifie entre les fleuves, pource qu’elle est entre Tigris et
Euphrates) ont nommee Interamnis.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc09025.htm#fr_379) <span
id="xxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p8"></span> It should be eighteen thousand.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc09025.htm#fr_380) <span
id="xxvi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p9"></span> There is another way in which this difference
as to number may be reconciled besides that in which Calvin attempts to
do it. “If the Hebrew numbers here,” says Street, “have been ever
expressed by letters used as numerals, the variation might be accounted
for; <span id="xxvi-p9.1"></span>יב being twelve, and <span
id="xxvi-p9.2"></span>יח being eighteen, and many instances being to be
found of the corruption of <span id="xxvi-p9.3"></span>ח into <span
id="xxvi-p9.4"></span>ב. — See *Dr Kennicott*’*s Dissertation* on <span
id="xxvi-p9.5"></span>[1 Chronicles
11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#000)<span id="xxvi-p9.5"></span>, page
96, where it is plainly shown that many errors in numbers have arisen
from the numbers having been expressed by letters, and one letter having
been mistaken for another.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc09025.htm#fr_381) <span
id="xxvi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p3"></span> The three first verses, which complain of
calamities and distresses, seem not to correspond to the title of the
psalm, from which we would naturally expect the expressions of joy and
praise for the victory obtained. Hare conjectures that these three
verses have accidentally changed place with <span
id="xxvi.i-p3.1"></span>[Ps. 85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#004)<span id="xxvi.i-p3.1"></span>.
Archbishop Secker observes, that this conjecture “is bold, but otherwise
very ingenious and plausible; and this change would make each psalm more
consistent, and reconcile this psalm to its title very well; for the
historical books mention no distress in the war to which the title
refers.” Dr Adam Clarke considers this conjecture well founded; but
others think the apparent discrepancy may be removed by supposing that
the psalm was written after some of the battles of which mention is made
in the title, and that the Author does not restrict himself to those
events, but takes in a wider range, so as to embrace the afflictive
condition both of Israel and Judah during the latter part of Saul’s
life, and the former years of David’s reign.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc09025.htm#fr_382) <span
id="xxvi.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p9"></span> It was customary among the Hebrews to make
their wine stronger and more inebriating by the addition of hotter and
more powerful ingredients; such as honey, spices, <span
id="xxvi.i-p9.2"></span>*defrutum*, (*i* *e*., wine inspissated by
boiling it down to two-thirds or one-half of the quantity,) mandrakes,
opiates, and other drugs. Such were the stupifying ingredients which the
celebrated Helen is represented, in Homer’s Odyssey, as mixing in the
bowl, together with the wine, for her guests oppressed with grief, to
raise their spirits; and such is probably the wine to which there is
here an allusion. The people were stupified by the heavy judgments of
God, like a person stupified with wine which had been rendered more
intoxicating by the deleterious drugs with which it had been mingled.
This highly poetical language is not unfrequently employed to express
the divine judgments: as in <span id="xxvi.i-p9.3"></span>[Isa.
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020)<span id="xxvi.i-p9.3"></span>, and
<span id="xxvi.i-p9.4"></span>[Jer.
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016)<span id="xxvi.i-p9.4"></span>. The
original word <span id="xxvi.i-p9.5"></span>תרעלה, *tarelah*, means
properly *trembling*, from the verb <span id="xxvi.i-p9.6"></span>רעל,
*raal*, from which the English word *reel* is perhaps derived. We might
therefore read, “the wine of trembling.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc09025.htm#fr_383) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxvi.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, que
tes bien aimez soyont delivrez.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, let thy beloved be
delivered.”

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc09025.htm#fr_384) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxvi.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou,
gouverneur.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, governor.”

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc09025.htm#fr_385) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p8"></span> Boothroyd gives a translation similar to
this, and thinks that this is required by the connection. But see note
3, p. 397.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc09025.htm#fr_386) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p9"></span> Hamer has given a very ingenious
explanation of this passage, derived from the manners of the East. “It
seems,” says he, “that the modern Eastern people have looked upon the
giving them a *banner* as a more sure pledge of protection ‘than that
given by words.’ So Albertus Aquensis tell us, that when Jerusalem was
taken in 1099, about three hundred Saracens got upon the roof of a very
lofty building, and earnestly begged for quarter, but could not be
induced, by any promises of safety, to come down, until they had
received the banner of Tancred \[one of the chiefs of the Crusade army\]
as a pledge of life. It did not, indeed, avail them, as that historian
observes; for their behavior occasioned such indignation that they were
destroyed to a man. The event showed the faithlessness of these zealots,
whom no solemnities could bind; but the Saracens surrendering themselves
upon the delivery of a standard to them, proves in what a strong light
they looked upon the giving them a banner; since it induced them to
trust it when they would not trust any promises. Perhaps the delivery of
a banner was anciently esteemed, in like manner, an obligation to
protect, and the Psalmist might consider it in this light, when, upon a
victory gained over the Syrians and Edomites, after the public affairs
of Israel had been in a bad state, he says, ‘Thou hast showed thy people
hard things, etc.; thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee.’
Though thou didst for a time give up thine Israel into the hands of
their enemies, thou hast now given them an assurance of thy having
received them under thy protection.” — *Observations*, *volume* 3, pp.
496, 497. Harmer supposes that our translation, which speaks of *a
banner displayed*, is inaccurate; observing, that it is most probable
that the Israelites anciently used only a spear, properly ornamented to
distinguish it from a common one — a supposition which he founds on the
fact, that a very long spear, covered all over with silver, and having a
ball of gold on the top, was the standard of the Egyptian princes at the
time of the Crusade wars, and was carried before their armies. He
proposes to read, “Thou hast given an ensign or standard \[<span
id="xxvi.ii-p9.1"></span>נם, *nes*\] to them that fear thee, that it may
be lifted up.” But Parkhurst considers the radical meaning of the Hebrew
word <span id="xxvi.ii-p9.2"></span>נם, *nes*, to be *a banner* or
*ensign*, from its *waving* or *streaming* in the wind; in other words,
*a streamer* See his Lexicon on <span id="xxvi.ii-p9.3"></span>נם.
Mant’s explanation of the phrase is similar to that of Calvin. “In this
place,” says he, “it may mean no more than that God had united his
people under one head, and so enabled them to meet their enemies by
repairing to the standard of their sovereign.” “The banner, or standard
of an army,” says Walford, “is the object of constant attention to
soldiers: so long as it is safe, and elevated, so long courage, hope,
and energy, are maintained. The poet uses this symbol to express his
hope that God Himself would be the source of their valor and success, in
order that *the truth*, the promise made to David, might be
accomplished.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc09025.htm#fr_387) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p11"></span> The Latin is here concise — “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p11.1"></span>Nam in ipsa varietate David magnitudinem
gratiae commendat.” Accordingly, the French version amplifies the
passage — “<span id="xxvi.ii-p11.2"></span>Car David en proposant la
diversite et la changement d’un temps a l’autre magnifie,” etc.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc09025.htm#fr_388) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xxvi.ii-p14.1"></span>Cum
praeclaris elogiis.” — *Lat*. Amplified in the French version as
follows: — “<span id="xxvi.ii-p14.2"></span>l’ornant de titres
excellens, et lui faisant des promesses authentiques.”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc09025.htm#fr_389) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p15"></span> This is the reading of Mudge, Street,
Archbishop Secker, and Morrison. “Should not the word be read, *in his
sanctuary*? whence the divine oracles were issued forth. David, having
received a favorable answer, perhaps by Urim and Thummim, delivers
himself in a strain of the fullest confidence of victory over his
enemies.” — *Dimock*.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc09025.htm#fr_390) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p16"></span> Shechem lay in Samaria, and, therefore,
by it the whole of Samaria may be intended. The valley of Succoth, or
booths, received its name from Jacob’s making booths, and feeding his
cattle there. (See <span id="xxvi.ii-p16.1"></span>[Gen.
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)<span id="xxvi.ii-p16.1"></span>.)
It lay beyond the Jordan, and it may be employed to designate the whole
of that district of country. Though Samaria, and the country beyond the
Jordan, were now in the hands of the enemy, yet David anticipates the
time when he would gain complete and absolute possession of them, which
he expresses by *dividing*, and *meting them out*. The allusion is to
the dividing and measuring out of land; and it was a part of the power
of a king to distribute his kingdom into cities and provinces, and to
place judges and magistrates over them.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc09025.htm#fr_391) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p17"></span> Gilead and Manasseh were beyond the
Jordan. The tribe of Gad, which was in Gilead, was distinguished for its
warlike valor.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc09025.htm#fr_392) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p18"></span> This tribe was also distinguished for its
valor. (<span id="xxvi.ii-p18.1"></span>[De
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)<span id="xxvi.ii-p18.1"></span>;
<span id="xxvi.ii-p18.2"></span>[Ps
78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)<span id="xxvi.ii-p18.2"></span>;
see also <span id="xxvi.ii-p18.3"></span>[Ge
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019)<span
id="xxvi.ii-p18.3"></span>.)

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc09025.htm#fr_393) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p21"></span> This office of washing the feet was in
the East commonly performed by slaves, and the meanest of the family, as
appears from what Abigail said to David when he took her to wife,
“Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord,” <span id="xxvi.ii-p21.1"></span>[1Sa
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041)<span id="xxvi.ii-p21.1"></span>;
and from the fact of our Savior washing his disciples’ feet, to give
them an example of humility, <span id="xxvi.ii-p21.2"></span>[Joh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)<span id="xxvi.ii-p21.2"></span>.
The word <span id="xxvi.ii-p21.3"></span>νιπτὴρ, used in this last
passage, signifies in general *a washing pot*, and is put for the word
<span id="xxvi.ii-p21.4"></span>ποδονιπτρον, the term which the Greeks,
in strict propriety of speech, applied to a vessel for washing the feet.
As this office was servile, so the vessels employed for this purpose
were a mean part of household stuff. Gataker and Le Clerc illustrate
this text from an anecdote related by Herodotus, concerning Amasis, king
of Egypt, who expressed the meanness of his own origin by comparing
himself to a pot for washing the feet in, (Herod., Lib. 2, c. 172.)
When, therefore, it is said, ‘Moab is my washing-pot,’ the complete and
servile subjection of Moab to David is strongly marked. This is
expressed not by comparing Moab to a slave who performs the lowest
offices, as presenting to his master the basin for washing his feet, but
by comparing him to the mean utensil itself. See <span
id="xxvi.ii-p21.5"></span>[2 Sam. 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002),
[1 Chr. 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#002),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#013)<span id="xxvi.ii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc09025.htm#fr_394) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p21.6"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p22"></span> Edom or Idumea was inhabited by the
Edomites, or posterity of Edom, that is, Esau, (the elder brother of
Jacob,) who, on account of his profanity in selling his birthright for a
mess of red pottage — called in Hebrew *Edom* — had this name imposed
upon him to the perpetual disgrace of himself and his posterity, (<span
id="xxvi.ii-p22.1"></span>[Gen. 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030),
[Gen. 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009), [Heb.
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016)<span
id="xxvi.ii-p22.1"></span>.) The expression, “Over Edom will I cast my
shoe,” has been differently explained by interpreters. Some, as Gataker
and Martin, read, “To Edom will I cast my shoe;” and suppose that the
reference is to the custom which then prevailed, of the master employing
his meanest servant to untie, take off, and cleanse his shoes, (<span
id="xxvi.ii-p22.2"></span>[Mt
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="xxvi.ii-p22.2"></span>;
<span id="xxvi.ii-p22.3"></span>[Lu
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span id="xxvi.ii-p22.3"></span>;)
and that David intimates, that the Edomites would become his menial
slaves, who would perform to him the lowest offices. “And the prophet,”
observes Martin, “uses the word *throw*, which marks an action done in a
passionate and angry manner, in allusion to the circumstance that
masters, when employing their servants with whom they are displeased to
take off their shoes, hold out their feet to them with violence, as if
they would thrust their feet against them.” The LXX. and Vulgate read,
“will extend my shoe.” And Bishop Horne is of opinion, that the meaning
is, “extending his shoe,” that is to say, putting his feet upon them;
and this, it is well known, was the manner in which Eastern conquerors
were wont to treat their captives. But there is another ancient custom
to which others suppose the passage refers. The ancients were wont to
throw their shoes and sandals, when soiled with dirt, into some obscure
corner before they sat down to meat, and many might possibly have some
mean place in their houses into which they commonly threw them; and,
therefore, the throwing of the shoe *over* or *on* Edom might mean, as
Bucer expounds it, “Edom will be as the place into which I cast my
shoe.” But whatever may be the precise allusion, the meaning conveyed
undoubtedly is, that David would make a complete conquest of Edom, that
he would reduce it to the lowest subjection. And such was actually the
case, as we learn from <span id="xxvi.ii-p22.4"></span>[2Sa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014)<span id="xxvi.ii-p22.4"></span>.
“Abu Walid would have <span id="xxvi.ii-p22.5"></span>נעל here to
signify *a fetter*, — ‘I will cast my fetter or chain on him:’ and so
Kimchi, in his roots; though in his comment here he interpret it in the
notion of a shoe.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc09025.htm#fr_395) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p22.6"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p23"></span> “The apostrophe to Philistia is the
language of irony and of defiance. — ‘Philistia, triumph thou over me!’
as if he had said, ‘Thou hast been used to insult and triumph over me;
but circumstances are now reversed, and it is my turn to shout and
triumph over thee.’ See <span id="xxvi.ii-p23.1"></span>[Ps
108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)<span
id="xxvi.ii-p23.1"></span>.” *Williams*’ *Cottage Bible*.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc09025.htm#fr_396) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p24"></span> “*Philistia*, *be thou glad of me*,
rather, *Philistia*, *welcome we* (as thy conqueror) *with shouts*; a
hard task for the vanquished to perform.” — *Cresswell* Bishop Horne
reads, “Over Philistia give a shout of triumph.” Horsley reads, “Over
Philistia is my shout of triumph.” “I take,” says he, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p24.1"></span>התריעעי for a noun substantive, with the
pronoun of the first person suffixed.”

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc09025.htm#fr_397) <span
id="xxvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxvi.iii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
la salut que l’homme peut apporter.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, the help
which man can bring.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc09025.htm#fr_398) <span
id="xxvi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p7"></span> Literally, “the strong city,” or “the
city of strength.” The Chaldee makes it Tyre, the capital of Phoenicia.
Mudge and others think Petra, the capital of Idumea, is meant. Viewed as
referring to that remarkable city, which was hewn out of the rock, and
deemed impregnable, (<span id="xxvi.iii-p7.1"></span>[Ob
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003)<span id="xxvi.iii-p7.1"></span>,)
and with which Burckhardt, Laborde, Stephens, and other modern
travelers, have made us so minutely acquainted; the language of the
Psalmist is very appropriate, illustrating the strength of his faith,
and magnifying the greatness of the divine aid. *Who will bring me into
the fortified city*? it is impossible for me, by my own strength, or by
mere human aid, to occupy this stronghold, unless God interpose in my
behalf, assist, and prosper my attempts.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc09025.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xxvi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p10"></span> Street supposes that this psalm was
composed before the battle of Helam, which is recorded in <span
id="xxvi.iii-p10.1"></span>[1Ch
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#016)<span
id="xxvi.iii-p10.1"></span>, where David beat the Syrians of Mesopotamia
and the Syrians of Zobah; and, farther, that this psalm might have been
sung by the armies of Israel when they were marching out to that battle,
triumphantly commemorating their former victories, and avowing their
hopes of gaining another by the help of the Almighty. On this verse he
observes: “it was a constant practice among the bravest nations of the
Greeks, for the troops to advance to battle chanting some kind of song.”
And, after quoting some lines which were sung by the Spartan soldiery,
he adds, “The Grecian poet avails himself of the love of glory, and the
ties of domestic affection, to animate his troops; but the Hebrew makes
use of the more powerful stimulus of religious enthusiasm.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 61](cc09026)
