[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09018)  [Next](cc09020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>PSALM 54

<span id="xx-p2"></span>David has recorded in this psalm the prayers
which he offered up to God when he heard of his having been betrayed by
the Ziphites, and was reduced to a situation of extreme danger. It
cannot fail to impress us with a high idea of his indomitable faith,
thus to find him calling upon the name of God in the immediate prospect
of death.

<span id="xx-p3"></span>To the chief musician on Neginoth. A Psalm of
David for instruction: when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Doth not
David hide himself with us?

<span id="xx-p4"></span>We know from the sacred history that David
frequently concealed himself in that part of the wilderness which
adjoined to the Ziphites. It appears (<span id="xx-p4.1"></span>[1 Sam.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019.md), [1 Sam.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001)<span id="xx-p4.1"></span>.md) that
he was betrayed by them on two different occasions; and he takes notice
of the particular circumstances in which the psalm was written, to teach
us that we should never despair of divine help even in the worst
situation. Surrounded as he was by hostile troops, and hemmed in on
every side by apparently inevitable destruction, we cannot but admire
the rare and heroical intrepidity which he displayed in committing
himself, by prayer, to the Almighty. It might have appeared just as
credible that God could bring the dead out of the grave, as that he
could preserve him in such circumstances; for it seemed impossible that
he should escape from the cave where he was concealed with his life.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
54:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1**. Save me, O God! by thy name, and judge
me by thy strength. **2**. Hear my prayer, O God! give ear to the words
of my mouth. **3**. For strangers are risen up against me, and the
terrible ones have sought after my soul they have not set God before
them. Selah.

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span><span id="xx.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Save me, O God!* As David was at this
time placed beyond the reach of human assistance, he must be understood
as praying to be saved by the *name* and *the power of God,* In an
emphatical sense, or by these in contradistinction to the usual means of
deliverance. Though all help must ultimately come from God, there are
ordinary methods by which he generally extends it. When these fail, and
every earthly stay is removed, he must then take the work into his own
hands. It was in such a situation that David here fled to the saints’
last asylum, and sought to be saved by a miracle of divine power. By
appealing, in the second part of the verse, to God as his judge, he
asserts his uprightness. And it must strike us all, that in asking the
divine protection it is indispensably prerequisite we should be
convinced of the goodness of our cause, as it would argue the greatest
profanity in any to expect that God should patronise iniquity. David was
encouraged to pray for deliverance by the goodness of his cause and his
consciousness of integrity; nor did he entertain a single doubt, that on
representing this to God he would act the part of his defender, and
punish the cruelty and treachery of his enemies.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span><span id="xx.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**2.** *Hear my prayer, O God!* The language
is expressive of his earnestness. He was led to this fervor of
supplication by the extremity of his present circumstances, which is
alluded to in the following verse, where he complains of being
surrounded by men fierce, barbarous, and unrestrained by a sense of
religion. There was no necessity for his informing God of a fact which
was already known to him; but he disburdens his own heart by venting the
cause of his fear and disquietude. By calling his enemies *strangers,*
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) he seems to refer to their
barbarity, whether he applied the name to the Ziphites only, or, in
general, to the whole army of Saul. Others consider him, in this term,
to advert to their degeneracy as children of Abraham; and it is true
that the Jews are repeatedly stigmatised by the prophets under this form
of expression, when they had cast themselves out of the Church of God by
their profligacy or impiety. But in this passage it seems to be used in
a different sense. As even enemies are accustomed, in some measure, to
respect the ties of kindred and relationship, David would point out to
us the monstrous inhumanity of the men who now surrounded him, by the
fact that they assaulted him as *strangers,* as persons who had never
known him, or as if he had been born in some distant part of the world.
He calls them, also, *terrible ones,*  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) *not mighty,* or *powerful ones,* as
some have rendered the word; for that falls short of the meaning
intended by David, which was, that they were divested of all humanity,
and ready to rush upon him like wild beasts. Hence the fear with which
he resorted to the protection of God. He adds, that *they sought after
his soul,* to denote that nothing would content their insatiable cruelty
but his life. And the better to express the unbridled nature of their
fury, he tells us that they had no respect to God. The only thing which
could be supposed, in the circumstances, to act as a restraint upon
their minds, was the consideration of there being a judge in heaven to
whom they were amenable for their conduct; and being insensible to this,
what moderation could be expected of them?

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
54:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004.md)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Behold! God is my helper; the Lord is
with them that uphold my soul. **5**. He shall reward evil unto mine
enemies: cut them off in thy truth. **6**. I will freely sacrifice unto
thee: I will praise thy name, O God! for it is good. **7**. For he hath
delivered me out of all trouble; and mine eye hath seen upon my
adversaries.  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span><span id="xx.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *Behold! God is my helper* Such
language as this may show us that David did not direct his prayers at
random into the air, but offered them in the exercise of a lively faith.
There is much force in the demonstrative adverb. He points, as it were,
with the finger, to that God who stood at his side to defend him; and
was not this an amazing illustration of the power with which faith can
surmount all obstacles, and glance, in a moment, from the depths of
despair to the very throne of God? He was a fugitive amongst the dens of
the earth, and even there in hazard of his life — how, then, could he
speak of God as being near to him? He was pressed down to the very mouth
of the grave; and how could he recognize the gracious presence of God?
He was trembling in the momentary expectation of being destroyed; and
how is it possible that he can triumph in the certain hope that Divine
help will presently be extended to him? In numbering God amongst his
defenders, we must not suppose that he assigns him a mere common rank
amongst the men who supported his cause, which would have been highly
derogatory to his glory. He means that God took part with those, such as
Jonathan and others, who were interested in his welfare. These might be
few in number, possessed of little power, and cast down with fears; but
he believed that, under the guidance and protection of the Almighty,
they would prove superior to his enemies: or, perhaps, we may view him
as referring, in the words, to his complete destitution of all human
defenders, and asserting that the help of God would abundantly
compensate for all.  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span><span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**5.** *He shall reward evil unto mine
enemies* As the verb <span id="xx.ii-p9.1"></span>ישיב*, yashib,* may be
rendered *he shall cause to return,*  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) it seems to point not only at the
punishment, but the kind of punishment, which would be awarded to his
enemies, in the recoiling of their wicked machinations upon their own
heads. Some give an optative signification to the verb, understanding
the words to express a wish or prayer; but I see no reason why it should
not be taken strictly in the future tense, and imagine that David
intimates his certain expectation that this favor, which he had already
prayed for, would be granted. It is by no means uncommon to find the
prayers of the Psalmist intersected with sentences of this kind,
inserted for the purpose of stimulating his faith, as here, where he
announces the general truth, that God is the righteous judge who will
recompense the wicked. With the view of confirming his hopes, he adverts
particularly to *the truth* of God; for nothing can support us in the
hour of temptation, when the Divine deliverance may be long delayed, but
a firm persuasion that God is true, and that he cannot deceive us by his
divine promises. His confidence of obtaining his request was grounded
upon the circumstance that God could no more deny his word than deny
himself.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span><span id="xx.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *I will freely sacrifice unto thee.*
According to his usual custom, he engages, provided deliverance should
be granted, to feel a grateful sense of it; and there can be no doubt
that he here promises also to return thanks to God, in a formal manner,
when he should enjoy an opportunity of doing so. Though God principally
looks to the inward sentiment of the heart, that would not excuse the
neglect of such rites as the Law had prescribed. He would testify his
sense of the favor which he received, in the manner common to all the
people of God, by sacrifices, and be thus the means of exciting others
to their duty by his example. And he would *sacrifice freely:* by which
he does not allude to the circumstance, that sacrifices of thanksgiving
were at the option of worshippers, but to the alacrity and cheerfulness
with which he would pay his vow when he had escaped his present dangers.
The generality of men promise largely to God so long as they are under
the present pressure of affliction, but are no sooner relieved than they
relapse into that carelessness which is natural to them, and forget the
goodness of the Lord. But David engages to sacrifice freely, and in
another manner than the hypocrite, whose religion is the offspring of
servility and constraint. We are taught by the passage that, in coming
into the presence of God, we cannot look for acceptance unless we bring
to his service a willing mind. The last clause of this verse, and the
verse which follows, evidently refer to the time when the Psalmist had
obtained the deliverance which he sought. The whole psalm, it is true,
must have been written after his deliverance; but up to this point, it
is to be considered as recording the form of prayer which he used when
yet exposed to the danger. We are now to suppose him relieved from his
anxieties, and subjoining a fresh expression of his gratitude: nor is it
improbable that, he refers to mercies which he had experienced at other
periods of his history, and which were recalled to his memory by the one
more immediately brought under our notice in the preceding verses; so
that he is to be understood as declaring, in a more general sense, that
*the name of God was good, and that he had been delivered out of all
trouble* I have already adverted, in a former psalm, (<span
id="xx.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006.md)<span
id="xx.ii-p12.1"></span>,) to the sense in which the righteous are said
*to see* the destruction of their enemies. It is such a sight of the
event as is accompanied with joy and comfort; and should any inquire,
whether it is allowable for the children of God to feel pleasure in
witnessing the execution of Divine judgments upon the wicked, the answer
is obvious, that all must depend upon the motive by which they are
influenced. If their satisfaction proceed in any measure from the
gratification of a depraved feeling, it must be condemned; but there is
certainly a pure and unblameable delight which we may feel in looking
upon such illustrations of the divine justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc09019.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span> For <span id="xx.i-p8.1"></span>זרים,
*zairim*, *strangers*, upwards of twenty MSS. have <span
id="xx.i-p8.2"></span>זדים, *zoidim*, *the proud*; and this is the sense
given by the Chaldee Paraphrast. As the Ziphites were Jews, and of the
same tribe with David, (<span id="xx.i-p8.3"></span>[Jos
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024)<span id="xx.i-p8.3"></span>,.md)
and therefore not, strictly speaking, “strangers,” some think that *the
proud* is the true reading. But the Ziphites, as our Author justly
observes, may be called “strangers,” because they acted towards David
the part of strangers and enemies, in seeking to deliver him into the
hands of his unjust and cruel persecutor, Saul.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc09019.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="xx.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span> Ainsworth reads, “Daunting tyrants.”
“*Terrible dismayers*, as Saul and his retinue, whose terror daunted
many. See <span id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>[Ps
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018.md)<span id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc09019.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> The translators of our English Bible have
supposed an ellipsis here; and hence they supply “only desire.” Calvin,
in his translation of the verse, makes no supplement, but understands it
in a similar sense, “My eye hath seen punishment upon my adversaries;”
just as it is said in <span id="xx.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
91:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#008.md)<span id="xx.ii-p3.1"></span>,
“With thine eyes shalt thou behold and see *the reward* of the wicked.”
But if we read the words literally, without any supplement, and as they
are rendered by the LXX. and the Syriac, “My eyes beheld, or looked upon
mine enemies,” they will be susceptible of a very good and natural
meaning. David’s enemies were not at this time destroyed; but Saul, when
he had reached the farther side of the mountain where David lay
concealed, and was about to seize his victim, having heard that the
Philistines invaded the land, hastened in confusion to repel the
invaders. The meaning of David’s language, therefore, may be, that he
was so near Saul and his army as to behold them marching away, which may
be easily conceived, when it is considered that “Saul went on this side
of the mountain Maon, and David and his men on that side of the
mountains” (<span id="xx.ii-p3.2"></span>[1Sa
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026)<span id="xx.ii-p3.2"></span>..md)

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc09019.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span> The phrase, <span
id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>אדני בסמכי, *Adonai besomkey*, which Calvin
renders, “The Lord is with them that uphold,” is translated by Hammond,
“The Lord among the sustainers;” and he remarks, that this form of
expression, which is not unusual among the Hebrews, signifies no more
than “God is my upholder; not one of many upholders, but my only
upholder.” Thus, when Jephtha (<span id="xx.ii-p7.2"></span>[Jud
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#035)<span id="xx.ii-p7.2"></span>.md)
tells his daughter, “Thou art among the troublers of me,” or “one of
them that trouble me,” the meaning simply is, that she very much grieved
and troubled him. So <span id="xx.ii-p7.3"></span>[Ps
55:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#018.md)<span id="xx.ii-p7.3"></span>,
“There were many with me;” *i* *e*., “God was with me,” which is as good
as the greatest multitude. This is the sense in which the learned
Castellio understands the passage, rendering it, “<span
id="xx.ii-p7.4"></span>Dominus is est qui mihi vitam sustentat;” “The
Lord is he who sustains my life;” and he defends it by the above and
like arguments. With this the Septuagint agrees: “<span
id="xx.ii-p7.5"></span>Κυριος ἀντιλήπτωρ τὢς ψνχὢς μου,” “The Lord is
the defender of my soul;” and also the Syriac, Arabic, and Aethiopic.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc09019.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span> French and Skinner read, “May their
mischief return upon those who watch me;” and observe, “that *their
mischief* in Hebrew is *the evil*, and that the meaning is, the very
evil which they devised against me. Compare <span
id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ps 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016.md)<span
id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 55](cc09020.md)
