[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09023)  [Next](cc09025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>PSALM 59

<span id="xxv-p2"></span>The title, which immediately follows, informs
us upon what occasion this psalm was written, which bears a considerable
resemblance to the preceding. He begins by insisting upon the injustice
of that cruel hostility which his enemies showed to him, and which he
had done nothing to deserve. His complaint is followed up by prayer to
God for help; and afterwards, as his hopes revive in the exercise of
devout meditation, he proceeds to prophesy their calamitous destruction.
At the close, he engages to preserve a grateful remembrance of his
deliverance, and to praise the goodness of God.

<span id="xxv-p3"></span>To the chief musician, Al-taschith, \[destroy
not,\] Michtam of David,when Saul sent, and they watched the house to
kill him.

<span id="xxv-p4"></span>The incident in David’s history, here referred
to, is one with which we are all familiar, (<span
id="xxv-p4.1"></span>[1Sa 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxv-p4.1"></span>.) Besieged in his own house by a troop of
soldiers, and having no opportunity of egress from the city, every
avenue to which was taken possession of by Saul’s guards, it seemed
impossible that he could escape with his life. He was indebted
instrumentally for his deliverance to the ingenuity of his wife, but it
was from the divine goodness that he looked for safety. Michal may have
contrived the artifice which deceived the soldiers sent by her father,
but he never could have been saved except through the wonderful
preservation of God. We are told in the words of the title that his
house was watched, and this amounts, in the circumstances, to its being
said that he was shut up to certain destruction; for the emissaries of
Saul were sent with orders not only for his apprehension, but his death.

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
59:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001.md)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my
God! lift me up from the reach of them that rise up against me. **2**.
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.
**3**. For, lo! they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered
against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Jehovah: **4**.
They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to hasten for my
help, and behold. **5**. And thou, O Jehovah, God of Hosts! the God of
Israel, awake to visit all the nations: be not merciful to any wicked
transgressors. Selah.

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span><span id="xxv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span>**1** *Deliver me from mine enemies, O my
God!* He insists upon the strength and violence of his enemies, with the
view of exciting his mind to greater fervor in the duty of prayer. These
he describes as *rising up* against him, in which expression he alludes
not simply to the audacity or fierceness of their assaults, but to the
eminent superiority of power which they possessed; and yet he asks that
he may be lifted up on high, as it were, above the reach of this
over-swelling inundation. His language teaches us that we should believe
in the ability of God to deliver us even upon occasions of emergency,
when our enemies have an overwhelming advantage. In the verse which
follows, while he expresses the extremity to which he was reduced, he
adverts at the same time to the injustice and cruelty of his
persecutors. Immediately afterwards, he connects the two grounds of his
complaint together: on the one hand, his complete helplessness under the
danger, and, on the other, the undeserved nature of the assaults from
which he suffered. I have already repeatedly observed, that our
confidence in our applications to a throne of grace will be proportional
to the degree in which we are conscious of integrity; for we cannot fail
to feel greater liberty in pleading a cause which, in such a case, is
the cause of God himself. He is the vindicator of justice, the patron of
the righteous cause everywhere, and those who oppress the innocent must
necessarily rank themselves amongst his enemies. David accordingly
founds his first plea upon his complete destitution of all earthly means
of help, exposed as he was to plots on every side, and attacked by a
formidable conspiracy. His second he rests upon a declaration of
innocency. It may be true that afflictions are sent by God to his people
as a chastisement for their sins, but, so far as Saul was concerned,
David could justly exonerate himself from all blame, and takes this
occasion of appealing to God on behalf of his integrity, which lay under
suspicion from the base calumnies of men. They might pretend it, but he
declares that they could charge him with no crime nor fault. Yet,
groundless as their hostility was, he tells us that they *ran,* were
unremitting in their activity, with no other view than to accomplish the
ruin of their victim.

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span><span id="xxv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span>**4.** *Awake to hasten for my help, and
behold.* In using this language, he glances at the eagerness with which
his enemies, as he had already said, were pressing upon him, and states
his desire that God would show the same haste in extending help as they
did in seeking his destruction. With the view of conciliating the divine
favor, he once more calls upon God to be the witness and judge of his
cause, adding, *and behold* The expression is one which savours at once
of faith and of the infirmity of the flesh. In speaking of God, as if
his eyes had been hitherto shut to the wrongs which he had suffered, and
needed now for the first time to be opened for the discovery of them, he
expresses himself according to the weakness of our human apprehension.
On the other hand, in calling upon God *to behold* his cause, he shows
his faith by virtually acknowledging that nothing was hid from his
providential cognisance. Though David may use language of this
description, suited to the infirmity of sense, we must not suppose him
to have doubted before this time that his afflictions, his innocence,
and his wrongs, were known to God. Now, however, he lays the whole
before God for examination and decision.

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span>He prosecutes the same prayer with still
greater vehemency in the verse which succeeds. He addresses God under
new titles, calling him *Jehovah, God of Hosts, and the God of Israel,*
the first of which appellations denotes the immensity of his power, and
the second the special care which he exerts over the Church, and over
all his people. The manner in which the pronoun is introduced, *and
Thou, etc.,* is emphatical, denoting that it was as impossible for God
to lay aside the office of a judge as to deny himself, or divest himself
of his being. He calls upon him *to visit all the nations:* for although
the cause which he now submitted was of no such universal concernment,
the wider exercise of judgment would necessarily include the lesser; and
on the supposition of heathens and foreigners being subjected to the
judgment of God, it followed that a still more certain and heavy doom
would be awarded to enemies within the pale of the Church, who
persecuted the saints under the guise of brethren, and overthrew those
laws which were of divine appointment. The opposition which David
encountered might not embrace *all nations;* but if these were
judicially visited by God, it was absurd to imagine that those within
the Church would be the only enemies who should escape with impunity. In
using these words, it is probable also that he may have been struggling
with a temptation with which he was severely assailed, connected with
the number of his enemies, for these did not consist merely of three or
four abandoned individuals. They formed a great multitude; and he rises
above them all by reflecting that God claims it as his prerogative, not
only to reduce a few refractory persons to submission, but to punish the
wickedness of the whole world. If the judgments of God extended to the
uttermost parts of the earth, there was no reason why he should be
afraid of his enemies, who, however numerous, formed but a small section
of the human race. We shall shortly see, however, that the expression
admits of being applied without impropriety to the Israelites, divided,
as they were, into so many tribes or peoples. In the words which follow,
when he deprecates the extension of God’s mercy to wicked transgressors,
we must understand him as referring to the reprobate, whose sin was of a
desperate character. We must also remember, what has been already
observed, that in such prayers he was not influenced by mere private
feelings, and these of a rancorous, distempered, and inordinate
description. Not only did he know well that those of whom he speaks with
such severity were already doomed to destruction, but he is here
pleading the common cause of the Church, and this under the influence of
the pure and well-regulated zeal of the Spirit. He therefore affords no
precedent to such as resent private injuries by vending curses on those
who have inflicted them.

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
59:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**6**. They will return at evening; they
will make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) **7**. Behold, they will prate  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) with their mouth; swords are in their
lips for who (say they) will hear? **8**. But thou, O Jehovah! shalt
laugh at them; thou shalt have all the nations in derision. **9**. I
will put in trust his strength with thee;  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md) for God is my fortress.

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span>**6.** *They will return at evening.* He
compares his enemies to famished and furious dogs which hunger impels to
course with endless circuits in every direction, and under this figure
accuses their insatiable fierceness, shown in the ceaseless activity to
which they were instigated by the desire of mischief. He says that *they
return in the evening,* to intimate, not that they rested at other
times, but were indefatigable in pursuing their evil courses. If they
came no speed through the day, yet the night would find them at their
work. The barking of dogs aptly expressed as a figure the formidable
nature of their assaults.

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span>In the verse which follows, he describes
their fierceness. The expression, *prating,* or belching out with their
mouth, denotes that they proclaimed their infamous counsels openly, and
without affecting concealment. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxv.ii-p10.1"></span>נבע, *nabang,* means, metaphorically, *to
speak,* but properly, it signifies *to gush out,*  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) and here denotes more than simply
speaking. He would inform us, that not content with plotting the
destruction of the innocent secretly amongst themselves, they published
their intentions abroad, and boasted of them. Accordingly, when he adds,
that *swords were in their lips,* he means that they breathed out
slaughter, and that every word they spoke was a sword to slay the
oppressed. He assigns as the cause of their rushing to such excess of
*wickedness,* that they had no reason to apprehend disgrace. It may be
sufficiently probable, that David adverts here, as in many other places,
to the gross stupidity of the wicked, who, in order to banish fear from
their minds, conceive of God as if he were asleep in heaven; but I am of
opinion that he rather traces the security with which they prosecuted
their counsels, and openly proclaimed them, to the fact, that they had
long ere now been in possession of the uncontrolled power of inflicting
injury. They had succeeded so completely in deceiving the people, and
rendering David odious by their calumnies, that none had the courage to
utter a word in his defense. Nay, the more atrociously that any man
might choose to persecute this victim of distress, from no other motive
than to secure the good graces of the king, the more did he rise in
estimation as a true friend to the commonwealth.

<span id="xxv.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p13"></span>**8.** *But thou, O Jehovah! shalt laugh at
them.* In the face of all this opposition, David only rises to greater
confidence. When he says that God would *laugh* at his enemies, he
employs a figure which is well fitted to enhance the power of God,
suggesting that, when the wicked have perfected their schemes to the
uttermost, God can, without any effort, and, as it were, in sport,
dissipate them all. No sooner does God connive at their proceedings,
than their pride and insolence take occasion to manifest themselves: for
they forget that even when he seems to have suspended operation, he
needs but nod, and his judgments shall be executed. David, accordingly,
in contempt of his adversaries, tells them that God was under no
necessity to make extensive preparations, but, at the moment when he saw
fit to make retribution, would, by a mere play of his power, annihilate
them all. He in this manner conveys a severe rebuke to that blind
infatuation which led them to boast so intemperately of their own
powers, and to imagine that God was slumbering in the heavens. In the
close of the verse, mention is made of *all nations,* to intimate that
though they might equal the whole world in numbers, they would prove a
mere mockery with all their influence and resources. Or the words may be
read — Even As *thou hast all the nations in derision.* One thing is
obvious, that David ridicules the vain boasting of his enemies, who
thought no undertaking too great to be accomplished by their numbers.

<span id="xxv.ii-p14"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p15"></span>**9** *I will intrust his strength to thee*
The obscurity of this passage has led to a variety of opinions amongst
commentators. The most forced interpretation which has been proposed is
that which supposes a change of person in the relative *his,* as if
David, in speaking of himself, employed the third person instead of the
first, *I will intrust my strength to thee* The Septuagint, and those
who adopt this interpretation, have probably been led to it by the
insufficient reason, that in the last verse of the psalm it is said, *I
will ascribe with praises* my *strength to thee,* or, my *strength is
with thee, I will sing, etc.* But on coming to that part of the psalm,
we will have occasion to see that David there, with propriety, asserts
of himself what he here in another sense asserts of Saul. There can be
no doubt, therefore, that the relative is to be here understood of Saul.
Some consider that the first words of the sentence should be read apart
from the others — *strength is his* — meaning that Saul had the evident
superiority in strength, so as at the present to be triumphant. Others
join the two parts of the sentence, and give this explanation: Although
thou art for the present moment his strength, in so far as thou dost
sustain and preserve him on the throne, yet I will continue to hope,
until thou hast raised me to the kingdom, according to thy promise. But
those seem to come nearest the meaning of the Psalmist who construe the
words as one continuous sentence — *I will put in trust his strength
with thee;* meaning that, however intemperately Saul might boast of his
strength, he would rest satisfied in the assurance that there was a
secret divine providence restraining his actions. We must learn to view
all men as subordinated in this manner, and to conceive of their
strength and their enterprises as depending upon the sovereign will of
God. In my opinion, the following version is the best — *His strength is
with thee,*  <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) *I will wait.* The
words are parallel with those in the end of the psalm, where there can
be no doubt that the nominative case is employed, *My* *strength is with
thee; I will sing.* So far as the sense of the passage is concerned,
however, it does not signify which of the latter interpretations be
followed. It is evident that David is here enabled, from the eminence of
faith, to despise the violent opposition of his enemy, convinced that he
could do nothing without the divine permission. But by taking the two
parts of the sentence separately, in the way I have suggested, — *His
strength is with thee, I will wait,* — the meaning is more distinctly
brought out. First, David, in vindication of that power by which God
governs the whole world, declares that his enemy was under a secret
divine restraint, and so entirely dependent for any strength which he
possessed upon God, that he could not move a finger without his consent.
He then adds, that he would wait the event, whatsoever it might be, with
composure and tranquillity. For the word which we have translated, *I
will intrust,* may here be taken as signifying *I will keep myself,* or
quietly wait the pleasure of the Lord. In this sense we find the word
used in the conjugation *Niphal,* <span id="xxv.ii-p16.4"></span>[Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p16.4"></span>.
Here it is put in the conjugation *Kal,* but that is no reason why we
may not render it, “I will silently wait the issue which God may send.”
It has been well suggested, that David may allude to the guards which
had been sent to besiege his house, and be considered as opposing to
this a watch of a very different description, which he himself
maintained, as he looked out for the divine issue with quietness and
composure.  <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md)

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
59:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**10**. The God of my mercy will prevent
me: God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies. **11**. Slay them
not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring them
down, O Lord! our shield. **12**. The sin of their mouth, the words of
their lips; let them be taken in their pride: and let them speak of
cursing and lying.

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span>**10.** *The God of my mercy will prevent
me* In the Hebrew, there is the affix of the third person, but we have
the point which denotes the first.  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) The Septuagint has adopted the third
person, and Augustine too ingeniously, though with a good design, has
repeatedly quoted the passage against the Pelagians, in proof that the
grace of God is antecedent to all human merit. In the same manner, he
has again and again cited the preceding verse, to refute the arrogancy
of those who boast of the power of free-will. *“I will put in trust my
strength with thee,”* he says; “that is, men must subject themselves
with all modesty and humility to God, as having no strength but that
with which he supplies them.” Now, it may be said with great
plausibility, that the man *puts his strength in trust with God,* who
declares that he has no strength but what comes from him, and who
depends entirely upon his help. The sentiment inculcated is also,
without all doubt, a pious and instructive one; but we must be ever on
our guard against wresting Scripture from its natural meaning. The
Hebrew word <span id="xxv.iii-p6.4"></span>קדמ, *kidem,* means no more
than *to come forward seasonably;* and David simply intimates that the
divine assistance would be promptly and opportunely extended.  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) The scope of the words is, that God
will interpose at the very moment when it is required, however much he
may retard or defer his assistance. Were it not that we are hurried on
by the excessive eagerness of our own wishes, we would sufficiently
recognize the promptness with which God hastens to our help, but our own
precipitance makes us imagine that he is dilatory. To confirm his faith,
he calls him *the God of his mercy,* having often proved him to be
merciful; and the experience of the past afforded him good hopes of what
he might expect in the future. The idea of some, that David uses the
word in an active sense, and praises his own mercy, is poor and
unnatural. Its passive use is quite common.

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span>**11** *Slay them not, lest my people
forget* David very properly suggests this to his own mind, as a
consideration which should produce patience. We are apt to think, when
God has not annihilated our enemies at once, that they have escaped out
of his hands altogether; and we look upon it as properly no punishment,
that they should be gradually and slowly destroyed. Such being the
extravagant desire which almost all, without exception, have, to see
their enemies at once exterminated, David checks himself, and dwells
upon the judgment of God to be seen in the lesser calamities which
overtake the wicked. It is true, that were not our eyes blinded, we
would behold a more evident display of divine retribution in cases where
the destruction of the ungodly is sudden; but these are so apt to fade
away from our remembrance, that he had good reason to express his desire
that the spectacle might be one constantly renewed, and thus our
knowledge of the judgments of God be more deeply graven upon our hearts.
He arms and fortifies himself against impatience under delays in the
execution of divine judgment, by the consideration that God has an
express design in them, as, were the wicked exterminated in a moment,
the remembrance of the event might speedily be effaced. There is an
indirect censure conveyed to the people of Israel for failing to improve
the more striking judgments of God. But the sin is one too prevalent in
the world even at this day. Those judgments which are so evident that
none can miss to observe them without shutting his eyes, we sinfully
allow to pass into oblivion; so that we need to be brought daily into
that theater where we are compelled to perceive the divine hand. This we
must never forget when we see God subjecting his enemies to a gradual
process of destruction, instead of launching his thunders instantly upon
their head. He prays that God would *make them to wander,* as men under
poverty and misery, who seek in every direction, but in vain, for a
remedy to their misfortunes. The idea is still more forcibly described
in the word which follows, *make them descend,* or, *cast them down.* He
wished that they might be dragged from that position of honor which they
had hitherto occupied, and thrown to the ground, so as to present, in
their wretchedness and degradation, a constant illustration of the wrath
of God. The word <span id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>בחילך, *becheylcha,*
which we have translated, *in thy power,* some render, *with thy army,*
understanding the people of God. But it is more probable that David
calls to his assistance *the power* of God for the destruction of his
enemies, and this because they deemed themselves invincible through
those worldly resources in which they trusted. As a further argument for
obtaining his request, he intimates in the close of the verse that he
was now pleading the cause of the whole Church, for he uses the plural
number, *O God our shield* Having been chosen king by divine
appointment, the safety of the Church stood connected with his person.
The assault made upon him by his enemies was not an assault upon himself
merely as a private individual, but upon the whole people, whose common
welfare God had consulted in making choice of him. And this suggested
another reason why he should patiently submit to see the judgments of
God measured out in the manner which might best engage their minds in
assiduous meditation.

<span id="xxv.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p11"></span>**12** *The sin of their mouth, the words
of their lips* Some interpreters read, *for,* or, *on account of the sin
of their mouth,*  <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) supplying the
causal particle, that the words may be the better connected with the
preceding verse. And there can be no doubt that the reason is stated
here why they deserved to be subjected to constant wanderings and
disquietude. The words as they stand, however, although abrupt and
elliptical, well express the meaning which David would convey; as if he
had said, that no lengthened proof was necessary to convict them of sin,
which plainly showed itself in the mischievous tendency of their
discourse. Wickedness, he tells us, proceeded from their mouth., They
vomited out their pride and cruelty. That this is the sense in which we
are to understand the words, is confirmed by what immediately follows —
*Let them be taken in their pride.* He here points to the source of that
insolence which led them with such proud and contumelious language, and
in such a shameless manner, to oppress the innocent. He then specifies
the sin of their lips, adding, that *they spoke words of cursing and
falsehood* By this he means that their mouth was continually filled with
horrid imprecations, and that they were wholly addicted to deceit and to
calumniating.  <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) Those have
mistaken the meaning of David who give a passive signification to the
word which I have translated *to speak,* and understand him as saying
that the wicked would be accounted examples of divine vengeance, the
plain and notorious marks of which were written upon them.

<span id="xxv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
59:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013.md)<span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p2"></span>**13**. Consume, consume them in wrath, that
they may not be, and let them know unto the ends of the earth that God
ruleth in Jacob. Selah. **14**. And at evening they will return; they
will make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city. **15**. They
will wander up and down to eat;  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md)
if they be not satisfied,  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md) they
will even lodge all night long. **16**. But I will sing of thy power, I
will praise thy mercy in the morning;  <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md) for thou hast been my fortress and
refuge in the day of my trouble. **17**. My strength is with thee, I
will sing psalms; for God is my defence, the God of my mercy.

<span id="xxv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p8"></span>**13** *Consume, consume them in wrath, that
they may not be* David may seem to contradict himself in praying for the
utter destruction of his enemies, when immediately before he had
expressed his desire that they might not be exterminated at once.  <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md) What else could he mean when he asks
that God would consume them in wrath, but that he would cut them off
suddenly, and not by a gradual and slower process of punishment? But he
evidently refers in what he says here to a different point of time, and
this removes any apparent inconsistency, for he prays that when they had
been set up for a sufficient period as an example, they might eventually
be devoted to destruction. It was customary with the victorious Roman
generals, first to lead the captives which had been kept for the day of
triumph through the city, and afterwards, upon reaching the capital, to
give them over to the lictors for execution. Now David prays that when
God had, in a similar manner, reserved his enemies for an interval
sufficient to illustrate his triumph, he would upon this consign them to
summary punishment. The two things are not at all inconsistent; first,
that the divine judgments should be lengthened out through a
considerable period, to secure their being remembered better, and that
then, upon sufficient evidence being given to the world of the certainty
with which the wicked are subjected in the displeasure of God to the
slower process of destruction, he should in due time bring them forth to
final execution, the better to awake, by such a demonstration of his
power, the minds of those who may be more secure than others, or less
affected by witnessing moderate inflictions of punishment. He adds,
accordingly, *that they may know, even to the ends of the earth, that
God ruleth in Jacob* Some would insert the copulative particle, reading,
*that they may know that God rules in Jacob, and in all the nations of
the world,* an interpretation which I do not approve, and which does
violence to the sense. The allusion is to the condign nature of the
judgment, which would be such that the report of it would reach the
remotest regions, and strike salutary terror into the minds even of
their benighted and godless inhabitants. He was more especially anxious
that God should be recognised as ruling *in the Church,* it being
preposterous that the place where his throne was erected should present
such an aspect of confusion as converted his temple into a den of
thieves.

<span id="xxv.iv-p10"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p11"></span>**14** *And at evening they shall return*
It is of no consequence whether we read the words in the future tense or
in the subjunctive, understanding it to be a continuance of the
preceding prayer. But it seems more probable that David, after having
brought his requests to a close, anticipates the happy issue which he
desired. And he makes an apt allusion to what he had already said of
their insatiable hunger. The words which he had formerly used he
repeats, but with a different application, ironically declaring that
they would be ravenous in another sense, and that matters would issue
otherwise than they had looked for. Above he had complained that they
made a noise like dogs, adverting to the eagerness and fierceness with
which they were bent upon mischief; now he derides their malicious
efforts, and says, that after wearying themselves with their endless
pursuit all day, they would go disappointed of their purpose. He uses no
longer the language of complaint, but congratulates himself upon the
abortive issue of their activity. The Hebrew word which I have
translated, *if not,* in the close of the fifteenth verse, is by some
considered to be the form of an oath. But this is an over-refined
interpretation. Others would have the negation repeated, reading, *if
they shall not have been satisfied, neither shall they lodge for the
night* But this also is far-fetched. The simple and true meaning
suggests itself at once, that, although they might not be satisfied,
they would be forced to lay themselves down, and the misery of their
hunger would be aggravated, by the circumstance that they had passed the
whole day in fruitless application, and must lie down for the night
empty, wearied, and unsatisfied.  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md)

<span id="xxv.iv-p13"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p14"></span>**16** *But I will sing of thy power* By
this he does not mean merely that he would have occasion to sing at some
future period, but prepares himself presently for the exercise of
thanksgiving; and he proceeds to acknowledge that his deliverance would
be at once an illustrious effect of Divine power, and conferred of mere
grace. It may be true, that David escaped at this time from the hands of
his enemies without stir, and with secrecy, through the dexterity of his
wife; still, by means of this artifice, God disappointed the
preparations and forces of Saul, and may, therefore, with propriety be
said to have exerted his power. We may suppose, however, that David
takes occasion, from this particular instance, to look further back, and
embrace, in his view, the various Divine interpositions which he had
experienced.

<span id="xxv.iv-p15"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p16"></span>**17** *My strength is with thee, I will
sing psalms* He expresses still more explicitly the truth, that he owed
his safety entirely to God. Formerly he had said that the strength of
his enemy was with God, and now he asserts the same thing of his own.
The expression, however, which admits of two meanings, he elegantly
applies to himself in a different sense.  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) God has the strength of the wicked in
his hands, to curb and to restrain it, and to show that any power of
which they boast is vain and fallacious. His own people, on the other
hand, he supports and secures, against the possibility of falling, by
supplies of strength from himself. In the preceding part of the psalm,
David had congratulated himself upon his safety, by reflecting that Saul
was so completely under the secret restraint of God’s providence as to
be unable to move a finger without his permission. Now, weak as he was
in himself, he maintains that he had strength sufficient in the Lord;
and accordingly adds, that he had good reason to engage in praise, as
James the inspired apostle exhorts those who are merry to sing psalms,
(<span id="xxv.iv-p17.3"></span>[Jas
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)<span id="xxv.iv-p17.3"></span>..md)
As to the reading which some have adopted, *I will ascribe my strength
with praises unto thee,* the reader cannot fail to see that it is
forced. It is clear that the two clauses must be taken separately, as I
have already observed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc09024.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, ils
iront et viendront.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “*Or*, *they go and come*.” “He
here describes the ceaseless pursuit of him in which his enemies were
engaged all the day they were seeking him in vain in more distant
places; in the evening they came again into the city, and continued
their search, while their execrations and curses resembled the angry
howling of a dog.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc09024.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxv.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou,
bouilloneront.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, will belch out.”

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc09024.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>Ou, sa force
est a toy, je me tiendray coy: ou, ma force est a toy,” etc. — *Fr*.
*marg*. “Or, his strength is with thee, I will keep myself quiet: or, my
strength is with thee,” etc.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc09024.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span> Ainsworth reads, “*to* *utter* or *well
out*, as from a fountain; *belch* or *babble*, as <span
id="xxv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Prov. 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#002.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p11.1"></span>,
‘As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her malice.’”
“<span id="xxv.ii-p11.2"></span>Le mot Hebrieu signifie *se repandre en
paroles*, etc.;” *i*.*e*., “The Hebrew word signifies *to break out in
words*, and it here denotes the oft repeated and passionate expressions
which proceed from the mouth of persons actuated by hatred and rage, as
in <span id="xxv.ii-p11.3"></span>[Ps
94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p11.3"></span>.
To it the word *bark* answers very well, which is borrowed from dogs,
and expresses the noise made by these animals; and this word is here the
more apposite, that David in the preceding verse compares his enemies to
dogs which incessantly run about and do nothing but bark.” — *Martin*.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc09024.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p16"></span> In the Latin edition, from which we now
translate, it reads, “<span id="xxv.ii-p16.1"></span>Fortitude *mea* ad
re.” This is evidently a mistake of the printer for “<span
id="xxv.ii-p16.2"></span>*fortitudo ejus*,” and has misled the former
English translators. This is the more wonderful, as they thus make the
Author adopt the very transposition of person which he had immediately
before rejected. Of course, the French version reads, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p16.3"></span>*Sa* forte est a toy: je garderay.”

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc09024.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p16.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p17"></span> Hammond translates, “His strength I will
ward, or avoid, or beware, or take heed of at thee.” And the amount of
his explanation is: Saul having sent a party to guard, that is, to
besiege the house in which David was, in order to kill him, as is
mentioned in the title of the psalm, David resolves to guard, or look
to, or beware of the strength of his persecutor, by fleeing to God as
his refuge.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc09024.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span> “We have <span
id="xxv.iii-p6.1"></span>חסדו, *his mercy*, with the points <span
id="xxv.iii-p6.2"></span>חסדי, *my mercy*, the *keri* being for the one,
and the *kethib* for the other. And, accordingly, of the interpreters,
some read the one, some the other, both certainly meaning the same
thing: the Chaldee, ‘the God of my grace, *or* goodness, or mercy;’ but
the LXX. ‘<span id="xxv.iii-p6.3"></span>Ο Θεός μοῦ τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ,’ ‘My
God his mercy,’ and so the Latin.” — *Hammond* Green translates, “My God
shall prevent me with his loving-kindness.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc09024.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span> Horsley reads, “God shall give me ready
help.”

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc09024.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p12"></span> This is the reading adopted by Jerome,
and also by Horsley, who remarks, that in Jerome’s copies the words,
“sin” and “discourse,” had certainly the preposition <span
id="xxv.iii-p12.1"></span>כ prefixed.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc09024.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p13"></span> The Syriac translation of the first part
of the verse is, “The discourse of their mouth is the sin of their
lips.” That is, whatever their lips speak is sin; so many words, so many
sins.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc09024.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p3"></span> “The literal translation, *to eat*,
*i*.*e*., to devour, may be best.” — *Archbishop Secker*. From the great
attention which is paid to external purity in the East, and in
consequence of dogs being reckoned unclean, as they were by the Jews
under the law, the inhabitants do not admit them into their houses, and
even carefully avoid touching them in their streets, by which they would
consider themselves defiled. But though not there domesticated as with
us, dogs are to be found in great numbers, and crowd the streets. They
are not attached to any particular person or family, nor accounted the
property of any one; and though it is not uncommon for some of the
inhabitants, from motives of superstition, to give money weekly or
monthly to butchers and bakers to feed them at stated times, and though
some even leave legacies at their death for the same purpose, yet they
must necessarily subsist in a great measure on what they can seize or
steal; and, being very numerous, they are perpetually wandering about in
large troops seeking for something to devour. — (*Harmer*’*s
Observations*, *volume* 1, p. 344.) To these circumstances the Psalmist
clearly alludes in the 14th and 15th verses, when he compares the
behavior of his enemies to that of dogs. He repeats what he had said in
the 5th verse; but here he intends to convey a different idea. “Let them
do what they may;” as if he had said, “I am safe under the protection of
God.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc09024.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p4.1"></span>C’est,
combien qu’ils ne soyent.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, though they be not
satisfied.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc09024.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p5"></span> “*In the morning*. It should seem this hath
a relation to Saul’s servants watching for him in the morning to kill
him, (<span id="xxv.iv-p5.1"></span>[1Sa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011)<span id="xxv.iv-p5.1"></span>;.md)
meaning, At that time when those people imagine to have me in their
hands I shall be in safety, and have cause to praise and bless thee for
my deliverance.” — *Annotations on the Bible by English Divines*.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc09024.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p9"></span> Williams observes, that the Hebrew rendered
*consume* “literally means *to finish*, bring to an end; namely, the
<span id="xxv.iv-p9.1"></span>*banditti*. The Psalmist, verse 11, prays,
‘Slay them not;’ *i*.*e*., take not away their lives as individuals, but
put an end to the conspiracy.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc09024.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p12"></span> Street translates, “If they be not
satisfied, they spend the night in howling;” and observes, that there
seems to be a word lost after the original verb <span
id="xxv.iv-p12.1"></span>לון, *lun*, which he renders, *they spend the
night*; and he supplies h; by the words, *in howling* The meaning of the
verb <span id="xxv.iv-p12.2"></span>לום, *lun*, is ambiguous. It
signifies both *to continue all night*, and *to growl*, or *murmur*
Either sense will be appropriate in this passage. The Chaldee and Syriac
understand it in the former sense; and the Septuagint in the latter.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc09024.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="xxv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p17.1"></span>Sed
eleganter ambiguam locutionem diverso sensu ponit.” — *Lat*. In the
French version, “<span id="xxv.iv-p17.2"></span>Mais c’est une bonne
rencontre et qui a grace, quand il met deux fois un propos ambigu, mais
en divers sens.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 60](cc09025.md)
