[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09011)  [Next](cc09013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>PSALM 47

<span id="xiii-p2"></span>Some think that this psalm was composed at the
time when the temple was dedicated, and the ark of the covenant placed
in the sanctuary. But as this is a conjecture which has little to
support it, it is better, if I am not mistaken, instead of detaining
ourselves with this, to consider the subject-matter of the psalm, and
the use to which it ought especially to be applied. It was no doubt
appointed for the stated holy assemblies, as may be easily gathered from
the whole tenor of the poem; and perhaps it was composed by David, and
delivered by him to the Levites, to be sung by them before the temple
was built, and when the ark as yet abode in the tabernacle. But whoever
was its author, he exhorts not only the Israelites, but also all
nations, to worship the only true God. It chiefly magnifies the favor
which, according to the state of things at that time, God had graciously
vouchsafed to the offspring of Abraham; and salvation to the whole world
was to proceed from this source. It however contains, at the same time,
a prophecy of the future kingdom of Christ. It teaches that the glory
which then shone under the figure of the material sanctuary will diffuse
its splendor far and wide; when God himself will cause the beams of his
grace to shine into distant lands, that kings and nations may be united
into fellowship with the children of Abraham.

<span id="xiii-p3"></span>To the chief musician of the sons of Korah: A
Psalm.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
47:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Clap your hands, all ye peoples:
shout unto God with the voice of triumph. **2**. For Jehovah is high,
terrible, and a great King over all the earth. **3**. He hath put in
order  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) the people under us, and
the nations under our feet. **4**. He hath chosen our inheritance for
us, the glory of Jacob, whom he loved. Selah.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span><span id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Clap your hands, all ye peoples* As
the Psalmist requires the nations, in token of their joy and of their
thanksgiving; to God, to clap their hands, or rather exhorts them to a
more than ordinary joy, the vehemence of which breaks forth and
manifests itself by external expressions, it is certain that he is here
speaking of the deliverance which God had wrought for them. Had God
erected among the Gentiles some formidable kingdom, this would rather
have deprived all of their courage, and overwhelmed them with despair,
than given them matter to sing and leap for joy. Besides, the inspired
writer does not here treat of some common or ordinary blessings of God;
but of such blessings as will fill the whole world with incredible joy,
and stir up the minds of all men to celebrate the praises of God. What
he adds a little after, that all nations were brought into subjection to
Israel, must, therefore, necessarily be understood not of slavish
subjection, but of a subjection which is more excellent, and more to be
desired, than all the kingdoms of the world. It would be unnatural for
those who are subdued and brought to submit by force and fear to leap
for joy. Many nations were tributary to David, and to his son Solomon;
but while they were so, they ceased not, at the same time, to murmur,
and bore impatiently the yoke which was imposed upon them, so far were
they from giving thanks to God with joyful and cheerful hearts.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span><span id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>Since, then, no servitude is happy and
desirable but that by which God subdues and brings under the standard
and authority of Christ his Son those who before were rebels, it follows
that this language is applicable only to the kingdom of Christ, who is
called *a high and terrible King,* (verse 2;) not that he makes the
wretched beings over whom he reigns to tremble by the tyranny and
violence of his sway, but because his majesty, which before had been
held in contempt, will suffice to quell the rebellion of the whole
world. It is to be observed, that the design of the Holy Spirit is here
to teach, that as the Jews had been long contumeliously treated,
oppressed with wrongs, and afflicted from time to time with divers
calamities, the goodness and liberality of God towards them was now so
much the more illustrious, when the kingdom of David had subdued the
neighboring nations on every sidle, and had attained to such a height of
glory. We may, however, easily gather from the connection of the words
the truth of what I have suggested, that when God is called *a terrible
and great King over all the earth,* this prophecy applies to the kingdom
of Christ. There is, therefore, no doubt, that the grace of God was
celebrated by these titles, to strengthen the hearts of the godly during
the period that intervened till the advent of Christ, in which not only
the triumphant state of the people of Israel had fallen into decay, but
in which also the people, being oppressed with the bitterest contumely,
could have no taste of the favor of God, and no consolation from it, but
by relying on the promises of God alone. We know that there was a long
interruption of the splendor of the kingdom of God’s ancient people,
which continued from the death of Solomon to the coming of Christ. This
interval formed, as it were, a gulf or chasm, which would have swallowed
up the minds of the godly, had they not been supported and upheld by the
Word of God. As, therefore, God exhibited in the person of David a type
of the kingdom of Christ, which is here extolled, although there
followed shortly after a sad and almost shameful diminution of the glory
of David’s kingdom, then the most grievous calamities, and, finally, the
captivity and a most miserable dispersion, which differed little from a
total destruction, the Holy Spirit has exhorted the faithful to continue
clapping their hands for joy, until the advent of the promised Redeemer.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span><span id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**3.** *He hath set in order the people
under us* Some translate the verb *he hath subjected;* and this agrees
with the translation which I have given. Others translate it *he hath
led,* which is somewhat more remote from the meaning. But to understand
the verb <span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>ידבר, *yadebber,* as meaning *to
destroy,* as is done by others, is altogether at variance with the mind
of the prophet; for it is doubtless an advantageous, joyful, and
desirable subjection which is here meant. In the Hebrew, the verb is in
the future tense, *he will set in order;* and if any are disposed to
prefer retaining it in this tense, I have no great objection to it. As,
however, it is certain that under the figure of the kingdom of David
there is here celebrated the grace of God to come, I have readily
adopted that rendering which has been preferred by other interpreters.
Besides, although in this verse the prophet especially exhorts his own
countrymen to gratitude to God, because, through his favor, they ruled
over all people; yet it is certain that he means, that those also who
were subdued are associated with the Jews in this joy. The body does not
differ more from the shadow than the reigned expressions of joy with
which the heathen nations honored David in old time, differ from those
with which the faithful through the whole world  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) receive Christ,; for the latter flow
from the willing obedience of the heart. And assuredly, if after the ark
was brought to the temple, there had not appeared hidden under this
figure something far higher, which formed the substance of it:, it would
have been as it were a childish joy to assign to God his dwelling there,
and to shut him up within such narrow limits. But when the majesty of
God which had dwelt in the tabernacle was manifested to the whole world,
and when all nations were brought in subjection to his authority, this
prerogative of the offspring of Abraham was then illustriously
manifested. The prophet, then, when he declares that the Gentiles Will
be subdued, so that they will not refuse to obey the chosen people, is
describing that kingdom of which he had previously spoken. We are not to
suppose that he here treats of that secret providence by which God
governs the whole world, but of the special power which he exercises by
means of his word; and, therefore, in order that he may be properly
called a King, his own people must necessarily acknowledge him as such.
It may, however, be asked, “Since Christ has brought the Church under
his own authority and celestial power, in what sense can it be said that
the nations are subject to the Jews, seeing we know that the order of
the Church cannot be settled aright, and as it ought to be, unless
Christ the only head stand forth prominently above all, and all the
faithful, from the greatest to the least, keep themselves in the humble
rank of members? Nay, more, when Christ erected his dominion through the
whole world, the adoption, which had before been the peculiar privilege
of one people, began to be the common privilege of all nations; and by
this means liberty was granted to all together, that being united to one
another by the ties of true brotherhood, they should aspire to the
celestial inheritance.” The answer to this is easy: When the yoke of the
law,  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) was imposed upon the
Gentiles, the Jews then obtained the sovereignty over them; even as by
the word the pastors of the Church exercise the jurisdiction of the Holy
Spirit. For this very reason the Church is called a Queen, and the
Mother of all the godly, (<span id="xiii.i-p12.2"></span>[Ga
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="xiii.i-p12.2"></span>,.md)
because divine truth, which is like a scepter to subdue us all, has been
committed to her keeping. Although then the Jews, when the kingdom of
Christ emerged into light, were in a state of wretched and ignominious
servitude to heathen nations, and had been, as it were, their slaves;
yet the sovereignty is truly and justly attributed to them, because God
“sent the rod of his strength out of Zion,” (<span
id="xiii.i-p12.3"></span>[Ps
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)<span id="xiii.i-p12.3"></span>;.md)
and as they were intrusted with the keeping of the la their office was
to restrain and subdue the Gentiles by its authority. The only way by
which the rest of the world has been brought into subjection to God is,
that men, being renewed by the Spirit of God, have willingly yielded
themselves docile and tractable to the Jews, and suffered themselves to
be under their dominion; as it is said in another passage,

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>“In those days it shall come to pass, that
ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall
take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,saying, We will go with
you;for we have heard that God is with you,” (<span
id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>[Zec
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)<span id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span><span id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**4.** *He hath chosen our inheritance for
us.* The inspired poet here celebrates more distinctly the special grace
which God, in his goodness, had bestowed upon the chosen and holy seed
of Abraham. As he passed by all the rest of the word, and adopted to
himself a people who were few in number and contemptible; so it was
proper that such a signal pledge of his fatherly love should be
distinguished from his common beneficence, which is extended to all
mankind without distinction. The word *chosen* is therefore peculiarly
emphatic, implying that God had not dealt with the children of Abraham
as he had been accustomed indiscriminately to deal with other nations;
but that he had bestowed upon them, as it were by *hereditary* right, a
peculiar dignity by which they excelled all others. The same thing is
expressed immediately after by the word *glory* Thus then the prophet
enjoins the duty of thanksgiving to God, for having exalted, in the
person of Jacob, his chosen people to the highest degree of honor, so
that they might boast that their condition was distinguished from that
of all other nations. He shows, at the same time, that this was entirely
owing to the free and unmerited favor of God. The relative pronoun
*whom* is put instead of the causal particle *for* or *because,* as if
the Psalmist had attributed the cause of this prerogative by which they
were distinguished to God himself. Whenever the favor of God towards the
Jews is commended, in consequence of his having loved their fathers,
this principle should always be kept in mind, that hereby all merits in
man are annihilated. If all the excellence or glory of the holy
patriarch depended purely and simply upon the good pleasure of God, who
can dare to arrogate any thing to himself as peculiarly his own? If God
then has given us any thing above others, and as it were by special
privilege, let us learn to ascribe the whole to the fatherly love which
he bears towards seeing he has chosen us to be his flock. We also gather
from this passage that the grace which God displays towards his chosen
is not extended to all men in common, but is a privilege by which he
distinguishes a few from the great mass of mankind.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
47:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. God is gone up with triumph, Jehovah
with the sound of a trumpet. **6**. Sing praises to God, sing praises:
sing praises to our King, sing praises. **7**. For God is King of all
the earth: sing praises every one who understandeth. **8**. He hath
obtained the kingdom over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of
his holiness. **9**. The princes of the peoples \[or nations\] are
assembled together to the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields
of the earth are God’s: he is greatly exalted.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** *God is gone up with triumph* There
is here an allusion to the ancient ceremony which was observed under the
Law. As the sound of trumpets was wont to be used in solemnising the
holy assemblies, the prophet says that God *goes up,* when the trumpets
encourage and stir up the people to magnify and extol his power. When
this ceremony was performed in old time, it was just as if a king,
making his entrance among his subjects, presented himself to them in
magnificent attire and great splendor, by which he gained their
admiration and reverence. At the same time, the sacred writer, under
that shadowy ceremony, doubtless intended to lead us to consider another
kind of going up more triumphant — that of Christ when he “ascended up
far above all heavens,” (<span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>.md)
and obtained the empire of the whole world, and armed with his celestial
power, subdued all pride and loftiness. You must remember what I have
adverted to before, that the name *Jehovah* is here applied to the ark;
for although the essence or majesty of God was not shut up in it, nor
his power and operation fixed to it, yet it was not a vain and idle
symbol of his presence. God had promised that he would dwell in the
midst of the people so long as the Jews worshipped him according to the
rule which he had prescribed in the Law; and he actually showed that he
was truly present with them, and that it was not in vain that he was
called upon among them. What is here stated, however, applies more
properly to the manifestation of the glory which at length shone forth
in the person of Christ. In short, the import of the Psalmist’s language
is, When the trumpets sounded among the Jews, according to the
appointment of the Law, that was not a mere empty sound which vanished
away in the air; for God, who intended the ark of the covenant to be a
pledge and token of his presence, truly presided in that assembly. From
this the prophet draws an argument for enforcing on the faithful the
duty of *singing praises to God* He argues, that by engaging in this
exercise they will not be acting blindly or at random, as the
superstitious, who, having no certainty in their false systems of
religion, lament and howl in vain before their idols. He shows that the
faithful have just ground for celebrating with their mouths and with a
cheerful heart the praises of God;  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) since they certainly know that he is
as present with them, as if he had visibly established his royal throne
among them.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** *For God is King of all the earth*
The Psalmist, having called God in the close of the preceding verse
*King* of the chosen people, now calls him *King* *of all the earth;*
and thus, while he claims to the Jews the right and honor of
primogeniture, he at the same time joins to them the Gentiles as
associates and partakers with them of the same blessing. By these words
he intimates that the kingdom of God would be much more magnificent and
glorious at the coming of the Messiah, than it was under the shadowy
dispensation of the Law, inasmuch as it would be extended to the utmost
boundaries of the earth. To show the greater earnestness in his
exhortation, he repeats the words, *Sing praises to God,* five times.
The word <span id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>מםכיל, *maskil,*  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) is put in the singular number instead
of the plural; for he invites to this exercise all who are skillful in
singing. He, no doubt, speaks of knowledge in the art of music; but he
requires, at the same time, the worshippers of God to sing the praises
of God intelligently, that there may not be the mere sound of tongues,
as we know to be the case among the Papists. Knowledge of what is sung
is required in order to engage in a proper manner in the singing of
psalms, that the name of God may not be profaned, as it would certainly
be, were there nothing more but the voice which melts away or is
dissolved in the air.  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md)

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**8.** *He hath obtained the kingdom over
the heathen* Literally it is, *He hath reigned;* but as the verb <span
id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>מלך, *malach,* is in the past tense, which in
Hebrew denotes a continued act, we have translated it, *He hath obtained
the kingdom* The prophet repeatedly informs us that God reigns over the
Gentiles; and from this it is easy to gather that he here treats of a
new and a previously unheard of manner of reigning. There is an implied
contrast between the time of the Law, when God confined his empire, or
kingdom, within the boundaries of Judea, and the coming of Christ, when
he extended it far and wide, so as to occupy the whole world from one
end to the other. The majesty of God sent forth some sparks of its
brightness among the heathen nations, when David made them tributary;
but the prophet could not, on that account, have properly said that God
reigned among them, since they both contemned his worship and the true
religion, and also wished to see the Church completely extinguished. To
find the fulfillment of this prophecy, we must, therefore, necessarily
come to Christ. What is added in the second clause of the verse, *God
sitteth upon the throne of his holiness,* may be taken in a twofold
sense. By this form of expression is often to be understood *the
tabernacle,* or *the temple;* but it also sometimes signifies *heaven.*
If any are inclined to explain it of *the temple,* the meaning will be,
That while God reigned over the whole world, and comprehended all
nations under his dominion, he had established his chief seat at
Jerusalem; and it was from thence that the doctrine of the gospel, by
which he has brought under his dominion all people, flowed. We may,
however, very properly take this expression as spoken of heaven*;* and
thus the sense will be, That God, in stretching forth his hand to subdue
men, and bring them to submit to his authority, evidently shows that,
from his heavenly throne, he reigns over men. Unless he show men his
power and working by signs manifest and near at hand, he is not
acknowledged as Governor of the world.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>**9** *The princes of the peoples are
gathered together.* The Psalmist enriches and amplifies by various
expressions the preceding sentence. He again declares that the way in
which God obtained dominion over the Gentiles was, that those who before
were aliens united in the adoption of the same faith with the Jews; and
thus different nations, from a state of miserable dispersion, were
gathered together into one body. When the doctrine of the Gospel was
manifested and shone forth, it did not remove the Jews from the covenant
which God had long before made with them. On the contrary, it has rather
joined us to them. As then the calling of the Gentiles was nothing else
than the means by which they were grafted and incorporated into the
family of Abraham, the prophet justly states, that strangers or aliens
from every direction *were gathered together* to the chosen people, that
by such an increase the kingdom of God might be extended through all
quarters of the globe. On this account Paul says, (<span
id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>[Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>,.md)
that the Gentiles were made one body with the Jews, that they might be
partakers of the everlasting inheritance. By the abolition of the
ceremonies of the Mosaic economy, “the middle wall of partitions” which
made a separation between the Jews and the Gentiles, is now removed,
(<span id="xiii.ii-p14.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xiii.ii-p14.2"></span>;.md)
but it nevertheless remains true, that we are not accounted among the
children of God unless we have been grafted into the stock of Abraham.
The prophet does not merely speak of the common people: he also tells us
that princes themselves will regard it as the height of their felicity
to be gathered together with the Jews; as we shall see in another psalm,
(<span id="xiii.ii-p14.3"></span>[Ps
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)<span id="xiii.ii-p14.3"></span>,.md)

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>“And of Zion it shall be said, This and
that man was born in her.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>Farther, it is said that this gathering
together will be *to the people of the God of Abraham,* to teach us that
it is not here meant to attribute to the Jews any superiority which they
naturally possess above others, but that all their excellence depends
upon this, that the pure worship of God flourishes among them, and that
they hold heavenly doctrine in high estimation. This, therefore, is not
spoken of the bastard or cast-off Jews, whom their own unbelief has cut
off from the Church. But as, according to the statement of the Apostle
Paul, (<span id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>,) the root being holy, the branches are also
holy, it follows that the falling away of the greater part does not
prevent this honor from continuing to belong to the rest. Accordingly,
the “consumption” which, as is stated in the prophecy of Isaiah,
overflowed the whole earth, is called the people of the God of Abraham,
(chapter 10:22, 23.) This passage contains two very important and
instructive truths. In the first place, we learn from it, that all who
would be reckoned among the children of God ought to seek to have a
place in the Church, and to join themselves to it, that they may
maintain fraternal unity with all the godly; and, secondly, that when
the unity of the Church is spoken of, it is to be considered as
consisting in nothing else but an unfeigned agreement to yield obedience
to the word of God, that there may be one sheepfold and one Shepherd.
Moreover, those who are exalted in the world in respect of honors and
riches, are here admonished to divest themselves of all pride, and
willingly and submissively to bear the yoke in common with others, that
they may show themselves the obedient children of the Church.

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>What follows immediately after, *The
shields of the earth are God’s,* is understood by many as spoken of
princes.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) I admit that this
metaphor is of frequent occurrence in Scripture, nor does this sense
seem to be unsuitable to the scope of the passage. It is as if the
prophet had said, It is in the power of God to ingraft into his Church
the great ones of the world whenever he pleases; for he reigns over them
also. Yet the sense will be more simple if we explain the words thus:
That, as it is God alone who defends and preserves the world, the high
and supreme majesty, which is sufficient for so exalted and difficult a
work as the preservation of the *world,* is justly looked upon with
admiration. The sacred writer expressly uses the word *shields* in the
plural number, for, considering the various and almost innumerable
dangers which unceasingly threaten every part of the world, the
providence of God must necessarily interpose in many ways, and make use,
as it were, of many bucklers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc09012.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, range.”
— *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, subdued.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc09012.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>Par tout
le monde.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc09012.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p12.1"></span>C’est a
dire, la reformation selon la vraye religion de Dieu.” — *Fr*. *marg*.
“That is to say, the reformation according to the true religion of God.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc09012.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>De faire
retentir en leurs bouches et d’un coeur alaigre les louanges de Dieu.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc09012.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span> Calvin renders this word in the Latin
version by “<span id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>intelligens;” and in the
French by “<span id="xiii.ii-p9.2"></span>entendu;” and in the margin of
the French version there is the note, “<span
id="xiii.ii-p9.3"></span>C’est, O vous chacun entundu!” — “That is, O
every one of you who understandeth!” Dr Adam Clarke reads, “Sing an
instructive song;” and observes, “Let *sense* and *sound* go together.
Let your *hearts* and *heads* go with your *voices*.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc09012.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>Comme de
faict il seroit s’il n’y avoit seulement que la voix qui s’escoule en
l’air.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc09012.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span> Magistrates and governors are called
*shields* in <span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ho
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p18.2"></span>[Ps
89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p18.2"></span>.
In this sense the word is here understood by the Septuagint.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 48](cc09013.md)
