[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09026)  [Next](cc09028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p1"></span>PSALM 62

<span id="xxviii-p2"></span>The greater part of this psalm is occupied
with meditations, in which David encourages himself and others to hope
in God, and fortifies his mind against the assaults of temptation. And
as we are ever prone to be drawn away from God by the influence which
worldly objects exert over our senses, perishing and evanescent as these
are, occasion is taken to show the folly of this, and bring us to a
single and entire dependence upon God.

<span id="xxviii-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Jeduthun, A Psalm
of David.

<span id="xxviii-p4"></span>The fact being ascertained that there was
one of the chief singers who bore the name of Jeduthun, some have
thought that this psalm was committed into his hands to be sung, (<span
id="xxviii-p4.1"></span>[1 Chr. 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#016.md),
[1 Chr. 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#038.md),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041.md), [1 Chr.
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001)<span id="xxviii-p4.1"></span>.md) In
the title to <span id="xxviii-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
39](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#000.md)<span id="xxviii-p4.2"></span>, it
is sufficiently probable that the allusion is to some musician of that
family. But this would not seem to be the case here; for the psalm is
not said to be given *to,* but *upon* Jeduthun. This has led to the
opinion that it formed the beginning of some song commonly known at that
time. Still the Hebrew particle <span id="xxviii-p4.3"></span>על, *al,*
which we have rendered *upon,* means frequently *for, to,* or *before;*
and it will consist with the words to suppose, that this psalm was put
into the hands of the posterity of Jeduthun.  <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407.md)

<span id="xxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
62:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Nevertheless, my soul is silent
towards God: from him is my salvation. **2**. Nevertheless, he himself
is my rock and my salvation, my high tower: I shall not be greatly
moved.

<span id="xxviii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Nevertheless, my soul is silent
towards God.* Should the translation I have followed be adopted, the
psalm is to be considered as beginning abruptly, in the usual style of
compositions of an impassioned kind.  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408.md) Of this we have an instance in <span
id="xxviii.i-p6.3"></span>[Psalm
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p6.3"></span>,
where the prophet, who had been agitated with doubts, as we shall see
more particularly afterwards, suddenly brings his mind to a fixed
decision, and, in the way of cutting off all further subject of debate,
exclaims, “Yet God is good to Israel.” And so it is, I conceive, in the
psalm before us. We know that the Lord’s people cannot always reach such
a measure of composure as to be wholly exempt from distraction. They
would wish to receive the word of the Lord with submission, and to be
dumb under his correcting hand; but inordinate affections will take
possession of their minds, and break in upon that peace which they might
otherwise attain to in the exercise of faith and resignation. Hence the
impatience we find in many; an impatience which they give vent to in the
presence of God, and which is an occasion to themselves of much trouble
and disquietude. The Hebrew particle <span
id="xxviii.i-p6.4"></span>אך*, ach,* is often used in an exclusive
sense, and has been rendered by some, *only;* it is also employed in an
affirmative sense, and has been rendered *truly,* or *certainly.* But in
order to arrive at its full meaning, we must suppose that David felt an
inward struggle and opposition, which he found it necessary to check.
Satan had raised a tumult in his affections, and wrought a degree of
impatience in his mind, which he now curbs; and he expresses his
resolution *to be silent.*  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md) The
word implies a meek and submissive endurance of the cross. It expresses
the opposite of that heat of spirit which would put us into a posture of
resistance to God. The silence intended is, in short, that composed
submission of the believer, in the exercise of which he acquiesces in
the promises of God, gives place to his word, bows to his sovereignty,
and suppresses every inward murmur of dissatisfaction. The Hebrew word
<span id="xxviii.i-p7.3"></span>דומיה*, dumiyah,* which I have rendered
*is silent,* some consider to be the noun; and it is of little
consequence which translation we adopt.

<span id="xxviii.i-p8"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p9"></span>The particle <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.1"></span>אך, *ach,* in the second verse, I would render
in the same way as in the first. The believer triumphs in one encounter
with temptation only to enter upon another; and here David, who appeared
to have emerged from his distress, shows that he had still to struggle
with remaining difficulties. We meet with the same particle no fewer
than six times throughout the psalm. This, too, may explain the many
titles which he applies to God, each of which is to be considered as a
foil by which he would ward off the attacks of the tempter. The
expression in the close of the verse, *I shall not be greatly moved,*
implies his persuasion that he might be overtaken with afflictions, (for
he was well aware that he could claim no exemption from the common lot
of humanity,) but his conviction, at the same time, that these would not
overwhelm him, through the good help of God. We shall find him saying
afterwards, in so many words, *I* *shall not fall;* perhaps because he
felt, as he advanced in prayer, that he had greater boldness in
despising affliction. Or the expressions may be taken as synonymous in
the two places. The truth itself is unquestionable. The believer may be
overthrown for a time; but as he is no sooner cast down than he is
raised up again by God, he cannot properly be said to fall. He is
supported by the Spirit of God, and is not therefore really prostrated
and overcome.

<span id="xxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
62:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. How long will ye continue mischief
against a man?  <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md) ye shall be
slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and a fence which has
been struck. **4**. Yet they consult to cast him down from his
elevations: they delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, and curse
inwardly. Selah. **5**. Nevertheless, my soul, be thou silent before
God: for my expectation is from him. **6**. Nevertheless, he is my rock
and my salvation: my high tower; I shall not fall.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** *How long will ye continue
mischief?* The Hebrew word <span id="xxviii.ii-p6.1"></span>תהותתו*,
tehotethu,*  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md) which I have
translated *continue,* or *lengthen out, mischief,* is rendered by some,
*to meditate,* or *imagine mischief,* while others suppose an allusion
to the putting forth of the tongue in sign of mockery. It has been
rendered also, *to rush upon,* or *assault.* The sense of the passage
seems to be, How long will ye meditate evil against a man, and persist
in mischievous devices for accomplishing his ruin? He has in view the
obstinate malice of his enemies, moving every stone for his destruction,
and forming new plans daily for effecting it. The instruction to be
learned from his experience is, that we should exercise patience, even
when our enemies show unwearied cruelty in their attempts to destroy us,
and are instigated by the devil to incessant artifices for our
persecution. We may just advert to the meaning of the figure which is
subjoined. Some think that the wicked are compared to a *bowing wall,*
because it threatens every moment to fall to the ground, and they, upon
every sin which they commit, tend more and more downwards, till they are
precipitated into destruction. But it would seem as if the allusion were
somewhat different. A wall, when ill built, bulges out in the center,
presenting the appearance of nearly twice its actual breadth; but, as it
is hollow within, it soon falls to ruins. The wicked, in like manner,
are dilated with pride, and assume, in their consultations, a most
formidable appearance; but David predicts that they would be brought to
unexpected and utter destruction, like a wall badly constructed, and
hollow in the interior, which falls with a sudden crash, and is broken
by its own weight into a thousand pieces.  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md) The word <span
id="xxviii.ii-p8.2"></span>גדר, *gader,* which I have rendered, *a
fence,* means, properly, an enclosure built of slight and insufficient
materials;  <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) and an epithet is
added still more to express the violence and impetuosity of their fall.
The Psalmist, then, would teach us that, high as our enemies may appear
to stand, and proud and swelling as their denunciations may be, they
shall be suddenly and signally overthrown, *like a smitten wall.*

<span id="xxviii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p11"></span>**4.** *Yet they consult to cast him
down from his elevation* I still would interpret the particle <span
id="xxviii.ii-p11.1"></span>אך*, ach,* in an adversative sense. David,
on the one hand, encouraged himself by determining to rest steadfastly
upon the promise of divine favor; but, upon the other, he had before him
the machinations of his enemies, characterised by cruelty, audacity,
pride, and deceit. By all their attempts, as if he had said, they do
nothing but precipitate their own fall; still such are the frenzy and
the fury by which they are actuated, that they persist in their
intrigues against me. He insinuates that their attacks were directed,
not so much against himself as against God — agreeably to the picture
which is given us of impiety by the poets in their fable of the Giants.
 <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) Nothing will satisfy the
enemies of God but setting themselves above the heavens. David is to be
understood as primarily speaking here of himself in the third person,
but of himself as elevated expressly by the divine hand. Accordingly,
though we might consider that God is the party directly intended, the
scope of the words rather intimates that they aimed at the overthrow of
one whom God had exalted, and desired to establish in honor. In thus
attempting to thwart his purpose, they were really fighting against God.
The clause which follows, *they delight in lies,* has reference to the
same thing. Refusing to acknowledge his divine vocation, they persevered
in following such corrupt designs, as could only recoil upon them to
their own confusion, as the Psalmist exclaims,

<span id="xxviii.ii-p13"></span>“O ye sons of men! how long is my glory
made matter of your reproach? how long will ye love vanity, and seek
after leasing? Selah.” — (<span id="xxviii.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ps
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span id="xxviii.ii-p13.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xxviii.ii-p14"></span>Or the expression may denote the hidden
and deceitful measures which they adopted in their persecution of this
saint of God; for it is immediately added, that *they blessed with their
mouth, but cursed inwardly* Whatever may be the meaning, it is evident
that David, contemplating all the treachery, intrigues, and wickedness
of his enemies, supports himself by the single consideration, that his
help was in God, and that every opposing instrumentality was therefore
vain.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p16"></span>**5.** *Nevertheless, my soul, be thou
silent before God.* Here there may appear to be a slight inconsistency,
inasmuch as he encourages himself to do what he had already declared
himself to have done. His soul was silent before God; and where the
necessity of this new silence, as if still under agitation of spirit?
Here it is to be remembered, that our minds can never be expected to
reach such perfect composure as shall preclude every inward feeling of
disquietude, but are, at the best, as the sea before a light breeze,
fluctuating sensibly, though not swollen into billows. It is not without
a struggle that the saint can compose his mind; and we can very well
understand how David should enjoin more perfect submission upon a spirit
which was already submissive, urging upon himself farther advancement in
this grace of silence, till he had mortified every carnal inclination,
and thoroughly subjected himself to the will of God. How often, besides,
will Satan renew the disquietudes which seemed to be effectually
expelled? Creatures of such instability, and liable to be borne away by
a thousand different influences, we need to be confirmed again and
again. I repeat, that there is no reason to be surprised though David
here calls upon himself a second time to preserve that silence before
God, which he might already appear to have attained; for, amidst the
disturbing motions of the flesh, perfect composure is what we never
reach. The danger is, that when new winds of troubles spring up, we lose
that inward tranquillity which we enjoyed, and hence the necessity of
improving the example of David, by establishing ourselves in it more and
more. He adds the ground of his silence. He had no immediate response
from God, but he confidently hoped in him. *My expectation,* he says,
*is from God.* Never, as if he had said, will he frustrate the patient
waiting of his saints; doubtless my silence shall meet with its reward;
I shall restrain myself, and not make that false haste which will only
retard my deliverance.

<span id="xxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
62:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** In God is my salvation and my
glory; the rock of my strength, and my hope, is in God. **8.** Hope in
him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is our
hope. Selah. **9.** Nevertheless, the sons of Adam are vanity, and the
children of men  <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md) a lie  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416.md) when they ascend in the scales, they
are found together lighter than vanity.  <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) **10.** Trust not in oppression and
robbery, and be not vain: if riches increase, set not your heart upon
them.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p8"></span>**7.** *In God is my salvation* One
expression is here heaped upon another and this apparently because he
wished to rein that infirmity of disposition which makes us so prone to
slide into wrong exercise. We may throw out a passing and occasional
acknowledgement, that our only help is to be found in God, and yet
shortly display our distrust in him by busying ourselves in all
directions to supplement what we consider defective in his aid. The
various terms which he employs to express the sufficiency of God as a
deliverer, may thus be considered as so many arguments to constancy, or
so many checks which he would apply to the waywardness of the carnal
heart, ever disposed to depend for support upon others rather than God.
Such is the manner in which he animates his own spirit; and next, we
find him addressing himself to others, calling upon them to enter upon
the same conflict, and reap the same victory and triumph. By the
*people,* there seems little doubt that he means the Jews. The Gentiles
being yet unvisited by the true religion and divine revelation, it was
only in Judea that God could be the object of trust and religious
invocation; and it would appear, that by distinguishing the chosen
people of the Lord from the surrounding heathen, he insinuates how
disgraceful it would be in them not to devote themselves entirely to
God, being, as they were, the children of Abraham, favored with the
discovery of his grace, and specially taken under his divine protection.
The expression, *at all times,* means both in prosperity and adversity,
intimating the blameworthiness of those who waver and succumb under
every variation in their outward circumstances. God tries his children
with afflictions, but here they are taught by David to abide them with
constancy and courage. The hypocrites, who are loud in their praises of
God so long as prosperity shines upon their head, while their heart
fails them upon the first approach of trial, dishonor his name by
placing a most injurious limitation to his power. We are bound to put
honor upon his name by remembering, in our greatest extremities, that to
Him belong the issues of death. And as we are all too apt at such times
to shut up our affliction in our own breast — a circumstance which can
only aggravate the trouble and imbitter the mind against God, David
could not have suggested a better expedient than that of disburdening
our cares to him, and thus, as it were, *pouring out our hearts before
him.* It is always found, that when the heart is pressed under a load of
distress, there is no freedom in prayer.  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md) Under trying circumstances, we must
comfort ourselves by reflecting that God will extend relief, provided we
just freely roll them over upon his consideration. What the Psalmist
advises is all the more necessary, considering the mischievous tendency
which we have naturally to keep our troubles pent up in our breasts till
they drive us to despair. Usually, indeed, men show much anxiety and
ingenuity in seeking to escape from the troubles which may happen to
press upon them; but so long as they shun coming into the presence of
God, they only involve themselves in a labyrinth of difficulties. Not to
insist farther upon the words, David is here to be considered as
exposing that diseased but deeply-rooted principle in our nature, which
leads us to hide our griefs, and ruminate upon them, instead of
relieving ourselves at once by pouring out our prayers and complaints
before God. The consequence is, that we are distracted more and more
with our distresses, and merge into a state of hopeless despondency. In
the close of the verse, he says, in reference to the people generally,
what he had said of himself individually, that their safety was to be
found only under the divine protection.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p11"></span>**9.** *Nevertheless, the sons of Adam
are vanity.* If we take the particle <span
id="xxviii.iii-p11.1"></span>אך, *ach,* affirmatively, as meaning
*surely* or *certainly,* then this verse contains a confirmation of the
truth expressed in the preceding verse; and David argues by contrast,
 <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419.md) that as men are lighter than
vanity, we are shut up to the necessity of placing all our expectation
upon God. It would agree well, however, with the contrast to suppose,
that, under an impression of the little effect which the truth he had
announced was calculated to have upon the people, (ever disposed to
build upon fallacious hopes,) he exclaims, with a degree of holy fervor,
*Nevertheless, etc.* According to this view, he is here administering a
reproof to the blind infidelity so prevalent amongst men, and which
leads them to deceive themselves with lying vanities rather than trust
in the infallible promises of Jehovah. Having had occasion to discover
such a large amount of vanity in the chosen seed of Abraham, he does not
scruple to speak of the whole human family in general as being abandoned
to lying delusions. The adverb <span id="xxviii.iii-p12.3"></span>יחד*,
yachad, together,* intimates that all, without exception, are ready to
find an occasion of turning aside. Such is the sweeping condemnation
passed, not upon a few individuals, but upon human nature, declaring men
to be lighter than vanity; and may we not ask what in this case becomes
of boasted reason, wisdom, and free-will? It is of no avail to object,
that believers are delivered from the deceit which is here condemned. If
they owe their exemption from lying and vanity to the regeneration of
the Spirit, this is to grant that they were subject to these in their
natural state. The first man was created by God upright, but drew us by
his fall into such a depth of corruption, that any light which was
originally bestowed has been totally obscured. Is it alleged that there
still remain in man such gifts of God as are not to be despised, and as
distinguish him from all the other creatures, this is easily answered,
by remembering, that however great these may be, he is tainted by sin,
and therefore nothing to be accounted of. It is only when allied with
the knowledge of God that any of the endowments conferred upon us from
above can be said to have a real excellency; — apart from this, they are
vitiated by that contagion of sin which has not left a vestige in man of
his original integrity. With too much justice, then, might David say
that all men are vanity and nothingness.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p13"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p14"></span>**10** *Trust not in oppression and
robbery* We are here taught that there can be no real trusting in God
until we put away all those vain confidences which prove so many means
of turning us away from him. The Psalmist bids us remove whatsoever
would have this tendency, and purge ourselves of every vicious desire
that would usurp the place of God in our hearts. One or two kinds of sin
only are mentioned, but these are to be understood as representing a
part for the whole, all those vain and rival confidences of which we
must be divested before we can cleave to God with true purpose and
sincerity of heart. By *oppression and robbery* may be understood the
act itself of abstracting by violence, and the thing which has been
abstracted. It is obviously the design of the passage to warn us against
the presumption and hardihood of sin, which is so apt to blind the
hearts of men, and deceive them into the belief that their evil courses
are sanctioned by the impunity which is extended to them. Interpreters
have differed in their construction of the words of this verse. Some
join to each of the nouns its own verb, reading, *Trust not in
oppression, and be not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set not your
heart upon them.*  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420.md) Others
connect the words *oppression and robbery* with the first verb, and make
the second to stand apart by itself in an indefinite sense. It is of
very little consequence which of the constructions we adopt, since both
express the main sentiment; and it is evident that the Psalmist, in
condemning the infatuated confidence of those who boast in robbery,
appropriately terms it a mere illusion of the mind, with which they
deceive or amuse themselves. Having denounced, in the first place, those
desires which are plainly evil and positively wicked, he proceeds
immediately afterwards to guard against an inordinate attachment even to
such riches as may have been honestly acquired. To *set the heart* upon
riches, means more than simply to covet the possession of them. It
implies being carried away by them into a false confidence, or, to use
an expression of Paul, “Being high-minded.” The admonition here given is
one which daily observation teaches us to be necessary. It is uniformly
seen that prosperity and abundance engender a haughty spirit, leading
men at once to be presumptuous in their carriage before God, and
reckless in inflicting injury upon their fellow-creatures. But, indeed,
the worst effect to be feared from a blind and ungoverned spirit of this
kind is, that, in the intoxication of outward greatness, we be left to
forget how frail we are, and proudly and contumeliously to exalt
ourselves against God.

<span id="xxviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
62:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p2"></span>**11**. God hath spoken once; twice have
I heard this, that power belongeth unto God. **12**. Also unto thee, O
Lord: belongeth mercy; thou wilt certainly render to every man according
to his work.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p5"></span>**11** *God hath spoken once.* The
Psalmist considered that the only effectual method of abstracting the
minds of men from the vain delusions in which they are disposed to
trust, was bringing them to acquiesce implicitly and firmly in the
judgment of God. Usually they are swayed in different directions, or
inclined at least to waver, just as they observe things changing in the
world;  <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421.md) but he brings under
their notice a surer principle for the regulation of their conduct, when
he recommends a deferential regard to God’s Word. God himself “dwells in
the light which is inaccessible,” (<span id="xxviii.iv-p6.3"></span>[1Ti
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)<span
id="xxviii.iv-p6.3"></span>;) and as none can come to him except by
faith, the Psalmist calls our attention to his word, in which he
testifies the truth of his divine and righteous government of the world.
It is of great consequence that we be established in the belief of God’s
Word, and we are here directed to the unerring certainty which belongs
to it. The passage admits of two interpretations; but the scope of it is
plainly this, that God acts consistently with himself, and can never
swerve from what he has said. Many understand David to say that God had
spoken once and a second time; and that by this explicit and repeated
assertion of his power and mercy, he had confirmed the truth beyond all
possibility of contradiction. There is a passage much to the same effect
in the thirty-third chapter of the book of Job, and fourteenth verse,
where the same words are used, only the copulative is interposed. If any
should prefer it, however, I have no objections to the other meaning —
*God has spoken once; twice have I heard this.* It agrees with the
context, and suggests a practical lesson of great importance; for when
God has once issued his word he never retracts: on the other hand, it is
our duty to ponder on what he has said, long and deliberately; and the
meaning of David will then be, that he considered the Word of God in the
light of a decree, steadfast and irreversible, but that, as regarded his
exercise in reference to it, he meditated upon it again and again, lest
the lapse of time might obliterate it from his memory. But the simpler
and preferable reading would seem to be, that God had spoken once and
again. There is no force in the ingenious conjecture, that allusion may
be made to God’s having spoken once in the Law, and a second time in the
Prophets. Nothing more is meant than that the truth referred to had been
amply confirmed, it being usual to reckon anything certain and fixed
which has been repeatedly announced. Here, however, it must be
remembered, that every word which may have issued forth from God is to
be received with implicit authority, and no countenance given to the
abominable practice of refusing to receive a doctrine, unless it can be
supported by two or three texts of Scripture. This has been defended by
an unprincipled heretic among ourselves, who has attempted to subvert
the doctrine of a free election, and of a secret providence. It was not
the intention of David to say that God was tied down to the necessity of
repeating what he might choose to announce, but simply to assert the
certainty of a truth which had been declared in clear and unambiguous
terms. In the context which follows, he exemplifies himself that
deferential reverence and regard for the word of God which all should,
but which so few actually do, extend to it.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p7"></span>We might just put together, in a
connected form, the particular doctrines which he has singled out for
special notice. It is essentially necessary, if we would fortify our
minds against temptation, to have suitably exalted views of the power
and mercy of God, since nothing will more effectually preserve us in a
straight and undeviating course, than a firm persuasion that all events
are in the hand of God, and that he is as merciful as he is mighty.
Accordingly, David follows up what he had said on the subject of the
deference to be yielded to the word, by declaring that he had been
instructed by it in the power and goodness of God. Some understand him
to say, that God is possessed of power to deliver his people, and of
clemency imbuing him to exercise it. But he would rather appear to mean,
that God is strong to put a restraint upon the wicked, and crush their
proud and nefarious designs, but ever mindful of his goodness in
protecting and defending his own children. The man who disciplines
himself to the contemplation of these two attributes, which ought never
to be dissociated in our minds from the idea of God, is certain to stand
erect and immovable under the fiercest assaults of temptation; while, on
the other hand, by losing sight of the all-sufficiency of God, (which we
are too apt to do,) we lay ourselves open to be overwhelmed in the first
encounter. The world’s opinion of God is, that he sits in heaven an idle
and unconcerned spectator of events which are passing. Need we wonder,
that men tremble under every casualty, when they thus believe themselves
to be the sport of blind chance? There can be no security felt unless we
satisfy ourselves of the truth of a divine superintendence, and can
commit our lives and all that we have to the hands of God. The first
thing which we must look to is his power, that we may have a thorough
conviction of his being a sure refuge to such as cast themselves upon
his care. With this there must be conjoined confidence in his mercy, to
prevent those anxious thoughts which might otherwise rise in our minds.
These may suggest the doubt — What though God govern the world? does it
follow that he will concern himself about such unworthy objects as
ourselves?

<span id="xxviii.iv-p8"></span>There is an obvious reason, then, for the
Psalmist coupling these two things together, his power and his clemency.
They are the two wings wherewith we fly upwards to heaven; the two
pillars on which we rest, and may defy the surges of temptation. Does
danger, in short, spring up from any quarter, then just let us call to
remembrance that divine power which can bid away all harms, and as this
sentiment prevails in our minds, our troubles cannot fail to fall
prostrate before it. Why should we fear — how can we be afraid, when the
God who covers us with the shadow of his wings, is the same who rules
the universe with his nod, holds in secret chains the devil and all the
wicked, and effectually overrules their designs and intrigues?

<span id="xxviii.iv-p9"></span>The Psalmist adds, *Thou wilt certainly
render to every man according to his work.* And here he brings what he
said to bear still more closely upon the point which he would establish,
declaring that the God who governs the world by his providence will
judge it in righteousness. The expectation of this, duly cherished, will
have a happy effect in composing our minds, allaying impatience, and
checking any disposition to resent and retaliate under our injuries. In
resting himself and others before the great bar of God, he would both
encourage his heart in the hope of that deliverance which was coming,
and teach himself to despise the insolent persecution of his enemies,
when he considered that every man’s work was to come into judgment
before Him, who can no more cease to be Judge than deny himself. We can
therefore rest assured, however severe our wrongs may be, though wicked
men should account us the filth and the off-scourings of all things,
that God is witness to what we suffer, will interpose in due time, and
will not disappoint our patient expectation. From this, and passages of
a similar kind, the Papists have argued, in defense of their doctrine,
that justification and salvation depend upon good works; but I have
already exposed the fallacy of their reasoning. No sooner is mention
made of works, than they catch at the expression, as amounting to a
statement that God rewards men upon the ground of merit. It is with a
very different design than to encourage any such opinion, that the
Spirit promises a reward to our works — it is to animate us in the ways
of obedience, and not to inflame that impious self-confidence which cuts
up salvation by the very roots. According to the judgment which God
forms of the works of the believer, their worth and valuation depend,
first, upon the free pardon extended to him as a sinner, and by which he
becomes reconciled to God; and, next, upon the divine condescension and
indulgence which accepts his services,  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) notwithstanding all their
imperfections. We know that there is none of our works which, in the
sight of God, can be accounted perfect or pure, and without taint of
sin. Any recompense they meet with must therefore be traced entirely to
his goodness. Since the Scriptures promise a reward to the saints, with
the sole intention of stimulating their minds, and encouraging them in
the divine warfare, and not with the remotest design of derogating from
the mercy of God, it is absurd in the Papists to allege that they, in
any sense, merit what is bestowed upon them. As regards the wicked, none
will dispute that the punishment awarded to them, as violators of the
law, is strictly deserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc09027.htm#fr_407.md) <span
id="xxviii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p5"></span> Jeduthun was first chosen to be one of the
chief musicians in conducting the praises of the Jewish sanctuary when
the ark was brought from Obed-edom to mount Zion. His sons were also
appointed to preside over different departments of the vocal and
instrumental worship in the tabernacle. He had six sons who were thus
employed. Jeduthun and his family appear to have been eminent for their
piety, and to have been endued with the spirit of prophecy.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc09027.htm#fr_408.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p6.1"></span>Sicuti
patheticae sententiae ut plurimum defectivae sunt.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxviii.i-p6.2"></span>Comme nous scavons que les propos dits de
quelque affection vehemente, le plus souvent sont imparfaits.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc09027.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p7"></span> The import of the Hebrew word is “patient
silence.” The Septuagint reads, “<span id="xxviii.i-p7.1"></span>Ουχι τῶ
Θεῶ ὑποταγήσεται ἡ ψυχή μου? “Shall not my soul be subject to God?” And
doubtless the Psalmist intended to say that his soul was quiet,
submissive, and subject; the rebellious affections being tamed and
subdued. With respect to the translation of our English Bible, “Truly my
soul waiteth upon God,” Dr Adam Clarke remarks, “I do not think that the
original will warrant this translation.” He reads, “Surely to God only
is my soul dumb;” which he thus explains: “I am subject to God Almighty.
He has a right to lay on me what He pleases; and what He lays on me is
much less than I deserve; therefore am *I dumb* before God. The Vulgate,
and, almost all the versions, have understood it in this sense: ‘<span
id="xxviii.i-p7.2"></span>Nonne Deo subjecta erit anima mea? Shall not
my soul be subject to God?’” With this agree the version and
interpretation of Calvin.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc09027.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxviii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
courrez-vous sus l’homme?” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, will ye make assaults
upon a man?”

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc09027.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p7"></span> Hammond observes, that this verb “is but
once used in the Scriptures, and so will not be easily interpreted but
either by the notion which we find put upon it by the ancient
interpreters, or else by the Arabic use of it.” The Chaldee renders it,
*raise tumults*; the Syriac, *stir up*, *instigate*, *incite*, or
*provoke*; the Septuagint and Vulgate, *assail*, or *rush upon*; and the
Arabic, *use violence or injustice* Gesenius gives the sense of the
Septuagint. Kimchi and Aben Ezra read, <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.1"></span>*pravitatis cogitabitis* “Abu Walid compares
<span id="xxviii.ii-p7.2"></span>תהותתו with the Arabic <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.3"></span>תהתהתו, with *t*, not with *th*, which
signifies *to multiply words*; and so he would have it, according to the
use of it in that tongue, to signify speaking much against, backbiting,
defaming, spreading evil reports of, lashing out with your tongues
against, for hurt. What he thus observes of <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.4"></span>תהותתו, with *t*, not *th*, may have place
also with the word, as we have it; for the root with <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.5"></span>ת, *th* also in Arabic signifies <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.6"></span>*mentiri*, *to lie*, and *confusion*,
*injustice*, *violence*; which as well agree to his sense as that of the
root with *t*.” When David says, *against a man*, and uses also the
third person in the fourth verse, it is of himself that he speaks.
“*Against* *a man*; *i* *e*., against me, a man like yourselves, whom
common hmnanity obliges you to pity; a single man, who is no fit match
for you.” — *Poole*’*s Annotations*

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc09027.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.7"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p8"></span> Isaiah has also made use of this image
to express sudden and utter destruction, (<span
id="xxviii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc09027.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p9"></span> In the East it is common for the
inhabitants to enclose their vineyards and gardens with hedges,
consisting of various kinds of shrubs, and particularly such as are
armed with spines. They have also mounds of earth-walls about their
gardens. Rawwolff describes the gardens about Jerusalem as surrounded by
mud-walls, not above four feet high, easily climbed over, and washed
down by rain in a very little time. Stone-walls are also frequently
used. Thus Egmont or Heyman, describing the country about Saphet, a
celebrated city of Galilee, tells us, “The country round it is finely
improved, the declivity being covered with vines, supported by low
walls. — *Harmer*’*s Observations*, volume 2, pp. 216-219. Doubdan
describes some of these in the Holy Land as built of loose stones,
without any cement to join them. The original word probably means some
such “fence” as this. Indeed, it always appears to denote a wall of
stones: sometimes in express contradistinction to the hedge, or thorny
fence. — See *Parkhurst*’*s Lexicon*, on <span
id="xxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>גדר

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc09027.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="xxviii.ii-p12.1"></span>Les
Poetes profanes ont dit que les Geans delibererent de prendre les plus
hautes montagnes et les mettans l’une sur l’autre, monter jusques au
ciel, pour arracher Jupiter de son siege.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “It was said
by the profane poets that the Giants formed a design of taking the
highest mountains which they could find piling them one above another,
scaling the heavens, and taking Jupiter by storm.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc09027.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p3"></span> <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.1"></span>כני
ארם, *beney Adam*, *the sons of Adam* <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.2"></span>כני אים, *beney ish*, *the sons of
substance*, or children of substantial men, as Dr Adam Clarke renders
the phrase. “Adam,” says he, “was the name of the first man when formed
out of the *earth*: *Ish* was his name when united to his wife, and they
became one flesh. *Before*, he was the incomplete man; *after*, he was
the *complete* man.” The phrases are rendered in our English version,
*men of low degree*, and *men of high degree* — See note, p. 236, of
this volume; and volume1, note 1, p. 100.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc09027.htm#fr_416.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p4"></span> “Because they promise much, and rouse
men’s expectations upon consideration of their great power and dignity,
but are not able to perform, and generally deceive those who trust in
them. In which respect lying is ascribed to *a fountain*, <span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.1"></span>[Jer
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.1"></span>; to *wine*, <span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.2"></span>[Ho
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002.md)<span id="xxviii.iii-p4.2"></span>;
to *the olive*, <span id="xxviii.iii-p4.3"></span>[Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.3"></span>; when they do not give what they promise.”
— *Poole*’*s Annotations*.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc09027.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p5"></span> <span
id="xxviii.iii-p5.1"></span>הכל”*hebel* The radical meaning of the term
is, *a breath* The same word occurs in the first clause, intimating,
that men of low degree are as unsubstantial as a breath; and here men of
low degree, and men of high degree, when both are united, are described
as lighter than a breath. See p. 78 of this volume, note 1. “Taking the
infinitive with <span id="xxviii.iii-p5.3"></span>ל, *lamed*, to stand
for the future, as it often does, the latter part may be literally
translated, ‘They will ascend together in the balance more than
vanity.’” — *Arch* *Secker* This strongly expresses how unavailing it is
to trust in man. If men of low degree and men of high degree are put
both together in one scale, and vanity in the other, the scale of vanity
will preponderate.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc09027.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p9"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.iii-p9.1"></span>Cependant que nostre coeur est enserre et
comme estouppd de douleur, jamais il n’en sort de prieres naifves et
franchement faites.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc09027.htm#fr_419.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iii-p12.1"></span>A
repugnantibus ostendet David.” — *Lat*. Explained in the French version
thus — “<span id="xxviii.iii-p12.2"></span>Montrera par un argument
prins des choses repugnantes.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc09027.htm#fr_420.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p15"></span> The words are thus connected in our
English version.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc09027.htm#fr_421.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iv-p6.1"></span>Ad
varias mundi inclinationes.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxviii.iv-p6.2"></span>Selon les divers changements qu’on voit au
monde.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc09027.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p10"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.iv-p10.1"></span>D’une pure douceur et support debonnaire
dont il use, il fait qu’icelles soyent acceptees de lui,” etc. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 63](cc09028.md)
