[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09009)  [Next](cc09011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>PSALM 45

<span id="xi-p2"></span>In this psalm, the grace and beauty of Solomon,
his virtues in ruling the kingdom, and also his power and riches, are
illustrated and described in terms of high commendation. More
especially, as he had taken to wife a stranger out of Egypt, the
blessing of God is promised to him in this relationship, provided the
newly espoused bride, bidding adieu to her own nation, and renouncing
all attachment to it, devote herself wholly to her husband. At the same
time, there can be no doubt, that under this figure the majesty, wealth,
and extent of Christ’s kingdom are described and illustrated by
appropriate terms, to teach the faithful that there is no felicity
greater or more desirable than to live under the reign of this king, and
to be subject to his government.

<span id="xi-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon the lilies; of the
sons of Korah;  
for instruction; a song of loves.

<span id="xi-p4"></span>It is well known that this psalm was composed
concerning Solomon; but it is uncertain who was its author. It is, in my
opinion, probable, that some one of the prophets or godly teachers
(whether after Solo-men’s death, or while he was yet alive, it is of no
importance to inquire) took this as the subject of his discourse, with
the design of showing, that whatever excellence had been seen in Solomon
had a higher application. This psalm is called *a song of loves,* not,
as some suppose, because it illustrates the fatherly love of God, as to
the benefits which he had conferred in such a distinguished manner upon
Solomon, but because it contains an expression of rejoicing on account
of his happy and prosperous marriage. Thus the words, *of loves,* are
put for a descriptive epithet, and denote, that it is a love-song.
Indeed, Solomon was called <span id="xi-p4.1"></span>ידידיה, *Yedidyah,*
which means *beloved of the Lord,* <span id="xi-p4.2"></span>[2Sa
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025.md)<span id="xi-p4.2"></span>. But
the context, in my opinion, requires that this term <span
id="xi-p4.3"></span>ירידות, *yedidoth,* that is to say, *loves,* be
understood as referring to the mutual love which husband and wife ought
to cherish towards each other. But as the word *loves* is sometimes
taken in a bad sense, and as even conjugal affection itself, however
well regulated, has always some irregularity of the flesh mingled with
it; this song is, at the same time, called <span
id="xi-p4.4"></span>משכיל, *maskil,* to teach us, that the subject here
treated of is not some obscene or unchaste amours, but that, under what
is here said of Solomon as a type, the holy and divine union of Christ
and his Church is described and set forth. As to the remaining part of
the inscription, interpreters explain it in various ways. <span
id="xi-p4.5"></span>שושן, *shushan,* properly signifies *a lily;* and
the sixtieth psalm has in its inscription the same term in the singular
number. Here, and in the eightieth psalm, the plural number is employed.
It is therefore probable, that it was either the beginning of a common
song, or else some instrument of music. But as this is a matter of no
great consequence, I give no opinion, but leave it undecided; for,
without any danger to the truth, every one may freely adopt on this
point whatever view he chooses.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
45:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1**. My heart is boiling over with a good
matter: I shall speak of the works which I have made concerning the
king: my tongue is as the pen of a swift writer. **2**. Thou art fairer
than the sons of men: grace is poured into thy lips; because God hath
blessed thee for ever. **3**. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O mighty
one! with glory and majesty.  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)
**4**. And in thy majesty do thou prosper: ride forth upon the word of
truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things. **5**. Thine arrows are sharp (so that the people
fall under thee) in the heart of the enemies of the King.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span><span id="xi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**1** *My heart is boiling over*  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md) *with a good matter* This preface
shows sufficiently that the subject of the psalm is no common one; for
whoever the author of it may have been, he here intimates, at the very
outset, that he will treat of great and glorious things. The Holy Spirit
is not accustomed to inspire the servants of God to utter great swelling
words, and to pour forth empty sounds into the air; and, therefore, we
may naturally conclude, that the subject here treated of is not merely a
transitory and earthly kingdom, but sortie-thing more excellent. Were
not this the case, what end would it serve to announce, as the prophet
does in such a magnificent style, that his heart *was boiling over,*
from his ardent desire to be employed in rehearsing the praises of the
king? Some prefer to translate the word *to utter;* but the other
signification of the word appears to me to be more appropriate; and it
is confirmed by this, that from this verb is derived the noun <span
id="xi.i-p7.4"></span>מרהשת, *marchesheth,* a word which is found once
or twice in Moses, and signifies a frying-pan, in which sweatmeats are
baked. It is then of the same import as if the inspired writer had said,
My heart is ready to breathe forth something excellent and worthy of
being remembered. He afterwards expresses the harmony between the tongue
and the heart, when he compares his tongue to *the pen of a swift* and
ready *writer*

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span><span id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**2.** *Thou art fairer than the sons of men.*
The Psalmist commences his subject with the commendation of the beauty
of the king, and then he proceeds also to praise his eloquence. Personal
excellence is ascribed to the king, not that the beauty of the
countenance, which of itself is not reckoned among the number of the
virtues, ought to be very highly valued; but because a noble disposition
of mind often shines forth in the very countenance of a man. This may
have been the case with Solomon, so that from his very countenance it
might have appeared that he was endued with superior gifts. Nor is the
grace of oratory undeservedly commended in a king, to whom it belongs,
by virtue of his office, not only to rule the people by authority, but
also to allure them to obedience by argument and eloquence, just as the
ancients feigned that Hercules had in his mouth golden chains, by which
he captivated the ears of the common people, and drew them after him.
How manifestly does this rebuke the mean-spiritedness of kings in our
day, by whom it is regarded as derogatory to their dignity to converse
with their subjects, and to employ remonstrance in order to secure their
submission; nay, who display a spirit of barbarous tyranny in seeking
rather to compel than to persuade them, and in choosing rather to abuse
them as slaves, than to govern them by laws and with justice as a
tractable and obedient people. But as this excellence was displayed in
Solomon, so also did it shine forth more fully afterwards in Christ, to
whom his truth serves the part of a scepter, as we shall have occasion
by and by to notice mere at large. The term <span
id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>על-כן*, al-ken,* which we have translated
*because,* is sometimes rendered *wherefore;* but it is not necessary
that we should interpret it in this place in the latter sense, as if
Solomon had been blessed on account of his beauty and excellence, for
both of these are blessings of God. It is rather to be understood as the
reason why Solomon was distinguished for these endowments, namely,
because God had blessed him. As to the interpretation which others give,
*God shall bless thee for thy excellency,* it is both cold and forced.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span><span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Gird thy sword upon thy thigh.* Here
Solomon is praised as well for his warlike valor, which strikes terror
into \]his enemies, as for his virtues which give him authority among
his subjects, and secure him their reverence. On the one hand, no king
will be able to preserve and defend his subjects, unless he is
formidable to his enemies; and, on the other hand, it will be to little
purpose to make war boldly upon foreign realms, if the internal state of
his own kingdom is not established and regulated in uprightness and
justice. Accordingly, the inspired writer says, that the sword with
which he will be girded will be, in the first place, a token of warlike
prowess to repel and rout his enemies; and, secondly, of authority
*also,* that he might not be held in contempt among his own subjects. He
adds, at the same time, that the glory which he will obtain will not be
a merely transient thing, like the pomp and vain-glory of kings, which
soon decay, but will be of lasting duration, and will greatly increase.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>He then comes to speak of the virtues which
flourish most in a time of peace, and which, by an appropriate
similitude, he shows to be the true means of adding strength and
prosperity to a kingdom. At first sight, indeed, it seems to be a
strange and inelegant mode of expression, to speak of *riding upon
truth, meekness, and righteousness,* (verse 4;) but, as I have said, he
very suitably compares these virtues to chariots, in which the king is
conspicuously borne aloft with great majesty. These virtues he opposes
not only to the vain pomp and parade in which earthly kings proudly
boast; but also to the vices and corruptions by which they endeavor most
commonly to acquire authority and renown. Solomon himself

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>“Mercy and truth preserve the king;  
and his throne is upholden by mercy.”— <span id="xi.i-p13.2"></span>[Pr
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028.md)<span id="xi.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>But, on the contrary, when worldly kings
desire to enlarge their dominions, and to increase their power,
ambition, pride, fierceness, cruelty, exactions, rapine, and violence,
are the horses and chariots which they employ to accomplish their ends;
and, therefore, it is not to be wondered at if God should very often
cast them down, when thus elated with pride and vain-glory, from their
tottering and decayed thrones. For kings, then, to cultivate
faithfulness and justice, and to temper their government with mercy and
kindness, is the true and solid foundation of kingdoms. The latter
clause of the verse intimates, that every thing which Solomon undertakes
shall prosper, provided he combine with warlike courage the qualities of
justice and mercy. Kings who are carried headlong with a blind and
violent impulse, may for a time spread terror and consternation around
them; but they soon fall by the force of their own efforts. Due
moderation, therefore, and uniform self-restraint, are the best means
for making the hands of the valiant to be feared and dreaded.

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span><span id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**5.** *Thy arrows are sharp, etc.* Here the
Psalmist again refers to warlike power, when he says that the *arrows*
of the king shall be sharp, so that they shall pierce the *hearts of his
enemies;* by which he intimates that he has weapons in his hand with
which to strike, even at a distance, all his enemies, whoever they may
be, who resist his authority. In the same sense also he says that *the
people shall fall under him;* as if it had been said, Whoever shall
engage in the attempt to shake the stability of his kingdom shah
miserably perish, for the king has in his hand a sufficiency of power to
break the stubbornness of all such persons.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
45:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**6**. Thy throne, O God: is for ever and
ever the sceptre of thy kingdom is the sceptre of equity. **7**. Thou
lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: because God, thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *Thy throne, O God! is for ever and
ever.* In this verse the Psalmist commends other princely virtues in
Solomon, namely, the eternal duration of his throne, and then the
justice and rectitude of his mode of government. The Jews, indeed,
explain this passage as if the discourse were addressed to God, but such
an interpretation is frivolous and impertinent. Others of them read the
word <span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>אלהים, *Elohim,* in the genitive case,
and translate it *of God,* thus: *The throne of thy God* But for this
there is no foundation, and it only betrays their presumption in not
hesitating to wrest the Scriptures so shamefully, that they may not be
constrained to acknowledge the divinity of the Messiah.  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) The simple and natural sense is, that
Solomon reigns not tyrannically, as the most of kings do, but by just
and equal laws, and that, therefore, his throne shall be established for
ever. Although he is called *God,* because God has imprinted some mark
of his glory in the person of kings, yet this title cannot well be
applied to a mortal man; for we nowhere read in Scripture that man or
angel has been distinguished by this title without some qualification.
It is true, indeed, that angels as well as judges are called
collectively <span id="xi.ii-p6.2"></span>אלהים, *Elohim, gods;* but not
individually, and no one man is called by this name without some word
added by way of restriction, as when Moses was appointed to be a god to
Pharaoh, (<span id="xi.ii-p6.3"></span>[Ex
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)<span id="xi.ii-p6.3"></span>..md)
From this we may naturally infer, that this psalm relates, as we shall
soon see, to a higher than any earthly kingdom.

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>In the next verse there is set before us a
fuller statement of the righteousness for which this monarch is
distinguished; for we are told that he is no less strict in, the
punishment of iniquity than in maintaining justice. We know how many and
great evils are engendered by impunity and license in doing evil, when
kings are negligent and slack in punishing crimes. Hence the old
proverb, That it is better to live under a prince who gives no
allowance, than under one who imposes no restraint. To the same purpose
also is the well-known sentiment of Solomon,

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>“He that justifieth the wicked, and he that
condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.” —  
(<span id="xi.ii-p8.2"></span>[Pr
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#015)<span id="xi.ii-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>Just and rightful government, therefore,
consists of these two parts: first, That they who rule should carefully
restrain wickedness; and, secondly, That they should vigorously maintain
righteousness; even as Plato has well and wisely said, that civil
government consists of two parts — rewards and punishments. When the
Psalmist adds, that the king was *anointed above his fellows,* this is
not to be understood as the effect or fruit of his righteousness, but
rather as the cause of it: for the love of uprightness and equity by
which Solomon was actuated arose from the fact, that he was divinely
appointed to the kingdom. In ordaining him to the honor of authority and
empire, Jehovah, at the same time, furnished him with the necessary
endowments. The particle <span id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>על-כם *al-ken,*
therefore, as in the former instance, is to be understood here in the
sense of *because;* as if it had been said, It is no wonder that Solomon
is so illustrious for his love of justice, since, from the number of all
his brethren, he was chosen to be consecrated king by holy anointing.
Even before he was born, he was solemnly named by a divine oracle, as
successor to the kingdom, and when he was elevated to the throne, he was
also adorned with princely virtues. From this it follows, that anointing
in respect of order preceded righteousness, and that, therefore,
righteousness cannot be accounted the cause of the anointing. The royal
dignity is called *the oil of gladness,* because of the effect of it;
for the felicity and welfare of the Church depended upon the kingdom
promised to the house of David.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md)

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>Hitherto, I have explained the text in the
literal sense. But it is necessary that I should now proceed to
illustrate somewhat more largely the comparison of Solomon with Christ,
which I have only cursorily noticed. It would be quite sufficient for
the pious and humble simply to state what is obvious, from the usual
tenor of Scripture, that the posterity of David typically represented
Christ to the ancient people of God; but as the Jews and other ungodly
men refuse to submit cordially to the force of truth, it is of
importance to show briefly from the context itself, the principal
reasons from which it appears that some of the things here spoken are
not applicable fully and perfectly to Solomon. As I intimated at the
outset, the design of the prophet who composed this psalm was to confirm
the hearts of the faithful, and to guard them against the terror and
alarm with which the melancholy change that happened soon after might
fill their minds. An everlasting duration, it might be said, had been
promised to this kingdom, and it fell into decay after the death of one
man. To this objection, therefore, the prophet replies, that although
Rehoboam, who was the first successor of that glorious and powerful
king, had his sovereignty reduced within narrow limits, so that a great
part of the people were cut off and placed beyond the bounds of his
dominion, yet that was no reason why the faith of the Church should
fail; for in the kingdom of Solomon God had exhibited a type or figure
of that everlasting kingdom which was still to be looked for and
expected. In the first place, the name of king is ascribed to Solomon,
simply by way of eminence, to teach us, that what is here said is not
spoken of any common or ordinary king, but of that illustrious
sovereign, whose throne God had promised should endure as long as the
sun and moon continued to shine in the heavens, (<span
id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ps 72:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#005.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>.) David certainly was king, and so were those
who succeeded Solomon. It is necessary then to observe, that there is in
this term some special significance, as if the Holy Spirit had selected
this one man from all others, to distinguish him by the highest mark of
sovereignty. Besides, how inconsistent would it be to commend very
highly warlike valor in Solomon, who was a man of a meek and quiet
disposition, and who having ascended the throne when the kingdom enjoyed
tranquillity and peace, devoted himself only to the cultivation of those
things that are suitable to a time of peace, and never distinguished
himself by any action in battle? But, above all, no clearer testimony
could be adduced of the application of this psalm to Christ, than what
is here said of the eternal duration of the kingdom. There can be no
doubt, that allusion is here made to the holy oracle of which I have
already made mention, That as long as the sun and moon shall endure in
the heavens the throne of David shall endure. Even the Jews themselves
are constrained to refer this to the Messiah. Accordingly, although the
prophet commenced his discourse concerning the son of David, there can
be no doubt, that, guided by the Holy Spirit to a higher strain, he
comprehended the kingdom of the true and everlasting Messiah. Besides,
there is the name <span id="xi.ii-p11.2"></span>אלהים, *Elohim,* which
it is proper to notice. It is no doubt also applied both to angels and
men, but it cannot be applied to a mere man without qualification. And,
therefore, the divine majesty of Christ, beyond all question, is
expressly denoted here.  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md)

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>I now proceed to notice the several parts,
which however I shall only refer to briefly in passing. We have said
that while this song is called a *love song,* or *wedding song,*
stilldivine instruction is made to hold the most prominent place in it,
lest our imaginations should lead us to regard it as referring to some
lascivious and carnal amours. We know also, that in the same sense
Christ is called “the perfection of beauty;” not that there was any
striking display of it in his countenance, as some men grossly imagine,
but because he was distinguished by the possession of singular gifts and
graces, in which he far excelled all others. Nor is it an unusual style
of speaking, that what is spiritual in Christ should be described under
the form of earthly figures. The kingdom of Christ, it is said, shall be
opulent; and in addition to this it is said, that it shall attain to a
state of great glory, such as we see where there is great prosperity and
vast power. In this description there is included also abundance of
pleasures. Now, there is nothing of all this that applies literally to
the kingdom of Christ, which is separated from the pomps of this world.
But as it was the design of the prophets to adapt their instruction to
the capacity of God’s ancient people, so in describing the kingdom of
Christ, and the worship of God which ought to be observed in it, they
employ figures taken from the ceremonies of the Law. If we bear in mind
this mode of statement, in accordance with which such descriptions are
made, there will no longer be any obscurity in this passage. It is also
deserving of our notice, that, after the Psalmist has commended this
heavenly king for his eloquence, he also describes him as armed with
*his sword.* As, on the one hand, he governs by the influence of
persuasion, those who willingly submit to his authority, and manifest
docility of disposition; so, on the other hand, as there have been in
all ages, and will continue to be, many who are rebellious and
disobedient, it is necessary that the unbelieving should be made to feel
in their own destruction that Christ has not come unarmed. While,
therefore, he, is alluring us with meekness and kindness to himself, let
us promptly and submissively yield to his authority, lest he should fall
upon us, armed as he is with his sword and with deadly arrows. It is
said, indeed, with much propriety, that *grace is poured into his lips;*
for the Gospel, in its very nature, breathes the odour of life: but if
we are stubborn and rebellious, this grace will become a ground of
terror, and Christ himself will convert the very doctrine of his
salvation into a sword and arrows against us. From this also there
arises no small consolation to us, that the multitude and insolence of
the adversaries of Christ may not discourage us. We know well with what
arrogance the Papists reject Jesus Christ, whom, nevertheless, they
boast to be their King; we know also with what profane contempt the
greater part of the world deride him, and how frowardly the Turks and
Jews reproach him. In the midst of such disorder, let us remember this
prophecy, That Christ has no want of a sword and arrows to overthrow and
destroy his enemies. Here I will again briefly repeat what I have
noticed above, namely, that however much the Jews endeavor by their
cavillings to pervert the sense of this verse, *Thy throne, O God! is
for ever and ever,* yet it is sufficient of itself to establish the
eternal divinity of Christ: for when the name <span
id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>אלהים, *Elohim* is ascribed either to angels or
men, some other mark is at the same time usually added, to distinguish
between them and the only true God; but here it is applied to Christ,
simply and without any qualification. It is of importance, however, to
notice, that Christ is here spoken of as he is

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>“God manifested in the flesh,” — (<span
id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>[1Ti 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span>He is also called God, as he is the Word,
begotten of the Father before all worlds; but he is here set forth in
the character of Mediator, and on this account also mention is made of
him a little after, as being subject to God. And, indeed, if you limit
to his divine nature what is here said of the everlasting duration of
his kingdom, we shall be deprived of the inestimable benefit which
redounds to us from this doctrine, when we learn that, as he is the head
of the Church, the author and protector of our welfare, he reigns not
merely for a time, but possesses an endless sovereignty; for from this
we derive our greatest confidence both in life and in death. From the
following verse also it clearly appears, that Christ is here exhibited
to us in the character of Mediator; for he is said *to have been
anointed of God,* yea, even *above his fellows,* (<span
id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>[Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>; <span id="xi.ii-p15.2"></span>[Heb
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span id="xi.ii-p15.2"></span>..md)
This, however, cannot apply to the eternal Word of God, but to Christ in
the flesh, and in this character he is both the servant of God and our
brother.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
45:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**8.** All thy garments smell of myrrh, and
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whence they have made thee
glad **9.** The daughters of kings were among thy honorable women:
 <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) thy consort stood on thy right
hand  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) in gold of Ophir.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md) **10.** Hearken, O daughter! And
consider, and incline thy ear; and forget thy own people and thy
father’s house. **11**. And the King shall greatly desire thy beauty:
for he is thy Lord, and thou shalt worship him.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) **12.** And the daughter of Tyre with
a gift: the rich among the people shall entreat thy face.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span><span id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *All thy garments smell of myrrh* As
to the signification of the words I am not disposed to contend much, for
I find that even the Jews are not agreed among themselves as to the
meaning of the third word, except that from the similarity of
pronunciation it may be conjectured to denote cassia. It is sufficient
that we understand the prophet as meaning that the garments of the king
are perfumed with precious and sweet-smelling odours. He describes
Solomon coming forth from his ivory palace amidst shoutings of universal
applause and joy. I explain not the word <span
id="xi.iii-p9.1"></span>מני, *minni, Out of me,* because no tolerable
meaning can be drawn from this. I translate it *whence,*  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) and refer it to the *ivory palaces*
Superfluity and excess in pleasures cannot be justified, not only in the
common people, but not even in kings; yet, on the other hand, it is
necessary to guard against too much austerity, that we may not condemn
the moderate display of grandeur which is suitable to their dignity,
even as, a little after, the prophet describes the queen sumptuously and
royally apparelled.  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) We must,
however, at the same time, consider that all that is here commended in
Solomon was not approved of by God. Not to speak of other things, it is
well known that from the very first the sin of polygamy was a thing
displeasing to God, and yet concubines are here spoken of as included
among the blessings of God, for there is no reason to doubt that by *the
honorable women,* or *maids of honor,*  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) the prophet means Solomon’s wives, of
whom mention is made in another place. The daughter of the king of
Egypt, whom Solomon had married, was his principal wife, and the first
in rank  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) but it appears that the
others, whom sacred history describes as occupying an inferior rank,
were provided for in a liberal and honorable manner. These the prophet
calls the *daughters of kings,* because some of them were descended of
the royal blood. In what sense, then, it might be asked, does the
prophet account it among the praises of Solomon that he had many wives,
— a thing which God condemns in all private *persons,* but expressly in
kings? (<span id="xi.iii-p13.2"></span>[De
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)<span id="xi.iii-p13.2"></span>..md)
Doubtless it may easily be inferred that in commending, according to a
common practice, the wealth and glory of the king, as the prophet here
does, he did not mean to approve of the abuse of them. It was not his
design to set forth the example of a man in opposition to the law of
God. It is true, indeed, that the power, dignity, and glory, which
Solomon enjoyed, were granted to him as singular blessings from God; but
as generally happens, he defiled them greatly by not exercising
self-control, and in abusing the great abundance with which he was
blessed, by the excessive indulgence of the flesh. In short, it is here
recorded what great liberality God manifested towards Solomon in giving
him every thing in abundance. As to the fact that he took to him so many
wives, and did not exercise a due moderation in his pomp, this is not to
be included in the liberality of God, but is a thing as it were
accidental.

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span><span id="xi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *Hearken, O daughter! and consider*
I have no doubt, that what is here said is spoken of the Egyptian woman,
whom the prophet has described as standing at the right hand of the
king. It was not, indeed, lawful for Solomon to marry a strange woman;
but this of itself is to be accounted among the gifts of God, that a
king so powerful as the king of Egypt was,  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) sought his alliance. At the same time,
as by the appointment of the Law, it was required that the Jews,
previous to entering into the marriage relation, should endeavor to
instruct their wives in the pure worship of God, and emancipate them
from superstition; in the present instance, in which the wife spoken of
was descended from a heathen nation, and who, by her present marriage,
was included in the body of the Church, the prophet, in order to
withdraw her from her evil training, exhorts her to forget her own
country and her father’s house, and to assume a new character and other
manners. If she did not do this, there was reason to fear, not only that
she would continue to observe in private the superstitions and false
modes of worshipping God to which she had been habituated, but that
also, by her public example, she would draw away many into a similar
evil course; and, indeed, this actually came to pass soon after. Such is
the reason of the exhortation which the prophet here gives her, in
which, in order to render his discourse of more weight, he addresses her
by the appellation of *daughter,* a term which it would have been
unsuitable for any private man to have used. The more clearly to show
how much it behoved the new bride to become altogether a new woman, he
employs several terms thereby to secure her attention, *Hearken,
consider, and incline thy ear* It is certainly a case in which much
vehemence and urgent persuasion are needed, when it is intended to lead
us to a complete renunciation of those things in which we take delight,
either by nature or by custom. He then shows that there is no reason why
the daughter of Pharaoh should feel any regret in forsaking *her
father,* her kinsfolk, and the land of Egypt, because she would receive
a glorious recompense, which ought to allay the grief she might
experience in being separated from them. To reconcile her to the thought
of leaving her own country, he encourages her by the consideration that
she is married to so illustrious a king.

<span id="xi.iii-p17"></span>Let us now return to Christ. And, in the
first place, let us remember that what is spiritual is here described to
us figuratively; even as the prophets, on account of the dulness of men,
were under the necessity of borrowing similitudes from earthly things.
When we bear in mind this style of speaking, which is quite common in
the Scriptures, we will not think it strange that the sacred writer here
makes mention of *ivory palaces, gold, precious stones,* and *spices;*
for by these he means to intimate that the kingdom of Christ will be
replenished with a rich abundance, and furnished with all good things.
The glory and excellence of the spiritual gifts, with which God enriches
his Church, are indeed held in no estimation among men; but in the sight
of God they are of more value than all the riches of the world. At the
same time, it is not necessary that we should apply curiously to Christ
every particular here enumerated;  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) as for instance, what is here said of
the many wives which Solomon had. If it should be imagined from this
that there may be several churches, the unity of Christ’s body will be
rent in pieces. I admit, that as every individual believer is called
“the temple of God,” (<span id="xi.iii-p18.1"></span>[1Co
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017.md)<span id="xi.iii-p18.1"></span>,
and 6:19,) so also might each be named “the spouse of Christ;” but
properly speaking, there is only one spouse of Christ, which consists of
the whole body of the faithful. She is said *to sit by the side of the
king,* not that she exercises any dominion peculiar to herself, but
because Christ rules in her; and it is in this sense that she is called
“the mother of us all,” (<span id="xi.iii-p18.2"></span>[Ga
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="xi.iii-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.iii-p19"></span>This passage contains a remarkable prophecy
in reference to the future calling of the Gentiles, by which the Son of
God formed an alliance with strangers and those who were his enemies.
There was between God and the uncircumcised nations a deadly quarrel, a
wall of separation which divided them from the seed of Abraham, the
chosen people, (<span id="xi.iii-p19.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xi.iii-p19.1"></span>;.md)
for the covenant which God had made with Abraham shut out the Gentiles
from the kingdom of heaven till the coming of Christ. Christ, therefore,
of his free grace, desires to enter into a holy alliance of marriage
with the whole world, in the same way as if a Jew in ancient times had
taken to himself a wife from a foreign and heathen land. But in order to
conduct into Christ’s presence his bride chaste and undefiled, the
prophet exhorts the Church gathered from the Gentiles to forget her
former manner of living, and to devote herself wholly to her husband. As
this change, by which the children of Adam begin to be the children of
God, and are transformed into new men, is a thing so difficult, the
prophet enforces the necessity of it the more earnestly. In enforcing
his exhortation in this way by different terms, *hearken, consider,
incline thy ear,* he intimates, that the faithful do not deny
themselves, and lay aside their former habits, without intense and
painful effort; for such an exhortation would be superfluous, were men
naturally and voluntarily disposed to it. And, indeed, experience shows
how dull and slow we are to follow God. By the word *consider,* or
*understand,* our stupidity is tacitly rebuked, and not without good
reason; for whence arise that self-love which is so blind, that false
opinion which we have of our own wisdom and strength, the deception
arising from the fascinations of the world, and, in fine, the arrogance
and pride which are natural to us, but because we do not consider how
precious a treasure God is presenting to us in his only begotten Son?
Did not this ingratitude prevent us, we would without regret, after the
example of Paul, (<span id="xi.iii-p19.2"></span>[Php
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="xi.iii-p19.2"></span>,.md)
reckon as nothing, or as “dung,” those things which we admire most, that
Christ might replenish us with his riches. By the word *daughter,* the
prophet gently and sweetly soothes the new Church; and he also sets
before her the promise of a bountiful reward,  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) to induce her, for the sake of Christ,
willingly to despise and forsake whatever she made account of
heretofore. It is certainly no small consolation to know that the Son of
God will delight in us, when we shall have put off our earthly nature.
In the meantime, let us learn, that to deny ourselves is the beginning
of that sacred union which ought to exist between us and Christ. By her
*father’s house* and *her people* is doubtless meant all the corruptions
which we carry with us from our mother’s womb, or derive from evil
custom; nay, under this mode of expression there is comprehended
whatever men have belonging to themselves; for there is no part of our
nature sound or free from corruption.

<span id="xi.iii-p21"></span>It is necessary, also, to notice the reason
which is added, namely, that if the Church refuses to devote herself
wholly to Christ, she casts off his due and lawful authority. By the
word *worship* we must understand not only the outward ceremony, but
also, according to the figure synecdoche, a holy desire to yield
reverence and obedience. Would to God that this admonition, as it ought,
had been thoroughly weighed! for the Church of Christ had then been more
obedient to his authority, and we should not in these days have had so
great a contest to maintain in reference to her authority against the
Papists, who imagine that the Church is not sufficiently exalted and
honored, unless with unbridled license she may insolently triumph over
her own husband. They, no doubt, in words ascribe supreme authority to
Christ, saying, that every knee should bow before him; but when they
maintain that the Church has an unlimited power of making laws, what
else is this but to give her loose reins, and to exempt her from the
authority of Christ, that she may break forth into any excess according
to her desire? I stay not to notice how wickedly they arrogate to
themselves the title and designation of the Church. But it is
intolerable sacrilege to rob Christ and then adorn the Church with his
spoils. It is no small dignity which the Church enjoys, in being seated
at the right hand of the King, and it is no small honor to be called
“the Mother” of all the godly, for to her it belongs to nourish and keep
them under her discipline. But at the same time it is easy to gather
from innumerable passages of Scripture, that Christ does not so elevate
his own Church that he may diminish or impair in the least his own
authority.

<span id="xi.iii-p22"></span><span id="xi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p23"></span>**12** *And the daughter of Tyre with a
gift.* This also is a part of the recompense which the prophet promises
to the queen in order to mitigate or rather to extinguish entirely, the
longing desire she might still feel after her former condition. He says:
that the Tyrians will come humbly to pay her reverence, bringing
presents with them. Tyre, we know, was formerly a city of great renown,
and, therefore, he accounts it a very high honor that men will come from
a city so distinguished and opulent to greet her and to testify their
submission to her. It is not necessary for us to examine every word
minutely, in order to apply to the Church every thing here said
concerning the wife of Solomon; but in our own day we realize some happy
fruits of this prophecy when God has so ordered it, that some of the
great men of this world, although they themselves refuse to submit to
the authority of Christ, act with kindness towards the Church,
maintaining and defending her.

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
45:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**13**. The daughter of the King is all
glorious within: her clothing is of garments embroidered with gold.
**14**. She shall be brought to the King in raiment of needle-work: the
virgins after her, her companions, shall be brought to thee. **15**.
They shall be brought with joy and gladness; they shall enter into the
palace of the King. **16**. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy
children: thou shalt make them princes in all the earth. **17**. I will
make thy name to be remembered throughout all generations: therefore the
people shall praise thee for ever and ever.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**13** *The daughter of the King is all
glorious within*  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) This verse may
be understood in a twofold sense; either as meaning that the queen, not
only when she appears in public before all the people, but also when
sitting in private in her own chamber, is always sumptuously apparelled;
or, that the splendor and gorgeous appearance of her attire is not
merely a thing of display, designed to dazzle the eyes of the simple,
but consists of expensive and really substantial material. The prophet
accordingly enhances the happy and lofty condition of the queen by the
circumstance, that she has not only sumptuous apparel in which she may
appear on particular occasions, but also for her ordinary and daily
attire. Others expound it in this sense, That all her glory consists in
the king inviting her familiarity into his presence; and this opinion
they rest on the ground that immediately after there is a description
given of her as passing into the chamber of the king accompanied with a
great and glorious train of followers. This display of pomp exceeds the
bounds of due moderation; but, in the meantime, we are taught by it,
that while the Church is thus richly apparelled, it is not designed to
attract the notice of men, but only for the pleasure of the King. If in
our day the Church is not so richly adorned with that spiritual beauty
in which the glory of Christ shines forth, the fault ought to be imputed
to the ingratitude of men, who either through their own indifference
despise the goodness of God, or else, after having been enriched by him,
again fall into a state of poverty and want.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span><span id="xi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span>**16** *Instead of thy fathers shall be thy
children* This also serves to show the glory and transcendent excellence
of this kingdom, namely, that the children will not be inferior in
dignity to their fathers, and that the nobility of the race will not be
diminished after the death of Solomon; for the children which shall be
born to him will equal those who had preceded them in the most excellent
virtues. Then it is added, that they shall be *princes in all the
earth,* because the empire shall enjoy such an extent of dominion on
every side, that it might easily be divided into many kingdoms. It is
easy to gather, that this prophecy is spoken expressly concerning
Christ; for so far were the sons of Solomon from having a kingdom of
such an extent, as to divide it into provinces among them, that his
first successor retained only a small portion of his kingdom. There were
none of his true and lawful successors who attained the same power which
he had enjoyed, but being princes only over one tribe and a half of the
people, they were, on this account, shut up within narrow limits, and,
as we say, had their wings clipped.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) But at the coming of Christ, who
appeared at the close of the ancient Church, and the beginning of the
new dispensation, it is an undoubted truth, that children were begotten
by him, who were inferior in no respect to their fathers, either in
number or in excellence, and whom he set as rulers over the whole world.
In the estimation of the world, the ignominy of the cross obscures the
glory of the Church; but when we consider how wonderfully it has
increased, and how much it has been distinguished by spiritual gifts, we
must confess that it is not without cause that her glory is in this
passage celebrated in such sublime language. It ought, however, to be
observed, that the sovereignty, of which mention is here made, consists
not in the persons of men, but refers to the head. According to a
frequent mode of expression in the Word of God, the dominion and power
which belong properly to the head, and are applicable peculiarly to
Christ alone, are in many places ascribed to his members. We know that
those who occupy eminent stations in the Church, and who rule in the
name of Christ, do not exercise a lordly dominion, but rather act as
servants. As, however, Christ has committed to them his Gospel, which is
the scepter of his kingdom, and intrusted it as it were to their
keeping, they exercise, in some sort, his power. And, indeed, Christ, by
his ministers, has subdued to his dominion the whole world, and has
erected as many principalities under his authority as there have been
churches gathered to him in divers nations by their preaching.

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span><span id="xi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span>**17** *I will make thy name to be
remembered, etc.* This also is equally inapplicable to Solomon, who, by
his shameful and impious rebellion, stained the memory of his name with
disgrace. In polluting by superstitious abominations the land which was
consecrated to God, did he not bring upon himself indelible ignominy and
shame? For this deed alone his name deserves to be buried in everlasting
oblivion. Nor was his son Rehoboam in any degree more deserving of
praise; for through his own foolish presumption he lost the better part
of his kingdom. To find, therefore, the true accomplishment of what is
here said, we must come to Christ, the memory of whose name continues to
prosper and prevail. It is no doubt despised by the world, nay, wicked
men, in the pride of their hearts, even reproach his sacred name, and
outrageously trample it under their feet; but still it survives in its
undiminished majesty. It is also true, that his enemies rise up on all
sides in vast numbers to overthrow his kingdom; but notwithstanding, men
are already beginning to bow the knee before him, which they will
continue to do, until the period arrive when he shall tread down all the
powers that are opposed to him. The furious efforts of Satan and the
whole world have not been able to extinguish the name of Christ, which,
being transmitted from one generation to another, still retains its
glory in every age, even as at this day we see it celebrated in every
language. And although the greater part of the world tear it in pieces
by their impious blasphemies, yet it is enough that God stirs up his
servants every where to proclaim with fidelity and with unfeigned zeal
the praises of Christ. In the meantime, it is our duty diligently to use
our endeavors, that the memory of Christ, which ought to prosper and
prevail throughout all ages, to the eternal salvation of men, may never
at any time lose any of its renown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc09010.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="xi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p3.1"></span>(Qui est,)
gloire et magnificence.” — *Fr*. “(Which is,) glory and majesty.”

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc09010.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>רחש, *rachash*,
*boileth*, or *bubbleth up*, denotes the language of the heart, full and
ready for utterance.” — *Bythner*’*s Lyra* The Psalmist’s heart was so
full and warmed with the subject of the psalm, that it could not
contain; and the opening of the poem evinces that it was so, for he
abruptly breaks forth into an annunciation of its subject as if
impatient of restraint. Ainsworth thinks there is here an allusion to
the boiling of the *minchah*, or meat-offering under the law in the
frying-pan, (<span id="xi.i-p7.2"></span>[Le
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#009)<span id="xi.i-p7.2"></span>..md) It
was there boiled in oil, being made of fine flour unleavened, mingled
with oil, (<span id="xi.i-p7.3"></span>[Le
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005)<span id="xi.i-p7.3"></span>;.md) and
afterwards was presented to the Lord by the priest, verse 8, etc.
“Here,” says he, “the matter of this psalm is the *minchah* or oblation,
which with the oil, the grace of the spirit, was boiled and prepared in
the prophet’s breast, and now presented.”

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc09010.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span> See Appendix.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc09010.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p10.1"></span>Promis a la
maison de David.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc09010.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span> It is somewhat strange, after making the
above observations, that Calvin should consider this beautiful psalm as
referring primarily to Solomon, and to his marriage with the daughter of
Pharaoh. That this is an epithalamium or nuptial song, is readily
admitted; but that it refers to the nuptials of Solomon with Pharaoh’s
daughter, there seems no just ground for concluding. If Solomon could
not be described as “fairer than the children of men,” as “a mighty
warrior,” as “a victorious conqueror,” as “a prince, whose throne is for
ever and ever;” — if the name “God” could not be applied to him; — if it
could not be said that his “children,” in the room of their father, were
made princes in all the earth,” (verse 16;) that “his name” “would be
remembered in all generations,” and that “the people would praise him
for ever and ever,” (verse 17;) — if these things could not be spoken of
him without much incongruity, it may well be doubted whether the primary
application of this psalm is to him. Besides, although Solomon was a
type of Christ, he was not so in all things, and there is nothing in
this poem, nor in any other part of Scripture, which can lead us to
regard the marriage of this prince with the daughter of Pharaoh as an
image or type of the mystical marriage of Jesus Christ to the Church. We
therefore agree with Rosenmüller, that “the notion of Rudinger and
Grotius,” and other critics, “that this song is an <span
id="xi.ii-p12.1"></span>epithalamium — a song in celebration of the
marriage of Solomon, and his chief wife, the daughter of Pharaoh, (<span
id="xi.ii-p12.2"></span>[1Ki 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p12.2"></span>,) is altogether to be abandoned;” and that it
applies exclusively to the Messiah, and to the mystical union between
him and his Church; set forth in an allegory borrowed from the manners
of an Eastern court, and under the image of conjugal love, he being
represented as the bridegroom, and the Church as his bride. — See
Appendix.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc09010.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou, dames
d’honneur.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Maids of honor.”

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc09010.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span> The right hand was the place of dignity and
honor.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc09010.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p5.1"></span>אופור,
*Ophir*; in gold *of Ophir*, *in a golden garment*. Ophir, a country in
India abounding in precious gold, <span id="xi.iii-p5.2"></span>[1Ki
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#028.md)<span id="xi.iii-p5.2"></span>,
whose gold was obryzum, or ophrizum, *i* *e* most excellent.” —
*Bythner*’*s Lyra*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc09010.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>C’est, luy
porteras reverence.” — *Fr*. *marg*. That is, thou shalt do him
reverence.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc09010.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span> Calvin here seems to take the word <span
id="xi.iii-p10.1"></span>מני, *Minni*, which has somewhat perplexed
commentators, to be the particle <span id="xi.iii-p10.2"></span>מן,
*min*, *out of*, with <span id="xi.iii-p10.3"></span>י, *yod*,
paragogic, as it is in <span id="xi.iii-p10.4"></span>[Ps
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.4"></span>,
and many other places; and to suppose that the relative <span
id="xi.iii-p10.5"></span>אשר, *asher*, *which*, a pronoun frequently
omitted, is to be understood, — “*out of which* palaces *they have made
thee glad*.” This is the view taken by many interpreters. Others
understand the word <span id="xi.iii-p10.6"></span>מני, *minni*, to be a
noun; (and from <span id="xi.iii-p10.7"></span>[Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.7"></span>,
it appears that <span id="xi.iii-p10.8"></span>מני, *minni*, was the
proper name of a territory, which Bochart shows was a district of
Armenia;) and they translate the words thus, “From the ivory palaces of
Armenia they make thee glad,” make thee glad with presents. Others
suppose that <span id="xi.iii-p10.9"></span>מני, *minni*, is here the
name of a region, *Minnaea* in Arabia Felix, which abounded in myrrh and
frankincense; and according to this view, the clause may be rendered,
“The Minnaeitas from their ivory palaces make thee glad;” that is,
coming to thee from their ivory palaces they gladden thee with presents.
Rosenmüller thinks with Schmidt, De Wette, and Gesenius, that a more
elegant sense will be brought out if we understand <span
id="xi.iii-p10.10"></span>מני, *minni*, as a plural noun in a form
somewhat unusual, but of which there are several other examples in the
Old Testament, such as <span id="xi.iii-p10.11"></span>שכשי, <span
id="xi.iii-p10.12"></span>[2Sa
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.12"></span>;
<span id="xi.iii-p10.13"></span>כרי, <span id="xi.iii-p10.14"></span>[2
Kings 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#004.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.14"></span>;
<span id="xi.iii-p10.15"></span>עמי, <span
id="xi.iii-p10.16"></span>[2Sa
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.16"></span>;
<span id="xi.iii-p10.17"></span>[Ps
144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.17"></span>.
“The word,” says he, “according to these examples, stands for <span
id="xi.iii-p10.18"></span>מנים, and signifies, as in the Syriac, <span
id="xi.iii-p10.19"></span>[Ps
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.iii-p10.19"></span>,
*chords*, *stringed* instruments of music. The sense of the clause will
thus be, ‘From the palaces of ivory, musical instruments — players on
musical instruments — make thee glad.’” — *Rosenmüller on the Messianic
Psalms*, pp. 213-215. — *Biblical Cabinet*, volume 32.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc09010.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p10.20"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>Comme un
peu apres le prophere descrit la Royne ornee somptueusement et
magnifiquement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc09010.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p12.1"></span>Ou, dames
d’honneur.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc09010.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>Car
combien que la fille du Roy d’Egypte que Salomon avoit espousee, fust sa
principale femme, et teinst le premier lieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc09010.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p16.1"></span>Comme
estoit la Roy d’Egypte.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc09010.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p18"></span> This is certainly a most important rule in
interpreting the allegorical compositions of Scripture. It is not to be
imagined that there are distinct analogies between every part of an
allegorical representation, and the spiritual subjects which it is
designed to illustrate. The interpreter who allows his ingenuity to
press too closely all the points of the allegory to the spiritual
subjects couched under it, seeking points of comparison in the
complementary parts, which are introduced merely for the purpose of
giving more animation and beauty to the discourse, is in danger by his
fanciful analogies of degrading the composition, and falling into
absurdities.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc09010.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p20.1"></span>En luy
proposant bonne recompense.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc09010.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span> Dathe and Berlin refer *within* to the
interior of the queen’s palace, which seems to agree best with the
context. The original word rendered *within* denotes *the interior of a
house* in <span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>[Le
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>,
and <span id="xi.iv-p6.2"></span>[1Ki
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.iv-p6.2"></span>. Fry
explains the words thus: “*Most splendid is the royal daughter within*
the awning of her covered vehicle;” and refers to the picture of a
bridal procession in Mr Lane’s Egypt. Dr Geddes reads: —

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>“All glorious is the queen in her
apartment,  
Her robe is bespangled with gold;  
To the king she shall be brought in brocade,  
Attended by her virgin companions.”

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>“This,” says he, namely, verse 13th, “and the
two next verses, contain a fine description of Oriental manners. The
queen, before she be led to the king’s apartment, is gorgeously dressed
in her own; and thence proceeds with her female train to the royal
palace.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc09010.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>Et (comme on
dit) ont eu les ailes rongnees.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 46](cc09011.md)
