[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09002)  [Next](cc09004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>PSALM 38

<span id="iv-p2"></span>David, suffering under some severe and dangerous
malady, as may be conjectured, acknowledges that he is chastened by the
Lord, and entreats him to turn away his anger from him. In order the
more effectually to induce God to have mercy upon him, he bewails before
him the severity of his afflictions in a variety of particulars. These
we shall consider separately, and in order.

<span id="iv-p3"></span>A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)

<span id="iv-p5"></span>The title of this psalm refers to its subject.
Some suppose that it is the beginning of a common song, because in other
psalms the beginning of the song, to the tune of which they were set, is
commonly prefixed: but such an interpretation is unnatural, and without
foundation. Instead of this, I rather think that the title indicates
that David composed this psalm as a memorial for himself, as well as
others, lest he should too soon forget the chastisement by which God had
afflicted him. He knew how easily and speedily the chastisements with
which God visits us, and which ought to serve as a means of instruction
to us all our life, pass away from the mind. He was also mindful of his
own high calling; for, as he was appointed master and teacher over the
whole Church, it was necessary that whatever he had himself learned in
particular by divine teaching should be made known, and appropriated to
the use of all, that all might profit thereby. Thus we are admonished
that it is a very profitable exercise often to recall to remembrance the
chastisements with which God has afflicted us for our sins.

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
38:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! rebuke me not in thy wrath,
and chasten me not in thy anger. **2.** For thy arrows go down in me
 <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) and thy hand has come down upon
me. **3.** There is no soundness in my flesh because of thy anger; nor
any peace in my bones because of my sin. **4.** For my iniquities have
passed over my head, and as a weighty burden they have become too heavy
for me. **5.** My wounds have become putrid, they are corrupt, because
of my foolishness.

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**1** *O Jehovah! rebuke me not in thy wrath*
As I have already expounded this verse in the beginning of the sixth
psalm, where it occurs, and that I may not prove tedious to the reader,
I shall notice it more briefly here. David does not expressly ask that
his afflictions should be removed, but only that God would moderate the
severity of his chastisements. Hence we may infer, that David did not
give loose reins to the desires of the flesh, but offered up his earnest
prayer in a duly chastened spirit of devotion. All men would naturally
desire that permission should be granted them to sin with impunity. But
David lays a restraint upon his desires, and does not wish the favor and
indulgence of God to be extended beyond measure, but is content with a
mitigation of his affliction; as if he had said, Lord, I am not
unwilling to be chastised by thee, but I entreat thee, meanwhile, not to
afflict me beyond what I am able to bear, but to temper the fierceness
of thy indignation according to the measure of my infirmity, lest the
severity of the affliction should entirely overwhelm me. This prayer, as
I have said, was framed according to the rule of godliness; for it
contains nothing but what God promises to all his children. It should
also be noticed, that David does not secretly indulge a fretful and
repining spirit, but spreads his complaint before God; and this he does,
not in the way of sinful complaining, but of humble prayer and unfeigned
confession, accompanied with the hope of obtaining forgiveness. He has
used *anger* and *wrath* as denoting extreme rigour, and has contrasted
them with fatherly chastisement.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**2.** *For thy arrows go down in me.* He
shows that he was constrained by dire necessity to ask an alleviation of
his misery; for he was crushed under the weight of the burden which he
sustained. This rule is always to be observed in our prayers — to keep
God’s promises present to our view. But God has promised that he will
chastise his servants, not according to their deserts, but as they are
able to bear. This is the reason why the saints so often speak of their
own weakness, when they are severely oppressed with affliction. David
very properly describes the malady under which he labored, by the terms,
*the arrows* and *the hand,* or the chastisement *of God.* Had he not
been persuaded that it was God who thus afflicted him, he could never
have been brought to seek from him deliverance from his affliction. We
know that the great majority of men are blinded under the judgments of
God, and imagine that they are entirely the events of chance; and
scarcely one in a hundred discerns in them the hand of God. But, in his
sickness, as in all his other adversities, David views the hand of God
lifted up to punish him for his sins. And certainly, the man who
estimates his affliction only by the feeling of pain which it produces,
and views it in no other light, differs nothing from the beasts of the
field. As every chastisement of God should remind us of his judgment,
the true wisdom of the saints, as the prophet declares,

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>“to look to the hand of him who smiteth.”—
(<span id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>The pronoun *thy* is therefore emphatic.
David’s words are, as if he had said, I have not to do with a mortal
man, who can shoot his arrows with a force only in proportion to his own
strength, but I have to do with God, who can discharge the arrows that
come from his hand with a force altogether overwhelming.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>**3.** *There is no soundness in my flesh
because of thy anger* Others translate, *There is no beauty;* but this
does not seem to be so suitable. In the clause which follows, David
ascribes to God the praise of righteousness, without which, the
acknowledgement which he formerly made would be of little avail; nay,
instead of this, such an acknowledgement sometimes rather exasperates
the minds of men, so that they provoke the wrath of God still more, by
charging him with cruelty, and pouring forth horrible blasphemies
against him. Nothing, therefore, can be more preposterous, than to
imagine that there is in God a power so supreme and absolute, (as it is
termed,) as to deprive him of his righteousness. David, as soon as he
recognised his affliction as coming from God, turns to his own sin as
the cause of the Divine displeasure; for he had already been fully
satisfied in his own mind, that he is not like a tyrant who exercises
cruelty needlessly and at random, but a righteous judge, who never
manifests his displeasure by inflicting judgments but when he is
grievously offended. If, then, we would render to God the praise which
is due to him, let us learn by the example of David to connect our sins
with his wrath.

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span><span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**4.** *For my iniquities have passed over my
head.* Here he complains that he is overwhelmed by his sins as by a
heavy burden, so that he utterly faints under their weight; and yet he
again confirms the doctrine which we have already stated, that he
deservedly suffered the wrath of God, which had been inflicted on him in
a manner so severe and dreadful. The word <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>עון, *avon,* which we have translated
*iniquities,* no doubt often *signifies punishment,* but this is only in
a secondary and metaphorical sense. I am also willing to admit, that
David assigns to the effect what is proper to the cause, when he
describes by the appellation *iniquities,* the punishment which he had
procured by his own sin; and yet his object at the same time is plainly
and distinctly to confess, that all the afflictions which he suffered
were to be imputed to his sins. He quarrels not with God for the extreme
severity of his punishment, as Cain did, who said,

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>*“*My punishment is greater than I can bear,”
(<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>[Ge
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013)<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>It is true, indeed, that Moses uses the same
word <span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>עון, *avon,* in that passage, so that
there is some similarity between the language of David and Cain. But
David’s meaning is very different. When such temptations as these were
insinuating themselves into his mind, Could God afflict thee more
severely than he does? certainly, since he is doing nothing to relieve
thee, it is a sure sign that he wishes thee destroyed and brought to
nought; he not only despises thy sighs and groanings, but the more he
seeth thee cast down and forsaken, he pursueth thee the more fiercely
and with the greater rigour; — to preclude the entrance of such evil
thoughts and surmisings, he defended himself as with a shield by this
consideration, that he was afflicted by the just judgment of God. He has
here attributed to his own sins as the cause the weight of the wrath of
God which he felt; and, as we shall find in the following verse, he
again acknowledges, that what he is now suffering was procured by his
own foolishness. Although, then, in bewailing his own miseries, he may
seem in some measure to quarrel with God, yet he still cherishes the
humble conviction, (for God afflicteth not beyond measure,) that there
is no rest for him but in imploring the Divine compassion and
forgiveness; whereas the ungodly, although convicted by their own
consciences of guilt, murmur against God, like the wild beasts, which,
in their rage, gnaw the chains with which they are bound.

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span><span id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>**5** *My wounds*  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) *have become putrid* In this verse, he
pleads the long continuance of his disease as an argument for obtaining
some alleviation. When the Lord declares, concerning his Church,

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>“that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned,  
for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p20.3"></span>[Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="iv.i-p20.3"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>his meaning is, that when he has sufficiently
chastised his people, he is quickly pacified towards them; nay, more,
that if he continue to manifest his displeasure for too long a time, he
becomes through his mercy, as it were, weary of it, so that he hastens
to give deliverance, as he says in another place,

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>“For my name’s sake will I defer mine anger,
and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.
Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in
the furnace of affliction.”— (<span id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>[Isa.
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)<span id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>The object, therefore, which David has in
view, in complaining of the long continuance of his misery is, that when
he had endured the punishment which he had merited, he might at length
obtain deliverance. It was certainly no slight trial to this servant of
God to be thus kept in continual languishing, and, as it were, to
putrify and be dissolved into corruption in his miseries. In this his
constancy is the more to be admired, for it neither broke down from the
long period of delay, nor failed under the immense load of suffering. By
using the term *foolishness* instead of *sin,* he does not seek in this
way to extenuate his faults, as hypocrites do when they are unable to
escape the charge of guilt; for in order to excuse themselves in part,
they allege the false pretense of ignorance, pleading, and wishing it to
be believed, that they erred through imprudence and inadvertence. But,
according to a common mode of expression in the Hebrew language, by the
use of the term *foolishness,* he acknowledges that he had been out of
his right mind, when he obeyed the lusts of the flesh in opposition to
God. The Spirit, by employing this term in so many places to designate
crimes the most atrocious, does not certainly mean to extenuate the
criminality of men, as if they were guilty merely of some slight
offenses, but rather charges them with maniacal fury, because, blinded
by unhallowed desires, they wilfully fly in the face of their Maker.
Accordingly, sin is always conjoined with folly or, madness. It is in
this sense that David speaks of his own foolishness; as if he had said,
that he was void of reason and transported with madness, like the
infatuated rage of wild beasts, when he neglected God and followed his
own lusts.

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
38:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**6**. I am bent, I am, bowed down beyond
measure: I go mourning \[literally black\] all the day long, **7**. For
my reins are filled with burning, \[or, inflammation  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) \] and there is no soundness in my flesh.
**8**. I am very feeble and sore broken: I have roared because of the
roaring of my heart. **9**. O Lord!  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) thou knowest all my desire, and my
groaning is not hid from thee. **10**. My heart hath turned round, my
strength hath failed me: and as for the light of my eyes, it also is
gone from me.

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span><span id="iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>**6** *I am bent* This description clearly
shows that this holy man was oppressed with extreme grief, so much so,
that it is marvellous how, under such a vast accumulation of miseries,
his faith was sufficiently strong to bear up his mind. When he says
*bowed down,* he seems tacitly to contrast his humility and dejection
with the pride and stubbornness of many, who refuse to be humbled by the
many chastisements with which God afflicts them, but rather harden
themselves, daring to resist and oppose him. They must, no doubt, of
necessity, feel the pain of their afflictions, but they fall into such a
state of insensibility, that they are not affected by it. David then,
from this circumstance, draws an argument to induce his heavenly Judge
to have compassion on him, showing that he was not one of those who
obstinately rebel against him, and refuse to bow in humble submission,
even while the hand of God is upon them; but that he is abased and
humbled, even as the Apostle Peter exhorts all the godly to

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>“humble themselves under the mighty hand of
God.”  
(<span id="iv.ii-p8.2"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>Let us therefore learn, that there is no
other way by which we can obtain consolation under our afflictions, than
by laying aside all stubbornness and pride, and humbly submitting to the
chastisement of God. The word <span id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>כודר,
*koder,* which I have translated *black,* is rendered by others *clad in
black,*  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) and explained as referring
to the outward apparel, the black color of which has always been a token
of grief. But the opinion of those who understand it of the blackness of
the skin is more correct; for we know that grief renders men’s
countenances lean, wan, and black. David, therefore, by this token of
grief, describes the greatness of his affliction, because the natural
color of his face had faded, and he was like a corpse, already withered
and shrunk.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span>In the next verse, the word <span
id="iv.ii-p12.1"></span>כסלים, *kesalaim,* which I have rendered
*reins,* is by some translated *the flanks.* But the more generally
received opinion is, that it denotes the part under the reins, which
extends towards the haunch, or the space between the thighs and flanks,
where it is supposed there had been a sore. Commentators also differ in
their opinion respecting the word <span id="iv.ii-p12.2"></span>נקלה,
*nikleh,* which I have rendered *burning* In my translation I have
followed those who adhere to the original meaning of the word; for the
verb <span id="iv.ii-p12.3"></span>קלה, *kalah,* signifies *to burn,* or
*to consume with fire.* Others, indeed, explain it not improperly in the
sense *of filthiness and corruption.* I am, however, not inclined to
limit it to a sore. In my opinion, the sense simply is, that his reins,
or flanks, or thighs, were filled with an inflammatory disease, or at
least were covered over with putrid sores; for these parts of the body
are most subject to inflammation, and most liable to contract putrid
humours. Some expound it allegorically, as meaning, that David seemed
loathsome in his own eyes, when he thought of his reproach; but this
appears too forced. When he adds that he was *weakened* and *sore
broken,* he still farther confirms what he had said in the preceding
verses: for by these various terms he wished to express the intolerable
vehemence of his grief. Now, as a man, who is distinguished by courage,
does not cry out and complain, and as we know that David did not shrink
in bearing his afflictions, we may gather from this, that his sufferings
were severe and painful in the extreme, inasmuch as he not only wept
bitterly, but was also forced to cry out and complain. The noun <span
id="iv.ii-p12.4"></span>נהמת, *nahamath,* which I have rendered
*roaring,* may be derived from another verb than that which David has
here used; but the meaning is obvious, namely, that the incontrollable
emotions of his heart forced him to cry out.

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span>**9** *O Lord! thou knowest all my desire.*
He adds this, not so much in respect of God, as to strengthen himself in
the hope of obtaining some alleviation of his trouble, and thus to
animate himself to persevering prayer. It may be explained in a twofold
sense, either as denoting his confident assurance that his prayers and
groanings were heard by the Lord, or a simple declaration that he had
poured out before God all his cares and troubles; but the meaning is
substantially the same: for as long as men entertain any doubt whether
their groanings have come up before God, they are kept in constant
disquietude and dread, which so fetters and holds captive their minds,
that they cannot elevate their souls to God. On the contrary, a firm
persuasion that our groanings do not vanish away in their ascent to God,
but that he graciously hears them, and familiarly listens to them,
produces promptitude and alacrity in engaging in prayer. It might,
therefore, prove no small ground of encouragement to David, that he
approached God, not with a doubting and trembling heart, but
strengthened and encouraged by the assurance of which we have spoken,
and of which he himself speaks in another place, that his tears were
laid up in God’s bottle, (<span id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>..md)
In order that we may obtain access to God, we must believe that he is “a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him,” as the apostle states in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span id="iv.ii-p14.2"></span>[Heb
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii-p14.2"></span>..md)
But I rather approve of the other interpretation, That David here
declares that he had disburdened all his sorrows into the bosom of God.
The reason why the greater part of men derive no profit from complaining
grievously in their sorrow is, that they direct not their prayers and
sighs to God. David, then, in order to encourage himself in the assured
conviction that God will be his deliverer, says, that he had always been
a witness of his sorrows, and was well acquainted with them, because he
had neither indulged in a fretful spirit, nor poured out into the air
his complaints and howlings as the unbelieving are wont to do, but had
spread out before God himself all the desires of his heart.

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span>**10** *My heart hath turned round* The verb
which David here uses signifies *to travel* or *wander hither and
thither;* but here it is taken for the agitation or disquietude which
distress of heart engenders when we know not what to do. According as
men are disquieted in mind, so do they turn themselves on all sides, and
so their heart may be said to turn round, or to run to and fro. But
since faith, when it has once brought us into obedience to God, holds
our minds fixed on his word, it might here be asked by way of objection,
How it is that the heart of David was so affected by disquietude and
trouble? To this I answer, That although he continued to walk in the
ways of God, while he was sustained by the promises of God, yet he was
not altogether exempted from human infirmity. And, indeed, it will
always happen, that as soon as we fall into some danger, our flesh will
suggest to us various shifts and devices, and lead us into many errors
in search of counsel; so that even the most confident would fail and go
astray, unless he laid upon himself the same restraint by which David
was preserved and kept in subjection, namely, by keeping all his
thoughts shut up within the limits of God’s word. Nay, even in the
prayers which we offer up when our minds are at ease, we experience too
well how easily our minds are carried away, and wander after vain and
frivolous thoughts, and how difficult it is to keep them uninterruptedly
attentive and fixed with the same degree of intensity upon the object of
our desire. If this happen when we are not exercised by any severe
trial, what will be the case when we are agitated by violent storms and
tempests which threaten a thousand deaths, and when there is no way to
escape them? It is, therefore, no great wonder if they carried away the
heart of David, so that it was subject to various emotions amidst such
tempestuous agitations. He adds, that *his strength had failed* *him,*
as if he had compared himself to a dead man. What he adds concerning
*the light of his eyes* some understand as if he had said, that he was
so much oppressed with despair on all sides, that no counsel or
foresight was left to him. The more simple meaning, however, is, that
the light of life was taken away from him, because in it the energy of
the soul principally shows itself.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
38:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**11**. My friends and my companions stand
away from my sore; and my kinsfolk stand afar off. **12**. They also
that sought for my life have laid snares for me; and they that sought
after my hurt have talked of treachery, and imagine deceit daily.
**13**. But I, as a deaf man, hear not; and am as a dumb man that
openeth not his mouth. **14**. And I was as a man that heareth not, and
in whose mouth are no reproofs.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span><span id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>**11** *My friends and my companions stand
away from my sore* Here David enumerates other circumstances to show the
aggravated character of his misery, that he might excite the compassion
of God. One of these is, that he finds no help or solace among men. In
saying that his friends *stand away from him,* he means, that they cease
from performing any of the offices of humanity towards him. This might
happen either from pride or fear. If they withdrew from this poor
afflicted man because they despised him, they were cruel and proud; and
if they refused him their assistance for fear of being brought into
odium, it was most unpardonable cowardice. But in the meantime, it
augmented not a little the calamity of David, that even his friends and
kinsfolk dared not to show any token of compassion towards him. It is,
indeed, a very sore trial, when a man, who has had a great number of
friends, comes to be abandoned by them all.

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span><span id="iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>**12** *They also that sought for my life
have laid snares for me, etc*.. Here another circumstance is added, that
the enemies of David laid snares for him, and talked about his
destruction, and framed deceits among themselves.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) The purport of what is stated is, that
while his friends cowardly sit still and will do nothing to aid him, his
enemies vigorously bestir themselves, and seek by every means to destroy
him. He says that *they seek his life,* for as they were his deadly
enemies and blood-thirsty men, they were not content with doing him some
common injury, but furiously sought his destruction. He, however, here
complains not so much that they assailed him by force of arms and with
violence, as he accuses them of guileful conspiracy, which he designates
in the first place metaphorically by the term *snares,* and afterwards
adds in plain terms, that they *talk about his destruction,* and
secretly consult among themselves how they might do him hurt. Now, as it
is certain that David borrows not an artificial rhetoric from the bar,
(as profane orators  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) do when they
plead their cause,) in order to win the favor of God, but rather draws
his arguments from the Word of God, the sentences which he here brings
together for the confirmation of his faith we ought to appropriate to
our own use. If we are altogether destitute of human aid and assistance,
if our friends fail us in the time of need, and if others seek our ruin,
and breathe out nothing but destruction against us, let us remember that
it is not in vain for us to lay these things in prayer before God, whose
province it is to succor those who are in misery, to take under his
protection those who are perfidiously forsaken and betrayed, to restrain
the wicked, and not only to withstand their violence, but also to
anticipate their deceitful counsels and to frustrate their designs.

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>**13** *But I, as a deaf man, hear not,
etc.* The inspired writer here compares himself to a dumb and deaf man,
for two reasons. In the first place, he intimates that he was so
overwhelmed with the false and wicked judgments of his enemies, that he
was not even permitted to open his mouth in his own defense. In the
second place, he alleges before God his own patience, as a plea to
induce God the more readily to have pity upon him; for such meekness and
gentleness, not only with good reason, secures favor to the afflicted
and the innocent, but it is also a sign of true piety. Those who depend
upon the world, and have respect only to men, if they cannot avenge the
injuries that are done them, plainly show by their loud complaints the
burning rage and fury of their hearts. In order, therefore, that a man
may quietly and patiently endure the insolence, violence, calumny, and
deceit of his enemies, it is necessary that he trust in God. The man who
is fully persuaded in his own heart that God is his defender, will
cherish his hope in silence, and, calling upon him for help, will lay a
restraint upon his own passions. Accordingly, Paul, in <span
id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>,
very properly says, that we “give place unto wrath” when, oppressed
before the world, we nevertheless still repose on God. On the other
hand, whoever gives loose reins to his passions, takes away as much as
he can from God, to whom alone it belongs, the right of taking
vengeance, and deprives himself of his assistance. It is indeed certain,
that if David had obtained a hearing, he would have been ready to defend
his own innocence; but perceiving that it availed him nothing, nay, that
he was shut out and debarred from all defense of his cause, he humbly
submitted, waiting patiently for the heavenly Judge. He therefore says
that he held his peace, as if he had already been convicted and struck
dumb. And it is indeed very difficult, when we are conscious of our own
innocence, patiently and silently to bear an unjust condemnation, as if
all argument had failed us, and we had no excuse or reply left us.

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
38:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**15**. For on thee, O Jehovah! do I wait:
thou wilt answer me, O Lord!  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) my
God. **16**. For I said, lest they rejoice over me when my foot
slippeth, they magnify themselves against me. **17**. Surely I am ready
to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. **18**. Surely I
declare my iniquity; and I am dismayed because of my sin. **19**. And
yet my enemies living are become strong; and they that oppose me
wrongfully are become mighty. **20**. And they that reader me evil for
good are opposed to me; because I follow that which is good.

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>**15** *For on thee, O Jehovah! do I wait.*
David here shows the source of his patience. It consisted in this, that,
trusting in the grace of God, he overcame all the temptations of the
world. And certainly, the mind of man will never be framed to gentleness
and meekness, nor will he be able to subdue his passions, until he has
learned never to give up hope. The Psalmist, at the same time, adds,
that he cherished his hope by constant meditation, lest he should yield
to despair. And this is the only means of our perseverance, when, on the
ground of his own promises, with which we are furnished, we appeal to
him, yea, rather when setting before our view his fidelity and his
constancy in fulfilling what he has promised, we are sureties to
ourselves for him. Accordingly, Paul, in <span
id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ro 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>, very properly joins patience to hope and
consolation. The repetition of terms in this verse shows, that this holy
man was subjected to a severe and arduous conflict. *Thou,* he says, *O
Lord! my God, wilt answer me.* His language implies, that if God should
delay to come to his help, there was reason to fear that he would faint
from weariness, or fall into despair, unless, setting this double
defense before him, he persevered valiantly in the conflict.

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span>**16** *For I said, lest they rejoice over
me.* Here he also confirms his faith and his earnestness in prayer from
this consideration, that if he should be forsaken of God, his enemies
would triumph. This indignity, on their part, is of no small weight in
inducing God to help us; for the wicked, in thus magnifying themselves
against us, and indulging in derision, not only make war with our flesh,
but also directly assail our faith and endeavor to destroy whatever
there is of religion and the fear of God in our hearts. What is the
object of all their mockery, but to persuade us that what God has
promised is vain and worthless? The Psalmist immediately adds, that it
is not without cause that he is struck with the fear that his enemies
would rejoice over him, since he had already had experience of their
proud boastings. We are taught from this passage, that in proportion as
our enemies increase in insolence and cruelty towards us, or, seeing us
already overwhelmed by a heavy load of adversities, in their proud
disdain trample us under their feet, we ought to cherish the greater
hope that God will come to our help.

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span>**17** *Surely I am ready to halt* This
verse has led expositors to suppose that David was afflicted with some
sore, from which he was afraid of having brought upon him the infirmity
of halting all his days; but I have already shown, in <span
id="iv.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ps 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p10.1"></span>, that this supposition is very improbable. We
have certainly no greater reason for supposing that David was lame than
that Jeremiah was so, when he said,

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span>“All my familiars watched for my halting.”
—  
(<span id="iv.iv-p11.2"></span>[Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p11.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span>I therefore think that David here employs a
metaphorical mode of expression, and that his meaning is, that if God
did not soon come to his aid, there was no hope of his ever being
restored to his former condition; and that he was so greatly afflicted,
that he would walk as if he had been maimed or lame all the days of his
life.  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) It next follows by way of
exposition, that *his sorrow was continually before him.* The sense is,
that he was so grievously afflicted, that he could not forget it for a
single moment, so as to obtain some relaxation. In both the clauses of
the verse, David confesses that his disease is incurable, unless he
obtain some remedy from God, and that he cannot endure it, unless he be
raised up and sustained by the hand of God himself. This is the reason
why he directs all his thoughts and his requests to God alone; for as
soon as he shall turn aside from him, he sees nothing but immediate
ruin.

<span id="iv.iv-p14"></span><span id="iv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p15"></span>**18** and **19** *Surely I declare my
iniquity.* By comparison, he amplifies what he had just said concerning
the pride and the reproachful conduct of his enemies; for he says, that
whilst he is lying in a filthy and wretched condition, like a wicked
man, and one abandoned by God, they fly about in mirth and gladness,
nay, they carry their heads high, because they are rich and powerful.
But first, it is proper to notice in what sense it is that *he declares
his sin.* Those, in my judgment, are mistaken, who understand this
passage simply in the sense of a confession of his guilt before God,
that he might obtain forgiveness. According to their interpretation, the
Psalmist is supposed to repeat here what we have seen he said

<span id="iv.iv-p16"></span>“I acknowledged my sin unto thee,  
and mine iniquity have I not hid.”— (<span id="iv.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ps
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p16.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.iv-p17"></span>But in this place he is not speaking so much
of his repentance, as he is bewailing his sad and miserable condition;
and, therefore, *sin* and *iniquity* are to be understood of the
afflictions and chastisements which are the tokens of God’s wrath; as if
he had said, that the hand of God was against him, and lying so heavily
upon him, that from the very sight of the misery to which he was
reduced, the world in general might regard him as a condemned and
reprobate man. In order to render the meaning more obvious, the 18th and
19th verses must be read together, thus: *I declare my iniquity, and my
enemies are living; I am dismayed because of my sin, but they are become
strong.* I do not, however, deny that he regards the miseries to which
he was subjected as proceeding from his sins. In this respect, the godly
differ from the wicked, that, being admonished of their transgression by
adversity, they humbly sist themselves before the judgment-seat of God.
Accordingly, judging of the cause from the effects, he takes into
account these two things: First, That thus overwhelmed and afflicted, he
is lying under a heavy load of miseries; and, secondly, That all these
evils are justly inflicted as chastisements for sin.

<span id="iv.iv-p18"></span><span id="iv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p19"></span>This *living,*  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) which he attributes to his enemies,
implies as much as to enjoy continued and abundant prosperity in all
things; and therefore he adds, that they *are become strong and increase
in power* I interpret the word <span id="iv.iv-p20.6"></span>רבב,
*rabbab,* in this place, *increase in power,* because he would speak
improperly were he to be understood as saying, *that they were
multiplied.* He does not here complain that they increased in number,
but rather exalts their greatness, because the more they acquired of
riches, they acquired so much the greater audacity in oppressing the
good and the simple. He tells us that he is *assailed by them
wrongfully,* and without cause, that he may induce God to be the more
favorable and propitious to him. And surely, if we would have the favor
of God for our defense, we must always take care not to injure any man,
and to do nothing to provoke the hatred of any against us.

<span id="iv.iv-p21"></span><span id="iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p22"></span>This is more fully confirmed in the
following verse, in which he declares that they requited him evil for
the good which he had done them. More than this, however, is implied in
the language of David. It implies that he not only abstained from all
hurtful dealing towards his enemies, but that he had done them all the
good which was in his power; and on this account the rage of the wicked
is the less excusable, which not only moves them to do harm to others
without cause, but which likewise cannot be appeased by any marks of
kindness exercised towards them. It is indeed true, that there is
nothing which wounds those of an ingenuous disposition of mind more than
when wicked and ungodly men recompense them in a manner so dishonorable
and unjust; but when they reflect upon this consolatory consideration,
that God is no less offended with such ingratitude than those to whom
the injury is done, they have no reason to be troubled beyond measure.
To mitigate their sorrow, let this doctrine be the subject of their
frequent meditation, That whenever the wicked, to whom we have
endeavored to do good, shall requite us evil for good, God will
certainly be their judge. In the last place, it is added, as the highest
degree of their desperate wickedness, that they hated David because he
studied to practice uprightness: *They are opposed to me, because I
follow that which is good* It must be admitted, that those are froward
and wicked in the extreme, nay, even of a devilish disposition, who hold
uprightness in such abhorrence that they deliberately make war upon
those who follow after it. It is, indeed, a very sore temptation, that
the people of God, the more sincerely they endeavor to serve him, should
procure to themselves so much the more trouble and sorrow; but this
consideration ought to prove a sufficient ground of consolation to them,
that they are not only supported by the testimony of a good conscience,
but that they also know that God is ever ready, and that, too, for this
very reason, to manifest his mercy towards them. On the ground of this
assurance, they dare to appear in the presence of God, and entreat him,
as it is his cause as well as theirs, that he would maintain and defend
it. There can be no doubt that David, by his own example, has prescribed
this as a common rule to all the faithful, rather to incur the hatred
and ill-will of the world, than in the least degree to swerve from the
path of duty, and without any hesitation to regard those as their
enemies whom they know to be opposed to that which is just and
righteous.

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
38:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**21**. Forsake me not, O Jehovah! my God, and
be not far from me. **22**. Make haste to come to my aid, O Lord!  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) my salvation.  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md)

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span><span id="iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span>In these concluding verses, David briefly
states the chief point which he desired, and the sum of his whole
prayer; namely, that whereas he was forsaken of men, and grievously
afflicted in every way, God would receive him and raise him up again. He
uses three forms of expression; first, that *God would not forsake him,*
or cease to take care of him; secondly, that *he would not be far from
him;* and, thirdly, that *he would make haste to help him.* David was,
indeed, persuaded that God is always near to his servants, and that he
delays not a single moment longer than is necessary. But, as we have
seen in another place, it is not at all wonderful that the saints, when
they unburden themselves of their cares and sorrows into the bosom of
God, should make their requests in language according to the feeling of
the flesh. They are not ashamed to confess their infirmity, nor is it
proper to conceal the doubts which arise in their minds. Although,
however, waiting was wearisome to David according to the flesh, yet in
one word he plainly shows that he did not pray in uncertainty when he
calls God *his salvation,* or the author of his salvation. Some render
it *to my* *salvation,* but this is forced. David rather sets up this as
a wall of defense against all the devices by which, as we have seen, his
faith was assailed, That whatever might happen, he was, nevertheless,
well assured of his salvation in God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc09003.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p4"></span> This title occurs only here and in the 70th
psalm. This psalm is the third of what are called the Penitential
Psalms. The two before this are the 6th and the 32d; and the four which
follow it are the 51st, the 102d, the 130th, and the 143d. It is a
curious fact, that when Galileo was sentenced to be confined in the
dungeons of the Inquisition for an indefinite period, for having
maintained the Copernican system, he was enjoined to repeat as a penance
these seven Penitential Psalms every week for three years; by which it
was doubtless intended to extort a sort of confession from him of his
guilt, and an acknowledgement of the justice of his sentence.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc09003.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span> That is, they enter deep into the flesh. The
Septuagint reads, “<span id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>Ενεπάγησάν μοι” the
Vulgate, “<span id="iv.i-p3.2"></span>Infixae sunt mihi;” — “Are
fastened in me;” which is a natural consequence of entering deep, and
rather expresses the meaning, than conveys the precise idea of the
original word. The Syriac and Arabic versions give the same rendering
with the Vulgate.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc09003.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span> “The proper meaning of <span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>חכר is not a wound, but a bruise or wale made by
a severe blow. My wales through my severe chastisement are become putrid
and running sores.” — *Fry*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc09003.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span> Berlin reads, “<span
id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>aestu torrente;” Horsley, “with a parching heat;”
and this is the view taken by Hare, Dathe, Gesenius, and the Chaldee.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc09003.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> <span id="iv.ii-p4.1"></span>Dominus. In the
Hebrew Bible it is <span id="iv.ii-p4.2"></span>אדני, *Adonai*; but
several MSS. read <span id="iv.ii-p4.3"></span>יהאה, *Yehovah*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc09003.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="iv.ii-p10.1"></span>קדר is
literally ‘dressed in mourning;’ hence it may, by an easy figure, denote
the melancholy looks of a mourner.” — *Horsley*. This is the sense put
upon the expression by the Septuagint, “<span
id="iv.ii-p10.2"></span>Ολην τὴν ἡμερον σχυθρωπάζ ων ἐπορευόμης;” — “I
went with a mourning countenance all the day."

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc09003.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> ”<span id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>Et machine
des finesses pour le surprendre.” — *Fr*. “And devised stratagems for
ensnaring him.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc09003.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>Comme celles
des orateurs profanes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc09003.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span> <span id="iv.iv-p3.1"></span>Dominus. Heb.
<span id="iv.iv-p3.2"></span>אתי, *Adonai*. But instead of <span
id="iv.iv-p3.3"></span>אתי, *Adonai*, one hundred and two of Kennicott’s
and De Rossi’s MSS. read <span id="iv.iv-p3.4"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah*,
which may be presumed to be the true reading. As the Jews, from the
sacredness which they attach to the name *Jehovah*, never pronounce it,
and when it occurs in reading the Scriptures, pronounce <span
id="iv.iv-p3.5"></span>אתי, *Adonai*, it may readily be supposed that
Jewish scribes, in writing out copies of the Scriptures, from their
constantly reading *Adonai* for *Jehovah*, would be very apt to fall
into the mistake of writing the former word for the latter.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc09003.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p13.1"></span>Et que son
affliction est telle, qu’il ne sera jour de sa vie qu’il ne s’en sente.”
— *Fr*. “And that his affliction was such, that there would not be a day
of his life but he would feel it.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc09003.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p20"></span> Ainsworth reads, “*are alive*, or
*living*;” “that is,” says he, “lively, lusty, cheerful, hale, and
sound, or rich, as the word seemeth to mean in <span
id="iv.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ec 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p20.1"></span>.” Dr Lowth, instead of <span
id="iv.iv-p20.2"></span>חיים, *chayim*, *living*, proposes to read here
<span id="iv.iv-p20.3"></span>חאנם, *chinam*, *without cause* — *without
cause have strengthened themselves*. “I think,” says he, “<span
id="iv.iv-p20.4"></span>חינם, here for <span
id="iv.iv-p20.5"></span>חיים, is a remarkable instance of a reading
merely conjectural, unsupported by any authority but that of the
context, of the truth of which, no possible doubt can be made. Hare and
Houbigant, and I suppose every other competent reader, has hit upon it.
You see the two hemistichs are parallel and synonymous, word answering
to word.” — *Dr Lowth in Mr Merrick*’*s Note on this place*. — Street
and Dr Adam Clarke agree in this alteration.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc09003.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span> <span id="iv.v-p3.1"></span>Dominus. Heb.
<span id="iv.v-p3.2"></span>אדני, Adonai.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc09003.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iv.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p4.1"></span>Ou, de mon
salut.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, of my salvation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 39](cc09004.md)
