[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09025)  [Next](cc09027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvii"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p1"></span>PSALM 61

<span id="xxvii-p2"></span>This psalm begins with prayer, or, at any
rate, with the brief record of a prayer, which David had preferred to
God in a season of deep distress. It is chiefly occupied, however, with
the praises of God, expressing his thankfulness for a miraculous
deliverance which he had experienced from some imminent danger, and for
his establishment upon the throne.

<span id="xxvii-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Neginoth, A Psalm
of David.

<span id="xxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
61:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Hear my cry, O God! attend unto my
prayer. **2**. Prom the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my
heart is vexed: thou shalt lead me to the rock which is too high for me.
 <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400.md) **3**. For thou hast been my
hope, a tower of strength from the face of the enemy. **4**. I will
abide in thy tabernacle for ever; I will be safe under the covert of thy
wings. Selah.

<span id="xxvii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.i-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Hear my cry, O God!* It is not
exactly ascertained at what time this psalm was composed; but there
seems to be some probability in the conjecture, that David had been for
a considerable period in possession of the throne before he fell into
the circumstances of distress which are here mentioned. I agree with
those who refer it to the time of the conspiracy of Absalom;  <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md) for, had he not been an exile, he
could not speak, as in the second verse, of crying from the ends of the
earth. By using the term *cry,* he would intimate the vehemency of his
desire; and it is a word which expresses inward fervency of spirit,
without reference to the fact whether he may have prayed aloud, or in a
low and subdued tone. The repetition which is employed denotes his
diligence and perseverance in prayer, and teaches us that we should not
faint and become discouraged in this exercise, because God may not have
immediately and openly testified his acceptance of our petitions. There
can be no question that, by *the ends of the earth,* he refers to the
place of his banishment, as being cut off from access to the temple and
the royal city. By some, indeed, the words have been understood
figuratively, as meaning, that he prayed from the lowest deeps of
distress; but I can see no foundation for this. In a subsequent part of
the psalm, he calls himself King, a title never assumed by him before
the death of Saul, and from this circumstance we may at once infer, that
the time referred to was that when he fled in trepidation from the fury
of his son Absalom, and hid himself in the wilderness of Mahanaim, and
places of a similarly solitary description. Mount Zion was the place
where the ark of the covenant had been deposited, and it was the seat of
royalty; and David, when banished from this, which was the principal and
most eligible locality, speaks as if he had been driven to the uttermost
parts of the earth. Living, though he did, under the shadows of a legal
dispensation, he did not cease to pray, because removed to a distance
from the temple; and how inexcusable must our conduct be, privileged as
we are of God, and called to draw near by the way which has been opened
through the blood of Christ, if we break not through every hinderance
which Satan presents to our communications with heaven? Let those who
may have been deprived of the hearing of the word, and the dispensation
of the sacraments, so as, in a manner, to be banished out of the Church,
learn from the example of David to persevere in crying to God, even
under these solitary circumstances. He adverts, in what follows, to his
grief and anguish. He adds the fact of his being shut up from every
method of escape, that the grace of God might be made more apparent in
his deliverance. The Hebrew word <span id="xxvii.i-p7.2"></span>עטף,
*ataph,* which I have translated *vexed,* means occasionally *to cover,*
or *involve,* which has led some to render the clause, *while my heart
is turned about;* that is, tossed hither and thither, or agitated. This
is a harsh translation. Others read with more propriety, *while my heart
is involved in cares and troubles, or overwhelmed.*  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md) I have adopted a simpler rendering,
although I would not be understood as denying the metaphor, to which
they suppose that there is an allusion. The clause, there can be no
question, is inserted to intimate that he was not prevented by trouble
from having recourse to God. Notice was taken already of the outward
trial to which he was subjected, in distance from the sanctuary, and of
his rising above this, so as to direct his cry to God; and in the words
before us, we have his confession that he was far from being stoically
insensible, being conscious of a severe inward struggle with grief and
perplexity of mind. It is the duty, then, of believers, when oppressed
with heaviness and spiritual distress, to make only the more strenuous
efforts for breaking through these obstacles in their approaches to God.
His prayer is, that God would bring him to that safety from which he
seems to be excluded. By a *rock* or *citadel,* he means, in general,
secure protection, from which he complains of being shut out, as it was
impossible to reach it unless he were raised by the hand of God. In
looking round him, it seemed as if every place of shelter and safety
were lifted up above his head and rendered inaccessible. He was cut off
from all help, and yet, hopeless as deliverance appeared, he had no
doubt of his safety, should God only extend his hand for interposition.
This is the plain meaning of the passage, when divested of figure, that
God was able to rescue him from danger, though all other help should be
withdrawn, and the whole world should stand between him and deliverance;
a truth which we would do well to consider seriously. In looking for
deliverance from God, we must beware of yielding to the suggestions of
sense; we should remember that he does not always work by apparent
means, but delivers us when he chooses by methods inscrutable to reason.
If we attempt to prescribe any one particular line of procedure, we do
no less than wilfully limit his almighty power.

<span id="xxvii.i-p9"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p10"></span>**3.** *For thou hast been my hope* Here
we may suppose, either that he calls to his remembrance such benefits as
he had formerly received, or that he congratulates himself upon
deliverance which he had presently experienced. There is much
probability in either supposition. Nothing animates our hopes more than
the recollection of the past goodness of God, and, in the midst of his
prayers, we frequently find David indulging in reflections of this kind.
On the other hand, the remainder of the psalm is occupied with returning
praise to God for his present goodness; and there is no reason why we
should not suppose, that these words before us form the commencement of
the thanksgiving. In that case, the Hebrew particle, which we have
rendered *for* or *because,* may be understood rather in an affirmative
sense, *surely* or *certainly.*

<span id="xxvii.i-p11"></span>In the verse which follows, he expresses
the confidence which he had that he would dwell from this time forth in
the sanctuary of the Lord. I cannot altogether agree with those who
think that David was still in his state of exile from his native country
when this was written, and is merely to be understood as promising to
himself the certainty of his return. He would seem rather to be
rejoicing in restoration already obtained, than assuaging his grief by
anticipation of it in the future; and this will be still more apparent,
when we come to consider the immediate context. It is noticeable, that
now when he was returned from his banishment, and established within his
own palace, his heart was set more upon the worship of God than all the
wealth, splendor, and pleasures of royalty. We have his testimony in
other parts of his writings, that in the worst calamities which he
endured, he experienced nothing which could be compared to the
bitterness of being shut out from the ordinances of religion; and now he
accounts it a higher pleasure to lie as a suppliant before the altar,
than to sit upon the throne of a king. By the words which immediately
follow, he shows that he did not, like too many uninformed persons,
attach a superstitious importance to the mere externals of religion,
adding, that he found his safety *under the shadow of God’s wings.*
Ignorant persons might conceive of God as necessarily confined to the
outward tabernacle, but David only improved this symbol of the Divine
presence as a means of elevating the spiritual exercises of his faith. I
would not deny that there may be an allusion to the cherubim when he
speaks of the shadow of God’s wings. Only we must remember, that David
did not rest in carnal ordinances, the elements of the world,  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) but rose by them and above them to the
spiritual worship of God.

<span id="xxvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
61:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005.md)<span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. For thou, O God! hast heard my
vows: thou hast given inheritance to those  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) fearing thy name. **6**. Thou shalt
add days upon days to the king, and his years as generation upon
generation. **7.** He shalt abide before the face of God for ever:
prepare mercy and truth; let them keep him. **8.** So will I sing unto
thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *For thou, O God! hast heard my
vows.* He here shows the grounds upon which he had spoken of his abiding
under the wings of God. The sudden joy which he experienced arose from
the circumstance of God’s having heard his prayers, and made light to
spring out of darkness. By his *vows* we must understand his prayers,
according to a common figure of speech by which the part is taken for
the whole, having made vows when he prayed. In general, he would
acknowledge himself indebted for his restoration entirely to an
interposition of Divine power, and not to any dexterity which he had
shown in gaining time for the collection of his forces,  <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) nor to any assistance which he had
derived, either from the favor of the priests or the exertions of his
soldiers. Had the letter <span id="xxvii.ii-p7.3"></span>ל, *lamed,*
been prefixed to the Hebrew word <span id="xxvii.ii-p7.4"></span>יראי,
*yirey,* which is rendered *fearing,* there would have been no reason
left to doubt that the words which follow were of the nature of a
general assertion, to the effect, that God has given the inheritance to
those who fear him. As it is, they may be construed to mean, that God
had given David the inheritance of those who fear him. Still I prefer
attaching the more general sense to the words, and understand them as
intimating that God never disappoints his servants, but crowns with
everlasting happiness the struggles and the distresses which may have
exercised their faith. They convey an implied censure of that
unwarrantable confidence which is indulged in by the wicked, when
favored, through the divine forbearance, with any interval of
prosperity. The success which flatters them is merely imaginary, and
speedily vanishes. But *inheritance* — the word here employed by David —
suggests that the people of God enjoy a species of prosperity more solid
and enduring; their momentary and short-lived troubles having only the
effect of promoting their eternal welfare. He praises God that those who
fear his name are not left to the poor privilege of rejoicing for a few
days, but secured in a permanent heritage of happiness. The truth is one
which cannot be questioned. The wicked, having no possession by faith of
the divine benefits which they may happen to share, live on from day to
day, as it were, upon plunder. It is only such as fear the Lord who have
the true and legitimate enjoyment of their blessings.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *Thou shalt add days upon days to
the king etc.*  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406.md) David cannot be
considered as using these words of gratulation with an exclusive
reference to himself. It is true that he lived to an extreme old age,
and died full of days, leaving the kingdom in a settled condition, and
in the hands of his son, who succeeded him; but he did not exceed the
period of one man’s life, and the greater part of it was spent in
continued dangers and anxieties. There can be no doubt, therefore, that
the series of years, and even ages, of which he speaks, extends
prospectively to the coming of Christ, it being the very condition of
the kingdom, as I have often remarked, that God maintained them as one
people under one head, or, when scattered, united them again. The same
succession still subsists in reference to ourselves. Christ must be
viewed as living in his members to the end of the world. To this Isaiah
alludes, when he says, “Who shall declare his generation or age?” —
words in which he predicts that the Church would survive through all
ages, notwithstanding the incessant danger of destruction to which it is
exposed through the attacks of its enemies, and the many storms
assailing it. So here David foretells the uninterrupted succession of
the kingdom down to the time of Christ.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p12"></span>**7.** *He shall abide before the face of
God for ever.* This is only a simpler way of expressing what he had said
before, *I* *will abide in thy tabernacle for ever*. He refers to the
security and peace which he would enjoy under the protection of God, who
would effectually preserve his life. By *the face of God,* must be meant
the fatherly care and providence which he extends to his people. So
numerous are the dangers which surround us, that we could not stand a
single moment, if his eye did not watch over our preservation. But the
true security for a happy life lies in being persuaded that we are under
divine government. There follows a prayer that God would *appoint mercy
and truth* for preserving the king. And this admits of two meanings. As
clemency and truth are the best safeguards of a kingdom, it would not be
altogether unreasonable to suppose that David prays here to be endued
with these dispositions, as a means of establishing his throne. But the
other meaning is perhaps preferable, that God would gird himself with
clemency and truth in order to the preservation of the king. The Hebrew
term <span id="xxvii.ii-p12.1"></span>מנה, *manah,* signifies not only
*to prepare,* but *to set over,* or *appoint;* and he speaks as if the
true defense of the kingdom was only to be found in the mercy and
faithfulness of God. He uses the expression *prepare,* or *command,* to
intimate how easily God can provide the means necessary for preserving
his people. In the concluding words, he expresses his resolution to
persevere in the constant celebration of the praises of God, with a view
to fulfilling the vows which he had contracted — and this again may lead
us to remark the agreement which ought ever to subsist between the two
parts of invocation: for David, while he applied to God for help, under
the pressure of calamity, showed himself uniformly grateful when he had
experienced deliverance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc09026.htm#fr_400.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p3"></span> He represents himself as like a man
climbing to get up into a place of safety, but who wants strength to get
to it.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc09026.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p7"></span> It is generally agreed that this psalm
refers to the history recorded in <span id="xxvii.i-p7.1"></span>[2 Sam.
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc09026.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p8"></span> This last translation is omitted in the
French version, perhaps through inadvertency.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc09026.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xxvii.i-p12.1"></span>Non
fuisse retentum in mundi elementis.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxvii.i-p12.2"></span>David ne s’est point arret, aux elemens du
monde, (comme Sainct Paul appelle les ceremonies prises charnellement et
quant a l’exterieur,”) etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc09026.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxvii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
l’heritage de ceux.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, the inheritance of those.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc09026.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxvii.ii-p7.1"></span>Quamvis
prudenter colligendis viribus tempus sumpsisset,” etc. — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxvii.ii-p7.2"></span>Combien qu’il eust use de prudence a donner
ordre a son affaire, et prendre temps pour amasser forces,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc09026.htm#fr_406.md) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p10"></span> In the Chaldee it is: “Thou shalt add
days to the days of the King Messiah; his years shall be as the
generation of this world, and of the world to come.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 62](cc09027.md)
