[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09020)  [Next](cc09022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii"></span>

<span id="xxii-p1"></span>PSALM 56

<span id="xxii-p2"></span>In this psalm David mixes complaint with
prayer, and assuages the distress of his mind by meditation upon the
mercy of God. He pray, that he may experience the divine help under the
persecutions to which he was subjected by Saul, and his other enemies;
and expresses his confidence of success. It is possible, however, that
the psalm may have been written after the dangers to which he alludes
were past, and in thanksgiving for a deliverance which he had already
received.

<span id="xxii-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon the silent dove in
distant places,  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md) Michtam of
David, when the Philistines took him in Gath.

<span id="xxii-p5"></span>The portion of history referred to in the
title is recorded in <span id="xxii-p5.1"></span>[1 Samuel
21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#000.md)<span id="xxii-p5.1"></span>. Being
driven from every hiding-place in which he had hitherto found safety, he
fled to King Achish. He speaks here of having been apprehended; and that
he was so, may be gathered from the inspired narrative, where Achish is
represented as saying, “Lo, ye see the man is mad; wherefore, then, have
ye brought him to me?” It is probable that they suspected him of some
sinister design in the visit. He escaped upon that occasion by feigning
madness; but this psalm proves that he must have been engaged in fervent
supplication, and that faith was secretly in exercise even when he
betrayed this weakness. He would not appear to have been under that
inordinate agitation of mind, which instigates men to adopt methods of
relief which are positively sinful; but in the desperate emergency to
which he was reduced, he was compelled through fear to employ an artful
device, which might save his life, although it would lower his dignity
in the eyes of the world. If he lost the praise of magnanimity, it is at
least apparent from this psalm, what a strenuous contest there was
between faith and fear in his heart. The words, *upon the silent dove,*
are supposed by some to have formed the commencement of a song well
known at the time. Others have thought that David is here compared to a
dove; and this conjecture is borne out by the propriety of the metaphor
in his present circumstances,  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md)
especially as it is added, *in distant places,* for he had been driven
to an enemy’s country by the fury of his persecutors. The meaning which
some have attached to the word, translating it *a palace,* is
farfetched. I have already given my views of the term *Michtam.*  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) I would not pretend to say anything
dogmatically on a point upon which even Hebrew interpreters are not
agreed in opinion; but the probability is, that it was a particular kind
of tune, or a musical instrument.

<span id="xxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
56:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001.md)<span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Be merciful unto me, O God! for man
swallows me up  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) he fighting
against me, daily oppresseth me. **2**. Mine enemies daily swallow me
up: surely they be many  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) that
fight against me, O Most High!  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md)
**3**. In the day that I was afraid, I did put my trust in thee. **4**.
In God I will praise his word; in God I have put my trust: I will not
fear what flesh can do unto me.

<span id="xxii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p8"></span>**1** *Be merciful unto me, O God! for man
swallows me up*  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) It would be
difficult to determine whether he speaks here of foreign or domestic
enemies. When brought to King Achish he was as a sheep between two bands
of wolves, an object of deadly hatred to the Philistines on the one
hand, and exposed to equal persecutions from his own fellow-countrymen.
He uses the indefinite term *man* in this verse, though in the next he
speaks of having many enemies, the more forcibly to express the truth
that the whole world was combined against him, that he experienced no
humanity amongst men, and stood in the last necessity of divine help.
The term *daily* would suggest that he refers more immediately to Saul
and his faction. But in general, he deplores the wretchedness of his
fate in being beset with adversaries so numerous and so barbarous. Some
translate <span id="xxii.i-p9.2"></span>שאף, *shaaph, to regard,* but it
is more properly rendered *to swallow up,* a strong expression, denoting
the insatiable rage with which they assailed him. I have adhered to the
common translation of <span id="xxii.i-p9.3"></span>לחם*, lacham,*
though it also signifies *to eat up,* which might consist better with
the metaphor already used in the preceding part of the verse. It is
found, however, in the sense *to fight against,* and I was unwilling to
depart from the received rendering. I shall only observe in passing,
that those who read in the second member of the verse, *many fighting
with me,* as if he alluded to the assistance of angels, mistake the
meaning of the passage; for it is evident that he uses the language of
complaint throughout the verse.

<span id="xxii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *In the day that I was afraid, etc.*
In the Hebrew, the words run in the future tense, but they must be
resolved into the praeterite. He acknowledges his weakness, in so far as
he was sensible of fear, but denies having yielded to it. Dangers might
distress him, but could not induce him to surrender his hope. He makes
no pretensions to that lofty heroism which contemns danger, and yet
while he allows that he felt fear, he declares his fixed resolution to
persist in a confident expectation of the divine favor. The true proof
of faith consists in this, that when we feel the solicitations of
natural fear, we can resist them, and prevent them from obtaining an
undue ascendancy. Fear and hope may seem opposite and incompatible
affections, yet it is proved by observation, that the latter never comes
into full sway unless there exists some measure of the former. In a
tranquil state of the mind, there is no scope for the exercise of hope.
At such times it lies dormant, and its power is only displayed to
advantage when we see it elevating the soul under dejection, calming its
agitations, or soothing its distractions. This was the manner in which
it manifested itself in David, who feared, and yet trusted, was sensible
of the greatness of his danger, and yet quieted his mind with the
confident hope of the divine deliverance.

<span id="xxii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p13"></span>**4.** *In God I will praise his word* Here
he grows more courageous in the exercise of hope, as generally happens
with the people of God. They find it difficult at first to reach this
exercise. It is only after a severe struggle that they rise to it, but
the effort being once made, they emerge from their fears into the
fullness of confidence, and are prepared to grapple with the most
formidable enemies. *To praise,* is here synonymous with glorying or
boasting. He was now in possession of a triumphant confidence, and
rejoiced in the certainty of hope. The ground of his joy is said to be
*the divine word;* and this implies, that however much he might seem to
be forsaken and abandoned by God, he satisfied himself by reflecting on
the truthfulness of his promises. He would glory in God notwithstanding,
and although there should be no outward appearance of help, or it should
even be sensibly withdrawn, he would rest contented with the simple
security of his word. The declaration is one that deserves our notice.
How prone are we to fret and to murmur when it has not pleased God
immediately to grant us our requests! Our discontent may not be openly
expressed, but it is inwardly felt, when we are left in this manner to
depend upon his naked promises. It was no small attainment in David,
that he could thus proceed to praise the Lord, in the midst of dangers,
and with no other ground of support but the word of God. The sentiment
contained in the latter clause of the verse might seem at first glance
to merit little consideration. What more obvious than that God is able
to protect us from the hand of men, that his power to defend is
immensely greater than their power to injure? This may be true, but we
all know too well how much of that perverse unbelief there is in our
hearts, which leads us to rate the ability of God below that of the
creature. It was no small proof, therefore, of the faith of David, that
he could despise the threatenings of his enemies. And it would be well
if all the saints of God were impressed with such a sense of his
superiority to their adversaries as would lead them to show a similar
contempt of danger. When assailed by these, it should never escape their
recollection, that the contest is in reality between their enemies and
God, and that it were blasphemous in this case to doubt the issue. The
great object which these have in view is to shake our faith in the
promised help of the Lord; and we are chargeable with limiting his
power, unless we realize him standing at our right hand, able with one
movement of his finger, or one breath of his mouth, to dissipate their
hosts, and confound their infatuated machinations. Shall we place him on
a level with mortal man, and measure his probable success by the numbers
which are set against him? “But how,” may it be asked, “are we to
account for this sudden change in the exercise of David? A moment
before, he was expressing his dread of destruction, and now he bids
defiance to the collected strength of his enemies.” I reply, that there
is nothing in his words which insinuate that he was absolutely raised
above the influence of fear, and every sense of the dangers by which he
was encompassed. They imply no more than that he triumphed over his
apprehensions, through that confident hope of salvation with which he
was armed. Men he terms in this verse *flesh,* to impress the more upon
his mind the madness of their folly in attempting a contest so
infinitely above their strength.

<span id="xxii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
56:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005.md)<span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. Every day my words vex me; all their
thoughts are against me for evil. **6**. They gather themselves
together, they hide themselves, they watch my heels, because they seek
my soul.  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) **7**. After their
mischief they think to escape: in thine anger cast down the peoples, O
God! **8**. Thou hast taken account of my wandering; put thou my tears
into thy bottle: are they not in thy register?

<span id="xxii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p6"></span>**5** *Every day my words vex me* The first
part of this verse has been variously rendered. Some understand *my
words* to be the nominative in the sentence, and with these I agree in
opinion. Others suppose a reference to the enemies of David, and
translate, *they calumniate my words,* or, *they cause me grief on
account of my words.* Again, <span id="xxii.ii-p6.1"></span>יעצבו,
*yeatsebu,* has been taken in the neuter sense, and translated, *my
words are troublesome.* But <span id="xxii.ii-p6.2"></span>עצב  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md) , *atsab,* commonly signifies to
*afflict with grief,* and in *Pihel* is always taken transitively; nor
does there seem any reason in this place to depart from the general rule
of the language. And the passage flows more naturally when rendered, *my
words affect me with grief,* or *vex me,* than by supposing that he
refers to his enemies. According to this translation, the verse contains
a double complaint, that, on the one hand, he was himself unsuccessful
in everything which he attempted, his plans having still issued in
vexatious failure; while, on the other hand, his enemies were devising
every means for his destruction. It may appear at first sight rather
inconsistent to suppose that he should immediately before have
disclaimed being under the influence of fear, and now acknowledge that
he was not only distressed, but in some measure the author of his own
discomfort. I have already observed, however, that he is not to be
considered as having been absolutely divested of anxiety and fear,
although enabled to look down with contempt upon his enemies from the
eminence of faith. Here he speaks of the circumstances which tried him,
which his faith certainly overcame, but at the same time could not
altogether remove out of the way. He confesses his own lack of wisdom
and foresight, shown in the abortive issue of every plan which he
devised. It aggravated the evil, that his enemies were employing their
united counsels to plot his ruin. He adds, that *they gathered
themselves together;* and this made his case the more calamitous,
matched as he was, a single individual, against this numerous host. In
mentioning that they *hide themselves,* he adverts to the subtile
devices which they framed for surprising him into destruction. The verb
<span id="xxii.ii-p7.6"></span>יצפינו, *yitsponu,* by grammatical rule
ought to have the letter <span id="xxii.ii-p7.7"></span>ו, *vau,* in the
middle; from which the general opinion is, that the <span
id="xxii.ii-p7.8"></span>י *yod,* is as it were the mark of *Hiphil*,
denoting that the enemies of David came to the determination of
employing an ambush, with the view of surrounding him. He tells us that
they pressed upon him in every direction, and as it were trod upon his
heels, so that he had no respite. And he points at their implacable
hatred as the cause of their eager pursuit of him; for nothing, he
informs us, would satisfy them but his death.

<span id="xxii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** *After their mischief they think to
escape.* The beginning of this verse is read by some interrogatively,
*Shall they escape in their iniquity?*  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) But there is no necessity for having
recourse to this distant meaning. It is much better to understand the
words in the sense which they naturally suggest when first read, That
the wicked think to escape in their iniquity, but that God will cast
them down. He alludes to the fact that the ungodly, when allowed to
proceed without interruption in their evil courses, indulge the idea
that they have a license to perpetrate the worst wickedness with
impunity. In these our own times, we see many such profane characters,
who display an unmeasured audacity under the assurance that God’s hand
can never reach them. They not only look to go unpunished, but found
their hopes of success upon their evil deeds, and encourage themselves
to farther wickedness, by cherishing the opinion that they will contrive
a way of escape from every adversity. David has no sooner stated this
vain confident persuasion of the wicked, than he refutes it by an appeal
to the judgment of God, declaring his conviction that, however proudly
they might exalt themselves, the hour of vengeance would come when God
would *cast down the peoples* He makes use of the plural number, to
fortify his mind against fear, when he reflected upon the array of his
enemies. Let us remember, when our enemies are many, that it is one of
the prerogatives of God to cast down the people, and not one nation of
foes merely, but the world.

<span id="xxii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p12"></span>**8.** *Thou hast taken account of my
wanderings* The words run in the form of an abrupt prayer. Having begun
by requesting God to consider his tears, suddenly, as if he had obtained
what he asked, he declares that they were written in God’s book. It is
possible, indeed, to understand the interrogation as a prayer; but he
would seem rather to insinuate by this form of expression, that he stood
in no need of multiplying words, and that God had already anticipated
his desire. It is necessary, however, to consider the words of the verse
more particularly. He speaks of his *wandering* as having been noted by
God, and this that he may call attention to one remarkable feature of
his history, his having been forced to roam a solitary exile for so long
a period. The reference is not to any one wandering; the singular number
is used for the plural, or rather, he is to be understood as declaring
emphatically that his whole life was only one continued wandering. This
he urges as an argument to commiseration, spent as his years had been in
the anxieties and dangers of such a perplexing pilgrimage. Accordingly,
he prays that God might *put his tears into his bottle*  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) It was usual to preserve the wine and
oil in bottles: so that the words amount to a request that God would not
suffer his tears to fall to the ground, but keep them with care as a
precious deposit. The prayers of David, as appears from the passage
before us, proceeded upon faith in the providence of God, who watches
our every step, and by whom (to use an expression of Christ)

<span id="xxii.ii-p14"></span>“the very hairs of our head are
numbered,”  
(<span id="xxii.ii-p14.2"></span>[Mt
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span
id="xxii.ii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxii.ii-p15"></span>Unless persuaded in our mind that God
takes special notice of each affliction which we endure, it is
impossible we can ever attain such confidence as to pray that God would
put our tears into his bottle, with a view to regarding them, and being
induced by them to interpose in our behalf. He immediately adds, that he
had obtained what he asked: for, as already observed, I prefer
understanding the latter clause affirmatively. He animates his hope by
the consideration that all his tears were written in the book of God,
and would therefore be certainly remembered. And we may surely believe,
that if God bestows such honor upon the tears of his saints, he must
number every drop of their blood which is shed. Tyrants may burn their
flesh and their bones, but the blood remains to cry aloud for vengeance;
and intervening ages can never erase what has been written in the
register of God’s remembrance.

<span id="xxii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
56:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** When I cry, then shall mine enemies
turn back: this I know, for God is with me. **10.** In God will I praise
his word; in Jehovah will I praise his word. **11.** In God have! hoped:
I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

<span id="xxii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p5"></span>**9.** *When I cry, then shall mine
enemies turn back.* Here he boasts of victory with even more confidence
than formerly, specifying, as it were, the very moment of time when his
enemies were to be turned back. He had no sensible evidence of their
approaching destruction but from the firm reliance which he exercised
upon the promise, he was able to anticipate the coming period, and
resolved to wait for it with patience. Though God might make no haste to
interpose, and might not scatter his enemies at the very instant when he
prayed, he was confident that his prayers would not be disappointed: and
his ground for believing this was just a conviction of the truth, that
God never frustrates the prayers of his own children. With this
conviction thoroughly fixed in his mind, he could moderate his
anxieties, and calmly await the issue. It is instructive to notice, that
David, when he would secure the obtainment of his request, does not pray
in a hesitating or uncertain spirit, but with a confident assurance of
his being heard. Having once reached this faith, he sets at defiance the
devil and all the host of the ungodly.

<span id="xxii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p7"></span>**10** *In God will I praise his word* In
the original the pronoun is not expressed, but we are left to infer,
from the parallel verse which went before, that it is understood. The
repetition adds an emphasis to the sentiment, intimating, that though
God delayed the sensible manifestation of his favor, and might seem to
deal hardly in abandoning him to the word — giving him nothing more, he
was resolved to glory in it with undiminished confidence. When in a
spirit such as this we honor the word of God, though deprived of any
present experience of his goodness or his power, we “set to our seal
that God is true,” (<span id="xxii.iii-p7.1"></span>[Joh
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)<span id="xxii.iii-p7.1"></span>..md)
The repetition amounts to an expression of his determination that,
notwithstanding all circumstances which might appear to contravene the
promise, he would trust in it, and persist in praising it both now,
henceforth, and for ever. How desirable is it that the Lord’s people
generally would accustom themselves to think in the same manner, and
find, in the word of God, matter of never-failing praise amidst their
worst trials! They may meet with many mercies calling for the exercise
of thanksgiving, but can scarcely have proceeded one step in life before
they will feel the necessity of reliance upon the naked promise. A
similar reason may be given for his repetition of the sentiment in the
11th verse — *In God have I hoped,* etc. We shall find men universally
agreed in the opinion that God is an all-sufficient protector; but
observation proves how ready we are to distrust him under the slightest
temptation. When exposed to the opposition of assailants formidable for
strength, or policy, or any worldly advantages, let us learn with David
to set God in opposition to them, and we shall speedily be able to view
the mightiest of them without dismay.

<span id="xxii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
56:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012.md)<span
id="xxii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iv-p2"></span>**12**. Thy vows are upon me, O God! I will
pay thy praises. **13**. For thou hast delivered my soul from death:
hast thou not delivered my feet from falling headlong? that I may walk
before God in the light of the living.

<span id="xxii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iv-p5"></span>**12.** *Thy vows are upon me, O God!* I
hinted, from the outset, that it is probable this psalm was written by
David after he had escaped the dangers which he describes; and this may
account for the thanksgiving here appended to it. At the same time, we
have evidence that he was ever ready to engage in this exercise even
when presently suffering under his afflictions. He declares that *the
vows of God were upon him;* by which he means, that he was bound to pay
them, as, among the Romans, a person who had obtained what he sought,
under engagement of a vow, was said to be *voti damnatus* — *condemned
of his vow* If we have promised thanks, and our prayers have been heard,
an obligation is contracted. He calls them the vows of *God* — *thy
vows;* for the money in my hand may be said to be my creditor’s, being,
as I am, in his debt. He views his deliverance as having come from God;
and the condition having been performed, he acknowledges himself to be
burdened with the vows which he had contracted. We learn from the second
part of the verse what was the nature of the vows to which he adverts,
and, by attending to this, may preserve ourselves from the mistake of
imagining that he sanctions any such vows as those which are practiced
among Papists. He says that he would render *praises,* or *sacrifices of
praise;* for the word is applied to sacrifices, which were the outward
symbols of thanksgiving. David knew well that God attached no value to
sacrifices considered in themselves, or irrespectively of the design and
spirit of the person offering them; but we may believe that he would not
neglect the sacred ceremonies of the Law which was imposed upon the
Church at that time; and that he speaks of some solemn expression of
gratitude, such as was customary among the Jews upon the reception of a
signal Divine favor.

<span id="xxii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iv-p7"></span>**13.** *For thou hast delivered my soul
from death* This confirms the truth of the remark which I have already
made, that he considered his life as received from the hands of God, his
destruction having been inevitable but for the miraculous preservation
which he had experienced. To remove all doubt upon that subject, he
speaks of having been preserved, not simply from the treachery, the
malice, or the violence of his enemies, but from death itself. And the
other form of expression which he employs conveys the same meaning, when
he adds, that God had kept him back with his hand when he was on the eve
of rushing headlong into destruction. Some translate <span
id="xxii.iv-p7.1"></span>מדחי, *middechi, from falling;* but the word
denotes here a violent impulse. Contemplating the greatness of his
danger, he considers his escape as nothing less than miraculous. It is
our duty, when rescued from any peril, to retain in our recollection the
circumstances of it, and all which rendered it peculiarly formidable.
During the time that we are exposed to it, we are apt to err through an
excessive apprehension; but when it is over, we too readily forget both
our fears and the Divine goodness manifested in our deliverance. *To
walk in the light of the living* means nothing else than to enjoy the
vital light of the sun. The words, *before God,* which are interjected
in the verse, point to the difference between the righteous, who make
God the great aim of their life, and the wicked, who wander from the
right path and turn their back upon God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc09021.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxii-p4"></span> The late learned Editor of Calmet, from
comparing this title with verse 6 of the psalm preceding, had a
suspicion that it is here misplaced, and belonged originally to that
psalm.” — *Williams*’ *Cottage Bible*.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc09021.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxii-p6"></span> Harmer is of opinion, that the *dove dumb in
distant places* is simply the name of the psalm. In support of this
view, he quotes the titles of several Eastern books; a Persian
metaphysical and mystic poem, called the *Rose Bush*; a collection of
Floral Essays, the *Garden of Anemonies*; and a poem in which the
Arabian prophet is celebrated for having given sight to a blind person,
which is entitled the *Bright Star*. “The ancient Jewish taste.” he
remarks, “may reasonably be supposed to have been of the same kind.
Every one that reflects on the circumstances of David at the time to
which the 56th psalm refers, and considers the Oriental taste, will not
wonder to see that psalm entitled the *Dove dumb in distant places*.” —
*Observations*, *volume*3, p. 147-149.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc09021.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii-p7"></span> See volume1, p. 215.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc09021.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, me
mangeant.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, eating me.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc09021.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xxii.i-p4.1"></span>Ou, des
puissans et robustes.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, they be mighty and strong.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc09021.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p5"></span> The original word <span
id="xxii.i-p5.1"></span>מרום, *marom*, here rendered “O Most High!” is
literally *loftily* Dathe, Berlin, and Gesenius, render it *superbly*,
*proudly* Cresswell, following Le Clerc, reads, *from the highest
places*, and considers the meaning to be, that the foes of David made an
incursion upon him, descending from the mountains, and forcing him again
to supplicate Achish. Compare <span id="xxii.i-p5.2"></span>[1 Sam.
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003.md)<span id="xxii.i-p5.2"></span>.
Horsley and Dr Adam Clarke read, “from on high;” by which the latter
critic understands from “the place of *authority*, the court and cabinet
of Saul.” He observes, on the word <span id="xxii.i-p5.3"></span>מרום,
*marom*, “I do not think that this word expresses any attribute of God,
or, indeed, is at all addressed to him.” “In <span
id="xxii.i-p5.4"></span>[Mic 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxii.i-p5.4"></span>, however,” says Dr Morrison, “<span
id="xxii.i-p5.5"></span>מרום seems to express the perfections of the
divine character.” Calvin’s translation agrees with that of the Chaldee,
of Aquila, and of our English Bible.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc09021.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p9"></span> The verb here translated *swallows me up*,
is rendered by French and Skinner, *panteth after me*. It is literally
*draweth in the air*. It thus implies the intense desire of David’s
enemies to get him into their hands, and to destroy him.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc09021.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="xxii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, ne
demandent qu’a m’oster la vie.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, they want only to
take away my life.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc09021.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="xxii.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p7"></span> Horsley observes, that the primary meaning
of the verb <span id="xxii.ii-p7.1"></span>עצב, *atsab*, is “perhaps *to
do a thing with great labor*, *to take pains about it*; if, indeed, its
primary meaning be not *to distort* Hence it may signify to affect the
mind with any unpleasing passion or sensation, grief, vexation, anger;
for every perturbation is a sort of distortion of the mind. <span
id="xxii.ii-p7.2"></span>רברי יעצבו עלי — ‘<span
id="xxii.ii-p7.3"></span>torquent contra me verba mea,’ — ‘<span
id="xxii.ii-p7.4"></span>torquent, *i* *e*., labouriose fingunt in
mentem alienam et sensum alienum.’ — Pagninus after Aben Ezra and R.D.”
— *Horsley* Hammond, after stating that <span
id="xxii.ii-p7.5"></span>עזב, *atsab*, signifies primarily *to grieve*,
or *be in pain*, and that by metonomy it is used for the laborious
framing or forming of any thing, says, “Here, being applied to another’s
words or speeches, it seems to denote the depraving them, laboring and
using great art and diligence to put them into such a form as may be
most for the disadvantage of the speaker, turning and winding them to
his hurt, in putting some odious gloss upon them, and so, according to
sense, may most fully be rendered *depraving*.”

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc09021.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="xxii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p10"></span> French and Skinner read, “Shall they
escape after their wickedness?“ and observe, that the Hebrew is, “Is
there escape for them?“ the meaning being, that they assuredly will not
escape, because of their wickedness.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc09021.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="xxii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p13"></span> Some think that there is here an allusion
to an ancient custom of putting the tears of mourners into lachrymal
urns or bottles. In the Roman tombs there are found small vials, or
bottles of glass or pottery, usually called <span
id="xxii.ii-p13.1"></span>*ampulloe*, or <span
id="xxii.ii-p13.2"></span>*urnoe lachrymales*, which, it has been
supposed, contained tears shed by the surviving relatives and friends,
and were deposited in the sepulchres of the deceased as memorials of
affection and sorrow. If in this passage there is a reference to this
custom, it must have existed at an early period among the Hebrews. It
may however be doubted, whether there is any such allusion. “It is only
a modern conjecture that these bottles ‘found in the Roman tombs’ have
been deposited there for such a purpose, and there is no trace of such a
custom in ancient writings or sculptures. Some think they were intended
to contain the perfumes used in sprinkling the funeral pile. On some of
them there is the representation of one or two eyes, and this seems to
favor the former view.” — *Illustrated Commentary on the Bible* Let it
also be observed, that the word <span id="xxii.ii-p13.3"></span>נאד,
*nod*, here translated *bottle*, means a sort of bottle which had no
resemblance to these Roman urns. It was made of a goat’s or kid’s skin,
and was used by the Hebrews for keeping their wine, their milk, and
their oil. Compare <span id="xxii.ii-p13.4"></span>[1Sa
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#020.md)<span id="xxii.ii-p13.4"></span>;
<span id="xxii.ii-p13.5"></span>[Jos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#013.md)<span id="xxii.ii-p13.5"></span>;
<span id="xxii.ii-p13.6"></span>[Jud
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#019.md)<span id="xxii.ii-p13.6"></span>;
<span id="xxii.ii-p13.7"></span>[Mt
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017.md)<span id="xxii.ii-p13.7"></span>.
“Besides,” as Bishop Mant remarks, “the treasuring up of the Psalmist’s
tears shed by him during his own sufferings, seems a very different
thing from the offering up of the tears of surviving relations or
friends, as memorials on the tomb of a deceased person.” The expression,
“Put thou my tears into thy bottle,” may be viewed as simply meaning,
Let not my tears fall unnoticed; let my distress and the tears which it
has wrung from me be ever before thee, excite thy compassion, and plead
with thee to grant me relief. As the choicest things, such as wine and
milk, were put into bottles, the Psalmist may also be understood as
praying that his tears might not only be noted by God, but prized by
him. The <span id="xxii.ii-p13.8"></span>מאד, *nod*, was of large
capacity, and used for churning as well as for wine. It may therefore
contain a reference to the large quantity of tears which David’s
affliction forced from him. — *Harmer*’*s Observations*, *volume* 2, pp.
121, 122.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 57](cc09022.md)
