[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09022)  [Next](cc09024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 58

<span id="xxiv-p2"></span>The following psalm consists of two parts. In
the commencement, David vindicates his personal integrity from the
calumnies cast upon him by his enemies. Having expressed his sense of
the grievous injuries which they had inflicted, their cruelty and their
treachery, he concludes by an appeal to the judgment of God, and by
praying that they might be visited with deserved destruction.

<span id="xxiv-p3"></span>To the chief musician, Destroy not, Michtam of
David.

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
58:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Do ye indeed speak righteousness? O
congregation! do ye judge uprightly? O ye sons of men! **2**. Yea,
rather in heart ye plot wickedness; your hands weigh out violence upon
the earth. **3**. They are estranged, being wicked from the womb: they
went astray as soon as they were born, speaking lies. **4**. Their
poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf adder
that stoppeth her ear: **5**. Which will not hearken to the voice of the
enchanter, charm he never so wisely.

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Do ye indeed speak righteousness?*
In putting this question to his enemies, by way of challenge, David
displays the boldness of conscious rectitude. It argues that the justice
of our cause is demonstratively evident when we venture to appeal to the
opposite party himself; for were there any ground to question its
justice, it would show an absurd degree of confidence to challenge the
testimony of an adversary. David comes forward with the openness of one
who was supported by a sense of his integrity, and repels, by a
declaration forced from their own lips, the base charges with which they
blackened his character in the estimation of such as were simple enough
to believe them. “Ye yourselves,” as if he had said, “can attest my
innocence, and yet persecute me with groundless calumnies. Are you not
ashamed of such gross and gratuitous oppression?” It is necessary,
however, to determine who they were whom David here accuses. He calls
them a *congregation,* and again, *sons of men* The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.i-p5.1"></span>אלם, *elem,* which I have rendered
*congregation,* some consider to be an epithet applied to
*righteousness,* and translate *dumb;*  <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) but this does not express the meaning
of the Psalmist. Interpreters differ as to what we should understand by
the term *congregation.* Some think that he adverts, by way of
accusation, to the meetings which his enemies held, as is usual with
those who entertain wicked designs, for the purpose of concerting their
plans. I rather incline to the opinion of those who conceive that he
here gives (although only in courtesy) the usual title of honor to the
counsellors of Saul, who met professedly to consult for the good of the
nation, but in reality with no other intention than to accomplish his
destruction. Others read, *in the congregation* — a translation which
gives the same meaning to the passage we have already assigned to it,
but is not supported by the natural construction of the words. The
congregation which David addresses is that assembly which Saul convened,
ostensibly for lawful objects, but really for the oppression of the
innocent. The term, *sons of men,* which he immediately afterwards
applies to them — taking back, as it were, the title of courtesy
formerly given — would seem to be used in contempt of their character,
being, as they were, rather a band of public robbers than a convention
of judges. Some, however, may be of opinion, that in employing this
expression, David had in his eye the universality of the opposition
which confronted him — almost the whole people inclining to this wicked
factions and that he here issues a magnanimous defiance to the multitude
of his enemies. Meanwhile, the lesson taught us by the passage is
apparent. Although the whole world be set against the people of God they
need not fear, so long as they are supported by a sense of their
integrity, to challenge kings and their counsellors, and the promiscuous
mob of the people. Should the whole world refuse to hear us, we must
learn, by the example of David, to rest satisfied with the testimony of
a good conscience, and with appealing to the tribunal of God. Augustine,
who had none but the Greek version in his hands, is led by this verse
into a subtle disquisition upon the point, that the judgment of men is
usually correct when called to decide upon general principles, but fails
egregiously in the application of these principles to particular cases,
 <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) through the blinding and
warping influences of their evil passions. All this may be plausible,
and, in its own place, useful, but proceeds upon a complete
misapprehension of the meaning of the passage.

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span>**2.** *Yea, rather, in heart ye plot
wickedness.* In the former verse he complained of the gross
shamelessness manifested in their conduct. Now he charges them both with
entertaining wickedness in their thoughts, and practising it with their
hands. I have accordingly translated the Hebrew article <span
id="xxiv.i-p9.1"></span>אף, *aph, yea, rather* — it being evident that
David proceeds, after first repelling the calumnies of his enemies, to
the further step of challenging them with the sins which they had
themselves committed. The second clause of the verse may be rendered in
two different ways, *ye* *weigh violence with your hands,* or, *your
hands weigh violence;* and as the meaning is the same, it is immaterial
which the reader may adopt. Some think that he uses the figurative
expression, *to weigh,* in allusion to the pretense of equity under
which he was persecuted, as if he were a disturber of the peace, and
chargeable with treason and contumacy towards the king. In all
probability, his enemies glossed over their oppression with plausible
pretences, such as hypocrites are never slow to discover. But the Hebrew
word <span id="xxiv.i-p9.2"></span>פלס, *phalas,* admits of a wider
signification, *to frame* or *set in order;* and nothing more may be
meant than that they put into shape the sins which they had first
conceived in their thoughts. It is added, *upon the earth,* to denote
the unbridled license of their wickedness, which was done openly, and
not in places where concealment might have been practiced.

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span>**3.** *They are estranged, being wicked
from the womb.* He adduces, in aggravation of their character, the
circumstance, that they were not sinners of recent date, but persons
born to commit sin. We see some men, otherwise not so depraved in
disposition, who are drawn into evil courses through levity of mind, or
bad example, or the solicitation of appetite, or other occasions of a
similar kind; but David accuses his enemies of being leavened with
wickedness from the womb, alleging that their treachery and cruelty were
born with them. We all come into the world stained with sin, possessed,
as Adam’s posterity, of a nature essentially depraved, and incapable, in
ourselves, of aiming at anything which is good; but there is a secret
restraint upon most men which prevents them from proceeding all lengths
in iniquity. The stain of original sin cleaves to the whole humanity
without exception; but experience proves that some are characterised by
modesty and decency of outward deportment; that others are wicked, yet,
at the same time, within bounds of moderation; while a third class are
so depraved in disposition as to be intolerable members of society. Now,
it is this excessive wickedness — too marked to escape detestation even
amidst the general corruption of mankind — which David ascribes to his
enemies. He stigmatises them as monsters of iniquity.

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span>**4.** *Their poison is like the poison of
a serpent: they are like the deaf adder*  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) He prosecutes his description; and,
though he might have insisted on the fierceness which characterised
their opposition, he charges them more particularly, here as elsewhere,
with the malicious virulence of their disposition. Some read, *their
fury;*  <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) but this does not suit
the figure, by which they are here compared to serpents. No objection
can be drawn to the translation we have adopted from the etymology of
the word, which is derived from *heat.* It is well known, that while
some poisons kill by cold, others consume the vital parts by a burning
heat. David then asserts of his enemies, in this passage, that they were
as full of deadly malice as serpents are full of poison. The more
emphatically to express their consummate subtlety, he compares them to
deaf serpents, which shut their ears against the voice of the charmer —
not the common kind of serpents, but such as are famed for their
cunning, and are upon their guard against every artifice of that
description. But is there such a thing, it may be asked, as enchantment?
If there were not, it might seem absurd and childish to draw a
comparison from it, unless we suppose David to speak in mere
accommodation to mistaken, though generally received opinion.  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) He would certainly seem, however, to
insinuate that serpents can be fascinated by enchantment; and I can see
no harm in granting it. The Marsi in Italy were believed by the ancients
to excel in the art. Had there been no enchantments practiced, where was
the necessity of their being forbidden and condemned under the Law?
(<span id="xxiv.i-p16.3"></span>[De
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.i-p16.3"></span>.)
I do not mean to say that there is an actual method or art by which
fascination can be effected. It was doubtless done by a mere sleight of
Satan,  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) whom God has suffered to
practice his delusions upon unbelieving and ignorant men, although he
prevents him from deceiving those who have been enlightened by his word
and Spirit. But we may avoid all occasion for such curious inquiry, by
adopting the view already referred to, that David here borrows his
comparison from a popular and prevailing error, and is to be merely
supposed as saying, that no kind of serpent was imbued with greater
craft than his enemies, not even the species (if such there were) which
guards itself against enchantment.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
58:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Break their teeth, O God! in their
mouth: break the jaws of the lions. **7.** Let them flow away like
waters, let them depart: let them bend their bow, and let their arrows
be as broken.  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) **8.** Let him
vanish like a snail, which melts away; like the untimely birth of a
woman, which does not see the sun. **9.** Before your pots  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) can feel the fire of the thorns, a
whirlwind shall carry him away, like flesh yet raw.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span>**6.** *Break their teeth, O God! in their
mouth*  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) From this part of the
psalm he assumes the language of imprecation, and solicits the vengeance
of God, whose peculiar prerogative it is to repel oppression and
vindicate injured innocence. It is necessary, however, that we attend to
the manner in which this is done. He does not claim the judgment or
patronage of God to his cause, until he had, in the first place,
asserted his integrity, and stated his complaint against the malicious
conduct of his enemies; for God can never be expected to undertake a
cause which is unworthy of defense. In the verse before us, he prays
that God would crush the wicked, and restrain the violence of their
rage. By their *teeth,* he would intimate that they resembled wild
beasts in their desire to rend and destroy the victims of their
oppression; and this is brought out more clearly in the latter part of
the verse, where he likens them to *lions* The comparison denotes the
fury with which they were bent upon his destruction.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span>In the next verse, and in the several
succeeding verses, he prosecutes the same purpose, employing a variety
of apt similitudes. He prays that God would make them *flow away like
waters,* that is, swiftly. The expression indicates the greatness of his
faith. His enemies were before his eyes in all the array of their
numbers and resources; he saw that their power was deeply rooted and
firmly established; the whole nation was against him, and seemed to rise
up before him like a hopeless and formidable barrier of rocky mountains.
To pray that this solid and prodigious opposition should melt down and
disappear, evidenced no small degree of courage, and the event could
only appear credible to one who had learnt to exalt the power of God
above all intervening obstacles. In the comparison which immediately
follows, he prays that the attempts of his adversaries might be
frustrated, the meaning of the words being, that their arrows might fall
powerless, as if broken, when they bent their bow. Actuated as they were
by implacable cruelty, he requests that God would confound their
enterprises, and in this we are again called to admire his unshaken
courage, which could contemplate the formidable preparations of his
enemies as completely at the disposal of God, and their whole power as
lying at his feet. Let his example in this particular point be
considered. Let us not cease to pray, even after the arrows of our
enemies have been fitted to the string, and destruction might seem
inevitable.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span>**8.** *Let him vanish like a snail, which
melts away* The two comparisons in this verse are introduced with the
same design as the first, expressing his desire that his enemies might
pass away quietly, and prove as things in their own nature the most
evanescent. He likens them to *snails,*  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) and it might appear ridiculous in
David to use such contemptible figures when speaking of men who were
formidable for their strength and influence, did we not reflect that he
considered God as able in a moment, without the slightest effort, to
crush and annihilate the mightiest opposition. Their power might be such
as encouraged them, in their vain-confidence, to extend their schemes
into a far distant futurity, but he looked upon it with the eye of
faith, and saw it doomed in the judgment of God to be of short
continuance. He perhaps alluded to the suddenness with which the wicked
rise into power, and designed to dash the pride which they are apt to
feel from such an easy advance to prosperity, by reminding them that
their destruction would be equally rapid and sudden. There is the same
force in the figure employed in the end of the verse where they are
compared to *an abortion.* If we consider the length of time to which
they contemplate in their vain-confidence that their life shall extend,
 <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) they may be said to pass out of
this world before they have well begun to live, and to be dragged back,
as it were, from the very goal of existence.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p14"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p15"></span>**9.** *Before your pots can feel the fire
of your thorns.* Some obscurity attaches to this verse, arising partly
from the perplexed construction, and partly from the words being
susceptible of a double meaning.  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) Thus the Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.ii-p22.6"></span>סירות, *siroth,* signifies either *a pot* or
*a thorn.* If we adopt the first signification, we must read, *before
your pots feel the fire which has been kindled by thorns;* if the
second, *before your thorns grow to a bush,* that is, reach their full
height and thickness. What, following the former sense, we have
translated *flesh yet raw,* must be rendered, provided we adopt the
other, *tender, or not yet grown.* But the scope of the Psalmist in the
passage is sufficiently obvious. He refers to the swiftness of that
judgment which God would execute upon his enemies, and prays that he
would carry them away as by a whirlwind, either before they arrived at
the full growth of their strength, like the thorn sprung to the vigorous
plant, or before they came to maturity and readiness, like flesh which
has been boiled in the pot. The latter meaning would seem to be the one
of which the passage is most easily susceptible, that God, in the
whirlwind of his anger, would carry away the wicked like flesh not yet
boiled, which may be said scarcely to have felt the heat of the fire.

<span id="xxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
58:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p2"></span>**10**. The righteous shall rejoice when
he seeth  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) the vengeance; he
shall wash his hands in the blood of the wicked.  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) **11**. And a man shall say, Verily
there is a reward \[literally fruit  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) \] for the righteous; verily there is
a God that judgeth in the earth.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p8"></span>**10** *The righteous shall rejoice when
he seeth the vengeance* It might appear at first sight that the feeling
here attributed to the righteous is far from being consistent with the
mercy which ought to characterise them; but we must remember, as I have
often observed elsewhere, that the affection which David means to impute
to them is one of a pure and well-regulated kind; and in this case there
is nothing absurd in supposing that believers, under the influence and
guidance of the Holy Ghost, should rejoice in witnessing the execution
of divine judgments. That cruel satisfaction which too many feel when
they see their enemies destroyed, is the result of the unholy passions
of hatred, anger, or impatience, inducing an inordinate desire of
revenge. So far as corruption is suffered to operate in this manner,
there can be no right or acceptable exercise. On the other hand, when
one is led by a holy zeal to sympathise with the justness of that
vengeance which God may have inflicted, his joy will be as pure in
beholding the retribution of the wicked, as his desire for their
conversion and salvation was strong and unfeigned. God is not prevented
by his mercy from manifesting, upon fit occasions, the severity of the
judge, when means have been tried in vain to bring the sinner to
repentance, nor can such an exercise of severity be considered as
impugning his clemency; and, in a similar way, the righteous would
anxiously desire the conversion of their enemies, and evince much
patience under injury, with a view to reclaim them to the way of
salvation: but when wilful obstinacy has at last brought round the hour
of retribution, it is only natural that they should rejoice to see it
inflicted, as proving the interest which God feels in their personal
safety. It grieves them when God at any time seems to connive at the
persecutions of their enemies; and how then can they fail to feel
satisfaction when he awards deserved punishment to the transgressor?

<span id="xxiv.iii-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p10"></span>**11.** *So that a man shall say, Verily
there is a reward.* We have additional evidence from what is here said
of the cause or source of it, that the joy attributed to the saints has
no admixture of bad feeling. It is noticeable from the way in which this
verse runs, that David would now seem to ascribe to all, without
exception, the sentiment which before he imputed exclusively to the
righteous. But the acknowledgement immediately subjoined is one which
could only come from the saints who have an eye to observe the divine
dispensations; and I am, therefore, of opinion that they are specially
alluded to in the expression, *And a man shall say,* etc At the same
time, this mode of speech may imply that many, whose minds had been
staggered, would be established in the faith. The righteous only are
intended, but the indefinite form of speaking is adopted to denote their
numbers. It is well known how many there are whose faith is apt to be
shaken by apparent inequalities and perplexities in the divine
administration, but who rally courage, and undergo a complete change of
views, when the arm of God is bared in the manifestation of his
judgments. At such a time the acknowledgement expressed in this verse is
widely and extensively adopted, as Isaiah declares,

<span id="xxiv.iii-p11"></span>“When thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness,” (<span
id="xxiv.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.iii-p12"></span>The Hebrew particle <span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.1"></span>אך*, ach,* which we have translated *verily,*
occasionally denotes simple affirmation, but is generally intensitive,
and here implies the contrast between that unbelief which we are tempted
to feel when God has suspended the exercise of his judgments, and the
confidence with which we are inspired when he executes them. Thus the
particles which are repeated in the verse imply that men would put away
that hesitancy which is apt to steal upon their minds when God forbears
the infliction of the punishment of sin, and, as it were, correct
themselves for the error into which they had been seduced. Nothing tends
more to promote godliness than an intimate and assured persuasion that
the righteous shall never lose their reward. Hence the language of
Isaiah, “Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings,” (<span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.2"></span>[Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.2"></span>.) When righteousness is not rewarded, we are
disposed to cherish unbelieving fears, and to imagine that God has
retired from the government of the world, and is indifferent to its
concerns. I shall have an opportunity of treating this point more at
large upon the seventy-third psalm.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p13"></span>There is subjoined the reason why the
righteous cannot fail to reap the reward of their piety, because *God is
the judge of the world;* it being impossible, on the supposition of the
world being ruled by the providence of God, that he should not, sooner
or later, distinguish between the good and the evil. He is said more
particularly to judge *in the earth,* because men have sometimes
profanely alleged that the government of God is confined to heaven, and
the affairs of this world abandoned to blind chance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc09023.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xxiv.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>אלם.There is
some difficulty in ascertaining the sense of this word. Gesenius derives
it from <span id="xxiv.i-p6.2"></span>אלם, *to be silent*: *Is justice
indeed silent*? but this breaks the parallelism, which requires <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.3"></span>צדק תדברון, ‘will ye speak righteousness?’ in
the first line, to correspond with <span id="xxiv.i-p6.4"></span>מישרים
תשפטו, ‘will ye judge uprightness?’ In the second. Dathe agrees with
Bishop Lowth, etc., who propose to point the word <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.5"></span>אלם, or <span id="xxiv.i-p6.6"></span>*plene*,
<span id="xxiv.i-p6.7"></span>אלים, <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.8"></span>*judices*, ‘*O ye judges*, or rulers!’ See <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.9"></span>[Ex 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027)<span
id="xxiv.i-p6.9"></span>; <span id="xxiv.i-p6.10"></span>[Ps
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.10"></span>.
But this reading, though it makes a very good sense, receives no support
from the MSS., or ancient versions. Diodati and De Rossi agree with our
translators in taking the word in the sense of *assembly*,
*congregation* So Schindler <span id="xxiv.i-p6.11"></span>אלם, <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.12"></span>*collegatio hominum*, congregation, <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.13"></span>multitudo coetus, ab <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.14"></span>אלם, <span id="xxiv.i-p6.15"></span>*ligavit*,
colligavit. This is probably the true sense. LXX. Vulg. Aeth. and Ar.,
seem to have read <span id="xxiv.i-p6.16"></span>אלם, or <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.17"></span>אלם.” — (*Rogers*’ *Book of Psalms*, *volume*
2, p. 212.) Walford prefers Dathe’s version.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc09023.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.18"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xxiv.i-p7.1"></span>Argute hic
disputant, hominibus rectum esse judicium in generalibus principiis: sed
ubi ad hypothesin ventum est, hallucinari,” etc. The French translation
runs — “<span id="xxiv.i-p7.2"></span>Dispute yci subtilement que les
hommes ont un jugement droit et entier es principes generaux, mais quand
ce vient a la particularite, que leur raison defaut,” etc.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc09023.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xxiv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p14"></span> The <span id="xxiv.i-p14.1"></span>פתן,
*phethen*, rendered *adder*, is generally supposed by interpreters to be
the kind of serpent called by the ancients the aspic, and to which there
are frequent allusions in Scripture. <span id="xxiv.i-p14.2"></span>[De
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033)<span id="xxiv.i-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.i-p14.3"></span>[Job
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016)<span id="xxiv.i-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.i-p14.4"></span>[Isa
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)<span id="xxiv.i-p14.4"></span>.
It is the <span id="xxiv.i-p14.5"></span>בתם, *boeten*, of the Arabians,
which M. Forskal (*Descript* *Anim* p. 15) describes as spotted with
black and white, about one foot in length, nearly half an inch thick,
oviparous, and its bite almost instant death; and which is called “the
aspic” by the literati of Cyprus, though the common people give it the
name of <span id="xxiv.i-p14.6"></span>κουφη, *deaf*

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc09023.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xxiv.i-p14.7"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p15"></span> This is the reading of the Septuagint, the
Vulgate, and of Jerome. Sept. “<span id="xxiv.i-p15.1"></span>Θυμὸς.”
Vulg. and Jeremiah “Furor.”

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc09023.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xxiv.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p16"></span> That the serpent tribe may be charmed is a
well-attested fact, and one of the most curious and interesting in
natural history. It is often mentioned by the Greek and Roman classics,
by Hebrew and Arabic writers; to the last of whom the different species
of serpents were well known. It is also supported by the testimony of
many modern travelers. Some serpents are delighted with the sounds of
vocal and instrumental music, and by it may be disarmed of their fury
and rendered innoxious, (<span id="xxiv.i-p16.1"></span>[Ec
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.i-p16.1"></span>.)
In the East it is not uncommon to make use of pipes, flutes, whistles,
or small drums, to draw them from their hiding-places and to subdue
their ferocity; and when they are tame ones, the charmer makes them
dance and keep time with the notes of music, twists them round his body,
and handles them without any harm, although the fangs are not broken or
extracted. But in some cases the charmer’s art fails; and,
notwithstanding his incantations, the serpent will fasten on the arm, or
some other part of the body, and inflict, with its poisoned fangs, a
deadly wound, (<span id="xxiv.i-p16.2"></span>[Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017)<span id="xxiv.i-p16.2"></span>.)
In this case it “will not listen to the voice of the charmer.” It is not
necessary to suppose that the “deaf adder” means a species of serpent
naturally deaf, and which it is impossible for the charmer ever to
fascinate. Nothing more may be meant but that his incantations sometimes
fail of success; that some adders are so stubborn that the sound of
music makes no impression upon them; and they are like creatures who are
destitute of hearing, or whose ears are stopped. The manner in which the
“deaf adder stoppeth its ear” is described by Lochart to be this: — “The
reptile lays one ear close to the ground, and with its tail covers the
other, that it cannot hear the sound of the music; or it repels the
incantation by hissing violently.” So impenetrable are the wicked here
represented to be to persuasion: they will not be wrought upon to
forsake their wicked courses, and gained to the ways of God, by his most
persuasive entreaties.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc09023.htm#fr_350) <span
id="xxiv.i-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p17"></span> The power which charmers had over serpents
was probably ascribed by them to the agency of invisible beings,
although it might be the natural effect of the music which they used.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc09023.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span> There is nothing in the original for, “Let
their arrows be;” it is a supplement made by Calvin in the French
version. There is some difficulty in the last member of the verse. Many
interpreters refer it to God, who bends his bow against the ungodly.
This agrees with the Septuagint, Vulgate, Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic
versions. But Symmachus and others refer it to ungodly men, who study,
indeed, to hurt the godly, but without effect. “This seems,” says Dathe,
“to be the most natural connection: in the 6th verse the sacred writer
addresses God himself in the second person; and there is here described
the unsuccessful issue of the endeavors of the wicked against the
righteous.” “I am persuaded,” says Rogers, “that some word, the name of
something with which the wicked, perishing under the Divine vengeance,
were compared, is lost in the Hebrew.” — *Book of Psalms in Hebrew*,
*volume*2, p. 213.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc09023.htm#fr_352) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou, vos
espines.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, your thorns.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc09023.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span> “Break their teeth in their mouth” is most
probably a continuation of the metaphorical illustration taken from
serpents and adders immediately before, whose poison is contained in a
bag at the bottom of one of their teeth, and who are disarmed by being
deprived of this tooth which conveys the poison. This the charmer
sometimes does after he has brought them out of their retreats by music.
When the serpent makes its appearance, he seizes it by the throat, draws
it forth, shows its poisoned fangs, and beats them out. To this beating
out there seems to be here an allusion. “This mention of teeth,” says
Hammond, “fairly introduces that which follows concerning the lion,
whose doing mischief with that part is more violent and formidable, and
so signifies the open, riotous invader, the violent and lawless person;
as the serpent’s teeth, the more secret, indiscernible wounds of the
whisperer or backbiter, which yet are as dangerous and destructive as
the former, by the smallest puncture killing him on whom they fasten.”

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc09023.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span> The original word for *snail* occurs only
in this instance in the whole Bible. The LXX. render it <span
id="xxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>ὡσεὶ κηρὸς, *as wax*, and the Syriac and
Vulgate follow them. But the Chaldee reads “as a reptile,” interpreting
the word as meaning some creeping thing, which affords an eminent
example of melting, and this seems to apply to the snail, which, in its
progress from its shell, leaves a slime in its track till it altogether
melts away and dies. Comp. <span id="xxiv.ii-p12.2"></span>[Job
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016)<span id="xxiv.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc09023.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>Si
reputamus quantum temporis inani fiducia devorent,” etc. Literally, “If
we consider how much time they devour in their vain-confidence,” etc.
The French version adheres to this translation of the mere words. “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>Si nous regardons combien ils devorent de
temps par leur vaine confiance.” We have hazarded the more free
translation given in the text, because this seems one of those instances
where the brevity of the Latin idiom demands explanation, in order that
the idea may be intelligible in any other language.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc09023.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p16"></span> This verse has been deemed one of the
most difficult passages in the Psalter, and has greatly perplexed
commentators. Bishop Horsley reads —

<span id="xxiv.ii-p17"></span>“Before your pots feel the bramble,  
In whirlwind and hurricane he shall sweep them away.”

<span id="xxiv.ii-p18"></span>He supposes that the language is
proverbial, and that the Psalmist describes the sudden eruption of the
divine wrath; sudden and violent as the ascension of the dry bramble
underneath the housewife’s pot. Walford reads —

<span id="xxiv.ii-p19"></span>“Before your cooking vessels feel the
fuel;  
Both the green and the dry a whirlwind shall scatter.”

<span id="xxiv.ii-p20"></span>The passage is supposed by this author and
others to contain an allusion to the manners of the Arabs, who, when
they want to cook their food, collect bushes and brambles, both green
and withered, with which they kindle a fire in the open air. But before
their culinary vessels are sensibly afflicted with the heat, a whirlwind
not unfrequently arises and scatters the fuel. And this strikingly
expresses the sudden and premature destruction of the wicked. Fry gives
a somewhat different explanation. He reads —

<span id="xxiv.ii-p21"></span>“Sooner than your vessels can feel the
*blazing* thorn,  
The hot blast shall consume them, as well the green as the dry.”

<span id="xxiv.ii-p22"></span>And he observes, that “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p22.1"></span>שער, or <span id="xxiv.ii-p22.2"></span>סער,
no doubt expresses the action of the hot wind of the desert.” This wind
is eminently destructive, and has not unfrequently been known to entomb
and destroy whole caravans. Sidi Hamet, describing his journey across
the great desert to Tombuctoo with a caravan consisting of above one
thousand men and four thousand camels, relates that, “after travelling
upwards of a month they were attacked by the Shume, the burning blast of
the desert, carrying with it clouds of sand. They were obliged to lie
for two days with their faces on the ground, only lifting them
occasionally to shake off the sand and obtain breath. Three hundred
never rose again, and two hundred camels also perished.” — (*Murray*’*s
Discoveries in Africa*, *volume* 1, pp. 515, 516.) Estius gives this
sense: “Before your thorns shall arrive to their full growth into a
bush, the rage of a tempest shall snatch them away, as it were, in the
flower of their age and growing to maturity.” The words <span
id="xxiv.ii-p22.3"></span>כמו-חי, *kemo-chai*, which Calvin renders
*flesh yet raw*, are used in this sense in <span
id="xxiv.ii-p22.4"></span>[Le
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#016)<span id="xxiv.ii-p22.4"></span>,
and <span id="xxiv.ii-p22.5"></span>[1Sa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)<span id="xxiv.ii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc09023.htm#fr_357) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
pource qu’il aura veu.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, because he seeth.”

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc09023.htm#fr_358) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p4"></span> “The similitude is taken from fierce
battles, in which the effusion of blood is so great as to moisten the
feet of the victors in the conflict.” — *Walford*. See Appendix.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc09023.htm#fr_359) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p5"></span> Reward is the fruit of obedience, <span
id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>[Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)<span id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 59](cc09024)
