[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09028)  [Next](cc09030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxx"></span>

<span id="xxx-p1"></span>PSALM 64

<span id="xxx-p2"></span>This psalm expresses the language of complaint
and prayer. David, in order that he may incline God to compassionate his
case, dwells upon the injustice and cruelty, the intrigues and
deceitfulness of his enemies. At the close, his eyes are directed to
God, in the anticipation of a joyful deliverance from their hands.

<span id="xxx-p3"></span>To the chief musician. A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxx.i"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p1"></span><span id="xxx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
64:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)<span id="xxx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p2"></span>**1**. Hear my voice, O God: in my prayer:
preserve my life from fear of the enemy. **2**. Hide me from the counsel
of the wicked; from the assembly of the workers of iniquity. **3**. For
they have whetted their tongue like a sword; they have directed \[or
aimed  <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) \] for their arrow a
bitter word, \[or report.\] **4**. To shoot in secret at the perfect;
suddenly will they shoot, and not fear. **5**. They assure themselves in
an evil work, they commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall
see them? **6**. They have searched out iniquities, they have
accomplished a diligent search, \[lit. a search searched out,\] both the
inward part of each of them, and the heart, is deep.

<span id="xxx.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxx.i-p5"></span><span id="xxx.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Hear my voice, O God!* He begins by
saying that he prayed earnestly, and with vehemence, stating, at the
same time, what rendered this necessary. The voice is heard in prayer,
proportionally to the earnestness and ardor which we feel. He
condescends upon the circumstances of distress in which he was presently
placed, and takes notice of the dangers to which his life was exposed
from enemies, with other points fitted to excite the favorable
consideration of God. His praying that God would protect his life,
proves that it must have been in danger at this time. In the second
verse, he intimates that his enemies were numerous; and that, without
divine assistance, he would be unable to sustain their attacks. Some
difficulty attaches to the words, from their being susceptible of two
meanings. The Hebrew term <span id="xxx.i-p6.1"></span>סוד*, sod,* which
signifies *a secret,* is understood by some to refer here to the secret
plots of the wicked, and by others, to denote their meeting together for
consultation. In translating it, I have employed a word which admits of
either interpretation. The term <span id="xxx.i-p6.2"></span>רגשת*,
rigshath,* used in the second part of the verse, may also be rendered in
two ways, as meaning either an *assembly* of men, or *noise* and
*uproar.* It comes from <span id="xxx.i-p6.3"></span>רגש, *ragash,* a
root signifying *to make a tumult.* This would suggest that the word
<span id="xxx.i-p6.4"></span>סוד*, sod,* in the former clause, might
refer to the clandestine plots of the wicked, and <span
id="xxx.i-p6.5"></span>רגשת, *rigshath,* in the latter, to their open
violence; and that David prayed to be protected, on the one hand, from
the malicious purposes of his enemies, and, on the other, from the
forcible measures by which they proceeded to put them into execution.
But the meaning first given, and which I have adopted, seems the most
simple and natural, That he solicits the compassion of God, by
complaining of the number that were banded against him. Still his
language implies that he looked upon the protection of heaven as amply
sufficient against the greatest combination of adversaries. I may add,
that there is an implied plea for strengthening his cause in prayer, in
what he says of the malice and wickedness of those who were opposed to
him; for the more cruel and unjust the conduct of our enemies may be, we
have proportionally the better ground to believe that God will interpose
in our behalf.

<span id="xxx.i-p7"></span><span id="xxx.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p8"></span>**3** *For they have whetted their tongue
like a sword* His enemies, in their rage, aimed at nothing less than his
life, and yet what he complains of, more than all beside, is the poison
with which their words were imbued. It is probable that he refers to the
calumnious reports which he knew to be falsely spread to his discredit,
and with a view of damaging his reputation with the people. *Their
tongues* he likens to *swords; their bitter and venomous words* to
*arrows.*  <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) And when he adds,
that, *they shoot against the upright and innocent,* he is to be
considered as contrasting his integrity with their unprincipled conduct.
It inspired him with confidence in his religious addresses, to know that
he could exonerate his own conscience from guilt, and that he was the
object of undeserved attack by worthless and abandoned men. In
mentioning that *they shoot secretly* and *suddenly,* he refers to the
craft which characterised them. They were not only eagerly bent upon
mischief, and intent in watching their opportunities, but so expert and
quick in their movements, as to smite their victim before he could
suspect danger. When we hear that David, who was a man in every respect
so much more holy and upright in his conduct than ourselves, suffered
from groundless aspersions upon his character, we have no reason to be
surprised that we should be exposed to a similar trial. This comfort, at
least, we always have, that we can betake ourselves to God, and obtain
his defense of the upright cause. He takes particular notice of another
circumstance, that they shot their empoisoned arrows from their lips
*without fear,* or shame. This self-secure spirit argued a degree of
abandoned presumption, in so far as they could persist in obstinately
pursuing the conduct in which they had been repeatedly detected, and
renew their desperate attempts, to the disregard of all fear of God or
worldly shame.

<span id="xxx.i-p10"></span><span id="xxx.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p11"></span>**5** *They assure themselves in an evil
work.* He proceeds to complain of the perverse determination with which
they pursued their wickedness, and of their combinations amongst
themselves; remarking, at the same time, upon the confidence with which
they stirred one another up to the most daring acts of iniquity. In this
there can be little doubt that they were encouraged by the present state
of weakness to which David was reduced in his circumstances, taking
occasion, when they found him in poverty and exile, and without means of
resistance, to persecute him with the greater freedom. Having adverted
to them as being beyond hope of amendment, and incapable of any
impressions of humanity, he speaks of their meeting together to plot his
destruction; and, in connection with this, of the unbounded confidence
which they were led to display, from a belief that their designs were
not seen. It is well known that one circumstance which strengthens the
false security of the wicked, and encourages them to triumph in their
crafty policy towards the simple and upright in heart, is their thinking
that they can cover their crimes by such pretexts as they have always at
hand. *They say, Who shall see them?* The word <span
id="xxx.i-p11.1"></span>למו*, lamo, them,* may refer either to the
workers of iniquity themselves, or to the snares spoken of in the
preceding clause. The first seems the preferable meaning. They run
recklessly, and without restraint, in the ways of sin, blinded by their
pride, and influenced neither by the fear of God nor a sense of shame.

<span id="xxx.i-p12"></span>In the verse which follows, he animadverts
severely upon the deceit which they practiced. He speaks of their having
exhausted all the arts of mischief, so as to have left nothing in this
department to be discovered. The *search* referred to has relation to
the secret methods of doing evil. He adds, that their malice was deep.
By the *inward part* and *the heart,* which was *deep,* he means the
hidden devices to which the wicked have recourse for concealment. Some,
instead of translating the words, *the inward part of each, etc.,* give
a more indefinite sense to <span id="xxx.i-p12.1"></span>איש, *ish,* and
read, *the inward part, and deep heart,* of every one, *is found in
them;* that is, his enemies contrived to comprise in themselves all that
men have ever displayed in the shape of craft and subtilty. Either
rendering may be adopted; for it is evidently David’s meaning that his
enemies practiced secret stratagem as well as open violence, to compass
his ruin, and showed themselves to be possessed of the deepest
penetration in discovering dark and unimagined methods of doing
mischief.

<span id="xxx.ii"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
64:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)<span id="xxx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p2"></span>**7**. And God shall shoot an arrow at them;
suddenly shall they be wounded. **8**. And they shall make their own
tongue to fall upon themselves: and all that see them shall flee away.
 <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) **9**. And all men shall see,
and shall declare the work of God, and shall understand  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) what he hath done. **10**. The
righteous shall be glad in Jehovah, and shall hope in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.

<span id="xxx.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxx.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxx.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p7"></span>**7** *And God shall shoot an arrow at them*
The Psalmist now congratulates himself in the confident persuasion that
his prayers have not been without effect, but already answered. Though
there was no appearance of God’s approaching judgment, he declares that
it would suddenly be executed; and in this he affords a remarkable proof
of his faith. He saw the wicked hardening themselves in their
prosperity, and presuming upon impunity from the divine connivance and
forbearance; but instead of yielding to discouragement, he was borne up
by the belief that God, according to his usual mode of procedure with
the wicked, would visit them at an unexpected moment, when they were
flattering themselves with having escaped, and indulging in extravagant
confidence. It is a consideration which should comfort us, when
subjected to long-continued trial, that God, in delaying to punish the
ungodly, does so with the express design of afterwards inflicting
judgments of a more condign description upon them, and when they shall
say, “Peace and safety,” overwhelming them with sudden destruction,
(<span id="xxx.ii-p7.1"></span>[Jer
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011)<span id="xxx.ii-p7.1"></span>
 <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) )

<span id="xxx.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxx.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p10"></span>**8** *And they shall make their own tongue
to fall upon themselves* Pursuing the same subject, he remarks, that the
poison concocted in their secret counsels, and which they revealed with
their tongues, would prove to have a deadly effect upon themselves. The
sentiment is the same with that expressed elsewhere by another figure,
when they are said to be caught in their own snares, and to fall into
the pit which they have digged themselves, (<span
id="xxx.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ps 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)<span
id="xxx.ii-p10.1"></span>.) It is just that Heaven should make the
mischiefs which they had devised against innocent and upright men to
recoil upon their own heads. The judgment is one which we see repeatedly
and daily exemplified before our eyes, and yet we find much difficulty
in believing that it can take place. We should feel ourselves bound the
more to impress the truth upon our hearts, that God is ever watching, as
it were, his opportunity of converting the stratagems of the wicked into
means just as completely effective of their destruction, as if they had
intentionally employed them for that end. In the close of the verse, to
point out the striking severity of their punishment, it is said that
*all who saw them should flee away* The judgments of God are lifted
above out of the sight of an ignorant world, and ere it can be roused to
fear and dismay, these must be such as to bear signal marks indeed of a
divine hand.

<span id="xxx.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxx.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p12"></span>**9** *And all men shall see, and shall
declare the work of God.* He insists more fully upon the good effects
which would result from the judgment executed in leading such as had
formerly overlooked a Divine Providence altogether, to catch a spirit of
inquiry from the singularity of the spectacle; and acquaint themselves
with, and speak one to another of a subject hitherto entirely new to
them. He intimates, that the knowledge of what God had so signally
wrought would extend far and wide — for he says, *all men,* etc. The
Hebrew verb <span id="xxx.ii-p12.1"></span>שכל*, shachal,* employed,
admits either of the neuter signification, *they shall understand,* or
of the active, *they shall cause others to understand.* But as it is
usual with David to repeat the same thing twice, perhaps the latter or
transitive sense is preferable. Another desirable consequence which
would flow from the deliverance granted is mentioned in the last verse,
that it would afford matter of joy, hope, and holy triumph to the
saints, who would be confirmed in expecting the same help from God which
he had extended to his servant David. Those formerly called the
*righteous* are now styled *the upright in heart,* to teach us, that the
only righteousness which proves acceptable is that which proceeds from
inward sincerity. This truth I have insisted upon at large elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc09029.htm#fr_438) <span
id="xxx.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p3"></span> The original word <span
id="xxx.i-p3.1"></span>דרך, *darach*, signifies *to go*, *to send out*,
*direct*, and is used in different senses, according to the objects to
which it is applied. “But most especially it is used of a bow or arrows.
If of <span id="xxx.i-p3.2"></span>קשת, *a bow*, then it is *to bend
it*; if of <span id="xxx.i-p3.3"></span>חצים, *arrows*, then it is not
so properly *to shoot* as *to prepare*, or *direct* them. So <span
id="xxx.i-p3.4"></span>[Ps 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007)<span
id="xxx.i-p3.4"></span>, ‘He directeth or prepareth his arrows;’ so
here, ‘they direct, or aim, or make ready their arrows.’ Parallel to
which is that of <span id="xxx.i-p3.5"></span>[Jer
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003)<span id="xxx.i-p3.5"></span>,
where being applied to the tongue, as to a bow that shoots out lying
words, as arrows, it must be rendered *bend*; but here applied to words
as arrows, *direct*, and not *bend*.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc09029.htm#fr_439) <span
id="xxx.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.i-p9"></span> *They have directed for their arrow a bitter
word* There may be, in these words, an allusion to the practice of
fixing letters on arrows, and shooting or directing them where it was
designed they should fall and be taken up. Thus the Jews say, Shebna and
Joab sent letters to Sennacherib, acquainting him that all Israel were
willing to make peace with him; but Hezekiah would not suffer them.
Timoxenus and Artabazus sent letters to one another in this way at the
siege of Potidaea. See Gill, *in loco* The *word* which they are said to
direct as their arrow is called <span id="xxx.i-p9.1"></span>מר, *mar*,
*bitter*, and this probably contains an allusion to poisoned arrows. The
Chaldee paraphrast has “bending the bow and anointing the arrows,”
plainly intimating a conviction that such an allusion is implied.
Poisoned arrows appear, from <span id="xxx.i-p9.2"></span>[Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)<span id="xxx.i-p9.2"></span>, to
have been of very ancient use in Arabia. They were also used by many
other nations in different parts of the world. Homer says of Ulysses,
that he went to Ephyre, a city of Thessaly, in order to procure deadly
poison for smearing his deadly-pointed arrows, Odyssey, Lib. 1, 50,
335-345. Virgil describes one of his heroes as eminently skillful in
anointing the dart, and arming its steel with poison, Aen. Lib. 9, 50,
771. And Horace mentions the <span id="xxx.i-p9.3"></span>*venenatoe
sagittoe*, *the poisoned arrows* of the ancient Moors in Africa, Lib. 1,
Ode 22, 50, 3. Wherever this practice has prevailed, the poison employed
has been of the most deadly kind, the slightest wound being followed by
certain and almost instant death. This makes the language here
strikingly expressive. David compares the calumnies his enemies launched
against him to poisoned arrows.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc09029.htm#fr_440) <span
id="xxx.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxx.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
trembleront.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, shall tremble.”

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc09029.htm#fr_441) <span
id="xxx.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxx.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou, feront
entendre.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, shall cause to understand.”

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc09029.htm#fr_442) <span
id="xxx.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxx.ii-p8"></span> In the French version the reference is
changed to <span id="xxx.ii-p8.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="xxx.ii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 65](cc09030)
