[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09003)  [Next](cc09005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>PSALM 39

<span id="v-p2"></span>In the beginning of the psalm, David intimates
that his heart had been seized with extreme bitterness of grief, which
forced him to give utterance to complaints with too much vehemence and
ardor. He confesses that whilst he was disposed to be silent, and to
exercise patience, he was nevertheless compelled, by the vehemence of
his sorrow, to break out into an excess which he by no means intended.
Then he relates the complaints which he had made mingled with prayers,
which indicate great trouble of mind; so that from this it appears that
he had wrestled with no ordinary effort in resisting temptation, lest he
should fall into despair.

<span id="v-p3"></span>To the chief musician, Jeduthun. A Psalm of
David.

<span id="v-p4"></span>It is well known that Jeduthun was one of the
chief singers of whom sacred history makes mention. (<span
id="v-p4.1"></span>[1 Chr. 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#016), [1
Chr. 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#038),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#042)<span id="v-p4.1"></span>) It is,
therefore, probable that this psalm was delivered to the chief singer,
who was of his household. Some, indeed, understand it as denoting the
particular kind of tune, and suppose that it was the beginning of some
other song; but this I consider too forced an interpretation. Nor can I
agree with others who suppose that David here complains of some disease;
for unless some urgent reason require it, it is improper to limit
general statements to particular cases. On the contrary, from the
extreme character of the sufferings which he here describes, it may be
presumed that a variety of afflictions is here included, or, at least,
that some one is referred to which was more severe than all the others,
and one which had continued for a long time. Besides, it ought to be
considered that in this psalm David is not proclaiming his own merit, as
if in his affliction he had presented his prayers to God in the
language, and according to the spirit dictated by true piety: he rather
confesses the sin of his infirmity in bursting forth into immoderate
sorrow, and in being led by the vehemence of this affection to indulge
in sinful complaints.

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
39:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1**. I said, I will take heed to my ways,
that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a muzzle, while
the wicked standeth before me. **2**. I was dumb in silence; I held my
peace from good; and my sorrow was stirred. **3**. My heart became hot
within me; in my musing a fire burned: I spake with my tongue.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p4"></span><span id="v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**1.** *I said, I will take heed to my ways.*
David explains and illustrates the greatness of his grief by this
circumstance, that, contrary to his inclination and resolution, he broke
forth into the severest complaints. The meaning substantially is, that
although he had subdued his heart to patience, and resolved to keep
silence, yet the violence of his grief was such that it forced him to
break his resolution, and extorted from him, if we might so speak,
expressions which indicate that he had given way to an undue degree of
sorrow. The expression, *I said,* it is well known, does not always mean
what is expressed in words, but is often used to denote the purpose of
the heart, and, therefore, the words *in heart* are sometimes added.
David, therefore, means not that he boasted of his fortitude and
constancy, and made a display of them before men, but that before God he
was, by continued meditation, well fortified and prepared to endure
patiently the temptations by which he was now assailed. We ought to mark
particularly the carefulness by which he was distinguished. It was not
without cause that he was so much intent on exercising watchfulness over
himself. He did so because he was conscious of his own weakness, and
also well knew the manifold devices of Satan. He, therefore, looked on
the right hand and on the left, and kept watch on all sides, lest
temptation stealing upon him unawares from any quarter might reach even
to his heart. Access to it, then, had been impossible, since it was shut
up on every side, if the extreme severity of his grief had not
overpowered him, and broken his resolution. When he says, *I will keep
my mouth with a muzzle,*  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) *that I
sin not with my tongue,* it is not to be understood as if he could with
difficulty restrain and conceal his grief, (for it is mere pretense for
a man to show by the countenance and speech the appearance of meekness
when the heart still swells with pride;) but as there is nothing more
slippery or loose than the tongue, David declares that he had endeavored
so carefully to bridle his affections, that not so much as one word
should escape from his lips which might betray the least impatience. And
that man must indeed be endued with singular fortitude who unfeignedly
and deliberately restrains his tongue, which is so liable to fall into
error. As to what follows, *while the wicked standeth before me,* it is
generally understood, as if David had concealed his grief, lest he
should give occasion of blasphemy to the wicked, who, as soon as they
see the children of God fail under the weight of their afflictions,
insolently break forth into derision against them, which amounts to a
contempt of God himself. But it appears to me that by the term
*standeth,* David meant to express something more, — that even while he
saw the wicked bearing rule, exercising authority, and exalted to honor,
he resolved not to speak a single word, but to bear patiently the
poverty and indignity which otherwise grieve and torment not a little
even good men. Accordingly, he says not merely that when he was in the
presence of the wicked he restrained himself, lest he should be
subjected to their scorn, but that even while the worst of men
prospered,  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) and, proud of their
high rank, despised others, he was fully determined in his own mind not
to be troubled at it. By this he very plainly shows that he was so beset
with wicked men, ever ready for mischief, that he could not freely heave
a sigh which was not made the subject of ridicule and scorn. Since,
then, it was so hard a task for David to restrain his tongue, lest he
should sin by giving way to complaints, let us learn from his example,
whenever troubles molest us, to strive earnestly to moderate our
affections, that no impious expression of dissatisfaction against God
may slip from us.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span><span id="v.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>**2.** *I was dumb in silence.* He now declares
that this resolution of which he has spoken had not been a mere passing
and momentary thought, but that he had shown by his conduct that it was
indeed a resolution deeply fixed in his heart. He says, then, that he
held his peace for a time, just as if he had been deaf, which was a
singular manifestation of his patience. When he thus determined to be
silent, it was not such a resolution as persons of a changeable
disposition, who scarcely ever know their own mind, and who can with
difficulty be brought to carry their desires into effect, often make: he
had long and steadfastly inured himself to the exercise of patience; and
this he had done, not only by keeping silence but by making himself
utterly dumb, as if he had been deprived of the power of speech. The
expression *from good* is expounded by some in the sense that he not
only refrained from uttering sinful and unadvised words, but also that
he abstained from speaking on any subject whatever. Others think that he
held his peace from good, either because, being overwhelmed with
miseries and afflictions, he found no relief to whatever side he turned,
or else, because, by reason of the greatness of his sorrow, he was
unable to sing the praises of God. But in my opinion the natural sense
is, that although he was able adequately to defend himself, and it could
not be shown that he wanted just and proper grounds of complaint, yet he
refrained from speaking of his own mere will.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) He might have encountered the ungodly
with a good defense of his own innocence, but he rather preferred to
forego the prosecution of his righteous cause than indulge in any
intemperate sorrow. He adds in the last clause of the verse, that
although he thus restrained himself for a time, yet at length the
violence of his grief broke through all the barriers which he had set to
his tongue. If David, who was so valiant a champion, failed in the midst
of his course, how much greater reason have we to be afraid lest we fall
in like manner? He says that *his sorrow was stirred,* because, as we
shall soon see, the ardor of his affections was inflamed so as to become
tumultuous. Some render the phrase in this sense, that *his sorrow was
corrupted,* as if his meaning were, that it became worse; just as we
know that a wound becomes worse when it happens to putrify or fester:
but this sense is forced.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span><span id="v.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>**3.** *My heart became hot within me* He now
illustrates the greatness of his grief by the introduction of a simile,
telling us that his sorrow, being internally suppressed, became so much
the more inflamed, until the ardent passion of his soul continued to
increase in strength. From this we may learn the very profitable lesson,
that the more strenuously any one sets himself to obey God, and employs
all his endeavors to attain the exercise of patience, the more
vigorously is he assailed by temptation: for Satan, whilst he is not so
troublesome to the indifferent and careless, and seldom looks near them,
displays all his forces in hostile array against that individual. If,
therefore, at any time we feel ardent emotions struggling and raising a
commotion in our breasts, we should call to remembrance this conflict of
David, that our courage may not fail us, or at least that our infirmity
may not drive us headlong to despair. The dry and hot exhalations which
the sun causes to arise in summer, if nothing occurred in the atmosphere
to obstruct their progress, would ascend into the air without commotion;
but when intervening clouds prevent their free ascent, a conflict
arises, from which the thunders are produced. It is similar with respect
to the godly who desire to lift up their hearts to God. If they would
resign themselves to the vain imaginations which arise in their minds,
they might enjoy a sort of unrestrained liberty to indulge in every
fancy; but because they endeavor to resist their influence, and seek to
devote themselves to God, obstructions which arise from the opposition
of the flesh begin to trouble them. Whenever, therefore, the flesh shall
put forth its efforts, and shall kindle up a fire in our hearts, let us
know that we are exercised with the same kind of temptation which
occasioned so much pain and trouble to David. In the end of the verse he
acknowledges that the severity of the affliction with which he was
visited had at length overcome him, and that he allowed foolish and
unadvised words to pass from his lips. In his own person he sets before
us a mirror of human infirmity, that, being warned by the danger to
which we are exposed, we may learn betimes to seek protection under the
shadow of God’s wings. When he says that *he spake with his tongue,* it
is not a superfluous mode of expression, but a true and fuller
confession of his sin, in that he had not only given way to sinful
murmuring, but had even uttered loud complaints.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
39:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**4**. O Jehovah! cause me to know my end, and
the number of my days, that I may understand how long I may live.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) **5**. Behold, thou hast made my days as
a hand-breadth, and mine age as if it were nothing before thee: truly
every man, while he standeth, is wholly vanity. Selah. **6**. Surely man
walketh in a shadow; surely he disquieteth himself in vain: they heap
together \[riches,  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) \] and know not
who shall gather them.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span><span id="v.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>**4.** *O Jehovah! cause me to know my end.*
It appears from this, that David was transported by an improper and
sinful excess of passion, seeing he finds fault with God. This will
appear still more clearly from the following verses. It is true, indeed,
that in what follows he introduces pious and becoming prayers, but here
he complains, that, being a mortal man, whose life is frail and
transitory, he is not treated more mildly by God. Of this, and similar
complaints, the discourses of Job are almost full. It is, therefore, not
without anger and resentment that David speaks in this manner: “O God,
since thou art acting with so much severity towards me, at least make me
to know how long thou hast appointed me to live. But is it so, that my
life is but a moment, why then dost thou act with so great rigour? and
why dost thou accumulate upon my head such a load of miseries, as if I
had yet many ages to live? What does it profit me to have been born, if
I must pass the period of my existence, which is so brief, in misery,
and oppressed with a continued succession of calamities?”

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>Accordingly, this verse should be read in
connection with the following one. *Behold, thou hast made my days as a
hand-breadth.* A hand-breadth is the measure of four fingers, and is
here taken for a very small measure; as if it had been said, the life of
man flies swiftly away, and the end of it, as it were, touches the
beginning. Hence the Psalmist concludes that all men are only *vanity*
before God. As to the meaning of the words, he does not ask that the
brevity of human life should be shown to him, as if he knew it not.
There is in this language a kind of irony, as if he had said, Let us
count the number of the years which still remain to me on earth, and
will they be a sufficient recompense for the miseries which I endure?
Some render the word <span id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>חדל, *chedel, mundane;*
and others *temporal,* that is to say, that which endures only for a
time. But the latter rendering is not appropriate in this place: for
David does not as yet expressly declare the shortness of his life, but
continues to speak on that subject ambiguously. If the word *mundane* is
adopted, the sense will be, Show me whether thou wilt prolong my life to
the end of the world. But in my judgment, the translation which I have
followed is much more appropriate; and, besides, there may have been a
transposition of the letters <span id="v.ii-p8.3"></span>ד, *daleth,*
and <span id="v.ii-p8.4"></span>ל, *lamed,* making the word *chedel* for
*cheled.* It may, however, very properly be taken for an age or period
of life.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) When he says that *his
age is, as it were, nothing before God,* in order to excite God so much
the more to pity and compassion, he appeals to him as a witness of his
frailty, intimating, that it is not a thing unknown to him how
transitory and passing the life of man is. The expression, *wholly* or
*altogether vanity,*  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) implies that
among the whole human race there is nothing but vanity. He declares this
of men, even whilst *they are standing;*  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) that is to say, when, being in the prime
and vigor of life, they wish to be held in estimation, and seem to
themselves to be men possessed of considerable influence and power. It
was the pangs of sorrow which forced David to give utterance to these
complaints; but it is to be observed, that it is chiefly when men are
sore oppressed by adversity that they are made to feel their nothingness
in the sight of God. Prosperity so intoxicates them, that, forgetful of
their condition, and sunk in insensibility, they dream of an immortal
state on earth. It is very profitable for us to know our own frailty,
but we must beware lest, on account of it, we fall into such a state of
sorrow as may lead us to murmur and repine. David speaks truly and
wisely in declaring, that man, even when he seems to have risen to the
highest state of greatness, is only like the bubble which rises upon the
water, blown up by the wind; but he is in fault when he takes occasion
from this to complain of God. Let us, therefore, so feel the misery of
our present condition, as that, however cast down and afflicted, we may,
as humble suppliants, lift up our eyes to God, and implore his mercy.
This we find David does a little after, having corrected himself; for he
does not continue to indulge in rash and inconsiderate lamentations, but
lifting up his soul in the exercise of faith, he attains heavenly
consolation.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span><span id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>**6.** *Surely man walketh in a shadow.*
 <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) He still prosecutes the same
subject. By the word *shadow,* he means, that there is nothing
substantial in man, but that he is only, as we say, a vain show, and has
I know not how much of display and ostentation.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Some translate the word *darkness,* and
understand the Psalmist’s language in this sense, That the life of man
vanishes away before it can be known. But in these words David simply
declares of every man individually what Paul extends to the whole world,
when he says,

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>“The fashion of this world passeth away.” —  
<span id="v.ii-p16.2"></span>[1Co
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="v.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span>Thus he denies that there is any thing
abiding in men, because the appearance of strength which displays itself
in them for a time soon passes away. What he adds, that men *disquiet
themselves in vain,* shows the very height of their vanity; as if he had
said, It seems as if men were born for the very purpose of rendering
themselves more and more contemptible: for although they are only as a
shadow, yet as if they were fools, or rather insane, they involve
themselves needlessly in harassing cares, and vexing themselves to no
purpose. He expresses still more plainly how they manifest their folly,
when he declares that while they anxiously and carefully heap up riches,
they never think that they must soon, and it may be suddenly, leave
their present abode. And why is it that they thus fret away their mind
and body, but only because they imagine that they can never have enough?
for by their insatiable desire of gain, they eagerly grasp at all the
riches of the world, as if they had to live a hundred times the life of
man. Moreover, David does not in this passage hold up to scorn the
covetousness of man in the same sense in which Solomon does, <span
id="v.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ec 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010)<span
id="v.ii-p17.1"></span>; for he not only speaks of their heirs, but
declares generally, that men disquiet and vex themselves with care,
although they know not who shall reap the fruit of their labor in
amassing riches.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) They may indeed
wish to make provision for themselves; but what madness and folly is it
for them to torment themselves with incessant and unprofitable cares
which have no certain object or limit? David here condemns those ardent
and unbridled desires, under the influence of which worldly men are
carried away, and talk in a strange manner, confounding heaven and
earth; for they admit not that they are mortal, much less do they
consider that their life is bounded by the narrow limits of a
hand-breadth. David spoke under the influence of a distempered and
troubled state of mind; but there is included in his language this very
profitable lesson, that there is no remedy better fitted for enabling us
to rise above all unnecessary cares, than the recollection that the
brief period of our life is only, as it were, a hand-breadth.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
39:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**7**. And now, O Lord!  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) what do I wait for? my hope is towards
thee. **8**. Deliver me from all my sin; do not make me the reproach of
the foolish.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) **9**. I was dumb; I
will not open my mouth, because thou hast done it.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span><span id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>**7.** *And now, O Lord! what do I wait for?*
David, having acknowledged that his heart had been too much under the
influence of ardent and impetuous emotion, from which he had experienced
great disquietude, now returns to a calm and settled state of mind; and
from this what I have before stated is rendered still more obvious,
namely, that this psalm consists partly of appropriate prayers and
partly of inconsiderate complaints. I have said that David here begins
to pray aright. It is true, that even worldly men sometimes feel in the
very same way in which David here acknowledges that he felt; but the
knowledge of their own vanity does not lead them so far as to seek
substantial support in God. On the contrary, they rather wilfully render
themselves insensible, that they may indulge undisturbed in their own
vanity. We may learn from this passage, that no man looks to God for the
purpose of depending upon him, and resting his hope in him, until he is
made to feel his own frailty, yea, and even brought to nought. There is
tacitly great force in the adverb *now,* as if David had said, The
flattery and vain imaginations by which the minds of men are held fast
in the sleep of security no longer deceive me, but I am now fully
sensible of my condition. But we must go beyond this elementary stage;
for it is not enough, that, being aroused by a sense of our infirmity,
we should seek with fear and trembling to know our duty, unless at the
same time God manifest himself to us, on whom alone all our expectation
should depend. Accordingly, as it serves no end for worldly men to be
convinced of their utter vanity, because, although convinced of this,
they never improve by it, let us learn to press forward and make still
further progress, in order that, being as it were dead, we may be
quickened by God, whose peculiar office it is to create all things out
of nothing; for man then ceases to be vanity, and begins to be truly
something, when, aided by the power of God, he aspires to heavenly
things.

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span><span id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *Deliver me from all my sins.* In this
verse the Psalmist still continues his godly and holy prayer. He is now
no longer carried away by the violence of his grief to murmur against
God, but, humbly acknowledging himself guilty before God, he has
recourse to his mercy. In asking to be delivered from his
transgressions, he ascribes the praise of righteousness to God, while he
charges upon himself the blame of all the misery which he endures; and
he blames himself, not only on account of one sin, but acknowledges that
he is justly chargeable with manifold transgressions. By this rule we
must be guided, if we would wish to obtain an alleviation of our
miseries; for, until the very source of them has been dried up, they
will never cease to follow one another in rapid succession. David
unquestionably wished an alleviation of his miseries, but, as he
expected that, as soon as he should be reconciled to God, the
chastisement of his sins would also cease, he only here asks that his
sins may be forgiven him. We are thus taught by the example of David,
not merely to seek deliverance from the miseries which afflict and
trouble us, but to trace them to their cause and source, entreating God
that he would not lay our sins to our charge, but blot out our guilt.
What follows concerning the *reproach* or *scorn of the foolish* may be
understood in an active as well as a passive signification, denoting,
either that God would not abandon him to the mockery of the wicked, or
that he would not involve him in the same disgrace to which the ungodly
are given over. As, however, either of these senses will agree very well
with the design of the Psalmist, I leave it to the reader to adopt the
one which he prefers. Besides, the word <span
id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>נבל*, nabal,* signifies not only a foolish
person, but also a contemptible man, one who is utterly worthless and
base. It is at least certain, that by this word the reprobate, whom the
Scriptures condemn for their folly, are intended; because, being
deprived of their reason and understanding, they break forth into every
excess in contemning and reproaching God.

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span><span id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span>**9.** *I was dumb* Here David blames
himself, because he had not preserved that silence which, as we have
already seen, the violence of his grief forced him to break. When he
says then that he was *dumb,* he does not mean this as a commendation of
the uniform and persevering restraint which he had exercised over
himself. It is rather a correction of his error, as if reproving his own
impatience, he had spoken within himself in this way: What doest thou?
thou hadst enjoined upon thyself silence, and now thou murmurest proudly
against God; what wilt thou gain by this presumption? We have here a
very profitable and instructive lesson; for nothing is better fitted to
restrain the violent paroxysms of grief, than the recollection that we
have to do, not with a mortal man, but with God, who will always
maintain his own righteousness in opposition to all that men may say
against it in their murmuring complaints, and even in their outrageous
accusations. What is the reason why the great majority of men run to
such excess in their impatience, but because they forget that, in doing
so, they dare to plead a controversy with God? Thus, while some impute
all their miseries to fortune, and others to men, and others account for
them from a variety of causes which their own fancy suggests, while
scarcely one in a hundred recognises in them the hand of God, they allow
themselves to indulge in bitter complaint, without ever thinking that in
so doing they offend God. David, on the contrary, in order to subdue
every unholy desire and sinful excess, returns to God, and resolves to
keep silence, because the affliction which he is now suffering proceeded
from God. As David, who was thus afflicted with the severest trials,
resolved nevertheless to keep silence, let us learn from this, that it
is one of the chief exercises of our faith to humble ourselves under the
mighty hand of God, and to submit to his judgments without murmuring or
complaint. It is to be observed, that men humbly and calmly submit
themselves to God only when they are persuaded, not only that he does by
his almighty power whatever he pleases, but that he is also a righteous
Judge; for although the wicked feel that the hand of God is upon them,
yet as they charge him with cruelty and tyranny, they cease not to pour
forth horrible blasphemies against him. In the meantime, David regards
the secret judgments of God with such reverence and wonder, that,
satisfied with his will alone, he considers it sinful to open his mouth
to utter a single word against him.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
39:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**10**. Take away thy stroke from me: I have
failed \[or fainted\] by the blow of thy hand. **11**. Thou chastisest
man with rebukes for his iniquity; and as a moth, thou makest his
excellency to consume away: surely every man is vanity. Selah.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span><span id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>**10** *Take away thy stroke from me.* David
here confirms the prayer which he had already presented, namely, that
having obtained pardon from God, he might, at the same time, be gently
dealt with by him. This prayer, however, does not disturb the silence of
which he had just made mention; for our desires and prayers, if they are
framed according to the rule of God’s word, are not inconsiderate and
noisy so as to provoke the divine displeasure against us, but proceed
from the calm stillness which faith and patience produce in our hearts.
It is indeed true, that when any one prays earnestly to God, he cannot
fail to mix up with it his own feelings, pour forth his complaints, and
manifest an extreme ardor. But we see that David, who formerly bewailed
his miseries in loud lamentations, now sets himself calmly to consider
and weigh what he merited, and prays for pardon. His meaning is, that
God would mitigate the punishment which he had inflicted upon him. The
reason immediately follows; for *I have fainted by the blow of thy
hand.* In thus speaking, David does not allege this as an excuse to
extenuate his fault, but desires that he may be borne with in his
infirmity. As he says with respect to himself individually, that he is
consumed, because he feels that the hand of God is against him, so he
immediately states in the 11th verse the same truth in general terms,
telling us, that if God should begin to deal with us according to the
strict demands of the law, the consequence would be, that all would
perish, and be utterly overwhelmed under his wrath. He plainly shows,
first, that he is speaking not of any one man, or even of men generally,
for he makes use of a Hebrew word, which denotes a man renowned for his
valor, courage, or excellence;  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) and
then, secondly, he says, that if God should set himself to chastise such
persons, every thing which they esteem precious in themselves would
consume away or be dissolved. The sum is, that among men there is no one
endued with such power and glory whom the wrath of God, if it burn
fiercely against him, will not forthwith bring to nothing. But it will
be necessary to examine the words more minutely. David does not simply
describe the dreadful character of God’s wrath; but at the same time he
declares and sets forth his righteousness in all the punishments which
he inflicts upon men. The judgments of God sometimes strike fear and
dread into the hearts even of heathen men, but their blindness fills
them with such rage, that they still continue to fight against God. By
the term *rebukes,* David means severe punishments, such as are the
tokens of strict justice and signs of divine wrath. We know that God
often exercises the rod of his chastisement upon true believers, but he
does it in such a manner as that in punishing them he at the same time
gives them a taste of his mercy and his love, and not only tempers the
chastisements with which he visits them, but also mingles them with
comfort, which serves to render them much more tolerable. David, then,
is not speaking in this place of fatherly chastisement, but of the
punishment which God inflicts upon the reprobate, when, like an
inexorable judge in the exercise of his office, he executes against them
the judgment which they have merited. He tells us that when God makes
this rigour to be felt, there is no man who does not forthwith consume
or pine away. At first view the comparison of God to a moth may seem
absurd; for what relation is there, it may be said, between a small
moth-worm and the infinite majesty of God? I answer, That David has with
much propriety made use of this simile, that we may know that although
God does not openly thunder from heaven against the reprobate, yet his
secret curse ceases not to consume them away, just as the moth, though
unperceived, wastes by its secret gnawing a piece of cloth or wood.
 <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) At the same time, he alludes to
*the excellency*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) of man, which he
says is destroyed as it were by corruption, when God is offended, even
as the moth destroys the most precious cloths by wasting them. The
Scriptures often very appropriately employ various similitudes in this
Way, and are wont to apply them sometimes in one view and sometimes in
another. When Hezekiah (<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>[Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013)<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>)
compares God to a lion, he does so in reference to the feelings of his
own mind, because he was so prostrated and overwhelmed with fear and
terror. But in this place David teaches us, that although the world may
not perceive the dreadful vengeance of God, yet it consumes the
reprobate by secretly gnawing them. This sentence, *that every man is
vanity,* is again very properly repeated; for until we are overcome by
the power of God, and as it were humbled in the dust, we never search
into our own hearts, that the knowledge of our own vanity may divest us
of all presumption. Whence is it that men are so foolishly satisfied
with themselves, yea, and even applaud themselves, unless it be that, so
long as God bears with them, they are wilfully blind to their own
infirmities? The only remedy, then, by which men are cured of pride is
when, alarmed with a sense of God’s wrath, they begin not only to be
dissatisfied with themselves, but also to humble themselves even to the
dust.

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
39:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**12**. Hear my prayer, O Jehovah! and hearken
to my cry; and hold not thy peace  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
at my tears: for I am a stranger before thee, and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were. **13**. Let me alone, that I may recover strength, before
I depart, and be no more.

<span id="v.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p5"></span><span id="v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p6"></span>**12** *Hear my prayer, O Jehovah!* David
gradually increases his vehemence in prayer. He speaks first of
*prayer;* in the second place, of *crying;* and in the third place, of
*tears* This gradation is not a mere figure of rhetoric, which serves
only to adorn the style, or to express the same thing in different
language. This shows that David bewailed his condition sincerely, and
from the bottom of his heart; and in this he has given us, by his own
example, a rule for prayer. When he calls himself a *stranger* and a
*sojourner,* he again shows how miserable his condition was; and he adds
expressly, *before God,* not only because men are absent from God so
long as they dwell in this world, but in the same sense in which he
formerly said, *My days are before thee as nothing;* that is to say,
God, without standing in need of any one to inform him, knows well
enough that men have only a short journey to perform in this world, the
end of which is soon reached, or that they remain only a short time in
it, as those who are lodged in a house for pay.  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) The purport of the Psalmist’s discourse
is, that God sees from heaven how miserable our condition would be, if
he did not sustain us by his mercy.

<span id="v.v-p8"></span><span id="v.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p9"></span>**13** *Let me alone, that I may recover
strength.* Literally, it is, *cease from me,* and therefore some explain
it, Let there be a wall raised betwixt us, that thy hand may not reach
me. Others read, as a supplement, the word *eyes;* but as to the sense,
it matters little which of the expositions be adopted, for the meaning
is the same, That David entreats God to grant him a little relaxation
from his trouble, that he might recover strength, or, at least, enjoy a
short respite, before he depart from this world. This concluding verse
of the psalm relates to the disquietude and sinful emotions which he had
experienced according to the flesh; for he seems in the way of
complaining of God, to ask that at least time might be granted him to
die, as men are wont to speak who are grievously harassed by their
affliction. I admit, that he speaks in a becoming manner, in
acknowledging that there is no hope of his being restored to health,
until God cease to manifest his displeasure; but he errs in this, that
he asks a respite, just that he may have time to die. We might, indeed,
regard the prayer as allowable, by understanding it in this sense:
*Lord,* as it will not be possible for me to endure thy stroke any
longer, but I must, indeed, miserably perish, if thou continuest to
afflict me severely, at least grant me relief for a little season, that
in calmness and peace I may commit my soul into thy hands. But we may
easily infer, from the language which he employs, that his mind was so
affected with the bitterness of his grief that he could not present a
prayer pure and well seasoned with the sweetness of faith; for he says,
*before I depart, and be no more:* a form of speech which indicates the
feeling almost of despair. Not that David could regard death as the
entire annihilation of man, or that, renouncing all hope of his
salvation, he resigned himself to destruction; but he employs this
language, because he had previously been so much depressed by reason of
grief, that he could not lift up his heart with so much cheerfulness as
it behoved him. This is a mode of expression which is to be found more
than once in the complaints of Job. It is obvious, therefore, that,
although David endeavored carefully to restrain the desires of the
flesh, yet these occasioned him so much disquietude and trouble, that
they forced him to exceed the proper limits in his grief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc09004.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="v.i-p6.1"></span>מחסום, *machsom*, rendered *bridle* in our English
version, properly signifies a *muzzle*, and is so rendered in <span
id="v.i-p6.2"></span>[De 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span
id="v.i-p6.2"></span>. “Our translations,” observes Mant, “say ‘as with
a bridle.’ But we do not see how a bridle would preclude the person from
speaking; nor is it a correct phrase, which the word muzzle is.” It is
probable that the bridles of the ancients were made in the form of
muzzles.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc09004.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.i-p7"></span> Dr Geddes renders the last clause of the
verse, “While the wicked prosper before me.”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc09004.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span> French and Skinner read, “I held my peace
from good and bad.” In the Hebrew it is simply “from good;” but they
observe, “This expression occurs frequently in Scripture, and it would
seem, that owing to the constant use of it, one part only of the
sentence has been here expressed. Thus, ‘Take heed that thou speak not
to Jacob *either good or bad*,’ (<span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>[Ge
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#024)<span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>.)
Again, ‘Absalom spake *neither good nor bad*,’ (<span
id="v.i-p10.2"></span>[2Sa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#022)<span
id="v.i-p10.2"></span>.”)

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc09004.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> Or, as Horsley reads, “how brief I am.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc09004.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> The word *riches* is a supplement; there
being no word for it in Calvin’s version, nor in the Hebrew text; but
the meaning evidently is, “they heap up, accumulate, or amass riches.”
Horsley reads, “His accumulated riches — he knoweth not who shall gather
them.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc09004.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.ii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span> “*Mine age*, *i*.*e*., the whole extent of my
life.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc09004.htm#fr_66) <span
id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span> The word <span id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>הבל,
*hebel*, rendered *vanity*, according to some, means *the mirage*, that
deceptive appearance of a collection of waters in the distance, which
the traveler, through the Arabian deserts, imagines he sees before him,
and from which he fondly hopes to quench his thirst; but which, upon his
coming up to it, he finds to be only burning sands, to which the
reflection of the light of the sun had given the appearance of a lake of
water. According to others, vanity means *a vapor*, as the breath of
one’s mouth, which speedily vanishes; to which the apostle refers in
<span id="v.ii-p10.3"></span>[Jas
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014)<span id="v.ii-p10.3"></span>. “I
take the word in its proper sense,” \[vapor,\] says Bishop Mant, “as
more poetical and energetic than the derivative one of ‘vanity.’” See
Simonis and Parkhurst on <span id="v.ii-p10.4"></span>הבל. Abel gave to
his second son the name of *Hebel*, *vanity*, and here David declares
that <span id="v.ii-p10.5"></span>כל-אדם *col-adam*, all adam, every man
is *hebel*, vanity.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc09004.htm#fr_67) <span
id="v.ii-p10.6"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> This word here rendered *standeth* “is well
paraphrased by Dathe, ‘<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>Dum firmissime
constitutus videatur.’” — *Rogers*’ *Psalms in Heb*., *volume*2, p. 200.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc09004.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span> In the Hebrew it is literally, “Man walketh
in an image;” a phantasm, that which seems to be something real and
substantial, but which does not deserve that character, which is an
appearance only. Life is a mere show; “the baseless fabric of a vision;”
it has the semblance of solidity, but there is no reality in it. The
word occurs again in <span id="v.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
73:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)<span id="v.ii-p14.1"></span>,
“Thou shalt despise their image;” their vain show, or phantastic
prosperity. Walford reads, “walketh *as* a shadow;” observing, that “the
prefix <span id="v.ii-p14.2"></span>ב is often used for <span
id="v.ii-p14.3"></span>כ as a particle of similitude.” he farther
observes, that Dathe’s translation, “he pursues a shadow,” gives a good
sense, but does not convey the exact notion of the figure that is
conveyed by the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc09004.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.ii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>Et je ne scay
quelle parade et ostentation.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc09004.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span> It is important to mark the difference
between the Hebrew word <span id="v.ii-p18.1"></span>צכר, *tsabar*, here
rendered *to heap together*, and the Word <span
id="v.ii-p18.2"></span>אסף, *asaph*, rendered *to gather* “The former,”
says Hammond, “here appears to contain all the toil of the harvest, in
reaping, binding, setting up, and heaping things together, bringing them
from the several places where they grow, into a *cumulus* The latter
denotes the stowing or housing, laying it up, removing or carrying it
out of the field, where it is heaped or set up, ready for carriage. For
so <span id="v.ii-p18.3"></span>אסף signifies sometimes *to lay up*,
sometimes *to take away* This, then, is the description of the vanity of
our human estate, that when a man hath run through all the labors of
acquisition, and hath nothing visible to interpose betwixt him and his
enjoyments, yet even then he is uncertain, not only whether himself
shall possess it at last, but whether his heir shall do it; nay, he
knows not whether his enemy may not; he cannot tell ‘who shall gather
them into the barn,’ or enjoy them when they are there.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc09004.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> In the original it is <span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>אדני; but in some MSS. it is <span
id="v.iii-p3.2"></span>יהוה, which is probably the true reading.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc09004.htm#fr_72) <span
id="v.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou, vauneant
et desbauche, ou, meschant.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, the idle and
debauched, or, wicked.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc09004.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p6.1"></span>Car il use d’un
mot par lequel les Hebrieux signifient un homme vertueux, courageux, ou
excellent.” — *Fr*. The Hebrew word is <span id="v.iv-p6.2"></span>איש,
*ish* See volume 1, p. 40, note.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc09004.htm#fr_74) <span
id="v.iv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span> The meaning according to our English version
seems to be, that the beauty of man is consumed as the moth is consumed.
“But,” says Walford, “this gives no correct or suitable sense. The
design is to state, not that the moth is consumed, but that it is a
consumer or spoiler of garments.” He reads,

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span>“With rebukes thou chastisest man for
iniquity,  
Then thou destroyest his goodliness as a moth  
destroyeth a garment.”

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span>This is precisely Calvin’s interpretation. The
moth is called in Hebrew <span id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>עש, *ash*, from its
*corroding* and *destroying* the texture of cloth, etc. See Parkhurst’s
Lexicon on the word <span id="v.iv-p9.2"></span>עש. The metaphor here
employed is of frequent occurrence in Scripture. For example, in <span
id="v.iv-p9.3"></span>[Ho 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv-p9.3"></span>, God says, “I will be to Ephraim as a moth,” that
is, I will consume them; and in <span id="v.iv-p9.4"></span>[Isa
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009)<span id="v.iv-p9.4"></span>, it
is said, “The moth shall eat them as a garment.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc09004.htm#fr_75) <span
id="v.iv-p9.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span> The original word, which Calvin renders
“excellency,” is translated by Hammond “precious things;” by which he
understands wealth, greatness, health, beauty, strength, and, in short,
whatever is most precious to us.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc09004.htm#fr_76) <span
id="v.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p3"></span> “<span id="v.v-p3.1"></span>Ne dissimule
point.” — *Fr*. “Dissemble not.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc09004.htm#fr_77) <span
id="v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p7"></span> “<span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>Comme des gens qui
sont logez en une maison par emprunt.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 40](cc09005)
