[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09021)  [Next](cc09023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>PSALM 57

<span id="xxiii-p2"></span>This psalm consists of two parts. In the
first, David gives expression to the anxiety which he felt, imploring
Divine assistance against Saul and his other enemies. In the second, he
proceeds upon the confident expectation of deliverance, and stirs up his
soul to the exercise of praise.

<span id="xxiii-p3"></span>To the chief musician, Al-tascheth,  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) Michtam of David,  
when he fled from the face of Saul in the cave.

<span id="xxiii-p5"></span>We are left entirely to conjecture as to the
meaning of the word *Michtam;* and equal uncertainty prevails among
interpreters regarding the reason of the inscription given to the psalm,
*Al-tascheth, i.e., destroy not.* Some are of opinion that this formed
the commencement of a song well known at the time; others take it to be
an expression uttered by David in the desperate exigency to which he was
reduced, *O* *God! destroy me not* Others conceive that the word is
inscribed upon the psalm in praise of the high principle shown by David
when he prevented Abishai from slaying Saul, and are confirmed in their
opinion by the fact, that this is the very expression which the inspired
historian represents him as having used, (<span
id="xxiii-p5.1"></span>[1Sa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxiii-p5.1"></span>.) But as the prayers which follow must have been
offered up before he gave any such injunction to Abishai, this
explanation is not satisfactory; and we are left to adopt one or other
of the two former suppositions, either that the psalm was composed to
the air of some song generally known at the time, or that the word
expresses a brief prayer, which David notes down as having been uttered
in memorable circumstances, and in circumstances of great danger.

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
57:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001.md)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Be merciful unto me, O God! be
merciful unto me, for my soul trusteth in thee; and in the shadow of thy
wings will I hope,  <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) until
wickedness  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) pass over. **2**. I
will cry unto God most High, to God that performeth all things for me.
**3**. He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him
that would swallow me up.  <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) God
shall send forth his mercy and his truth.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Be merciful unto me, O God!* The
repetition of the prayer proves that the grief, the anxiety, and the
apprehension, with which David was filled at this time, must have been
of no common description. It is noticeable, that his plea for mercy is,
his having hoped in God. His *soul* trusted in him; and this is a form
of expression the force of which is not to be overlooked: for it implies
that the trust which he exercised proceeded from his very innermost
affections, — that it was of no volatile character, but deeply and
strongly rooted. He declares the same truth in figurative terms, when he
adds his persuasion that God would cover him with the shadow of his
wings. The Hebrew word <span id="xxiii.i-p8.1"></span>חסה, *chasah,*
which I have translated *to hope,* signifies occasionally *to lodge,* or
*obtain shelter,* and in this sense it may be understood with great
propriety in the passage before us, where allusion is made to the shadow
of wings. David had committed himself, in short, entirely to the
guardianship of God; and now experienced that blessed consciousness of
dwelling in a place of safety, which he expresses in the beginning of
the ninetieth psalm. The divine protection is compared to the shadow of
wings, because God, as I have elsewhere observed, the more familiarly to
invite us to himself, is represented as stretching out his wings like
the hen, or other birds, for the shelter of their young. The greater our
ingratitude and perversity, in being so slow to comply with such an
endearing and gentle invitation! He does not merely say, in general,
that he would hope in God, and rest under the shadow of his wings, but,
particularly, that he would do so at the time when wickedness should
pass over him, like a storm or whirlwind. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiii.i-p8.2"></span>הוה, *hovah,* which I have rendered
*wickedness,* some translate *power.* Be that as it may, it is evident
he declares that God would prove his refuge, and the wings of God his
shelter, under every tempest of affliction which blew over him. There
are seasons when we are privileged to enjoy the calm sunshine of
prosperity; but there is not a day of our lives in which we may not
suddenly be overtaken by storms of affliction, and it is necessary we
should be persuaded that God will cover us with his wings. To hope he
adds prayer. Those, indeed, who have placed their trust in God, will
always direct their prayers to him; and David gives here a practical
proof of his hope, by showing that he applied to God in his emergencies.
In addressing God, he applies to him an honorable title, commending him
as the God who performed whatsoever he had promised, or (as we may
understand the expression) who carries forward to perfection the work
which he has begun.  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) The Hebrew
word <span id="xxiii.i-p9.1"></span>גמר*, gomer,* here employed, would
seem to be used in the same sense as in <span
id="xxiii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008.md)<span id="xxiii.i-p9.2"></span>,
the scope of both passages being the same. It materially confirms and
sustains our hope to reflect that God will never forsake the workmanship
of his own hands, — that he will perfect the salvation of his people,
and continue his divine guidance until he have brought them to the
termination of their course. Some read, *to God, who rewards me;* but
this fails to bring out the force of the expression. It would be more to
the purpose, in my judgment, to read, *God, who fails me;* in which case
the sentence would, of course, require to be understood adversatively:
That though God failed him, and stretched not out his hand for his
deliverance, he would still persist in crying to him. The other meaning,
which some have suggested, *I will cry to God, who performs, or exerts
to the utmost, his severity against me,* is evidently forced, and the
context would lead us to understand the word as referring to the
goodness of God, the constancy of which in perfecting his work when once
begun, should ever be present to our remembrance,

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span>**3** *He shall send from heaven, and save
me.* David, as I have repeatedly had occasion to observe, interlaces his
prayers with holy meditations for the comfort of his own soul, in which
he contemplates his hopes as already realised in the event. In the words
before us, he glories in the divine help with as much assurance as if he
had already seen the hand of God interposed in his behalf. When it is
said, *he shall send from heaven,* some consider the expression as
elliptical, meaning that he would send *his angels;* but it seems rather
to be an indefinite form of speech, signifying that the deliverance
which David expected was one not of a common, but a signal and
miraculous description. The expression denotes the greatness of the
interposition which he looked for, and *heaven* is opposed to earthly or
natural means of deliverance. What follows admits of being rendered in
two different ways. We may supply the Hebrew preposition <span
id="xxiii.i-p11.1"></span>מ, *mem,* and read, *He shall save me from the
reproach;* or it might be better to understand the words appositively,
*He shall save me, to the reproach of him who swallows me up.*  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) The latter expression might be
rendered, *from him who waits for me.* His enemies gaped upon him in
their eagerness to accomplish his destruction, and insidiously watched
their opportunity; but God would deliver him, to their disgrace. He is
said to strike his enemies with shame and reproach, when he disappoints
their expectations. The deliverance which David anticipated was signal
and miraculous; and he adds, that he looked for it entirely from the
mercy and truth of God, which he represents here as the hands, so to
speak, by which his assistance is extended to his people.

<span id="xxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
57:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md)<span id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p2"></span>**4**. My soul is among lions;  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) and I lie even among them that are set
on fire,  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) even the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
**5**. Exalt thyself, O God: above the heavens: let thy glory be above
all the earth. **6**. They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is
bowed down: they have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof
they are fallen themselves.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p7"></span>**4.** *My soul is among lions.* He again
insists upon the cruelty of his enemies as a plea to prevail with God
for his speedier interposition. He compares them to lions, speaks of
them as inflamed with fury or implacable hatred, and likens their teeth
to spears and arrows. In what he says of their tongue, he alludes to the
virulent calumnies which are vended by the wicked, and which inflict a
deeper wound than any sword upon the innocent party who suffers from
them. David, as is well known, encountered no heavier trial than the
false and calumnious charges which were levelled against him by his
enemies. When we hear of the cruel persecution of different kinds which
this saint was called upon to endure, we should account it no hardship
to be involved in the same conflict, but be satisfied so long as we may
bring our complaints to the Lord, who can bridle the false tongue, and
put an arrest upon the hand of violence.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p9"></span>To him we find David appealing in the
words that follow, *Exalt thyself, O God! above the heavens: let thy
glory be above all the earth.* To perceive the appropriateness of this
prayer, it is necessary that we reflect upon the height of audacity and
pride to which the wicked proceed, when unrestrained by the providence
of God, and upon the formidable nature of that conspiracy which was
directed against David by Saul, and the nation in general, all which
demanded a signal manifestation of divine power on his behalf. Nor is it
a small comfort to consider that God, in appearing for the help of his
people, at the same time advances his own glory. Against it, as well as
against them, is the opposition of the wicked directed, and he will
never suffer his glory to be obscured, or his holy name to be polluted
with their blasphemies. The Psalmist reverts to the language of
complaint. He had spoken of the cruel persecution to which he was
subjected, and now bewails the treachery and deceit which were practiced
against him. His soul he describes as being *bowed down,* in allusion to
the crouching of the body when one is under the influence of fear, or to
birds when terrified by the fowler and his nets, which dare not move a
feather, but lie flat upon the ground. Some read, *He has bowed down my
soul* But the other is the most obvious rendering, and the verb <span
id="xxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>כפף, *caphaph,* is one which is frequently
taken with the neuter signification. Although the Hebrew word <span
id="xxiii.ii-p9.2"></span>נפש, *nephesh,* rendered *soul,* is feminine,
this is not the only place where we find it with a masculine adjunct.

<span id="xxiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
57:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p2"></span>**7**. My heart is prepared, O God! my
heart is prepared: I will sing, and give praise. **8**. Awake up, my
tongue: awake, psaltery and harp: I myself shall be awaked  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) at dawn of day. **9**. I will praise
thee, O Lord! among the peoples: I will sing unto thee among the
nations. **10**. For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth
unto the clouds. **11**. Be thou exalted, O God! above the heavens: let
thy glory be above all the earth.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p6"></span>**7.** *My heart is prepared, O God!*
 <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) Some read *fixed,* or
*confirmed,* and the Hebrew word <span id="xxiii.iii-p7.2"></span>נכון,
*nacon,* bears that signification as well as the other. If we adopt it,
we must understand David as saying that he had well and duly meditated
upon the praises which he was about to offer; that he did not rush into
a hurried and perfunctory discharge of this service, as too many are apt
to do, but addressed himself to it with steadfast purpose of heart. I
prefer, however, the other translation, which bears that he was ready to
enter upon the service with all cheerfulness and cordiality. And
although, wherever this spirit is really felt, it will lead to
steadfastness of religious exercise, it is not without importance that
the reader should be apprised of the force of the word which is here
employed in the Hebrew. The ready heart is here opposed by David to the
mere lip-service of the hypocrite, on the one hand, and to dead or
sluggish service, on the other. He addressed himself to this voluntary
sacrifice with a sincere fervor of spirit, casting aside sloth, and
whatever might prove a hinderance in the duty.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *Awake up, my tongue* David here
expresses, in poetical terms, the ardor with which his soul was
inspired. He calls upon tongue, psaltery, and harp, to prepare for the
celebration of the name of God. The word <span
id="xxiii.iii-p9.2"></span>כבוד, *cabod,* which I have translated
*tongue,* some have rendered *glory;* but although this is its more
common signification, it bears the other in the sixteenth psalm, and in
numerous places of Scripture. The context proves this to be its
signification here, David intimating that he would celebrate the praises
of God both with the voice and with instrumental music. He assigns the
first place to the heart, the second to declaration with the mouth, the
third to such accompaniments as stimulate to greater ardor in the
service. It matters little whether we render the verb <span
id="xxiii.iii-p9.3"></span>אעירה, *airah, I will be awaked,* or
transitively, *I will awake myself by dawn of day.*  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) But one who is really awaked to the
exercise of praising God, we are here taught will be unremitting in
every part of the duty.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p12"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p13"></span>**9.** *I will praise thee, O Lord!
among the peoples.* As the *nations* and *peoples* are here said to be
auditors of the praise which he offered, we must infer that David, in
the sufferings spoken of throughout the psalm, represented Christ. This
it is important to observe, as it proves that our own state and
character are set before us in this psalm as in a glass. That the words
have reference to Christ’s kingdom, we have the authority of Paul for
concluding, (<span id="xxiii.iii-p13.2"></span>[Ro
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxiii.iii-p13.2"></span>,) and, indeed, might sufficiently infer in
the exercise of an enlightened judgment upon the passage. To proclaim
the praises of God to such as are deaf, would be an absurdity much
greater than singing them to the rocks and stones; it is therefore
evident that the Gentiles are supposed to be brought to the knowledge of
God when this declaration of his name is addressed to them. He touches
briefly upon what he designed as the sum of his song of praise, when he
adds, that the whole world is full of the goodness and truth of God. I
have already had occasion to observe, that the order in which these
divine perfections are generally mentioned is worthy of attention. It is
of his mere goodness that God is induced to promise so readily and so
liberally. On the other hand, his faithfulness is commended to our
notice, to convince us that he is as constant in fulfilling his promises
as he is ready and willing to make them. The Psalmist concludes with a
prayer that God would arise, and not suffer his glory to be obscured, or
the audacity of the wicked to become intolerable by conniving longer at
their impiety. The words, however, may be understood in another sense,
as a prayer that God would hasten the calling of the Gentiles, of which
he had already spoken in the language of prediction, and illustrate his
power by executing not only an occasional judgment in Judea for the
deliverance of distressed innocence, but his mighty judgments over the
whole world for the subjection of the nations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc09022.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p4"></span> The words, <span
id="xxiii-p4.1"></span>אל-תשחת, *al-tascheth*, are found in the titles
of three other psalms, the 58th, 59th, and 75th.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc09022.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou,
hebergeray.” — *Fr*. *marg* “Or, will lodge.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc09022.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span> The original word, <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.1"></span>הוות, *ha-uoth*, for *wickedness*, the
Septuagint here renders *sin* — “Until sin pass away.” Symmachus
explains it in <span id="xxiii.i-p4.2"></span>[Ps
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012.md)<span id="xxiii.i-p4.2"></span>,
by <span id="xxiii.i-p4.3"></span>επηρεια, *insulting injury* “Simon,
from Schultens, has, I think, given the true meaning. <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.4"></span>הוה, *barathrum* — <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.5"></span>est *desiderium*, idque *pravum* v. c.
cupiditas devorandi — *cupiditas* dicitur profundum quod, *barathrum*,
quod expleri non potest.” — *Fry* French and Skinner read, “until their
mischief pass away;” “the mischief,” they observe, “now directed against
me by my enemies.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc09022.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p5.1"></span>Ou, a la
confusion de celuy qui m’a guette.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, to the
confusion of him who hath laid wait for me.” See note on <span
id="xxiii.i-p5.3"></span>[Psalm
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001.md)<span id="xxiii.i-p5.3"></span>,
where the same original word is used.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc09022.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span> Horsley reads the last clause of the
verse, “Upon God, who will bring things to a conclusion for me.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc09022.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span> In this all the ancient versions agree:
They make <span id="xxiii.i-p12.1"></span>חרף, *chereph*, a verb, and
not a noun, regarding it as applicable to God, and conveying the idea
that He would deliver David, having put to shame, or to reproach, his
enemies. Thus, in the Septuagint, it is “<span
id="xxiii.i-p12.2"></span>ἔδωκεν εἰς ὄνειδος” and in the Vulgate, “<span
id="xxiii.i-p12.3"></span>dedit in opprobrium,” “he gave to reproach;”
and in like manner in the Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc09022.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p3"></span> “Mudge translates literally, ‘I lie with
my soul amidst lionesses.’” — *Arch*. *Secker*. This agrees with the
opinion of Bochart, who thinks that the animals here intended are
lionesses, properly when giving suck to their young, a time when they
are peculiarly fierce and dangerous. “Nor need we wonder,” he observes,
“that the lioness is reckoned among the fiercest lions; for the lioness
equals, or even exceeds, the lion in strength and fierceness;” and this
he proves from the testimonies of ancient writers.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc09022.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p4"></span> Fry reads, “I lay down among children of
men, who are flaming fire, or breathing flames.” Ainsworth reads, “I lie
among inflamers;” “meaning,” says he, “fiery, fierce, and raging
persons, that flamed with wrath and envy, and inflamed others. Of such
David did complain to Saul, <span id="xxiii.ii-p4.1"></span>[1 Samuel.
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#040.md)<span id="xxiii.ii-p4.1"></span>
\[*sic*\].” French and Skinner read, “*men* *of fiery spirit*; and
observe, that the Hebrew is *flaming sons of men*, *i*.*e*., violent men
urging on my destruction.” Mant observes, that it may either be
“*persons* *set on fire*, that is, with rage and malice; or, perhaps,
*setters on fire*, kindlers of mischief, incendiaries.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc09022.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiii.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou, me
resueilleray.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, I will awake.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc09022.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p7"></span> This psalm consists of two parts. The
preceding verses, which contain the first part, express deep distress
and extreme danger, and are of a plaintive and imploring strain. But
here, where the second part commences, there is an elegant transition
suddenly made to the language of exultation and triumph, which continues
to the close of the psalm.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc09022.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p10"></span> Hammond reads, “I will awaken the
morning.” Dr Geddes, Archbishop Secker, Street, and Fry, give a similar
version. “The verb <span id="xxiii.iii-p10.1"></span>אעירח,” says
Street, “is in the Hiphil conjugation; and therefore transitive; and the
word <span id="xxiii.iii-p10.2"></span>השחר is the objective case after
it.” As to translating <span id="xxiii.iii-p10.3"></span>שחר, *early*,
Archbishop Secker says, “<span id="xxiii.iii-p10.4"></span>שחר is not
elsewhere used adverbially, nor, I believe, with an ellipsis of <span
id="xxiii.iii-p10.5"></span>כ;” and he observes, that “‘I will awaken
the morning’ is more grammatical and poetical.” A similar thought
frequently occurs in poetry. Thus Ovid says, “<span
id="xxiii.iii-p10.6"></span>Non vigil ales ibi cristati cantibus oris
evocat auroram.” “The cock by crowing calls not up the morning there.”
And in Milton’s Allegro we meet with the following couplet: —

<span id="xxiii.iii-p11"></span>“Oft listening how the hound and horn  
Cheerly rouse the slumbering morn.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 58](cc09023.md)
