[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc09029)  [Next](cc09031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxi"></span>

<span id="xxxi-p1"></span>PSALM 65

<span id="xxxi-p2"></span>This psalm is composed both of petition and
thanksgiving. It contains a prediction of the Gentiles being called to
the common faith, but is principally occupied with praising God for the
fatherly care which he exercises over his Church, and the benefits which
flow from it. The Psalmist prays particularly that God would continue
his former kindness to the Jewish people. Two instances of the Divine
goodness are specified, — the powerful defense extended to their land,
and the enriching of it with so many blessings.

<span id="xxxi-p3"></span>To the chief musician, a Psalm of David.
 <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md)

<span id="xxxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
65:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p2"></span>**1**. Praise waiteth  <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) for thee, O Lord! in Zion; and unto
thee shall the vow be performed. **2**. O thou that hearest prayer! unto
thee shall all flesh come. **3**. Words of iniquity have prevailed
against me: our transgressions thou shalt purge them away.  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md)

<span id="xxxi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.i-p6"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p7"></span>**1** *Praise waiteth for thee, O God! in
Zion* Literally it runs, *Praise is silent to thee,* but the verb <span
id="xxxi.i-p7.1"></span>דמיה, *dumiyah,* has been metaphorically
rendered first, *to be at rest,* then *to wait.* The meaning of the
expression is, that God’s goodness to his people is such as to afford
constantly new matter of praise. It is diffused over the whole world,
but specially shown to the Church. Besides, others who do not belong to
the Church of God, however abundantly benefits may be showered upon
them, see not whence they come, and riot in the blessings which they
have received without any acknowledgement of them. But the main thing
meant to be conveyed by the Psalmist is, that thanksgiving is due to the
Lord for his goodness shown to his Church and people. The second clause
of the verse is to the same effect, where he says, *unto thee shall the
vow be performed;* for while he engages on the part of the people to
render due acknowledgement, his language implies that there would be
ever remaining and new grounds of praise.

<span id="xxxi.i-p8"></span>With the verse which we have been now
considering, that which follows stands closely connected, asserting that
God hears the prayers of his people. This forms a reason why the vow
should be paid to him, since God never disappoints his worshippers, but
crowns their prayers with a favorable answer. Thus, what is stated last,
is first in the natural order of consideration. The title here given to
God carries with it a truth of great importance, That the answer of our
prayers is secured by the fact, that in rejecting them he would in a
certain sense deny his own nature. The Psalmist does not say, that God
has heard prayer in this or that instance, but gives him the name of the
hearer of prayer, as what constitutes an abiding part of his glory, so
that he might as soon deny himself as shut his ear to our petitions.
Could we only impress this upon our minds, that it is something peculiar
to *God,* and inseparable from him, to hear prayer, it would inspire us
with unfailing confidence. The power of helping us he can never want, so
that nothing can stand in the way of a successful issue of our
supplications. What follows in the verse is also well worthy of our
attention, that *all flesh shall come* unto God. None could venture into
his presence without a persuasion of his being open to entreaty; but
when he anticipates our fears, and comes forward declaring that prayer
is never offered to him in vain, the door is thrown wide for the
admission of all. The hypocrite and the ungodly, who pray under the
constraint of present necessity, are not heard; for they cannot be said
to come to God, when they have no faith founded upon his word, but a
mere vague expectation of a chance issue. Before we can approach God
acceptably in prayer, it is necessary that his promises should be made
known to us, without which we can have no access to him, as is evident
from the words of the apostle Paul, (<span id="xxxi.i-p8.1"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="xxxi.i-p8.1"></span>,.md)
where he tells us, that all who would come to God must first be endued
with such a faith in Christ as may animate them wig confidence. From
this we may infer, that no right rule of prayer is observed in the
Papacy, when they pray to God in a state of suspense and doubt.
Invaluable is the privilege which we enjoy by the Gospel, of free access
unto God. When the Psalmist uses the expression, *all flesh,* he
intimates by these few words that the privilege which was now peculiar
to the Jews, would be extended to all nations. It is a prediction of
Christ’s future kingdom.

<span id="xxxi.i-p9"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p10"></span>**3** *Words of iniquity have prevailed
against me*  <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) He does not
complain of the people being assailed with calumny, but is to be
understood as confessing that their sins were the cause of any
interruption which had taken place in the communication of the divine
favor to the Jews. The passage is parallel with that,

<span id="xxxi.i-p20"></span>“The ear of the Lord is not heavy that it
cannot hear, but our iniquities have separated betwixt us and him.” —
<span id="xxxi.i-p20.1"></span>[Isa
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p21"></span>David imputes it to his own sins and those
of the people, that God, who was wont to be liberal in his help, and so
gracious and kind in inviting their dependence upon him, had withdrawn
for a time his divine countenance. First, he acknowledges his own
personal guilt; afterwards, like <span id="xxxi.i-p21.1"></span>[Da
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005.md)<span id="xxxi.i-p21.1"></span>, he
joins the whole nation with himself. And this truth is introduced by the
Psalmist with no design to damp confidence in prayer, but rather to
remove an obstacle standing in the way of it, as none could draw near to
God unless convinced that he would hear the unworthy. It is probable
that the Lord’s people were at theft time suffering under some token of
the divine displeasure, since David seems here to struggle with some
temptation of this kind. He evidently felt that there was a sure remedy
at hand, for no sooner has he referred to the subject of guilt, than he
recognises the prerogative of God to pardon and expiate it. The verse
before us must be viewed in connection with the preceding, and as
meaning, that though their iniquities merited their being cast out of
God’s sight, yet they would continue to pray, encouraged by his
readiness to be reconciled to them. We learn from the passage that God
will not be entreated of us, unless we humbly supplicate the pardon of
our sins. On the other hand, we are to believe firmly in reconciliation
with God being procured through gratuitous remission. Should he at any
time withdraw his favor, and frown upon us, we must learn by David’s
example to rise to the hope of the expiation of our sins. The reason of
his using the singular number, in the confession which he makes of sin,
may be, that as king he represented the whole people, or that he
intended, like Daniel, to exhort them each to an individual and
particular examination and confession of his own guilt. We know how apt
hypocrites are to hide their personal sin, under a formal
acknowledgement of their share in the general transgression. But David,
from no affectation of humility, but from deep inward conviction, begins
with himself, and afterwards includes others in the same charge.

<span id="xxxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
65:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004.md)<span id="xxxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Blessed is the man whom thou hast
chosen, and hast brought near thee; we shall be satisfied with the
goodness of thy house, even of the sanctuary of thy palace. **5**.
Terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer to us, O God of our
salvation! the hope of all the ends of the earth, and the far of places
of the sea.  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md) **6**. By his
strength setting fast the mountains, being girded with power.  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) **7**. Stilling the noise of the seas,
the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the nations. **8**. They
also that dwell in the ends of the earth shall fear at thy signs; thou
shalt make the outgoings of the evening and morning to rejoice.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p7"></span>**4.** *Blessed is the man whom thou hast
chosen* Having already acknowledged that the people had separated
themselves from God by their sins, and forfeited all right to be heard,
he now takes refuge in the free grace of God, which secures the
remission of sin amongst other blessings. He thus casts an additional
light upon what he had said on the point of guilt being purged away, by
pointing to the cause of God, as being favorable to poor sinners, which
can only be found in his fatherly love leading him to welcome them into
his presence, however undeserving. That pardon which we daily receive
flows from our adoption, and on it also are all our prayers founded. How
could the sinner venture into the sight of God, to obtain reconciliation
with him, were he not persuaded of his being a Father? In the words
before us, David does not speak of the grace of God as reaching to the
Gentiles, (which he had done in a preceding part of the psalm,) but in
terms which apply only to the times in which he wrote. The Church of God
was confined to the Jews, and they only were admitted into the
sanctuary; whereas now, when the distinction has been abolished, and
other nations called to the same privilege, we are all at liberty to
approach him with familiarity. Christ is our peace, (<span
id="xxxi.ii-p7.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xxxi.ii-p7.1"></span>,.md)
who has united in one those who were far off, and those who were nigh.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p8"></span>What has been now said may show at once the
scope of the Psalmist. The Church and chosen people of God being in
possession of the promise of the remission of sin, he calls those
blessed whom God has included within that number, and introduced into
the enjoyment of such a distinguished privilege. His language intimates,
that the election did not at that time terminate upon all; for he
insists upon it as the special prerogative of the Jews, that they had
been chosen by God in preference to the other nations. Were it supposed
that man could do anything to anticipate the grace of God, the election
would cease to be with God himself, although the right and power of it
are expressly ascribed to him.  <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md)
But the Jews had no excellency above others, except in the one point of
having enjoyed the distinguishing favor of God. The middle wall of
partition is now broken down, that the Gentiles might be called in. It
is evident, however, that all are not alike called; and observation
proves the ignorance of those who will assert that the grace of God is
extended to all in common, without any choice exerted on his part. Can
any reason be imagined why God should not call all alike, except it be
that his sovereign election distinguishes some from others? Faith and
prayer may be means for procuring us an interest in the grace of God;
but the source whence it flows is not within but without us.  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) There is a blessedness in exercising
trust upon God, and embracing his promises — a blessedness experienced
when, through faith in Christ the Mediator, we apprehend him as our
Father, and direct our prayers to him in that character; — but ere this
faith and prayer can have any existence, it must be supposed that we who
are estranged from God by nature have been brought near by an exercise
of his favor. We are near him, not as having anticipated his grace, and
come to him of ourselves, but because, in his condescension, he has
stretched out his hand as far as hell itself to reach us. To speak more
properly, he first elects us, and then testifies his love by calling us.
It is noticeable, also, that though God separated the seed of Abraham to
be a peculiar people, entitled as the circumcision to a place in his
temple, there can be no question that David recognised a distinction
even amongst those who were Jews, all not having been the subjects of
God’s effectual calling, nor yet properly entitled to a place in his
temple. The Psalmist alludes, indeed, to the outward sanctuary, when he
speaks of the Jews as chosen to approach God; but we must remember (what
was brought under our attention, <span id="xxxi.ii-p10.3"></span>[Ps
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxi.ii-p10.3"></span>
and <span id="xxxi.ii-p10.4"></span>[Ps
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003)<span id="xxxi.ii-p10.4"></span>.md)
that all were not real members of the Church who trod the court of the
temple, but that the great qualifications necessary were the pure heart
and the clean hands. Accordingly, we must understand by those brought
near to God, such as present themselves before him in the exercise of
genuine faith, and not such as merely occupy a place in his temple as to
outward appearance. But, again, the being chosen, and the being called
to approach God, are two things mentioned here together, to correct any
such vain idea as that the sheep of God’s flock are allowed to wander at
will for any length of time, and not brought into the fold.  <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) This is one way by which our
gratuitous adoption is evidenced, that we come to the sanctuary under
the leading of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p12"></span>The Psalmist insists upon the fruit
springing out of the blessed privilege of which he had spoken, when he
adds, that believers *would be satisfied* with the fullness of his
temple. Hypocrites may go there, but they return empty and unsatisfied
as to any spiritual blessing enjoyed. It is noticeable, that the person
is changed in this part of the verse, and that David associates himself
with other believers, preferring to speak upon this subject from
personal experience. We are not to understand that believers are fully
replenished with the goodness of God at any one moment; it is conveyed
to them gradually; but while the influences of the Spirit are thus
imparted in successive measures, each of them is enriched with a present
sufficiency, till all be in due time advanced to perfection. I might
remark here, that while it is true, as stated, (<span
id="xxxi.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxxi.ii-p12.1"></span>,) that “God satisfieth our mouth with good
things,” at the same time it is necessary to remember what is said
elsewhere, “Open thy mouth, and I will fill it.” Our contracted desires
is the reason why we do not receive a more copious supply of blessings
from God; he sees that we are straitened in ourselves, and accommodates
the communications of his goodness to the measure of our expectations.
By specifying particularly the *goodness of the sanctuary,* the Psalmist
passes an implied commendation upon the outward helps which God has
appointed for leading us into the enjoyment of heavenly blessings. In
these former times God could have directly stretched out his hand from
heaven to supply the wants of his worshippers, but saw fit to satisfy
their souls by means of the doctrine of the law, sacrifices, and other
rites and external aids to piety. Similar are the means which he employs
in the Church still; and though we are not to rest in these, neither
must we neglect them.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p14"></span>**5** *Terrible things*  <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md) *in righteousness wilt thou answer to
us* He proceeds to illustrate, although in a somewhat different form,
the same point of the blessedness of those who are admitted into the
temple of God, and nourished in his house. He declares that God would
answer his people by miracles or fearful signs, displaying his power; as
if he had said, in deliverances as wonderful as those which he wrought
for their fathers when they went out of Egypt. It is in no common or
ordinary manner that God has preserved his Church, but with terrible
majesty. It is well that this should be known, and the people of God
taught to sustain their hopes in the most apparently desperate
exigencies. The Psalmist speaks of the deliverances of God as specially
enjoyed by the Jewish nation, but adds, that he was *the hope of the
ends of the earth,* even to the world’s remotest extremities. Hence it
follows, that the grace of God was to be extended to the Gentiles.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p16"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p17"></span>**6.** *By his strength setting fast the
mountains* For the sake of illustration, he instances the power of God
seen in the general fabric of the world. In these times it sounded as a
new and strange truth to say that the Gentiles should be called to the
same hope with the Jews. To prove that it was not so incredible as they
were apt to conceive, the Psalmist very properly adverts to the Divine
power apparent in all parts of the world. He instances the mountains
rather than the plains, because the immense masses of earth, and the
lofty rocks which they present, convey a more impressive idea of the
Godhead. Interpreters are not agreed as to the exact meaning of the
verse which follows. Some think that the mark of similitude must be
supplied before the first word of the sentence, and that it is meant to
be said that God stills the tumults of men when raging in their insolent
attempts, as he stills the agitations of the sea. Others understand the
first part of the verse to be a metaphorical declaration of what is
plainly stated in the close. I would take the words simply as they
stand, and consider that in the first member of the verse, David adverts
to the illustration of the divine power which we have in the sea, and in
the second to that which we have in his operations amongst men. His
strength is shown in calming the waves and tempestuous swellings of the
ocean. It is put forth also in quelling tumults which may have been
raised by the people.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p18"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p19"></span>**8** *They also that dwell, etc.* By the
*signs* referred to, we must evidently understand those signal and
memorable works of the Lord which bear the impress of his glorious hand.
It is true, that the minutest and meanest objects, whether in the
heavens or upon the earth, reflect to some extent the glory of God; but
the name mentioned emphatically applies to miracles, as affording a
better display of the divine majesty. So striking would be the proofs of
God’s favor to his Church, that, as the Psalmist here intimates to us,
they would constrain the homage and wonder of the most distant and
barbarous nations. In the latter part of the verse, if we take the
interpretation suggested by some, nothing more is meant, than that when
the sun rises in the morning, men are refreshed by its light; and again,
that when the moon and stars appear at night, they are relieved from the
gloom into which they must otherwise have been sunk. Were this
interpretation adopted, a preposition must be understood; as if it had
been said, Thou makest men to rejoice *on account of,* or *by* the
rising of the sun, of the moon, and of the stars. But the words, as they
stand, convey a sense which is sufficiently appropriate without having
recourse to any addition. It was said, that in consequence of the
wonders done by the Lord, fear would spread itself over the uttermost
parts of the earth; and the same thing is now asserted of the joy which
they would shed abroad: from the rising to the setting sun, men would
rejoice in the Lord, as well as fear him.

<span id="xxxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
65:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p2"></span>**9**. Thou hast visited the earth, and
watered it; thou hast greatly enriched it; the river of God is full of
waters: thou wilt prepare their corn, for so thou hast provided for it.
**10**. Thou dost saturate its furrows, thou makest the rain to fall
into them; thou moistenest it with showers; thou blessest the buddings
forth of it. **11**. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy
paths will drop fatness. **12**. They drop upon the dwellings  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md) of the wilderness, and the hills shall
be girt about with gladness;  <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md)
**13**. The pastures are clothed with flocks, the valleys are covered
with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.

<span id="xxxi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p7"></span>**9.** *Thou hast visited the earth, and
watered it* This and the verbs which follow denote action continually
going forward, and may therefore be rendered in the present tense. The
exact meaning of the second verb in the sentence has been disputed. Some
derive it from the verb <span id="xxxi.iii-p7.1"></span>שוק, *shuk,*
signifying *to desire;* and giving this meaning, that God visits the
earth after it has been made dry and thirsty by long drought.  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md) Others derive it from the verb <span
id="xxxi.iii-p8.2"></span>שקה, *shakah,* signifying *to give drink.*
This seems the most natural interpretation — *Thou visitest the earth by
watering it.* It suits the connection better, for it follows, *thou
plentifully enrichest it,* an expression obviously added by way of
amplification. Whether the Psalmist speaks of Judea only, or of the
world at large, is a point as to which different opinions may be held. I
am disposed myself to think, that although what he says applies to the
earth generally, he refers more particularly to Judea, as the former
part of the psalm has been occupied with recounting the kindness of God
to his own Church and people more especially. This view is confirmed by
what is added, *the stream* or *river of God is full of water* Some take
the *river of God* to mean a great or mighty river,  <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) but such a rendering is harsh and
overstrained, and on that supposition, *rivers,* in the plural number,
would have been the form of expression used. I consider that he singles
out the small rivulet of Siloah,  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457.md) and sets it in opposition to the
natural rivers which enrich other countries, intending an allusion to
the word of Moses, (<span id="xxxi.iii-p10.1"></span>[De
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxxi.iii-p10.1"></span>,) that the land which the Lord their God
should give unto his people would not be as the land of Egypt,
fertilized by the overflowings of the Nile, but a land drinking water of
the rain of heaven. Or we may suppose that he calls the rain itself
metaphorically *the river of God*  <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458.md) The words must, at any rate, be
restricted to Judea, as by *the pastures* or *dwellings of the
wilderness,* we are also to understand the more dry and uncultivated
districts, called in Scripture “the hill country.” But while it is the
kindness of God to his own people which is here more particularly
celebrated as being better known, we are bound, in whatever part of the
world we live, to acknowledge the riches of the Divine goodness seen in
the earth’s fertility and increase. It is not of itself that it brings
forth such an inexhaustible variety of fruits, but only in so far as it
has been fitted by God for producing the food of man. Accordingly, there
is a propriety and force in the form of expression used by the Psalmist
when he adds, that *corn is provided for man, because the earth has been
so prepared by God;*  <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459.md) which
means, that the reason of that abundance with which the earth teems, is
its having been expressly formed by God in his fatherly care of the
great household of mankind, to supply the wants of his children.

<span id="xxxi.iii-p13"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p14"></span>**10.** *Thou dost saturate its furrows*
Some take the verbs as being in the optative mood, and construe the
words as a prayer. But there can be little doubt that David still
continues the strain of thanksgiving, and praises God for moistening and
saturating the earth with rains that it may be fitted for producing
fruit. By this he would signify to us, that the whole order of things in
nature shows the fatherly love of God, in condescending to care for our
daily sustenance. He multiplies his expressions when speaking of a part
of the divine goodness, which many have wickedly and impiously
disparaged. It would seem as if the more perspicacity men have in
observing second causes in nature, they will rest in them the more
determinedly, instead of ascending by them to God. Philosophy ought to
lead us upwards to him, the more that it penetrates into the mystery of
his works; but this is prevented by the corruption and ingratitude of
our hearts; and as those who pride themselves in their acuteness, avert
their eye from God to find the origin of rain in the air and the
elements, it was the more necessary to awaken us out of such a spirit.

<span id="xxxi.iii-p15"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p16"></span>**11** *Thou crownest the year with thy
goodness*  <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460.md) Some read — *Thou
crownest the year* of *thy goodness;* as if the Psalmist meant that the
fertile year had a peculiar glory attached to it, and were crowned, so
to speak, by God. Thus, if there was a more abundant crop or vintage
than usual, this would be the crown of the year. And it must be granted
that God does not bless every year alike. Still there is none but what
is crowned with some measure of excellency; and for that reason it would
seem best to retain the simpler rendering of the words, and view them as
meaning that the Divine goodness is apparent in the annual returns of
the season. The Psalmist further explains what he intended, when he
adds, that *the paths of God dropped fatness,* — using this as a
metaphorical term for *the clouds,* upon which God rideth, as upon
chariots, as we read in <span id="xxxi.iii-p17.2"></span>[Ps
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003.md)<span id="xxxi.iii-p17.2"></span>
 <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461.md) The earth derives its
fruitfulness from the sap or moisture; this comes from the rain, and the
rain from the clouds. With a singular gracefulness of expression, these
are therefore represented as dropping fatness, and this because they are
the paths or vehicles of God; as if he had said, that, wherever the
Deity walked there flowed down from his feet fruits in endless variety
and abundance. He amplifies this goodness of God, by adding, that his
fatness drops even upon the wilder and more uncultivated districts. The
*wilderness* is not to be taken here for the absolute waste where
nothing grows, but for such places as are not so well cultivated, where
there are few inhabitants, and where, notwithstanding, the Divine
goodness is even more illustrated than elsewhere in dropping down
fatness upon the tops of the mountains.  <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462.md) Notice is next taken of *the valleys*
and level grounds, to show that there is no part of the earth overlooked
by God, and that the riches of his liberality extend over all the world.
The variety of its manifestation is commended when it is added, that
*the valleys* and lower grounds *are clothed with flocks,*  <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463.md) as well as with corn. He represents
inanimate things as rejoicing, which may be said of them in a certain
sense, as when we speak of the fields smiling, when they refresh our eye
with their beauty. It may seem strange, that he should first tell us,
that they *shout for joy,* and then add the feebler expression, that
*they sing;* interposing, too, the intensative particle, <span
id="xxxi.iii-p20.2"></span>אף, *aph, they shout for joy,* yea, *they
also sing* The verb, however, admits of being taken in the future tense,
*they shall sing,* and this denotes a continuation of joy, that they
would rejoice, not only one year, but through the endless succession of
the seasons. I may add, what is well known, that in Hebrew the order of
expression is frequently inverted in this way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc09030.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi-p4"></span> The title of this psalm does not inform us on
what particular occasion it was written. Mudge is of opinion that it was
“composed by a person just come to Jerusalem from some very distant
parts, where, upon his prayers and vows, he had been signally delivered
from the fury of the sea, and uproar of the natives; which leads him
into a general acknowledgement of the Divine Providence which extended
itself to the end of the earth.” It is thought by others to be a
thanksgiving to God for having graciously sent to the land of Judea a
copious rain, after it had been previously suffering from the effects of
a long-continued drought; and that it probably relates to the three
years of famine that followed some time after the rebellion of Absalom,
(<span id="xxxi-p4.1"></span>[2Sa
21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#000)<span id="xxxi-p4.1"></span>.md) which,
being alleviated by some plenteous showers of rain, called forth this
hymn of thanksgiving. Dr Morrison supposes that David wrote it for the
feast of tabernacles, as it seems to contain an expression of public
thanksgiving for the fruits of the earth, which had been safely gathered
in. All these, however, are only conjectures. Nor is it material for us
to know the occasion of its composition, embracing, as it does, such
general topics as may form a suitable theme for contemplation at all
times and in all circumstances.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc09030.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="xxxi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p3"></span> In our English version it is also
*waiteth*, and in the margin *is silent*. “Waiteth as a servant, whose
duty it is to do what thou commandest.” — *Boothroyd*. “The allusion in
this verse is beautiful, when we remember that Eastern servants wait in
silence, watching their lords, waiting for the signs of their will.” —
*Edwards*.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc09030.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="xxxi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p4"></span> The Hebrew word here rendered, “Thou shalt
purge them away,” is <span id="xxxi.i-p4.1"></span>תכפרם, *techapperem*;
properly, “thou wilt make atonement for them.” It is from the verb <span
id="xxxi.i-p4.2"></span>כפר, *kaphar*, which signifies *to cover*, *to
draw over*; and which in the conjugation *pihel*, acquired the
signification *to forgive*, (as it were *to cover* an offense,) and *to
do any act* which shall be the *cause* or *occasion* of forgiveness; and
thence, by a further process in the flow of ideas, *to compensate*, *to
expiate*, *to propitiate*, and to accept an expiation.” See Dr Pye Smith
on *The Sacrifice of Christ*, pp. 339, 340. The covering of the ark was
called <span id="xxxi.i-p4.3"></span>כפרת, *kapporeth*, <span
id="xxxi.i-p4.4"></span>[Ex 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017.md)<span
id="xxxi.i-p4.4"></span>; in Greek <span
id="xxxi.i-p4.5"></span>ἱλαστήριον, that is, *the propitiatory* or
*mercy-seat*; for upon it the blood of expiation, typical of the blood
of Christ, was sprinkled on the great day of atonement; and from it God
revealed his grace and will to his ancient people. The name <span
id="xxxi.i-p4.6"></span>ἱλαστήριον, is in <span
id="xxxi.i-p4.7"></span>[Ro 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md)<span
id="xxxi.i-p4.7"></span>, given by Paul to Christ, who was the true
propitiation for our sins, <span id="xxxi.i-p4.8"></span>[1Jo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md)<span id="xxxi.i-p4.8"></span>. The
words of the Psalmist then, without doubt, have a reference to the
expiatory sacrifices under the law, and consequently to Him who, “in the
end of the ages, hath appeared *to put away sin* by the sacrifice of
himself.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc09030.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="xxxi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p11"></span> In our English Bible it is, “Iniquities
prevail against me;” and on the margin, “Words or matters of iniquity,”
etc. Calvin gives the same meaning which is naturally suggested by our
English version, although from his translating the Hebrew text by *words
of iniquity*, we would at first view be apt, to suppose that he would
explain them as referring to the evil reports, the calumnies and
slanders, which David’s enemies propagated against him to ruin his
reputation. Dr Adam Clarke understands the words in this sense, and
gives a translation equivalent to Calvin’s “Iniquitous words have
prevailed against me,” or, “The words of iniquity are strong against
me.” — He thinks the reading of our English Bible “Is no just rendering
of the original;” observing, that “this verse has been abused to favor
Antinomian licentiousness;” and that “the true and correct translation
of the former clause will prevent this.” But we cannot see how the
verse, as it stands in our English Bible, can with justice be viewed as
tending to give encouragement to sin, it being no more than the
confession of a repentant sinner, accompanied with hope in the mercy of
God, founded on the glad tidings announced in the Gospel, that God is
willing to pardon the most guilty who believe in his Son, and repent of
their sins. The old Scottish, version of this verse —

<span id="xxxi.i-p12"></span>“Iniquities, I must confess,  
Prevail against me do:  
And as for our transgressions.  
Them purge away wilt thou,”

<span id="xxxi.i-p13"></span>which this learned author terms “most
execrable” and “abominable doggerel” — and at hearing which he supposes
David would feel chagrin, if such a feeling could affect the inhabitants
of heaven — is, it must be admitted, ill expressed, feeble, and easily
susceptible of an Antinomian sense. But not so, we think, the revised
version, now in very general use in Scotland, which, by the alteration
of a single word in the beginning of the third line, has made the verse
at the same time more correct and more nervous: —

<span id="xxxi.i-p14"></span>*“*But *as for our transgressions,  
Them purge away shalt thou:”*

<span id="xxxi.i-p15"></span>thus implying at once a deep sense of the
evil of sin, and a confident reliance on the forgiving mercy of God —
two subjects on which it is of the highest importance for us to
entertain just views in drawing near to God in prayer.

<span id="xxxi.i-p16"></span>Dr Morrison gives the following rendering:
—

<span id="xxxi.i-p17"></span>*“*Our *iniquities prevail against us;  
*But *thou art he who blotteth out our transgressions.”*

<span id="xxxi.i-p18"></span>Horsley’s version is: —

<span id="xxxi.i-p19"></span>“The account of iniquities is too great for
me:  
Thou shalt expiate our crimes.”

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc09030.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p3"></span> <span id="xxxi.ii-p3.1"></span>ים, *yam*,
*the sea*, is frequently employed to denote the *islands* which are
encompassed by the sea, and being here set in opposition to “the ends or
extreme parts of the earth,” that is, the continent, it signifies the
most remote islands of the world. Accordingly, the Chaldee paraphrase
is, “And of the islands of the sea which are remote from the continent.”
The concluding part of this verse is evidently prophetical of that
period when all mankind, when people of every tribe and color and clime,
shall be blessed with the knowledge of the gospel, and worship the only
true God.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc09030.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p4"></span> From the length and looseness of the
garments of the inhabitants of the East, in ancient times, it was
necessary to bind them close with a girdle, when they intended to exert
their strength. Hence the expression, “girded with strength.” Dr Lowth
thinks the allusion is to the vesture of the Aaronical priesthood. —
*Lectures on Sacred Poetry*, *volume* 1, pp. 173-175.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc09030.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxi.ii-p9.1"></span>Nam si
anteverterent homines Dei gratiam, non resideret penes ipsum electio,
eujus potestas et jus ei tribuitur.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc09030.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxi.ii-p10.1"></span>Fides
quidem et invocatio media sunt, quae nobis concilient Dei gratiam, sed
fons extra nos quaerendus est.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxxi.ii-p10.2"></span>Sont los moyens pour nous faire trouver grace
envers Dieu.” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc09030.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xxxi.ii-p11.1"></span>Jam hic
vocatio adjungitur electioni, ne quis somniet oves perpetuo vagari,
neque unquam colligi in ovile. Nam hoc effectu se ostendit,” etc. —
*Lat*. “<span id="xxxi.ii-p11.2"></span>Or la vocation exterieure est
yci adjointe a l’election, afin que nul n’imagine que les brebis soyent
tousjours errantes sans estre recueillies en la bergerie: car l’adoption
gratuite de Dieu se declare,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc09030.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p15"></span> The original word for *terrible things*
“signifies sometimes *terrible* sometimes w*onderful things*, anything
that exceeds in greatness or quality. In the latter sense we have it,
<span id="xxxi.ii-p15.1"></span>[De
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021.md)<span id="xxxi.ii-p15.1"></span>,
when speaking of God, it is said, ‘He is thy praise, and he is thy God,
that hath done for thee these great and terrible things,’ — *great*,
*exceeding*, *wonderful things*; and those acts of mercy, and not of
justice or punishment; and so here it appears to signify, being joined
with *answering us*, or *granting us*, *in answer to our prayers*, (so
<span id="xxxi.ii-p15.2"></span>ענת signifies *to answer a request*, *to
hear a prayer*,) and with *in* *righteousness*, which frequently imports
*mercy* The LXX. accordingly read it <span
id="xxxi.ii-p15.3"></span>θαυμαστὸς, *wonderful*.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc09030.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxi.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
pasturages,” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, pastures.”

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc09030.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p4"></span> “Curiously wrought or embroidered girdles
are still, as they were of old, an essential part of Eastern finery both
to men and women. It is in allusion probably to such sumptuous girdles
worn particularly on joyful occasions, that the Psalmist here represents
the hills as ‘girded with joy.’” — *Mant*.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc09030.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p8"></span> This is the sense preferred by Aben Ezra
and Kimchi. *Thou hast visited in mercy*; *i*.*e*., blessed the earth
*or* land, *after thou hast made it dry or thirsty*; *thou hast* or
*dost enrich it greatly*; *i*.*e*., thou, the same God, who hast
punished and made thirsty dost again return in mercy, enriching the land
and restoring plenty to it. Thus it was after the three years’ famine
recorded in <span id="xxxi.iii-p8.1"></span>[2Sa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxi.iii-p8.1"></span>.
But the Septuagint, Arabic, Chaldee, and Syriac versions, interpret the
word in the sense of *watering*.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc09030.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p9"></span> Some think reference is made to the
overflowing of the Jordan after a long drought.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc09030.htm#fr_457.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p10"></span> This river ran through Jerusalem, the
city of God. Bishop Hare, following Simeon de Muis, is of opinion that
this river is meant.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc09030.htm#fr_458.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p11"></span> “*The stream of God*, *i* *e*., copious
rain, according to the Oriental idiom.” — *Dr Geddes*. See p. 7, note 1,
of this volume. And without supposing this Hebraism, the treasures of
water which descend from the clouds may, with great poetical beauty, be
termed *the river of God* He collects them there by the wonderful
process of evaporation, and he pours them down. They are entirely in his
hand, and absolutely beyond the control of man. “The keys of the
clouds,” say the Jews, “are peculiarly kept in God’s hand, as the keys
of life and resurrection.” He can employ them as the instruments of his
mercy, by pouring down from them upon the earth copious and refreshing
showers, to promote vegetation and produce fruitful seasons; and he can
also make them when he pleases the instruments of judgment, either by
bottling them up, or by pouring from them floods of rain, as in the
deluge, and when the harvest is made a heap in the day of grief and
desperate sorrow, <span id="xxxi.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxxi.iii-p11.1"></span>. Horsley, instead of <span
id="xxxi.iii-p11.2"></span>פלג, *peleg*, in the singular, proposes to
read <span id="xxxi.iii-p11.3"></span>פלגות, *pelagoth*, in the plural,
and translates, “God is he who filleth the rivulets with water.” “The
word <span id="xxxi.iii-p11.4"></span>פלג,” says he, “as remarked by
“Archbishop Secker, is very rarely used as a noun in the singular
number. Mr Bates, indeed, takes it to be a noun in <span
id="xxxi.iii-p11.5"></span>[Ps
55:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#009.md)<span id="xxxi.iii-p11.5"></span>;
but his interpretation of that text is very doubtful. In the plural it
never signifies large rivers, but small brooks and rivulets. We have the
authority of the Syriac for reading it in the plural.”

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc09030.htm#fr_459.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p11.6"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p12"></span> In the Septuagint the last clause reads,
“<span id="xxxi.iii-p12.1"></span>Οτι οὕτῶς ἡ ἑτοιμασία,” “For thus is
the preparation;” that is, the earth was thus prepared. In the Syriac it
is, “When thou didst found or establish it;” and in the Chaldee, “Seeing
thou hast so founded it.”

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc09030.htm#fr_460.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p17"></span> This, say some, was probably the year
which followed the three years of famine, after Absalom’s rebellion.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc09030.htm#fr_461.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p18"></span> Some have imagined that instead of
*paths* we should render *cloud*; but the former reading is more
poetical. The original word <span id="xxxi.iii-p18.1"></span>מעגלך,
*paths*, is derived from <span id="xxxi.iii-p18.2"></span>עגל, *round*,
*circular*, *smooth*, because *paths* are made by *cart-wheels turning
round* upon them. Accordingly, Horsley renders it, “thy chariot-wheels,”
and French and Skinner, “the tracts of thy chariot-wheels.” God is here
represented as driving round the earth, and from the *clouds* the
*paths* of his chariot everywhere scattering blessings upon mankind.
This is an instance of the bold and sublime imagery for which the Hebrew
poetry is so remarkably distinguished. God is elsewhere described as
riding on the clouds during a storm of rain or thunder, <span
id="xxxi.iii-p18.3"></span>[Ps. 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011.md)<span id="xxxi.iii-p18.3"></span>.
Some read, “thy orbits,” and understand all the circling seasons of the
year, as ruled by the courses of the heavenly bodies.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc09030.htm#fr_462.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p19"></span> “By desert or wilderness,” observes Dr
Shaw, “the reader is not always to understand a country altogether
barren and unfruitful, but such only as is rarely or never sown or
cultivated; which, though it yields no crops of corn or fruit, yet
affords herbage, more or less, for the grazing of cattle, with fountains
or rills of water, though more sparingly interspersed than in other
places.”

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc09030.htm#fr_463.md) <span
id="xxxi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p20"></span> The phrase, “the pastures are clothed
with flocks,” cannot be regarded as the vulgar language of poetry. It
appears peculiarly beautiful and appropriate, when we consider the
numerous flocks which whitened the plains of Syria and Canaan. In the
Eastern countries, sheep are much more prolific than with us, and they
derive their name from their great fruitfulness; bringing forth, as they
are said to do, “thousands and ten thousands in their streets,” <span
id="xxxi.iii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxxi.iii-p20.1"></span>. They, therefore, formed no mean part of the
wealth of the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 66](cc09031.md)
