[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09013)  [Next](cc09015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>PSALM 49

<span id="xv-p2"></span>The wicked and the votaries of worldly pleasure
often enjoy prosperity, while such as fear the Lord are exposed to
affliction, and disposed to faint under the pressure of it. To moderate
that pride which the one class is apt to feel in the midst of their
success, and administer a check to the despondency of the other, the
Psalmist shows what little reason we have to envy the supposed happiness
of the ungodly, which, even when at its height, is vain and evanescent;
and he teaches us that good men, however great their trials may be, are
objects of the divine regard, and will be eventually delivered from
their enemies.

<span id="xv-p3"></span>To the Chief musician, a psalm of the sons of
Korah.  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206)

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
49:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all
ye inhabitants of the world: **2.** Both ye sons of Adam,  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) and ye sons of men,  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) rich and poor, together. **3.** My
mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding. **4.** I will incline my ear to a parable:  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) I will open my enigma  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) upon the harp.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span><span id="xv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**1.** *Hear this, all ye people.* Whoever may
have been the penman of this psalm, it discusses one of the most
important principles in divine philosophy, and there is a propriety in
the elevated terms designed to awaken and secure attention, with which
the Psalmist announces his purpose to discourse of things of a deep and
momentous nature. To a superficial view, indeed, the subject might seem
trite and common-place, treating, as he does, of the shortness of human
life, and the vanity of those objects in which worldly men confide. But
the real scope of the psalm is, to comfort the people of God under the
sufferings to which they are exposed, by teaching them to expect a happy
change in their condition, when God, in his own time, shall interpose to
rectify the disorders of the present system. There is a higher lesson
still inculcated by the Psalmist — that, as God’s providence of the
world is not presently apparent, we must exercise patience, and rise
superior to the suggestions of carnal sense in anticipating the
favorable issue. That it is our duty to maintain a resolute struggle
with our afflictions, however severe these may be, and that it were
foolish to place happiness in the enjoyment of such fleeting possessions
as the riches, honors, or pleasures of this world, may be precepts which
even the heathen philosophers have enforced, but they have uniformly
failed in setting before us the true source of consolation. However
admirably they discourse of a happy life, they confine themselves
entirely to commendations upon virtue, and do not bring prominently
forward to our view that God, who governs the world, and to whom alone
we can repair with confidence in the most desperate circumstances. But
slender comfort can be derived upon this subject from the teaching of
philosophy. If, therefore, the Holy Ghost in this psalm introduces to
our notice truths which are sufficiently familiar to experience, it is
that he may raise our minds from them to the higher truth of the divine
government of the world, assuring us of the fact, that God sits supreme,
even when the wicked are triumphing most in their success, or when the
righteous are trampled under the foot of contumely, and that a day is
coming when he will dash the cup of pleasure out of the hands of his
enemies, and rejoice the hearts of his friends, by delivering them out
of their severest distresses. This is the only consideration which can
impart solid comfort under our afflictions. Formidable and terrible in
themselves, they would overwhelm our souls, did not the Lord lift upon
us the light of his countenance. Were we not assured that he watches
over our safety, we could find no remedy from our evils, and no quarter
to which we might resort under them.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>The remarks which have been made may explain
the manner in which the inspired writer introduces the psalm, soliciting
our attention, as about to discourse on a theme unusually high and
important. Two things are implied in this verse, that the subject upon
which he proposes to enter is of universal application, and that we
require to be admonished and aroused ere we are brought to a due measure
of consideration. The words which I have translated, *inhabitants of the
world,* are translated by others, *inhabitants of time;* but this is a
harsh mode of expression, however much it may agree with the scope of
the psalm. He calls upon all men indiscriminately, because all were
equally concerned in the truths which he intended to announce. By *sons
of Adam,* we may understand the meaner or lower class of mankind; and by
*sons of men,*  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) the high, the
noble, or such as sustain any pre-eminence in life. Thus, in the outset,
he states it to be his purpose to instruct high and low without
exception; his subject being one in which the whole human family was
interested, and in which every individual belonging to it required to be
instructed.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span><span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**3.** *My mouth shall speak of wisdom* The
prophet was warranted in applying these commendatory terms to the
doctrine which he was about to communicate. It is, no doubt, by plain
appeals to observation that we find him reproving human folly; but the
general principle upon which his instruction proceeds is one by no means
obvious to the common sense of mankind, not to say that his design in
using such terms is less to assert the dignity of his subject than
simply to awaken attention. This he does all the more effectually by
speaking as one who would apply his own mind to instruction rather than
assume the office of exhortation. He puts himself forward as an humble
scholar, one who, in acting the part of teacher, has an eye at the same
time to his own improvement. It were desirable that all the ministers of
God should be actuated by a similar spirit, disposing them to regard God
as at once their own teacher and that of the common people, and to
embrace in the first place themselves that divine word which they preach
to others.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) The Psalmist had
another object in view. He would secure the greater weight and deference
to his doctrine by announcing that he had no intention to vend fancies
of his own, but to advance what he had learned in the school of God.
This is the true method of instruction to be followed in the Church. The
man who holds the office of teacher must apply himself to the reception
of truth before he attempt to communicate it, and in this manner become
the means of conveying to the hands of others that which God has
committed to his own. Wisdom is not the growth of human genius. It must
be sought from above, and it is impossible that any should speak with
the propriety and knowledge necessary for the edification of the Church,
who has not, in the first place, been taught at the feet of the Lord. To
condescend upon the words, some read in the third verse, *And the
meditation of my heart shall speak of understanding* But as it were a
harsh and improper expression to say that *the meditation of the heart
speaks,* I have adopted the simpler reading.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span><span id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**4.** *I will incline my ear*  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) *to a parable* The Hebrew word <span
id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>משל*, mashal,*  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) which I have translated *parable,*
properly denotes a *similitude;* but it is often applied to any deep or
weighty sayings, because these are generally embellished with figures
and metaphors. The noun which follows, <span
id="xv.i-p18.3"></span>חידת, *chidoth*  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) and which I have rendered *an enigma,*
or *riddle,* is to be understood in nearly the same sense. In <span
id="xv.i-p19.6"></span>[Eze 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002)<span
id="xv.i-p19.6"></span>, we have both the nouns with their corresponding
verbs joined together, <span id="xv.i-p19.7"></span>חור חידה ומשל משל,
*chud chedah umshol mashal,* the literal translation being, “Enigmatize
an enigma, and parabolize a parable.” I am aware that the reference in
this place is to an allegorical discourse, but I have already adverted
to the reason why, in Hebrew, the name of enigmas or similitudes is
given to any remarkable or important sayings. The Psalmist, when he adds
that he will *open* his dark saying, shows that nothing was farther from
his intention than to wrap the subject of his discourse in perplexing
and intricate obscurity. The truths of revelation are so high as to
exceed our comprehension; but, at the same time, the Holy Spirit has
accommodated them so far to our capacity, as to render all Scripture
profitable for instruction. None can plead ignorance: for the deepest
and most difficult doctrines are made plain to the most simple and
unlettered of mankind. I see little force in the idea suggested by
several interpreters, of the Psalmist having employed his *harp,* that
he might render a subject in itself harsh and disagreeable more engaging
by the charms of music. He would merely follow the usual practice of
accompanying the psalm with the harp.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
49:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**5**. Wherefore should I fear in the days of
evil? the iniquity of my heel shall compass me about. **6**. They trust
in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches.
**7**. The brother shall not be able to redeem, \[literally, shall not
redeem by redeeming;\] none shall give to God the price of his
redemption. **8**. And the redemption of their soul shall be precious,
and their continuance for ever. **9**. That he should still live for
ever, and not see the grave.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**5.** *Wherefore should I fear in the days
of evil?* The Psalmist now enters upon the point on which he proposed to
discourse, That the people of God must not yield to despondency even in
the most distressing circumstances, when their enemies may seem to have
enclosed them on every side, but must rest assured that God, although he
connives for a time, is awake to their condition, and only watches the
best opportunity of executing his judgments. This manner of introducing
the subject by interrogation is much more emphatic than if he had simply
asserted his resolution to preserve his mind undisturbed in the midst of
adversity. In the second clause of the verse he particularises the
heaviest and most bitter of all afflictions, those which are experienced
by the righteous when their enemies triumph in the unrestrained
indulgence of their wickedness. *When,* the adverb of time, must
therefore be understood — *When the iniquity of my heel shall compass me
about* There is a different meaning which some interpreters have
attached to the words, namely, If I should fear in the days of evil, and
be guilty of the excessive anxieties of the unbeliever, — in that case,
when the hour of my death came, my iniquity would compass me about. *The
heel* they take to be the end of life. But this interpretation is to be
dismissed at once as most unnatural. Nor do I see what reason others
have for referring this word to *the thoughts,* for I believe that in no
other part of Scripture can such a metaphor or similitude be found.
Others, with more plausibility, have rendered the original word *liers
in wait,*  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) because the Hebrew
verb <span id="xv.ii-p6.6"></span>עקב, *akab,* signifies *to deceive;*
and they consider the Psalmist as intimating, that he would not fear
though crafty and treacherous men laid snares for him. In my opinion,
there is no figure intended; and he means to say, that he would have no
fear when his enemies surrounded him, and in pursuing him, trode, as it
were, upon his heel. The French have a similar expression, “Poursuyvre
jusques aux talons.”  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) I agree
with them, that he speaks of enemies, but it is of their wicked
persecution as they press upon him in the height of their power, and
with design to destroy him, keep themselves near him, and tread, so to
speak, upon his very heel.

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span><span id="xv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *They trust in their wealth.* We are
now furnished with the reason why the suffering children of God should
dismiss their apprehensions, and keep themselves from despondency, even
when reduced to extremity by the violence and treachery of their
enemies. Any boasted power which they possess is fleeting and
evanescent. The Psalmist would convince us that the fear of man is
unwarrantable; that it argues ignorance of what man is even at his best;
and that it were as reasonable to startle at a shadow or a spectre.
*They boast themselves,* he adds, *in the multitude of their riches,*
and this is an error into which we are disposed to fall, forgetting that
the condition of man in this world is fluctuating and transitory. It is
not merely from the intrinsic insufficiency of wealth, honors, or
pleasures, to confer true happiness, that the Psalmist proves the misery
of worldly men, but from their manifest and total incapacity of forming
a correct judgment of such possessions. Happiness is connected with the
state of mind of that man who enjoys it, and none would call those happy
who are sunk in stupidity and security, and are destitute of
understanding. The Psalmist satisfactorily proves the infatuation of the
wicked from the confidence which they place in their power and wealth,
and their disposition to boast of them. It is a convincing sign of folly
when one cannot discern what is before his eyes. Not a day passes
without forcing the plain fact upon their notice, that none can redeem
the life of another; so that their conduct is nothing less than
insanity. Some read, *A man shall not be able to redeem his brother;*
which amounts to the same meaning, and the text admits of this
translation. The Hebrew word <span id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>אח, *ach,*
which I have rendered *brother,* is by others translated *one;* but I do
not approve, although I would not absolutely reject, this reading. The
Psalmist adds, that *none can give a price to God for the ransom of
another,* where he adverts to the truth that men’s lives are absolutely
at the disposal of God, and that they never can be extended by any human
arrangement one moment beyond the period which God has fixed.

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>He enforces the same lesson in the verse
which follows, where he states that *the redemption of their soul is
precious,* an expression not to be understood as implying merely that it
is an event of rare occurrence, but that it never can take place, as
<span id="xv.ii-p10.1"></span>[1Sa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p10.1"></span>,
where the word of the Lord is said to have been precious under the
priesthood of Eli, when it is evidently meant that it had ceased
altogether. The Psalmist would assert that no man can hope to purchase
an immortality either for himself or others in this world. I have
rendered the close of verse 8, *And their continuance for ever;* but
others, who construe the Hebrew word <span id="xv.ii-p10.2"></span>חדל,
*chadal,* as a verb, meaning *to cease,* read, *And ceaseth for ever,*
as if the Psalmist meant that no price was sufficiently great to answer
the purpose, and that it must therefore cease for ever, as what could
never obtain the end desired. I consider that which I have given to be
the real meaning of the word, having had occasion already to observe
upon <span id="xv.ii-p10.4"></span>[Psalm
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span id="xv.ii-p10.4"></span>,
that it signifies the fixed term of human life. The words in verse 9,
*That he should still live for ever,* more fully express the truth, that
it is not merely impossible to redeem the life of men when they are
dead, but impossible while they are yet living, to extend the term of
their existence. A definite limit has been assigned to every man’s life.
This he cannot pass over, and the Psalmist would impress the fact upon
us as one which stamps folly upon the conduct of the wicked, who will
cherish their unfounded confidence even at the moment when they are upon
the brink of the grave. In all this, it may strike the reader that he
has not announced any thing which merits being called a *dark saying,*
and has rather been treating a popular subject in a very plain style of
language; but if he consider that David here condemns, as by a voice
issuing from the awful judgment-seat of God, the stupidity of such as
forget that they are men, he will not be disposed to reckon the
expression inapplicable. Again, we have seen that he *has opened* his
dark saying, it being the divine will that instruction should be
delivered in a form adapted to the meanest capacity.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
49:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**10**. For he shall see that wise men die,
the fool and the brutish person shall perish together, and shall leave
their wealth to strangers. **11**. Their inward thought is their houses
for ever,  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) and their
dwelling-places to all generations; they have called out their names
upon the earth. **12**. And man shall not abide in honour; he has become
like the beasts: they perish.

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**10** *For he shall see that wise men die.*
I consider the ninth and tenth verses to be connected, and that it is
the intention of the Psalmist to censure the folly of those who dream of
spending an eternity in this world, and set themselves seriously to
establish a permanent settlement in it, though they cannot but see their
fellow-creatures cut down daily before their eyes by the stroke of
death. It is a common proverb, that experience teaches fools, and they
may be looked upon as something worse who will not lay to heart their
mortality, when surrounded by so many convincing illustrations of it.
This seems obviously to be the connection. These infatuated enemies of
God, as if he had said, cannot fail to perceive that death is the
universal lot of mankind, that the wise are equally liable to it with
the foolish; and yet they persist in the imagination that they will
remain here always, and will live as if they were never to quit with
this world! They see what happens to others, that all, without exception
or discrimination, are involved in the common mortality; and they must
observe how often it happens that wealth passes *into the hands of
strangers* The word <span id="xv.iii-p6.1"></span>אחרים, *acherim,* I
translate *strangers,* rather than *others;* for although it may be
extended to successors of any kind, yet I think that the Psalmist here
supposes the case of wealth passing into the hands of those who are not
our natural and lawful heirs, and cannot be considered in any sense as
representing us. Many not only die, but die childless, and their name
becomes extinct, which is an additional ingredient of bitterness in the
cup of the worldling. And yet all these affecting lessons of experience
are entirely lost upon them, and they still in their secret thoughts
fondly cherish the idea of living here for ever. The Hebrew word <span
id="xv.iii-p6.2"></span>קרב, *kereb,* means *the middle* of anything;
but it is taken metaphorically to signify *the heart,* or inward parts
of the man. Here it denotes that their *secret thoughts* are occupied
with an imaginary eternity which they hope to enjoy upon earth. Another
and more ingenious interpretation has been suggested by some, that as
the word occasionally means a *tomb,* the Psalmist may here be
satirising those who think to perpetuate their memory after death by
rearing expensive mausoleums.  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219)
This view of the words is strained and unnatural; and what immediately
follows proves that the other is the most correct, when it is added,
that worldly men *call out their names upon the earth;* that is, make
every exertion in their power to win reputation amongst their
fellow-creatures. Their desire should be to have their names written in
the book of life, and to be blessed before God and his holy angels; but
their ambition is of another kind — to be renowned and extolled upon
earth. By the expression, *calling out,* it is insinuated that the fame
of ungodly men is but an empty sound. Some interpreters prefer reading,
*They have called their lands by their own names,*  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) that they might leave some monument of
themselves to posterity. But what the Psalmist seems chiefly to insist
upon is, that they are wholly bent upon earthly renown.

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span><span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>**12** *And man shall not abide in honor*
Having exposed the vain and delusory nature of the fancies entertained
by the ungodly, he next shows that however fondly they may cherish them,
they must experience the same fate with the beasts of the field. It is
true that there is a great difference, so far as the soul is concerned,
between man and the brute creation; but the Psalmist speaks of things as
they appear in this world, and in this respect he was warranted to say
of the ungodly that they die as the beasts. His subject does not lead
him to speak of the world to come. He is reasoning with the children of
this world, who have no respect to another, and no idea of a farther
happiness than that which they enjoy here. He accordingly ridicules
their folly in conceiving of themselves as privileged with exemption
from the ordinary lot of humanity, and warns them that death will soon
be near to humble their presumptuous thoughts, and put them on a level
with the meanest of the lower creatures. This I prefer to the more
ingenious interpretation which some would put upon the words, that they
reduced themselves to the level of beasts by not recognising the true
dignity of their nature, which consists in the possession of a
never-dying soul. The Psalmist’s great aim is to show the vanity of the
boasting of the wicked, from the nearness of death, which must join them
in one common fate with the beasts of the field. The last word in the
verse gives the reason why the ungodly may be compared to the beasts —
*they perish* It matters little whether or not we consider the relative
<span id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>אשר*, asher,* as understood, and read,
*that perish*

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
49:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**13**. This their way is foolishness in
them,  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) and their posterity will
acquiesce in their sayings, \[literally, in their mouth.\] Selah.
**14**. Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed them;
and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their
strength  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) shall wax old; the
grave shall receive them  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) from
their dwelling. **15**. But God shall redeem my soul from the hand
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) of the grave; for he hath taken
me up. Selah

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>**13** *This their way is foolishness* As
this verse has been variously rendered, I shall briefly, before giving
my own sense of it, state the views which have been taken by others. As
the Hebrew word <span id="xv.iv-p9.1"></span>כסל*, kesel,* which I have
translated *foolishness,* occasionally means *the kidneys,* some refine
upon the term, and consider it to be here taken for *fat;* as if this
imagination of theirs were, so to speak, fat which stupified and
rendered their senses obtuse. But this reading is too forced to bear
examination. Others read, *This their way is their folly;*  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) that is, the reason why they pursue
such a line of conduct is, that they are destitute of sound judgment;
for, were they not utterly devoid of it, and did they possess one spark
of intelligence, would they not reflect upon the end for which they were
created, and direct their minds to higher objects? I rather conceive the
Psalmist simply to mean, that the event proves them to be wholly
destitute of wisdom, in placing their happiness upon earthly objects,
and brands them, notwithstanding all the pretensions they make to
foresight and shrewdness, with ridicule and contempt. And this he
states, to show in a more aggravated light the madness of their
posterity, who will not be instructed by the fate of their predecessors.
The last clause of the verse has also been variously rendered, and I may
state the views which have been taken of it by others. The Hebrew verb
<span id="xv.iv-p10.2"></span>רצה, *ratsah,* which I have translated *to
acquiesce,* they render, *to walk,* and the noun <span
id="xv.iv-p10.3"></span>פי, *phi,* translated *mouth* or *sayings,* they
take to mean *a measure,* thus understanding the Psalmist to say, that
the children walked by the same rule with their fathers; and they change
the letter <span id="xv.iv-p10.4"></span>ב, *beth,* into <span
id="xv.iv-p10.5"></span>כ*, caph,* the mark of similitude which is
sufficiently common in the Hebrew language. This view of the passage
comes near to the proper meaning of it. Some conceive that there is an
allusion to the beasts of the field; but this is improbable. It seems
best to understand with others that the word mouth denotes *principles*
or *sayings;* and the verb <span id="xv.iv-p10.6"></span>רצה, *ratsah,*
may be taken in its more ordinary and most generally received sense,
which implies consent or complacency. I have therefore translated it *to
acquiesce.* The boasted confidence of the ungodly proving vain in the
issue, and exposing them justly to ridicule, it argues a monstrous
infatuation in their posterity, with this example before their eyes, to
set their affections upon the same trifles, and to feel and express
themselves exactly in the same manner as those who went before them. If
men reflect at all upon the judgments which God executes in the world,
we might expect that they would particularly consider his dealings with
their immediate predecessors, and when, wholly insensible to the lessons
which should be learned from their fate, they precipitate themselves
into the same courses, this convincingly demonstrates their brutish
folly.

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span><span id="xv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>**14** *Like sheep they are laid in the
grave; death shall feed them*  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226)
The figure is striking. They go down into the grave as sheep are
gathered into the fold by the shepherd. The entire world might not seem
vast enough for men of a haughty spirit. They are so swollen with their
vain imaginations, that they would engross universal nature to
themselves. But the Psalmist, finding the wicked spread as it were far
and wide, in the boundless pride of their hearts, collects them together
into the grave, and hands them over to death as their shepherd. He
intimates, that whatever superiority they might affect over their
fellow-creatures, they would feel, when too late, that their boasting
was vain, and be forced to yield themselves up to the irresistible and
humiliating stroke of death. In the second part of the verse, the
Psalmist points out the very different fate which awaits the children of
God, and thus anticipates an obvious objection. It might be said, “Thou
tellest us that those who place their confidence in this world must die.
But this is no new doctrine. And why convert into matter of reproach
what must be considered as a law of nature, attaching to all mankind?
Who gave thee a privilege to insult the children of mortality? Art thou
not one of them thyself?” This objection he meets effectually, by
granting that on the supposition of death being the destruction of the
whole man, he would have advanced no new or important doctrine, but
arguing that infidel worldlings reject a better life to come, and thus
lay themselves justly open to this species of reprehension. For surely
it is the height of folly in any man for a mere momentary happiness — a
very dream — to abdicate the crown of heaven, and renounce his hopes for
eternity. Here it must be apparent, as I already took occasion to
observe, that the doctrine of this psalm is very different from that
taught by the philosophers. I grant that they may have ridiculed worldly
ambition with elegance and eloquence, exposed the other vices, and
insisted upon the topics of our frailty and mortality; but they
uniformly omitted to state the most important truth of all, that God
governs the world by his providence, and that we may expect a happy
issue out of our calamities, by coming to that everlasting inheritance
which awaits us in heaven. It may be asked, what that dominion is which
the upright shall eventually obtain? I would reply, that as the wicked
must all be prostrated before the Lord Jesus Christ, and made his
footstool, His members will share in the victory of their Head. It is
indeed said, that he “will deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
Father,” but he will not do this that he may put an end to his Church,
but “that God may be all in all,” (<span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>[1Co
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>.)
It is stated that this will be *in the morning*  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) — a beautiful and striking metaphor.
Surrounded as we are by darkness, our life is here compared to the
night, or to a sleep, an image which is specially applicable to the
ungodly, who lie as it were in a deep slumber, but not inapplicable to
the people of God, such being the dark mist which rests upon all things
in this world, that even their minds (except in so far as they are
illuminated from above) are partially enveloped in it. Here “we see only
as through a glass darkly,” and the coining of the Lord will resemble
the morning, when both the elect and reprobate will awake. The former
will then cast aside their lethargy and sloth, and being freed from the
darkness which rested upon them, will behold Christ the Sun of
Righteousness face to face, and the full effulgence of life which
resides in him. The others, who lie at present in a state of total
darkness, will be aroused from their stupidity, and begin to discover a
new life, of which they had previously no apprehension. We need to be
reminded of this event, not only because corruption presses us downwards
and obscures our faith, but because there are men who profanely argue
against another life, from the continued course of things in the world,
scoffing, as Peter foretold, (<span id="xv.iv-p16.3"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span id="xv.iv-p16.3"></span>,) at
the promise of a resurrection, and pointing, in derision, to the
unvarying regularity of nature throughout the lapse of ages. We may arm
ourselves against their arguments by what the Psalmist here declares,
that, sunk as the world is in darkness, there will dawn ere long a new
morning, which will introduce us to a better and an eternal existence.
It follows, that *their strength,* or *their form,*  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) (for the Hebrew word <span
id="xv.iv-p17.5"></span>צורה, *tsurah,* is susceptible of either
meanings) *shall wax old* If we read *strength,* the words intimate,
that though at present they are in possession of wealth and power, they
shall speedily decline and fall; but I see no objection to the other
meaning, which has more commonly been adopted. Paul tells us, (<span
id="xv.iv-p17.6"></span>[1Co 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span
id="xv.iv-p17.6"></span>,) that “*the fashion* of this world passes
away,” a term expressive of the evanescent nature of our earthly
condition; and the Psalmist may be considered as comparing their vain
and unsubstantial glory to a shadow. The words at the close of the verse
are obscure. Some read, *The grave is their dwelling;* and then they
make <span id="xv.iv-p17.7"></span>ם*, mem,* the formative letter of a
noun. But the other interpretation agrees better both with the words and
scope of the psalm, that *the grave awaits them from his dwelling*,
which is put for *their dwelling;* such a change of number being common
in the Hebrew language. They reside at present in splendid mansions,
where they rest in apparent security, but we are reminded that they must
soon come out of them, and be received into the tomb. There may be a
covert allusion to their goings abroad to places of public resort with
gaiety and pomp. These, the Psalmist intimates, must give place to the
sad procession by which they must be carried down to the grave.

<span id="xv.iv-p18"></span><span id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p19"></span>**15** *But God will redeem my soul* The
Hebrew particle, <span id="xv.iv-p19.1"></span>אך*, ach,* may be also
translated, *surely,* or *certainly.* The psalmist had made a general
assertion of the great truth, that the righteous shall have dominion in
the morning, and now he applies it to himself for the confirmation of
his own faith. This verse may, therefore, be regarded as a kind of
appendix to the former; in it he makes a personal application of what
had been said of all the righteous. By the word, *the hand,* is to be
understood *the dominion* and *power,* and not *the stroke,* of the
grave, as some have rendered it. The prophet does not deny his liability
to death; but he looks to God as He who would defend and redeem him from
it. We have here a convincing proof of that faith in which the saints
under the Law lived and died. It is evident that their views were
directed to another and a higher life, to which the present was only
preparatory. Had the prophet merely intended to intimate that he
expected deliverance from some ordinary emergency, this would have been
no more than what is frequently done by the children of the world, whom
God often delivers from great dangers. But here it is evident that he
hoped for a life beyond the grave, that he extended his glance beyond
this sublunary sphere, and anticipated the morning which will introduce
eternity. From this we may conclude, that the promises of the Law were
spiritual, and that our fathers who embraced them were willing to
confess themselves pilgrims upon earth, and sought an inheritance in
heaven. It evinced gross stupidity in the Sadducees, educated as they
were under the Law, to conceive of the soul as mortal. The man must be
blind indeed who can find no mention of a future life in this passage.
To what other interpretation can we wrest the preceding verse, when it
speaks of a morning altogether new and peculiar? We are sufficiently
accustomed to see the return of morning, but it points us to a day of an
extraordinary kind, when God himself shall rise upon us as the sun, and
surprise us with the discovery of his glory. When the Psalmist adds,
*Assuredly God will* *redeem my soul*  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) *from the power of the grave,* does he
not contemplate a special privilege, such as could not be shared by all
other men? If deliverance from death, then, be a privilege peculiar to
the children of God, it is evident that they are expectants of a better
life. We must not overlook, (what I have already noticed,) that the sure
method of profiting by the divine promises is, to apply to ourselves
what God has offered generally to all without exception. This is done by
the prophet, for how could he have arrived at an assured promise of the
redemption of his soul, except by the general fact known to him of the
future glory awaiting the children of God, and by concluding himself to
be amongst their number? The last clause of the verse runs in the Hebrew
literally, *for he will take me up* Some, however, resolve the causal
particle <span id="xv.iv-p20.5"></span>כי, *ki,* which we render *for,*
into the adverb of time *when,* and the verb <span
id="xv.iv-p20.6"></span>לקח, *lakach,* which we translate *to receive*
or *to take up,* they translate *to cut off,* or *take away from this
world,* giving to the passage this sense, When God shall have called my
soul out of this world to himself, he will rescue it from the power of
the grave. I am afraid that this is rather too strained an
interpretation. Those seem to take a juster view of the words who
consider that the future tense has been substituted for the perfect, and
who retain the proper signification of the causal particle, reading,
*for he has taken me up* The prophet did not consider that the ground of
his hope for a better resurrection was to be found in himself, but in
the gratuitous adoption of God who had taken him into his favor. There
is no need, however, why we should suppose a change of tense, and not
understand the Psalmist as meaning that God would redeem his soul from
death, by undertaking the guardianship of it when he came to die. The
despairing fears which so many entertain when descending to the grave
spring from the fact of their not commending their spirit to the
preserving care of God. They do not consider it in the light of a
precious deposit which will be safe in his protecting hands. Let our
faith be established in the great truth, that our soul, though it
appears to evanish upon its separation from the body, is in reality only
gathered to the bosom of God, there to be kept until the day of the
resurrection.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
49:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**16**. Be not thou afraid when one shall be
made rich, when the glory of his house shall be increased; **17**. For
when he dieth he shall not carry all away: his glory shall not descend
after him: **18**. For he will bless his soul in his lifetime, and they
shall praise thee when thou doest well to thyself.  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) **19**. He shall come but to the age
of his fathers, and will not see the light even for ever. **20**. Man is
in honour, and will not understand: he is like the beasts: they shall
perish.

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span><span id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>**16** *Be not thou afraid* The Psalmist
repeats, in the form of an exhortation, the same sentiment which he had
formerly expressed, that the children of God have no reason to dread the
wealth and power of their enemies, or to envy their evanescent
prosperity; and as the best preservative against despondency, he would
have them to direct their eyes habitually to the end of life. The effect
of such a contemplation will be at once to check any impatience we might
be apt to feel under our short-lived miseries, and to raise our minds in
holy contempt above the boasted but delusory grandeur of the wicked.
That this may not impose upon our minds, the prophet recalls us to the
consideration of the subject of death — that event which is immediately
at hand, and which no sooner arrives than it strips them of their false
glory, and consigns them to the tomb. So much is implied in the words,
*He shall not carry away all these things when he dieth*  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) Be their lives ever so illustrious in
the eyes of their fellow-creatures, this glory is necessarily bounded by
the present world. The same truth is further asserted in the succeeding
clause of the verse, *His glory shall not descend after him* Infatuated
men may strain every nerve, as if in defiance of the very laws of
nature, to perpetuate their glory after death, but they never can escape
the corruption and nakedness of the tomb; for, in the language of the
poet Juvenal, -

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span>“<span id="xv.v-p8.1"></span>Mots sola fatetur
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula,” —

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span>“It is death which forces us to confess how
worthless the bodies of men are.”

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span><span id="xv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span>**18** *For he will bless his soul in his
lifetime* Various meanings have been attached to this verse. Some read,
*He ought to have blessed his soul during his life* Others apply the
first clause of the verse to the wicked, while they refer the second to
believers, who are in the habit of praising God for all his benefits.
Others understand the whole verse as descriptive of believers, but
without sufficient ground. There can be little doubt that the reference
is to the children of the world. In the first part of the verse it is
said that *they bless their own soul*  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) so long as they live on earth, by
which is meant, that they indulge and pamper themselves with earthly
pleasures, giving way to the excesses of brutish intemperance, like the
rich man, of whom Christ spoke in the parable, who said,

<span id="xv.v-p13"></span>“Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry,” — (<span
id="xv.v-p13.1"></span>[Lu 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019)<span
id="xv.v-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="xv.v-p14"></span>or that they seek their happiness entirely
from this world, without cherishing a desire for the life that is to
come. Some translate the Hebrew verb, *he will do good,* and read thus,
*He will do good to his own soul in his lifetime.* But I conceive the
phrase to be synonymous in its import with that which is employed by
Moses,

<span id="xv.v-p15"></span>“And it come to pass, that he bless himself
in his heart;”  
(<span id="xv.v-p15.2"></span>[De
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)<span id="xv.v-p15.2"></span>,)

<span id="xv.v-p16"></span>that is, flatter himself as if he might
despise God with impunity. The inspired penman here represents the
stupidity of such as please themselves with a fallacious dream of
happiness. In the latter part of the verse the person is changed, and
the votary of pleasure is apostrophised;  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) the prophet insinuating, by the words
he uses, that the preposterous pride with which the wicked are inflamed
is in part the consequence of the delusive applause of the world, which
pronounces them to be happy, and echoes their praises even when they
gratify their most unlicensed passions.

<span id="xv.v-p18"></span><span id="xv.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p19"></span>**19** *He shall come to the age of his
fathers* He proceeds to show how false are the flatteries by which the
wicked deceive themselves, and are deceived by others. Be they ever so
intoxicated with the praises of the world, or with their own vain
imaginations, yet they cannot live beyond the age of their fathers; and,
granting their life to be extended to the longest term, it can never
stretch into eternity. Others understand the expression as synonymous
with *their being gathered to the tomb along with their fathers* who
have gone before them; as in Scripture death is usually called “The way
of all the earth.” The Psalmist, a little above, had spoken of their
being gathered together in the grave as sheep in a fold. According to
this view, the meaning of the passage is, that having never aspired
after heaven, but having been sunk in the low grovelling pursuits of
this world, they would come at last to the same fate with their fathers.
When it is added, *They shall not see the light even for ever,* we are
to understand their consignment to everlasting darkness.  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) In my opinion, both clauses of the
verse combine to express the same truth, That however they may flatter
and deceive themselves, they cannot prolong their life beyond the common
term of mortality. As either interpretation, however, agrees with the
general scope of the psalm, the reader may choose for himself. Should
the latter be adopted, the words in the close of the verse are to be
considered as asserting that the ungodly can only enjoy the light of
life for a short period, as they have no hope of another existence
beyond the grave. We are taught by the Psalmist, in the words which have
been under our consideration, to beware of flattering ourselves in the
possessions of this world, and to be principally anxious for the
attainment of that happiness which is reserved for us in heaven. We are
also warned not to allow ourselves to be carried away by the erring
influence of worldly applause. Even heathen authors have taught us the
same lesson. Thus the poet Persius says, —

<span id="xv.v-p21"></span>“<span id="xv.v-p21.1"></span>Non si quid
turbida Roma  
Elevet, accedas, examenve improbum in illa  
Castiges trutina: nec te quaesiveris extra,” —

<span id="xv.v-p22"></span>“If Rome, a city full of commotions, exalt or
despise any thing, beware of being satisfied with its weight or balance;
that is to say*,* of stopping at its judgment; and do not look to what
others say of you, but enter into thyself, and examine what thou art.”
 <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) But the disposition to be
deceived by flattery is one so strongly marked in our nature, as to
require that we should attend to the weightier admonition of one who was
inspired.

<span id="xv.v-p24"></span><span id="xv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p25"></span>**20** *Man is in honor, and will not
understand*  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) Here the prophet,
that he may not be understood as having represented the present life,
which in itself is a singular blessing of God, as wholly contemptible,
corrects himself as it were, or qualifies his former statements by a
single word, importing that those whom he reprehends have reduced
themselves to the level of the beasts that perish, by senselessly
devouring the blessings which God has bestowed, and thus divesting
themselves of that honor which God had put upon them. It is against the
abuse of this world that the prophet has been directing his censures.
They are aimed at those who riot in the bounties of God without any
recognition of God himself, and who devote themselves in an infatuated
manner to the passing glory of this world, instead of rising from it to
the contemplation of the things which are above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc09014.htm#fr_206) <span
id="xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv-p4"></span> Ten psalms bear the inscription, “*Of* or *for*
the sons of Korah.” As the prefixed preposition <span
id="xv-p4.1"></span>ל may be translated either *of* or *for*, it has
been doubted whether this and other psalms, with a similar inscription,
were written by or for the sons of Korah. Some, as Calmet, think it most
probable that they were composed by them, from certain peculiarities of
style in which they agree with each other, and differ from the psalms
which bear the name of David. Others ascribe these psalms to David, and
suppose that they were committed by him to the chief musician, to be
sung by the posterity of Korah.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc09014.htm#fr_207) <span
id="xv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>C’est, ceux de
bas estat.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, those of low estate.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc09014.htm#fr_208) <span
id="xv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>C’est, les
nobles.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, the noble.”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc09014.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>A *mon*
proverbe.” — *Fr*. “To *my* proverb.” “<span id="xv.i-p5.2"></span>Ou,
sentence grave.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, grave sentence.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc09014.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xv.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>Ou, dire
obscur.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, obscure saying.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc09014.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span> The original words for the first of these
expressions are, <span id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>בני אדם *bene adam*; and
those for the second, <span id="xv.i-p11.2"></span>בני איש *bene ish*
<span id="xv.i-p11.3"></span>אדם, *adam*, from <span
id="xv.i-p11.4"></span>אדמה, *adamah*, *earth*, means an earthly, frail,
mortal, mean man. The term <span id="xv.i-p11.5"></span>איש, *ish*, on
the other hand, is often used to describe a man who is great and
eminent, distinguished for his extraction, strength, valor, and dignity.
Thus, in <span id="xv.i-p11.6"></span>[1Sa
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p11.6"></span>, we
read, “Art thou not <span id="xv.i-p11.7"></span>איש, *ish*, a man?”
which is explained by what follows, “And who is like thee in Israel?”
denoting there the military valor and reputation of Abner. When the two
expressions, <span id="xv.i-p11.8"></span>בני אדם, *bene adam*, and
<span id="xv.i-p11.9"></span>בני איש, *bene ish*, are used together as
in this place, in <span id="xv.i-p11.10"></span>[Ps.
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009), [Isa.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009), [Isa.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p11.10"></span>,
the Jewish Rabbins and modern Christian interpreters have understood a
difference of rank to be stated; the former expression, denoting persons
of obscure birth, of low rank, the common people: and the latter,
meaning men of illustrious descent, the great or nobler sorts of men.
See Archbishop Secker’s Dissertation on the words <span
id="xv.i-p11.11"></span>אנוש איש אדם, in Appendix to Merrick’s
Annotations on the Psalms, No. 5. The Septuagint translates the former
phrase by “<span id="xv.i-p11.12"></span>Οἵ γηγενεῖς,” the earth-born.”
The Chaldee expresses the former by *the sons of old Adam*, and the
latter by *the sons of Jacob*; thus intending to comprehend Jews and
Gentiles, all men in the world. “But,” says Hammond, “it is more likely
that the phrases denote only the several conditions of men, men of the
*lower* and *higher* rank, for so the *consequeents* interpret it,
*rich* and *poor*.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc09014.htm#fr_212) <span
id="xv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p14.1"></span>Aussi certes
il est bien requis que tous les Prophetes de Dieu ayent un tel vouloir
et affection, ascavoir qu’ils souffrent volontiers que Dieu soit leur
maistre aussi bien que de tout le peuple, et qu’ils recoyvent tous les
premiers sa parolle, laquelle ils portent de leur bouche aux autres.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc09014.htm#fr_213) <span
id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span> Bythner and Fry are of opinion, that “the
inclining of the ear” is a metaphor taken from the position of the
minstrel, who, in accommodating his words to the tune, brings his ear
close to the harp, that he may catch the sounds. Thus the Psalmist
expresses the sense he himself had of the importance of his subject, and
his purpose of giving to it the most serious attention.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc09014.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xv.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span> This word is of great latitude in its
signification. It signifies primarily any similitude by which another
thing is expressed. Thence it comes to denote a figurative discourse,
either in the form of fiction and fable, such as riddles or significant
apologues, as that of Jotham, <span id="xv.i-p18.2"></span>[Jud
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p18.2"></span>, or
in which application is made of some true example or similitude, as when
the sluggard is bidden “go to the ant,” and the impenitent sinner to
consider the “swallow and crane,” which return at their certain seasons,
and so are fitted to give a lesson to sinners to repent. And, finally,
it belongs to all moral doctrine, either darkly or sententiously
delivered; wise men, in ancient times, having been in the habit of
delivering their lessons in short concise sentences, sometimes in
schemes and figures, and sometimes without them, as we see in the
Proverbs of Solomon, many of which are plain moral sayings without any
figure or comparison. Of this sort is that which is here introduced to
our attention; it is a moral theme not much veiled with figures, nor so
concise as proverbs usually are, but which contains the most instructive
lessons on the vanity of the prosperity of all wicked men. See Hammond
*in loco*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc09014.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xv.i-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span> This word is derived from an Arabic root
which signifies *to bend a thing aside*, *to tie knots*, *etc*.; and
thus it means *an intricate species of composition*, *a riddle* It is
used for *a riddle* in the story of Samson, <span
id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>[Judg. 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>; and
for *difficult questions*, as those put by the Queen of Sheba to
Solomon, <span id="xv.i-p19.3"></span>[1Ki
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p19.3"></span>. See
Lowth’s Lectures on Sacred Poetry, volume1, p. 78. Accordingly, it is
here rendered by the Septuagint, “<span id="xv.i-p19.4"></span>τὸ
πρόβλημά μου,” “my problem or difficult question,” which is not only
asked in the fifth verse, but also answered in the subsequent verses.
The word, however, is also applied to poetical compositions of a highly
adorned and finished style, in which nothing enigmatical appears, but
which contain weighty and important matter set forth in the parabolic
style to secure the reader’s or the hearer’s attention, <span
id="xv.i-p19.5"></span>[Ps 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span
id="xv.i-p19.5"></span>. See Gesenius’ Lexicon. In the subject-matter of
this psalm there does not appear to be any thing peculiarly intricate.
It treats of the vanity of riches, and the folly of those who trust in
them; their insufficiency to save from the power of death; and the final
triumph of all the suffering people of God over their rich and haughty
persecutors. This is indeed a dark theme to the worldly-minded man; but
it contains nothing occult or mysterious to those who are taught of God.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc09014.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span> Lowth reads, “The wickedness of those who
*lie in wait for me*, or endeavor to *supplant me*;” and Horsley, “When
the iniquity of *those who plot against me* environs me.” The original
word is <span id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>עקבי, *akabey*, which Dr Adam
Clarke thinks is to be considered as the contracted plural of <span
id="xv.ii-p6.2"></span>עקבים, *akabim*, *supplanters*, from <span
id="xv.ii-p6.3"></span>עקב, *akab*, *to supplant*, *to defraud* It is
literally, “My Jacobs;” that is, those who would act towards me as Jacob
acted towards Esau. See <span id="xv.ii-p6.4"></span>[Ge
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036)<span id="xv.ii-p6.4"></span>,
and <span id="xv.ii-p6.5"></span>[Jer.
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p6.5"></span>. The
Syriac and Arabic versions read it, “My enemies.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc09014.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xv.ii-p6.7"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span> *i*.*e*. “To pursue even to the heels.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc09014.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p3.1"></span>C’est, ils
ne pensent a autre chose si non comment ils pourront faire durer leurs
maisons.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, they think of nothing else but how
they shall be able to make their houses continue for ever.”

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc09014.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xv.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span> The reading of the Septuagint is, “<span
id="xv.iii-p7.1"></span>Καὶ οἱ τάφοι αὐτῶν ὀικίαι αὐτῶν εἰς τὸν αἰω̑να.”
“And their sepulchres are their houses for ever.” The Vulgate, Syriac,
and Chaldee, also read “sepulchres.” Kennicott supposes that the authors
of these versions must have read <span id="xv.iii-p7.2"></span>קברם,
*kaberam*, *their graves*, instead of <span
id="xv.iii-p7.3"></span>קרבם, *kirbam*, *their inward part* The text as
it stands admits of a good sense. Some eminent critics, however, are
disposed to think that the reading of the ancient versions is the true
one.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc09014.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xv.iii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span> Some also read the verse thus, “Their grave
is their house for ever, their dwelling-place through all generations,
though their names are celebrated over countries.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc09014.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est, est
cognue n’estre que folie en eux.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, is known to
be only folly in them.”

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc09014.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p4.1"></span>Ou, figure.”
*Fr*. *marg*. “Or, form.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc09014.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span> The words, *shall receive them*, are a
supplement, there being nothing for them in the Latin version nor in the
Hebrew text. They stand for <span id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>*le prendra* in
the French version.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc09014.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xv.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p6.1"></span>C’est,
puissance et domination de la mort.” — *Fr*. *marg*, “That is, the power
and dominion of death.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc09014.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xv.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p10.1"></span>כסל למו is
literally, *folly to them*; *i* *e*., though this their way (the
worldling’s trust in his wealth), seem to them a piece of special
wisdom, yet in the event it proves otherwise; it becomes perfect folly
to them when they come to discern their frustrations.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc09014.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span> This is also the reading of the Septuagint,
“<span id="xv.iv-p13.1"></span>Θάνατος ποιμανεῖ αὐτούς,” “Death shall
feed them as a shepherd,” and of Jerome, “<span
id="xv.iv-p13.2"></span>Mors pascet eos;” and this is the view taken by
Dr Kennicott, Dr Hammond, and Bishop Horsley. Hammond’s explanation of
this clause is as follows. He observes, that the Hebrew word <span
id="xv.iv-p13.3"></span>רעה, *raah*, means to give the sheep pasture, or
to look to them when they are feeding, <span
id="xv.iv-p13.4"></span>[Gen. 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#007),
[Gen. 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032)<span
id="xv.iv-p13.4"></span>; and that this feeding of sheep is very
different from feeding on them. He farther observes, that the word is
frequently used for *ruling* or *governing* “In this place,” says he,
“the metaphor of sheep must needs rule the signification of it. As sheep
are put into a pasture, there to continue together in a common place, so
men are put into <span id="xv.iv-p13.5"></span>שאול, <span
id="xv.iv-p13.6"></span>ἅδης, the state of the dead, mentioned in the
former words, and to that regularly follows — Death <span
id="xv.iv-p13.7"></span>ידעם, \[shall feed them,\] — is as the shepherd
that conducts or leads them into this pasture, those Elysian fields: —
an excellent piece of divine poesy, to signify, how men like sheep, like
beasts, go by flocks and herds out of this life, or more plainly, that
men die as ordinarily and regularly as sheep are led to their pasture.”
Some, however, read, “Death feedeth upon them.” “<span
id="xv.iv-p13.8"></span>רעה signifies not only *to feed*, but *to feed
upon* and lay waste; and thus we render it in <span
id="xv.iv-p13.9"></span>[Mic 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iv-p13.9"></span>, ‘They shall waste Assyria with the sword.’ See
also <span id="xv.iv-p13.10"></span>[Ps
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014)<span id="xv.iv-p13.10"></span>.”
— Appendix to the Notes in Merrick’s version, No. 4, p. 304. This verb
also signifies *to feed upon* in <span id="xv.iv-p13.11"></span>[Isa
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)<span id="xv.iv-p13.11"></span>,
and <span id="xv.iv-p13.12"></span>[Ho
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002)<span id="xv.iv-p13.12"></span>.
Fry’s translation is,

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span>“They are set apart like sheep for Hades;  
Death feedeth upon them, and they go down to them;”

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span>and he thinks that the idea here is, that
Death and Hades are the two monsters for whose consumption the flock is
destined. This is a personification which we frequently meet with in the
Latin poets. Cerberus is often represented by them as feasting on the
bodies of men in the grave; Thus, notwithstanding the strong desires
which worldly men have for immortality in this world, they shall become
the victims of the grave, and the prey of death.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc09014.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xv.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span> *In the morning*, that is, says Dathe, *in
the time of judgment*. He thinks there is here an allusion to the usual
time of holding courts of justice, which was in the morning. See <span
id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ps 73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014)<span
id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>, and 101:8; and <span
id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>[Jer
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012)<span id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc09014.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xv.iv-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span> The LXX. read, <span
id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>‘Η βοήθεια αὐτῶν, *their help*, conceiving the
word <span id="xv.iv-p17.2"></span>צותם, *tsuram*, to be derived from
<span id="xv.iv-p17.3"></span>צור, *tsur*, *a rock*, and metaphorically,
*confidence*, *aid* Ainsworth reads, “their form,” *their figure*,
*shape*, or *image*, *with all their beauty and proportion*; or “their
rock,” that is, *their strength* “The Hebrew *tsur*,” says he, “is
usually *a rock*; here it seemeth to be all one with *tsurah*, *a form*
or *figure*; and this is confirmed by the writing, for though by the
vowels and reading it is *tsur*, yet, by the letters, it is, *tsir*,
which is an *image*, <span id="xv.iv-p17.4"></span>[Isa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016)<span id="xv.iv-p17.4"></span>.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc09014.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p20"></span> *Soul* is not here to be understood of the
intellectual immaterial spirit. The Hebrew word <span
id="xv.iv-p20.2"></span>נפשי, *naphshi*, *my soul*, is often put in the
Old Testament Scriptures for the personal pronoun; and thus it means
*my* *person*, *myself*, *me*. — See Appendix., Note on <span
id="xv.iv-p20.4"></span>[Psalm
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span id="xv.iv-p20.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc09014.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span> French and Skinner read, “Yea, though men
praise thee when thou indulgest thyself;” and they explain *men* to mean
“parasites and flatterers,” and “indulgest thyself” as meaning,
“indulgest thyself in unrestrained luxury.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc09014.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span> “Heb. ‘take of all;’ that is, ought of all
that he hath. ‘For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain
that we can carry nothing out.’” — *Ainsworth*.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc09014.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span> That is, themselves. — See note, p. 252.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc09014.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p17"></span> “There is here a change,” says Walford,
“from the oblique to the direct form of speech, by which the writer
turns himself to the rich man, who prospers in the world, and says to
him, Though you now count yourself happy, and meet with applause from
persons of a character resembling your own, yet you shall go to the
abode of your fathers, who will never behold the light.” He reads the
19th verse, “Thou shalt go to the abode of thy fathers, who will never
behold the light.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc09014.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p20"></span> Horsley reads, “To all eternity they shall
not see light;” “that light,” says he, “which emphatically deserves the
name — that light, of which created light is but a faint image; the
light of God’s glory. He shall have no share in the beatific vision.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc09014.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p23"></span> This is the translation which is given of
these lines in the French version.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc09014.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p26"></span> This verse is precisely the same as the
12th, with the exception of one word. Instead of <span
id="xv.v-p26.1"></span>בל-ילין, *bal-yalin*, *will not lodge*, in the
12th verse, we have here <span id="xv.v-p26.2"></span>ולא יבין, *velo
yabin*, *and will not understand* But the Septuagint and Syriac versions
read in the 12th verse as here, “understands not.” Houbigant thinks that
this is the true reading of the 12th verse. “The very repetition,” says
he, “proves that it is to be so read. Besides, as the Psalmist
immediately subjoins, *They are like brute creatures*, it is
sufficiently evident that the reason why men are said to be like the
beasts is, because they do not *understand*, and not because *they do
not continue in honor*, since *honor* does not belong to the brute
creation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 50](cc09015)
