[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09030)  [Next](cc09032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxii"></span>

<span id="xxxii-p1"></span>PSALM 66

<span id="xxxii-p2"></span>There may have been one deliverance in
particular, which the Psalmist celebrates here in the name of the
Church, but he includes the many and various mercies which God had all
along conferred upon his chosen people. While he takes notice of the
divine interposition in their behalf, in a crisis of great mercy and
distress, he suggests it as matter of comfort under trial, that their
subjection to the tyranny of their enemies had been designed to prove
them as silver in the furnace. At the close, he would appear to speak of
himself individually, and adduces it as a proof of his integrity, that
God had heard him, for God does not grant acceptance to the wicked.

<span id="xxxii-p3"></span>To the chief musician, the Song of a Psalm.
 <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464)

<span id="xxxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
66:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)<span id="xxxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Shout unto God, all the earth.
**2**. Sing the honor of his name: make glorious his praise.  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) **3**. Say unto God, How terrible art
thou in thy works! in the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies lie
\[or feign submission\] unto thee. **4**. All the earth shall worship
thee, and they shall sing unto thee; they shall sing thy name. Selah.

<span id="xxxii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.i-p5"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Shout unto God, all the earth* The
psalm begins with this general declaration, which is afterwards reduced
to particulars.  <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) He addresses
himself to the whole world, and from this it would seem evident, that he
predicts the extent to which the kingdom of God should reach at the
coming of Christ. In the second verse the call is repeated with
increasing vehemency, to stir up to the praises of God, such as might
otherwise be remiss in the service. *To sing the honor of his name,* is
an expression sufficiently obvious; meaning, that we should extol his
sacred name in a manner suitable to its dignity, so that it may obtain
its due and deserved adoration. But the clause which follows is rather
ambiguous. Some think that it conveys a repetition of the same idea
contained in other words, and read, *set forth the glory of his praise.*
 <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) I prefer taking the Hebrew word
signifying *praise* to be in the accusative case; rendering the words
literally, *make a glory his praise.* And by this I understand him to
mean, not as some do, that we should glory exclusively in his praises,
 <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) but simply, that we highly
exalt his praises, that they may be glorious. The Psalmist is not
satisfied with our declaring them moderately, and insists that we should
celebrate his goodness in some measure proportionably to its excellence.

<span id="xxxii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Say unto God, How terrible art
thou in thy works!* Here he proceeds to state the grounds why he would
have us to praise God. Many content themselves with coldly descanting to
others of his praises, but with the view of awakening and more deeply
impressing our hearts, he directs us to address ourselves immediately to
God. It is when we hold converse with him apart, and with no human eye
to witness us, that we feel the vanity of hypocrisy, and will be likely
to utter only what we have well and seriously meditated in our hearts.
Nothing tends more to beget a reverential awe of God upon our spirits
than sisting ourselves in his presence. What the Psalmist adds is fitted
and designed to produce the same feeling, *that through the greatness of
God’s power, his enemies feign submission to him* Are they who would
perversely and obstinately revolt from his service, forced to humble
themselves before him, whether they will it or not, how much more, then,
ought his own children to serve him, who are invited into his presence,
by the accents of tenderness, instead of being reduced to subjection by
terror? There is an implied contrast drawn between the voluntary homage
which they yield, as attracted by the sweet influences of grace, and
that slavish obedience which is wrung reluctantly from the unbeliever.
The Hebrew word here used for *to lie,* signifies to yield such a
submission as is constrained, and not free or cordial, as <span
id="xxxii.i-p11.1"></span>[Ps
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)<span id="xxxii.i-p11.1"></span>.
Neither the words nor the scope favor the other senses which have been
suggested, as, that his enemies would acknowledge themselves to have
been deceived in their hopes, or that they would deny having ever
intended hostilities against him. There are many ways in which
hypocrites may *lie,* but nothing more is meant by the Psalmist here,
than that the power of God is such as to force them into a reluctant
subjection.

<span id="xxxii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p13"></span>**4.** *All the earth shall worship thee.*
The Psalmist had good reason for insisting upon this one point again and
again. Though all tongues were tuned to the praise of God, they never
could adequately extol it; and yet such are the negligence and the
perversity of men, that they will scarcely lift one feeble note in
celebration of a theme which should command their united strength and
might. We have another prediction here, of a time being to come when God
would be worshipped, not only by the Jews, a small section of the human
family, but by all the nations which would be eventually brought under
his government. And we are not to consider that he refers to such a
worship as would be constrained, and only not withheld, because
resistance might be dangerous, but to the sincere homage of the heart —
*they shall sing unto thee! they shall sing unto thy name* Praise is the
best of all sacrifices, (as we are told, <span
id="xxxii.i-p13.1"></span>[Ps. 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="xxxii.i-p13.1"></span>)
and the true evidence of godliness.  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469)

<span id="xxxii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
66:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005)<span id="xxxii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. Come and see the works of God; he
is terrible in his dealing towards the children of men. **6**. He turned
the sea into dry land; they went through the flood on foot; there did we
rejoice in him. **7.** He ruleth by his power over the world; his eyes
behold the nations; rebels  <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470)
shall not exalt themselves. **8**. Bless our God;  <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) O ye people! and resound the voice of
his praise. **9**. Who hath brought our souls unto life, and hath not
suffered our feet to fall.

<span id="xxxii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *Come and see the works of God* An
indirect censure is here passed upon that almost universal
thoughtlessness which leads men to neglect the praises of God. Why is it
that they so blindly overlook the operations of his hand, but just
because they never direct their attention seriously to them? We need to
be aroused upon this subject. The words before us may receive some
explanation by referring to a parallel passage, <span
id="xxxii.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)<span id="xxxii.ii-p7.1"></span>.
But the great scope of them is this, that the Psalmist would withdraw
men from the vain or positively sinful and pernicious pursuits in which
they are engaged, and direct their thoughts to the works of God. To this
he exhorts them, chiding their backwardness and negligence. The
expression, *Come and see,* intimates that what they blindly overlooked
was open to observation; for were it otherwise with the works of God,
this language would be inappropriate. He next points out what those
works of God are to which he would have our attention directed; in
general he would have us look to the method in which God governs the
human family. This experimental or practical kind of knowledge, if I
might so call it, is that which makes the deepest impression.  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) We find, accordingly, that Paul,
(<span id="xxxii.ii-p8.3"></span>[Ac
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span id="xxxii.ii-p8.3"></span>)
after speaking of the power of God in general, brings his subject to
bear upon this one particular point, and calls upon us to descend into
ourselves if we would discover the proofs of a present God. The last
clause of the fifth verse I would not interpret with some as meaning
that God was *terrible above the children of men* — superior to them in
majesty — but rather that *he is terrible towards them,* evincing an
extraordinary providence in their defense and preservation, as we have
seen noticed, <span id="xxxii.ii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)<span id="xxxii.ii-p8.4"></span>.
Men need look no further, therefore, than themselves, in order to
discover the best grounds for reverencing and fearing God. The Psalmist
passes next from the more general point of his providence towards
mankind at large, to his special care over his own Church, adverting to
what he had done for the redemption of his chosen people. What he states
here must be considered as only one illustration of many which he might
have touched upon, and as intended to remind God’s people of the
infinite variety of benefits with which their first and great
deliverance had been followed up and confirmed. This appears obvious
from what he adds, *there we rejoiced in him* It is impossible that the
joy of that deliverance could have extended to him or any of the
descendants of the ancient Israelites, unless it had partaken the nature
of a pledge and illustration of the love of God to the Church generally.
Upon that event he showed himself to be the everlasting Savior of his
people; so that it proved a common source of joy to all the righteous.

<span id="xxxii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p10"></span>**7.** *He ruleth by his power over the
world* The Hebrew word <span id="xxxii.ii-p10.1"></span>עולם, *olam,*
which I have translated *the world,* signifies occasionally *an age,* or
*eternity;*  <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) but the first sense
seems to agree best with the context, and the meaning of the words is,
that God is endued with the power necessary for wielding the government
of the world. What follows agrees with this, *that his eyes behold the
nations* Under the law, Judea was the proper seat of his kingdom; but
his providence always extended to the world at large; and the special
favor shown to the posterity of Abraham, in consideration of the
covenant, did not prevent him from extending an eye of providential
consideration to the surrounding nations. As an evidence of his care
reaching to the different countries round, he takes notice of the
judgments which God executed upon the wicked and the ungodly. He proves
that there was no part of the human family which God overlooked, by
referring to the fact of the punishment of evil-doers. There may be much
in the Divine administration of the world calculated to perplex our
conclusions; but there are always some tokens to be seen of his
judgments, and these sufficiently clear to strike the eye of an acute
and attentive observer.

<span id="xxxii.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p13"></span>**8** *Bless our God, O ye people!*
Although calling upon all, without exception, to praise God, he refers
particularly to some Divine interposition in behalf of the Church. He
would seem to hint that the Gentiles were destined, at a future period,
to share the favor now exclusively enjoyed by God’s chosen people. In
the meantime, he reminds them of the signal and memorable nature of the
deliverance granted, by calling upon them to spread abroad the fame of
it. Though he speaks of the Jewish people as having been *brought unto
life,* (an expression intended to denote deliverance of a more than
ordinary kind,) this means that they had been preserved from approaching
danger rather than recovered from a calamity which had actually
overtaken them, It is said that *their feet had not been suffered to
fall,* which implies, that, through seasonable help which they had
received, they had not fallen, but stood firm. The Psalmist, however,
does not take occasion, from the evil having been anticipated and
averted, to undervalue it. As they had been preserved safe by an
interposition of Divine goodness, he speaks of this as tantamount to
having been brought or restored to life.

<span id="xxxii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
66:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p2"></span>**10**. For thou, O God! hast proved us,
thou hast tried us as silver is tried. **11**. Thou broughtest us into
the net, thou laidest restraint upon our loins. **12**. Thou hast made
man to ride over our heads,  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) we
have come into fire and water, and thou hast brought us into a fruitful
place.  <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475)

<span id="xxxii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p7"></span>**10** *For thou, O God! hast proved us*
We may read, *Though thou, O God! etc.,* and then the passage comes in
as a qualification of what went before, and is brought forward by the
Psalmist to enhance the goodness of God, who had delivered them from
such severe calamities. But there is another object which I consider him
to have in view, and this is the alleviation of the grief of God’s
people, by setting before them the comfort suggested by the words which
follow. When visited with affliction, it is of great importance that we
should consider it as coming from God, and as expressly intended for our
good. It is in reference to this that the Psalmist speaks of their
having been *proved and tried.* At the same time, while he adverts to
God’s trying his children with the view of purging away their sin, as
dross is expelled from the silver by fire, he would intimate, also, that
trial had been made of their patience. The figure implies that their
probation had been severe; for silver is cast repeatedly into the
furnace. They express themselves thankful to God, that, while proved
with affliction, they had not been destroyed by it; but that their
affliction was both varied and very severe, appears not only from the
metaphor, but from the whole context, where they speak of having been
cast into the net, being reduced to straits, men riding over their
heads, and of being brought through shipwreck and conflagration.  <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) The expression, *laying a restraint*
\[or *chain*\] *upon their loins,* is introduced as being stronger than
the one which goes before. It was not a net of thread which had been
thrown over them, but rather they had been bound down with hard and
insolvable fetters. The expression which follows refers to men who had
shamefully tyrannised over them, and ridden them down as cattle. By
*fire* and *water* are evidently meant complicated afflictions; and it
is intimated that God had exercised his people with every form of
calamity. They are the two elements which contribute more than any other
to sustain human life, but are equally powerful for the destruction of
it. It is noticeable, that the Psalmist speaks of all the cruelties
which they had most unjustly suffered from the hands of their enemies,
as an infliction of Divine punishment; and would guard the Lord’s people
against imagining that God was ignorant of what they had endured, or
distracted by other things from giving attention to it. In their
condition, as here described, we have that of the Church generally
represented to us; and this, that when subjected to vicissitudes, and
cast out of the fire into the water, by a succession of trials, there
may at last be felt to be nothing new or strange in the event to strike
us with alarm. The Hebrew word <span id="xxxii.iii-p8.8"></span>רויה,
*revayah,* which I have rendered *fruitful place,* means literally *a
well-watered land.* Here it is taken metaphorically for a condition of
prosperity, the people of God being represented as brought into a
pleasant and fertile place, where there is abundance of pasturage. The
truth conveyed is, that God, although he visit his children with
temporary chastisements of a severe description, will ultimately crown
them with joy and prosperity. It is a mistake to suppose that the
allusion is entirely to their being settled in the land of Canaan,
 <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) for the psalm has not merely
reference to the troubles which they underwent in the wilderness, but to
the whole series of distresses to which they were subjected at the
different periods of their history.

<span id="xxxii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
66:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013)<span
id="xxxii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p2"></span>**13**. I will come into thy house with
burnt-offerings; I will pay thee my vows, **14**. Which my lips have
uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble. **15**. I will
offer unto thee burnt-sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams;
 <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) I will bring bullocks, with
goats. Selah. **16**. Come, hear, I will tell to all them that fear God,
what he hath done for my soul.

<span id="xxxii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxxii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p8"></span>**13** *I will come into thy house with
burnt offerings* Hitherto the Psalmist has spoken in the name of the
people at large. Now he emphatically gives expression to his own private
feelings, and calls upon them, by his example, to engage individually in
the exercises of religion, it being impossible that there should be any
hearty common consent unless each entered seriously upon the service of
thanksgiving for himself and apart. We are taught that when God at any
time succours us in our adversity, we do an injustice to his name if we
forget to celebrate our deliverances with solemn acknowledgements. More
is spoken of in this passage than thanksgiving. He speaks of vows having
been contracted by him in his affliction, and these evidenced the
constancy of his faith. The exhortation of the Apostle James is worthy
of our special notice —

<span id="xxxii.iv-p9"></span>“Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.
Is any merry?  
let him sing psalms.” (<span id="xxxii.iv-p9.2"></span>[Jas
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)<span id="xxxii.iv-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="xxxii.iv-p10"></span>How many are there who lavish their
hypocritical praises upon God in the career of their good fortune, while
they are no sooner reduced to straits than the fervor of their love is
damped, or gives place to the violence of fretfulness and impatience.
The best evidence of true piety is when we sigh to God under the
pressure of our afflictions, and show, by our prayers, a holy
perseverance in faith and patience; while afterwards we come forward
with the expression of our gratitude. The words, *which my lips have
uttered,* are not an unmeaning addition, but imply that he had never
allowed himself to be so far overcome by grief as not to throw his
desires into the express form of petition, declaring that he cast
himself for safety into the hands of God. On the subject of vows, I may
just shortly repeat the remarks which have been given at greater length
elsewhere. First, the holy fathers never vowed anything to God but what
they knew to be sanctioned by his approval. Secondly, their sole end in
vowing was to evidence their gratitude. The Papists, therefore, can find
no warrant, from their example, for the rash and impious vows which they
practice. They obtrude upon God whatever chances to come first into
their lips; the end which they propose to themselves is the farthest
removed from the right one; and with devilish presumption they engage
themselves to things which are not allowed them.

<span id="xxxii.iv-p11"></span><span id="xxxii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p12"></span>**15** *I will offer unto thee
burnt-sacrifices of fatlings.* We must suppose the speaker to be either
David or one of the more considerable men of the nation, for none in
humbler circumstances could have offered rich sacrifices of this kind.
It is probable that David was the author of the psalm, and here he
signifies his intention to show a kingly liberality in his offerings.
The reason why God ordered victims to be offered as an expression of
thanksgiving was, as is well known, to teach the people that their
praises were polluted by sin, and needed to be sanctified from without.
However we might propose to ourselves to praise the name of God, we
could only profane it with our impure lips, had not Christ once offered
himself up a sacrifice, to sanctify both us and our services. (<span
id="xxxii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Heb
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)<span id="xxxii.iv-p12.1"></span>)
It is through him, as we learn from the apostle, that our praises are
accepted. The Psalmist, by way of commendation of his burnt-offering,
speaks of its incense or sweet savor; for although in themselves vile
and loathsome, yet the rams and other victims, so far as they were
figures of Christ, sent up a sweet savor unto God.  <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) Now that the shadows of the Law have
been abolished, attentionis called to the true spiritual service. What
this consists in, is more clearly brought under our notice in the verse
which follows, where the Psalmist tells us, that he would spread abroad
the fame of the benefits which he had received from God. Such was the
end designed, even in the outward ceremonies under the Law, apart from
which they could only be considered as an empty show. It was this — the
fact, that they set forth the praises of the divine goodness — which
formed the very season of the sacrifices, preserving them from
insipidity. In calling, as he does, upon all *the fearers of the Lord,*
the Psalmist teaches us, that if we duly feel the goodness of God, we
will be inflamed with a desire to publish it abroad, that others may
have their faith and hope confirmed, by what they hear of it, as well as
join with us in a united song of praise. He addresses himself to none
but such as feared the Lord, for they only could appreciate what he had
to say, and it would have been lost labor to communicate it to the
hypocritical and ungodly.

<span id="xxxii.v"></span>

<span id="xxxii.v-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
66:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#017)<span
id="xxxii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.v-p2"></span>**17**. I cried unto him with my mouth, and
have extolled him under \[or with\] my tongue.  <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) **18**. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me. **19**. But truly God hath heard me;
he hath attended to the voice of my prayer. **20**. Blessed be God! who
hath not turned away my prayer, and his mercy from me.

<span id="xxxii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.v-p6"></span><span id="xxxii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.v-p7"></span>**17.** *I cried unto him with my mouth* He
proves that he owed his safety to Divine interposition, from the
circumstance of his having prayed, and in consequence, having sensibly
experienced his kindness. Answers to prayer serve in no small degree to
illustrate the goodness of God; and confirm our faith in it. In saying
that he cried to God with his *mouth* and *tongue,* these are terms
denoting, as we have seen in a previous part of the psalm, the vehemency
and earnestness with which he prayed. Had he not prayed from the heart,
he would have been rejected, but he makes mention of the *tongue* also,
in token of the ardor of his supplications. Some absurdly imagine, that
because the expression *under the tongue* is used, the meaning is *with
the heart* Words are said to come from under the tongue, because they
are formed by the flexion of the tongue, as in that passage,

<span id="xxxii.v-p8"></span>“The poison of asps is under their lips,”
(<span id="xxxii.v-p8.1"></span>[Ps
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003)<span id="xxxii.v-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="xxxii.v-p9"></span>The term *extol* intimates, that we cannot
honor God more in our worship, than by looking upwards to him for
deliverance. The Papists rob him of a chief part of his glory, when they
direct their prayers to the dead or to images, and make such little
account of calling upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="xxxii.v-p10"></span>The Psalmist next lays down the rule,
which must be attended to, if we would pray properly and acceptably;
guarding against that presumptuous exercise which overlooks the
necessity of faith and penitence. We see with what audacity hypocrites
and ungodly men associate themselves with the Lord’s people, in
compliance with the general calls of the word to engage in prayer. To
check this solemn mockery, the Psalmist mentions integrity of heart as
indispensable. I am aware that the words may be considered as an
assertion of his own personal uprightness of conduct, as we find him
frequently vindicating this, by an appeal to the visible and practical
proofs which God had shown of his favor to him; but his main object is
evidently to enforce by the example of his own exercise the common
propriety of drawing near to God with a pure heart. We have a parallel
scripture in <span id="xxxii.v-p10.1"></span>[Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031)<span id="xxxii.v-p10.1"></span>,
“We know that God heareth not sinners.” In one sense, he hears none but
sinners; for we must all conform to the great rule of applying to him
for the remission of our sins. But while believers make an unreserved
confession of guilt before God, by this very thing they cease to be
sinners, for God pardons them in answer to their supplications. We are
not to forget the words of Paul,

<span id="xxxii.v-p11"></span>“Let every one that nameth the name of
Christ depart from iniquity,” — (<span id="xxxii.v-p11.1"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="xxxii.v-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="xxxii.v-p12"></span>Besides, to *regard iniquity in the heart*
does not mean to be conscious of sin — for all the Lord’s people must
see their sins and be grieved for them, and this is rather praiseworthy
than condemnable; — but to be bent upon the practice of iniquity. He
particularly refers to the *heart,* intimating that not only were his
hands clean, in the sense of his being innocent before men, but that he
could appeal to God in proof of his inward integrity. When the heart
does not correspond to the outward conduct, and harbours any secret evil
intent, the fair exterior appearance may deceive men; but it is an
abomination in the sight of God, The Psalmist affirms with emphasis,
that his prayers had been answered, and we ought to draw the inference
that we shall never be disappointed, if we seek God in sincerity.

<span id="xxxii.v-p13"></span><span id="xxxii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.v-p14"></span>**20** *Blessed be God! who hath not
turned away my prayer* He concludes the psalm, as he began it, with
thanksgiving, and gives the reason of his not having met with a repulse;
or, to take the figurative expression which he employs, of God’s not
having *turned away his prayer.* This was, that he had not withdrawn his
mercy. For it is entirely of his free grace that he is propitious, and
that our prayers are not wholly ineffectual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc09031.htm#fr_464) <span
id="xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii-p4"></span> “This psalm is anonymous; nor can we, with
certainty, determine to what time it relates. Venema refers it to the
reign of Hezekiah, and supposes it to celebrate the deliverance which
was effected by the destruction of Sennacherib’s army. Rudinger is of
opinion, that it celebrates the opening of the sacred temple, after the
return from Babylon. It must be owned, that we have nothing but
conjecture to offer on this subject; yet it appears to me that the
latter of these opinions is the most probable.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc09031.htm#fr_465) <span
id="xxxii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, mettez
gloire a sa louan.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, put glory to his praise.”

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc09031.htm#fr_466) <span
id="xxxii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxii.i-p7.1"></span>Generalis
est praefatio, quam mox sequentur hypotheses.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxxii.i-p7.2"></span>C’est une preface generale, dont les
applications speciales suivent incontinent apres.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc09031.htm#fr_467) <span
id="xxxii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p8"></span> Hammond’s objection to this is, that if
<span id="xxxii.i-p8.1"></span>כבור, *glory*, were in the construct
state, governing the noun which follows, and giving this reading, *the
glory of his*, *praise*, the vowel should be changed from *kamets*, to
*segol*

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc09031.htm#fr_468) <span
id="xxxii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p9"></span> This is Aben Ezra’s view. He would read,
“Make *your* glory his praise;” that is, let it be your glory to praise
him.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc09031.htm#fr_469) <span
id="xxxii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xxxii.i-p14.1"></span>Est enim
hoc praecipuum laudis sacrificium, ut habetur, Psalmo 50:14, 23, ac
verum etiam testimonium pietatis. — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxxii.i-p14.2"></span>Car c’est le principal sacrifice, que le
sacrifice de louange, etc., et aussi le vray tesmoignage de piete.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc09031.htm#fr_470) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p3"></span> <span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.1"></span>*Defectores* — *Lat* <span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.2"></span>*Apostats* — *Fr* The original word is <span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.3"></span>הסוררים, *hassorerim*, from <span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.4"></span>סור, *sur*, *to turn aside*

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc09031.htm#fr_471) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p4"></span> “On this Theodoret remarks, that when men
bless God they offer him words only; but when God blesses man, it is not
in word only, but in deed; an abundance of good things always
accompanying the benediction.” — *Cresswell*

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc09031.htm#fr_472) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xxxii.ii-p8.1"></span>Haec
enim experimentalis (ut ita loquar) notitia magis afficit.” — *Lat*.
“<span id="xxxii.ii-p8.2"></span>Car ceste cognoissance d’experience et
de prattique esmeut d’avantage.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc09031.htm#fr_473) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p11"></span> Our English version renders the word in
this last sense. Hammond, with Calvin, prefers reading, “over the
world.” “That <span id="xxxii.ii-p11.1"></span>עולם,” says he, “<span
id="xxxii.ii-p11.2"></span>ἄιὼν, as the English *age*, signifies not
only *time* and *duration*, but also the *men* that live in any *time*,
there is no question. And then <span id="xxxii.ii-p11.3"></span>מושל
עולם, must here most properly be rendered *ruling the world*, or *over
the world*; and so the Chaldee certainly understood, who read, ‘who
exerciseth dominion over the world;’ and so I suppose the LXX. their
‘<span id="xxxii.ii-p11.4"></span>δεσπόξουτι τοῦ ἀιῶνος,’ ‘having
dominion over the world,’ doth import.” The Vulgate, in this instance
not following the Septuagint, has “<span id="xxxii.ii-p11.5"></span>in
aeternum,” “for ever.”

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc09031.htm#fr_474) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p3"></span> *To ride over*; signifies to insult or
tyrannise over. But here the image may be taken from the trampling of
war-horses in the day of battle. The cavalry, in the field of battle,
pay no regard to the fallen, the dying, and the dead, but tread
promiscuously upon all that come in their way, “Thou hast permitted us,”
says Dr Adam Clarke, “to fall under the dominion of our enemies, who
have treated us as broken infantry are when the cavalry dashes among
their disordered ranks, treading all under their horses’ feet.”

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc09031.htm#fr_475) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxxii.iii-p4.1"></span>In
planitiem.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxxii.iii-p4.2"></span>En lieu
plantureux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc09031.htm#fr_476) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.1"></span>Per
naufragium et incendium transiisse.” The French version reads, “<span
id="xxxii.iii-p8.2"></span>Par l’eau et par le feu;” but it is important
to retain the original more closely, as giving what Calvin considered to
be the sense of the words in the text. Fire and water, the one of which
elements consumes, while the other suffocates, is a proverbial
expression, signifying, as our author afterwards states, extreme danger
and complicated calamities. “When thou passest through the *waters*, I
will be with thee; when thou walkest through the *fire*, thou shalt not
be burnt,” <span id="xxxii.iii-p8.3"></span>[Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002)<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.3"></span>.
See also <span id="xxxii.iii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.4"></span>;
<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.5"></span>[Ezek.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007)<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.5"></span>;
<span id="xxxii.iii-p8.6"></span>[Nu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#023)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p8.6"></span>. Those things are said to come into or to
pass through the fire, which abide the same, without being consumed; and
which, like metals, lose only thereby their dross.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[478](cc09031.htm#fr_477) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p8.9"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p9"></span> Cresswell takes this view. His note on
the place is, “‘*Into* a wealthy place,’ literally *into* an irriguous
region, (comp. <span id="xxxii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Jud
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#015)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p9.1"></span>,) *i*.*e*., into a fertile country, a land
of abundance, the promised land: comp. <span
id="xxxii.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ex
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008)<span id="xxxii.iii-p9.2"></span>.”

<span id="fn_478"></span>[479](cc09031.htm#fr_478) <span
id="xxxii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p3"></span> Here Calvin, as well as our English
Bible, joins *incense* with *rams*, appearing to mean by *incense*,
offering by fire, the smoke produced by the sacrifice. But the burning
of incense was a distinct offering from that of animal sacrifices; and
therefore many critics read the verse so as to make *incense* a distinct
offering. Thus Horsley, altering the punctuation, translates,

<span id="xxxii.iv-p4"></span>“Offerings of fatlings I will offer unto
thee, with incense;  
“I will sacrifice rams, bullocks, and full-grown goats.”

<span id="xxxii.iv-p5"></span>This, we think, gives an improved view of
the passage. It may be here observed, that the Hebrews were not allowed
to sacrifice other animals than these three kinds, rams, bullocks, and
goats.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[480](cc09031.htm#fr_479) <span
id="xxxii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xxxii.iv-p13.1"></span>Le
Prophere loue yci le perfum de son holocauste, combien qu’il n’en peust
monter au ciel qu’ une odeur puante et infecte: mais il faut noter que
les beliers et autres bestes qu’on sacrifioit flairoyent bon devant
Dieu, entant que c’estoyent figures de Iesus Christ.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[481](cc09031.htm#fr_480) <span
id="xxxii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.v-p3"></span> In the original, the prefix <span
id="xxxii.v-p3.1"></span>ב, *beth*, for *with* is omitted, but it is
evidently understood. The reading is simply <span
id="xxxii.v-p3.2"></span>פי, *my mouth*, for <span
id="xxxii.v-p3.3"></span>בפי, *bephi*, *with my mouth* It is not
uncommon in Hebrew for some word or phrase to be omitted, which must be
supplied by the reader, in order to complete the regular or full
construction. Thus in <span id="xxxii.v-p3.4"></span>[Ps
114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008)<span id="xxxii.v-p3.4"></span>,
to the words <span id="xxxii.v-p3.5"></span>אגם-מים, *agam-main*, *a
pool of waters*, the letter <span id="xxxii.v-p3.6"></span>ל, *lamed*,
is to be supplied, <span id="xxxii.v-p3.7"></span>לאגם, *laagam*, *into*
a pool of, etc.

<span id="xxxii.v-p4"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Psalms 36-66](cc09032)
