[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste04)  [Next](ste06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

*A general account of* Noah's Flood; *A computation what quantity of
Water would be necessary for the making of it; that the common Opinion
and Explication of that Flood is not intelligible*.

’TIS now more than Five Thousand years since our World was made, and
though it would be a great pleasure to the mind, to recollect and view
at this distance those first Scenes of Nature: what the face of the
Earth was when

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

fresh and new, and how things differ’d from the state we now find them
in, the speculation is so remote, that it seems to be hopeless, and
beyond the reach of Humane Wit. We are almost the last Posterity of the
first Men, and fain into the dying Age of the World; by what footsteps,
or by what guide, can we trace back our way to those first Ages, and the
first order of things? And yet, methinks, it is reasonable to believe,
that Divine Providence, which sees at once throughout all the Ages of
the World, should not be willing to keep Mankind finally and fatally
ignorant of that part of Nature, and of the Universe, which is properly
their Task and Province to manage and understand. We are the Inhabitants
of the Earth, the Lords and Masters of it; and we are endow’d with
Reason and Understanding; doth it not then properly belong to us to
examine and unfold the works of God in this part of the Universe, which
is fain to our lot, which is our heritage and habitation? And it will be
found, it may be, upon a stricter Enquiry, that in the present form and
constitution of the Earth, there are certain marks and Indications of
its first State; with which if we compare those things that are recorded
in Sacred History, concerning the first Chaos, Paradise, and an
universal Deluge, we may discover, by the help of those Lights, what the
Earth was in its first Original, and what Changes have since succeeded
in it.

And though we shall give a full account of the Origin of the Earth in
this Treatise, yet that which we have propos’d particularly for the
Title and Subject of it, is to give an account of the primæval PARADISE,
and of the universal DELUGE: Those being the two most important things
that are explain’d by the Theory we propose. And I must beg leave in
treating of these two, to change the order, and treat first of the
Deluge, and then of Paradise: For though the State of Paradise doth
precede that of the Flood in Sacred History, and in the nature of the
thing, yet the explication of both will be more sensible, and more
effectual, if we begin with the Deluge; there being more Observations
and Effects, and those better known to us, that may be refer’d to this,
than to the other; and the Deluge being once truly explain’d, we shall
from thence know the form and Quality of the Ante-diluvian Earth. Let us
then proceed to the explication of that great and fatal Inundation,
whose History is well known; and according to Moses, the best of
Historians, in a few words is this--

Sixteen Hundred and odd years after the Earth was made, and inhabited,
it was overflow’d, and destroy’d in a Deluge of water. Not a Deluge that
was National only, or over-run some particular Country or Region, as
*Judea* or *Greece*, or any other, but it overspread the face of the
whole Earth, from Pole to Pole, and from East to West, and that in such
excess, that the Floods over-reacht the Tops of the highest Mountains;
the Rains descending after an unusual manner, and the fountains of the
*Great Deep* being broke open; so as a general destruction and
devastation was brought upon the Earth, and all things in it, Mankind
and other living Creatures; excepting only *Noah* and his Family, who by
a special Providence of God were preserv’d in a certain Ark, or Vessel
made like a Ship, and such kinds of living Creatures as he took in to
him. After these waters had rag’d for some time on the Earth, they began
to lessen and shrink, and the great waves and fluctuations of this
*Deep* or *Abysse*, being quieted by degrees, the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

waters retied into their Chanels and Caverns within the Earth; and the
Mountains and Fields began to appear, and the whole habitable Earth in
that form and shape wherein we now see it. Then the World began again,
and from that little Remnant preserv’d in the Ark, the present race of
Mankind, and of Animals, in the known parts of the Earth, were
propagated. Thus perisht the old World, and the present arose from the
ruines and remains of it.

This is a short story of the greatest thing that ever yet hapned in the
world, the greatest revolution and the greatest change in Nature; and if
we come to reflect seriously upon it, we shall find it extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to give an account of the waters that
compos’d this Deluge, whence they came or whither they went. If it had
been only the Inundation of a Country, or of a Province, or of the
greatest part of a Continent, some proportionable causes perhaps might
have been found out; but a Deluge overflowing the whole Earth, the whole
Circuit and whole Extent of it, burying all in water, even the greatest
Mountains, in any known parts of the Universe, to find water sufficient
for this Effect, as it is generally explained and understood, I think is
impossible. And what we may the better judge of the whole matter, let us
first compute how much water would be requisite for such a Deluge, or to
lay the Earth, consider’d in its present form, and the highest
Mountains, under water. Then let's consider whether such a quantity of
water can be had out of all the stores that we know in Nature: And from
these two we will take our Ground and Rise, and begin to reflect,
whether the World hath not been hitherto mistaken in the common opinion
and explication of the general Deluge.

To discover how much water would be requisite to make this Deluge, we
must first suppose enough to cover the plain surface of the Earth, the
Fields and lower Grounds; then we must heap up so much more upon this as
will reach above the tops of the highest Mountains; so as drawing a
Circle over the tops of the highest Mountains quite round the Earth,
suppose from Pole to Pole, and another to meet it about the middle of
the Earth, all that space or capacity contain’d within these Circles is
to be fill’d up with water. This I confess will make a prodigious mass
of water, and it looks frightfully to the imagination; ’tis huge and
great, but ’tis extravagantly so, as a great Monster: It doth not look
like the work of God or Nature: However let's compute a little more
particularly how much this will amount to, or how many Oceans of water
would be necessary to compose this great Ocean rowling in the Air,
without bounds or banks.

If all the Mountains were par’d off the Earth, and so the surface of it
lay even, or in an equal convexity every where with the surface of the
Sea, from this surface of the Sea let us suppose that the height of the
Mountains may be a mile and an half; or that we may not seem at all to
favour our own opinion or calculation, let us take a mile only for the
perpendicular height of the Mountains. Let us on the other side suppose
the Sea to cover half the Earth, as ’tis generally believ’d to do; and
the common depth of it, taking one place with another, to be about a
quarter of a mile or 250 paces. I say, taking one place with another,
for though the middle Chanel of the great Ocean be far deeper, we may
observe, that there is commonly a descent or declivity from the shore to
the middle part of the Chanel,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

so that one comes by degrees into the depth of it; and those shory parts
are generally but some fathoms deep. Besides, in arms of the Sea, in
Straits and among Islands, there is commonly no great depth, and some
places are plain shallows. So as upon a moderate computation, one place
compar’d with another, we may take a quarter of a mile, or about an
hundred fathoms, for the common measure of the depth of the Sea, if it
were cast into a Chanel of an equal depth every where. This being
suppos’d, there would need four Oceans to lie upon this Ocean, to raise
it up to the top of the Mountains, or so high as the waters of the
Deluge rise; then four Oceans more to lie upon the Land, that the water
there might swell to the same height; which together make eight Oceans
for the proportion of the water requir’d in the Deluge.

’Tis true, there would not be altogether so much water requir’d for the
Land as for the Sea, to raise them to an equal height; because Mountains
and Hills would fill up part of that space upon the Land, and so make
less water requisite. But to compensate this, and confirm our
computation, we must consider in the first place, that we have taken a
much less height of the Mountains than is requisite, if we respect the
Mediterraneous Mountains, or those that are at a great distance from the
Sea; For their height above the surface of the Sea, computing the
declivity of the Land all along from the Mountains to the Sea-side (and
that there is such a declivity is manifest from the course and descent
of the Rivers) is far greater than the proportion we have taken: For the
height of Mountains is usually taken from the foot of them, or from the
next plain, which if it be far from the Sea, we may reasonably allow as
much for the declension of the Land from that place to the Sea, as for
the immediate height of the Mountain; So, for instance, the Mountains of
the Moon in *Africa*, whence the *Nile* flows, and after a long course
falls into the Mediterranean Sea by *Egypt*, are so much higher than the
surface of that Sea, first, as the Ascent of the Land is from the Sea to
the foot of the Mountains, and then as the height of the Mountains is
from the bottom to the top: For both these are to be computed when you
measure the height of a Mountain, or of a mountainous Land, in respect
of the Sea: And the height of Mountains to the Sea being thus computed,
there would be need of six or eight Oceans to raise the Sea alone as
high as the highest In-land Mountains; And this is more than enough to
compensate the less quantity of water that would be requisite upon the
Land. Besides, we must consider the Regions of the Air upwards to be
more capacious than a Region of the same thickness in or near the Earth,
so as if an Ocean pour’d upon the surface of the dry Land, supposing it
were all smooth, would rise to the height of half a quarter of a mile
every where; the like quantity of water pour’d again at the height of
the Mountains, would not have altogether the same effect, or would not
there raise the mass half a quarter of a mile higher; for the surfaces
of a Globe, the farther they are from their Center, are the greater; and
so accordingly the Regions that belong to them. And, lastly, we must
consider that there are some Countries or Valleys very low, and also
many Caverns or Cavities within the Earth, all which in this case were
to be first fill’d with water. These things being compar’d and
estimated, we shall find that notwithstanding the room that Hills and
Mountains take up on

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the dry Land, there would be at least eight Oceans requir’d, or a
quantity of water eight times as great as the Ocean, to bring an
universal Deluge upon the Earth, as that Deluge is ordinarily understood
and explained.

The proportion of water for the Deluge being thus stated, the next thing
to be done, is to enquire where this water is to be found; if any part
of the Sublunary World will afford us so much: Eight Oceans floating in
the Air, make a great bulk of water, I do not know what possible Sources
to draw it from. There are the Clouds above, and the Deeps below, and in
the bowels of the Earth; and these are all the stores we have for water;
and *Moses* directs us to no other for the causes of the Deluge. *The
Fountains* (he saith) *of the great Abysse were broken up, or burst
asunder*, and the Rain descended for forty days, the *Cataracts* or
*Floodgates* of Heaven being open’d. And in these two, no doubt, are
contain’d the causes of the great Deluge, as according to *Moses*, so
also according to reason and necessity; for our World affords no other
treasures of water. Let us therefore consider how much this Rain of
forty days might amount to, and how much might flow out of the Abysse,
that so we may judge whether these two in conjunction would make up the
Eight Oceans which we want.

As for the Rains, they would not afford us one Ocean, nor half an Ocean,
nor the tenth part of an Ocean, if we may trust to the Observations made
by others concerning the quantity of water that falls in Rain. <span
class="margnote">*Cog. Phys. Mech.*, p. 221.</span>*Mersennus* gives us
this account of it. "It appears by our Observations, that a Cubical
Vessel of Brass, whereof we made use, is fill’d an inch and an half in
half an hours time; but because that sucks up nothing of the moisture as
the Earth doth, let us take an inch for half an hours Rain; whence it
follows, that in the space of 40 days and nights Rain, <span
class="margnote">*At* 4 *feet in* 24 *hours*.</span>the waters in the
Deluge would rise 160 feet, if the Rains were constant and equal to
ours, and that it rain’d at once throughout the face of the whole
Earth." But the Rain of the Deluge, saith he, should have been 90 times
greater than this, to cover, for instance, the Mountains of *Armenia*,
or to reach 15 Cubits above them. So that according to his computation,
the 40 days Rain would supply little more than the hundredth part of the
water requisite to make the Deluge. ’Tis true, he takes the heighth of
the Mountains higher than we do; but, however, if you temper the
Calculation on all sides as much as you please, the water that came by
this Rain would be a very inconsiderable part of what was necessary for
a Deluge. If it rain’d 40 days and 40 nights throughout the face of the
whole Earth, in the Northern and Southern Hemisphere all at once, it
might be sufficient to lay all the lower grounds under water, but it
would signifie very little as to the overflowing of the Mountains. <span
class="margnote">*Auct. cat. in* Gen. 7. 3.</span>Whence another Author
upon the same occasion hath this passage. "If the Deluge had been made
by Rains only, there would not have needed 40 days, but 40 years Rain to
have brought it to pass." And if we should suppose the whole middle
Region condens’d into water, it would not at all have been sufficient
for this effect, according to that proportion some make betwixt Air and
Water; for they say, Air turn’d into Water takes up a hundred times less
room than it did before. The truth is, we may reasonably suppose, that
all the vapours of the middle Region were turn’d into water in this 40
days and 40 nights Rain, if we admit, that this Rain was throughout the
whole

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Earth at once, in either Hemisphere, in every
Zone, in every Climate, in every Country, in every Province, in every
Field; and yet we see what a small proportion all this would amount to.

Having done then with these Superiour Regions, we are next to examine
the Inferiour, and the treasures of water that may be had there. *Moses*
tells us, that the Fountains of the great Abysse were broke open, or
*clove asunder*, as the word there us’d doth imply; and no doubt in this
lay the great mystery of the Deluge, as will appear when it comes to be
rightly understood and explain’d; but we are here to consider what is
generally understood by the *great Abysse*, in the common explication of
the Deluge; and ’tis commonly interpreted either to be the Sea, or
Subterraneous waters hid in the bowels of the Earth: These, they say,
broke forth and rais’d the waters, caus’d by the Rain, to such an
height, that together they overflowed the highest Mountains. But whether
or how this could be, deserves to be a little examin’d.

And in the first place; the Sea is not higher than the Land, as some
have formerly imagin’d; fansying the Sea stood, as it were, upon a heap,
higher than the shore; and at the Deluge a relaxation being made, it
overflow’d the Land. But this conceit is so gross, and so much against
reason and experience, that none I think of late have ventur’d to make
use of it. And yet on the other hand, if the Sea lie in an equal
convexity with the Land, or lower generally than the shore, and much
more than the mid-land, as it is certainly known to do, what could the
Sea contribute to the Deluge? It would keep its Chanel, as it doth now,
and take up the same place. And so also the Subterraneous waters would
lie quiet in their Cells; whatsoever Fountains or passages you suppose,
these would not issue out upon the Earth, for water doth not ascend,
unless by force. But let's imagine then that force us’d and appli’d, and
the waters both of the Sea and Caverns under ground drawn out upon the
surface of the Earth, we shall not be any whit the nearer for this; for
if you take these waters out of their places, those places must be
fill’d again with other waters in the Deluge; so as this turns to no
account upon the whole. If you have two Vessels to fill, and you empty
one to fill the other, you gain nothing by that, there still remains one
Vessel empty; you cannot have these waters both in the Sea and on the
Land, both above ground and under; nor can you suppose the Chanel of the
Sea would stand gaping without water, when all the Earth was overflow’d,
and the tops of the Mountains cover’d. And so for Subterraneous
Cavities, if you suppose the water pumpt out, they would suck it in
again when the Earth came to be laid under water; so that upon the
whole, if you thus understand the *Abysse* or *great Deep*, and the
breaking open its *Fountains* in this manner, it doth us no service as
to the Deluge, and where we expected the greatest supply, there we find
none at all.

What shall we do then? whither shall we go to find more than seven
Oceans of water that we still want? We have been above and below; we
have drain’d the whole middle Region, and we have examin’d the Deeps of
the Earth; they must want for themselves, they say, if they give us any;
And, besides, if the Earth should disgorge all the water that it hath in
its bowels, it would not amount to above half an Ocean, which would not
at all answer our occasions. Must we

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

not then conclude, that the common explication of the Deluge makes it
impossible? there being no such quantity of water in Nature as they make
requisite for an universal Deluge. Yet to give them all fair play,
having examin’d the waters above the Earth, or in the Air, the waters
upon the Earth, and the waters under the Earth; let us also consider if
there be not waters above the Heavens, and if those might not be drawn
down for the Deluge. *Moses* speaks of waters above the firmament, which
though it be generally understood of the middle Region of the Air,
especially as it was constituted before the Deluge, yet some have
thought those to be waters plac’d above the highest Heavens, or
Super-celestial waters: and have been willing to make use of them for a
supply, when they could not find materials enough under the Heavens to
make up the great mass of the Deluge. But the Heavens above, where these
waters lay, are either solid, or fluid; if solid, as Glass or Crystal,
how could the waters get through ’em to descend upon the Earth? If
fluid, as the Air or Æther, how could the waters rest upon them? For
Water is heavier than Air or Æther; So that I am afraid those pure
Regions will prove no fit place for that Element, upon any account. But
supposing these waters there, how imaginary soever, and that they were
brought down to drown the World in that vast quantity that would be
necessary, what became of them when the Deluge ceas’d? Seven or eight
Oceans of water, with the Earth wrapt up in the middle of them, how did
it ever get quit of them? how could they be dispos’d of when the Earth
was to be dri’d, and the World renew’d? It would be a hard task to lift
them up again among the Spheres, and we have no room for them here
below. The truth is, I mention this opinion of the Heavenly waters,
because I would omit none that had ever been made use of to make good
the common explication of the Deluge; but otherwise, I think, since the
System of the World hath been better known, and the Nature of the
Heavens, there are none that would seriously assert these
Super-celestial waters, or, at least, make use of them so extravagantly,
as to bring them down hither for causes of the Deluge.

We have now employ’d our last and utmost endeavours to find out waters
for the vulgar Deluge, or for the Deluge as commonly understood; and you
see with how little success; we have left no corner unsought, where
there was any appearance or report of water to be found, and yet we have
not been able to collect the eighth part of what was necessary upon a
moderate account. May we not then with assurance conclude, that the
World hath taken wrong measures hitherto in their notion and explication
of the general Deluge? They make it impossible and unintelligible upon a
double account, both in requiring more water than can be found, and more
than can be dispos’d of, if it was found: or could any way be withdrawn
from the Earth when the Deluge should cease. For if the Earth was
encompass’d with eight Oceans of water heapt one upon another, how these
should retire into any Chanels, or be drain’d off, or the Earth any way
disengag’d from them, is not intelligible; and that in so short a time
as some months: For the violence of the Deluge lasted but four or five
months, and in as many months after the Earth was dry and habitable. So
as upon the whole enquiry, we can neither find source nor issue,
beginning nor ending, for such an excessive mass

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of waters as the Vulgar Deluge requir’d; neither where to have them, nor
if we had them, how to get quit of them. And I think men cannot do a
greater injury or injustice to Sacred History, than to give such
representations of things recorded there, as to make them unintelligible
and incredible; As on the other hand, we cannot deserve better of
Religion and Providence, than by giving such fair accounts of all things
propos’d by them, or belonging to them, as may silence the Cavils of
Atheists, satisfie the inquisitive, and recommend them to the belief and
acceptance of all reasonable persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](ste06.md)
