[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste16)  [Next](ste18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

##### THE

## THEORY

###### OF THE

# EARTH

## BOOK II

Concerning the Primæval Earth, and concerning *Paradise*.

### CHAPTER I

*The Introduction and Contents of the Second Book. The general state of
the Primæval Earth, and of* Paradise.

WE have already seen a World begin and perish; An Earth rais’d from the
rudiments of a Chaos, and dissolv’d and destroy’d in an Universal
Deluge. We have given also an imperfect description of that Primæval
Earth, so far as was necessary to show the causes and manner of its
dissolution. But we must not content our selves with this; Seeing that
Earth was the first Theater upon which mortals appear’d and acted, and
continued so for above Sixteen hundred Years; and that with Scenes, as
both Reason and History tell us, very extraordinary and very different
from these of our present Earth, ’tis reasonable we should endeavour to
make a more full discovery and description of it; Especially seeing
*Paradise* was there; that seat of pleasure which our first Parents
lost, and which all their posterity have much ado to find again.

In the First Book we so far describ’d This new-found World, as to shew
it very different in form and fabrick from the present Earth; there was
no Sea there, no Mountains, nor Rocks, nor broken Caves, ’twas all one
continued and regular mass, smooth, simple and compleat, as the first
works of Nature use to be, But to know thus much only, doth rather
excite our curiosity than satisfie it; what were the other properties of
this World? how were the Heavens, how the Elements? what accommodation
for humane life? why was it more proper to be the seat of *Paradise*
than the present Earth? Unless we know these things, you will say, it
will seem but an aery *Idea* to us; and ’tis certain that the more
properties and particularities that we know concerning any thing, the
more real it appears to be.

As it was our chief design therefore in the precedent Book, to give an
account of the Universal Deluge, by way of a just Theory; so we propose
to our selves chiefly in this Book, from the same Theory to give a just
account of *Paradise*; and in performing of this, we shall be led into a
more full examination and display of that first Earth, and of its
qualities. And if we be so happy, as by the conduct of the same
principles and the same method, to give as fair an account, and as
intelligible of the state of *Paradise* in that Original Earth, as we
have done of the Deluge by the dissolution of it, and of the form of
this Earth which succeeded,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

one must be very morose or melancholy to imagine that the grounds we go
upon, all this while, are wholly false or fictitious. A foundation which
will bear the weight of two Worlds without sinking, must surely stand
upon a firm Rock. And I am apt to promise my self that this Theory of
the Earth will find acceptance and credit, more or less, with all but
those, that think it a sufficient answer to all arguments, to say *it is
a Novelty*.

But to proceed in our disquisition concerning *Paradise*, we may note,
in the first place, two opinions to be avoided, being both extreams; one
that placeth *Paradise* in the extra-mundane Regions, or in the Air, or
in the Moon; and the other that makes it so inconsiderable, as to be
confin’d to a little spot of ground in *Mesopotamia*, or some other
Country of *Asia*, the Earth being now as it was then. This offends as
much in the defect, as the other in the excess. For it is not any single
Region of the Earth that can be *Paradisiacal*, unless all Nature
conspire and a certain Order of things proper and peculiar for that
state. Nor is it of less importance to find out this peculiar Order of
things, than to find out the particular feat of *Paradise*, but rather
pre-requisite to it: We will endeavour therefore to discover and
determine both, so far as a Theory can go, beginning with that which is
more general.

’Tis certain there were some qualities and conditions of *Paradise* that
were not meerly Topical, but common to all the rest of the Earth at that
time; and these we must consider in the first place, examine what they
were, and upon what they depended. History, both Sacred and Profane,
must tell us what they were, and our Theory must show us upon what
causes they depended. I had once, I confess, propos’d to my self another
method, independent upon History or Effects; I thought to have continued
the description of the Primitive or Ante-diluvian Earth from the
contemplation of its causes only, and then left it to the judgment of
others to determine, whether that was not the Earth where the Golden Age
was past, and where *Paradise* stood. For I had observ’d three
conditions or characters of it, which I thought were sufficient to
answer all that we knew concerning that first state of things, *viz*.
*The regularity of its surface; The situation or posture of its Body to
the Sun; and the Figure of it:* From these three general causes, I
thought might be deduc’d all the chief differences of that Earth from
the present, and particularly those that made it more capable of being
*Paradisiacal*.

But upon second thoughts I judg’d it more useful and expedient to lay
aside the Causes at present, and begin with the Effects, that we might
have some sensible matter to work upon. Bare *Idea*'s of things are
lookt upon as Romantick till Effects be propos’d, whereof they are to
give an account; that makes us value the Causes when necessity puts us
upon enquiry after them; and the reasons of things are very acceptable,
when they ease the mind, anxious, and at a loss, how to understand
Nature without their help. We will therefore, without more ado, premise
those things that have been taken notice of as extraordinary and
peculiar to the first Ages of the World, and to *Paradise*, and which
neither do, nor can, obtain in the present Earth; whereof the first is a
*perpetual Spring or Equinox*; The second, the *Longevity of Animals*;
the and third *Their production out of the Earth*, and the great
fertility of the soil in all other things.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

These difficulties guard the way to *Paradise* like the flaming Sword,
and must be remov’d before we can enter; these are general Preliminaries
which we must explain before we proceed to enquire after the particular
place of this Garden of Pleasure. The Ancients have taken notice of all
these in the first Ages of the World, or in their *Golden Age*, as they
call it; and I do not doubt but what they ascrib’d to the Golden Age,
was more remarkably true of *Paradise*; yet was not so peculiar to it,
but that it did in a good measure extend to other parts of the Earth at
that time. And ’tis manifest that their Golden Age was contemporary with
our *Paradise*; for they make it begin immediately after the production
and inhabitation of the Earth (which They, as well as *Moses*, raise
from the Chaos) and to degenerate by degrees till the Deluge; when the
World ended and begun again.

That this parallel may the better appear, we may observe, that as we say
that the whole Earth was, in some sence, Paradisiacal in the first Ages
of the World, and that there was besides, one Region or Portion of it
that was peculiarly so, and bore the denomination of *Paradise*; So the
Ancients besides their Golden Age, which was common to all the Earth,
noted some parts of it that were more Golden, if I may so say, than the
rest, and which did more particularly answer to *Paradise*; as their
*Elysian* Fields, Fortunate Islands, Gardens of *Hesperides*,
*Alcinous*, *&c*. these had a double portion of pleasantness, and
besides the advantages which they had common with the rest of the Earth
at that time, had something proper and singular, which gave them a
distinct consideration and character from the rest.

Having made this observation, let us proceed, and see what Antiquity
saith concerning that first and Paradisiacal state of things, upon those
three Heads forementioned; First that there was a perpetual Spring, and
constant serenity of the Air; This is often repeated by the Ancient
Poets, in their description of the Golden Age:<span
class="margnote">*Virgil*</span>

*Non alios primâ crescentis origine mundi  
Illuxisse dies, aliumve habuisse tenorem,  
Crediderim: Ver illud erat, Ver magnus agebat  
Orbis, & hybernis parcebant flatibus Euri*.

*Such days the new-born Earth enjoy’d of old,  
And the calm Heavens in this same tenour rowl’d:  
All the great World had then one constant Spring,  
No cold East-winds, such as our Winters bring*.

For I interpret this in the same sence with Ovid's Verses of the Golden
Age:

*Ver erat Æternum: placidique tepentibus auris  
Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores*.

*The Spring was constant, and soft Winds that blew  
Rais’d, without Seed, Flow’rs always sweet and new*.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And then upon the expiration of the Golden Age,
He says,

*Jupiter antiqui contraxit tempora Veris*, *&c*.

*When* Jove *begun to reign he chang’d the Year,  
And for one Spring four Seasons made appear*.

\[paragraph continues\] The Ancients suppos’d, that in the reign of
*Saturn*, who was an Ante-diluvian God, as I may so call him, Time How’d
with a more even motion, and there was no diversity of Seasons in the
Year; but *Jupiter*, they say, first introduc’d that, when he came to
manage affairs. This is exprest after their way, who seldom give any
severe and Philosophical accounts of the changes of Nature. And as they
suppos’d this perpetual Spring in the Golden Age, so they did also in
their particular *Elysiums*; as I could show largely from their Authors,
if it would not multiply Citations too much in this place.

The Christian Authors have no less celebrated the perpetual Spring and
Serenity of the Heavens in *Paradise*; such expressions or descriptions
you will find in *Justin Martyr*, St. *Basil*, *Damascen*, *Isadore
Hispalensis*, and others; insomuch that *Bellarmine*, <span
class="margnote">*De Grat. prim. hom*.</span> I remember, reflecting
upon those Characters of *Paradise*, which many of the Fathers have
given in these respects, saith, such things could not be, unless the Sun
had then another course from what he hath now; or which is more easie,
the Earth another situation. Which conjecture will hereafter appear to
have been well-grounded. In the mean time, let us see the Christian
Poetry upon this subject, as we have seen the *Roman* upon the other.
*Alcimus Avitus* hath thus describ’d *Paradise* in his Notes upon
*Genesis*:

*Non hic alterni succedit temporis unquam  
Bruma, nec æstivi redeunt post frigora Soles;  
Hîc Ver assiduum Cœli clementia servat.  
Turbidus Auster abest, sempérque sub aere sudo  
Nubila diffugiunt, jugi cessura sereno.  
Nec poscit Natura loci, quos non habet, imbres,  
Sed contenta suo dotantur germina rore.  
Perpetuò viret omne solum, terræque benignæ  
Blanda nitet facies: Stant semper collibus herbæ,  
Arboribúsque comæ*, &c.

*No change of Seasons or excess was there,  
No Winter chill’d, nor Summer scorch’d the Air,  
But, with a constant Spring, Nature was fresh and fair.  
Rough Winds or Rains that Region never knew,  
Water’d with Rivers and the morning Dew;  
The Heav’ns still clear, the Fields still green and gay,  
No Clouds above, nor on the Earth decay;  
Trees kept their leaves and verdure all the Year,  
And Fruits were never out of Season there*.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And as the Christian Authors, so likewise the
*Jewish* have spoken of *Paradise* in the same manner; they tell us also
that the days there were always of the same length throughout the whole
Year; and that made them fancy *Paradise* to lie under the Æquinoctial;
as we shall see in its due place. ’Tis true, we do not find these things
mention’d expresly in the Sacred writings, but the effects that How’d
from them are recorded there, and we may reasonably suppose Providence
to have foreseen, that when those Effects came to be scan’d and narrowly
lookt into, they would lead us to a discovery of the Causes, and
particularly of this great and general Cause, that *perpetual Æquinox*
and unity of seasons in the Year, till the Deluge. The Longævity of the
Ante-diluvians cannot be explain’d upon any other supposition, as we
shall have occasion to show hereafter; and that you know is recorded
carefully in Scripture: As also that there was no *Rainbow* before the
Flood; which goes upon the same ground, that there was no variety of
Seasons, nor any Rain: And this by many is thought to be understood by
*Moses* his words, Gen. 2. 5, 6. which he speaks of the first and
Paradisiacal Earth. Lastly, seeing the Earth then brought forth the
principles of life and all living Creatures (Man excepted) according to
Moses, Gen. 1. 24. we must suppose that the state of the Heavens was
such as favour’d these Conceptions and Births, which could not possibly
be brought to perfection, as the Seasons of the Year are at present. The
first time that we have mention made in Scripture of Summer and Winter,
and the differences of Seasons, is at the ending of the Deluge, Gen. 8.
22. *Hence forward all the days of the Earth, Seed-time and Harvest,
Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, Day and Night shall not cease*. ’Tis
true these words are so lax, that they may be understood either of a new
course of Nature then instituted, or of an old one restor’d; but seeing
it doth appear from other arguments and considerations, that there was
at that time a new course of Nature constituted, it is more reasonable
to interpret the words in that sence; which, as it is agreeable to
truth, according to Reason and Antiquity; so it renders that remark of
*Moses* of far greater importance, if it be understood as an indication
of a new order then setled in Nature, which should continue thence
forwards so long as the Earth endur’d. Nor do I at all wonder that such
things should not be expresly and positively declar’d in Scripture, for
natural mysteries in the Holy writings, as well as Prophetical, are many
times, on set purpose, incompleatly deliver’d, so as to awaken and
excite our thoughts rather than full resolve them: This being often more
suitable to the designs of Providence in the government of the World.
But thus much for this first common or general Character of the Golden
Age, and of *Paradise*, a *perpetual Serenity and perpetual Æquinox*.

The second Character is the Longævity of men; and, as is probable, of
all other Animals in proportion. This, methinks, is as strange and
surprising as the other; and I know no difference betwixt the
Ante-diluvian World and the present, so apt to affect us, if we reflect
upon it, as this wonderful disproportion in the Ages of Men; Our
fore-fathers and their Posterity; They liv’d seven, eight, nine hundred
Years and upwards, and ’tis a wonder now if a man live to one hundred.
Our Oaks do not last so long as their Bodies did; Stone and Iron would
scarce out-wear them. And this property of the first Ages, or their
Inhabitants, how

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

strange soever, is well attested, and beyond all exception, having the
joynt consent of Sacred and Profane History. The Scripture sets down the
precise Age of a series of Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, and by that
measures the time from the beginning of the World to the Deluge; so as
all Sacred Chronology stands upon that bottom. Yet I know some have
thought this so improbable and incongruous a thing, that to save the
credit of *Moses* and the Sacred History, they interpret these years of
*Lunar* years or months; and so the Ages of these Patriarchs are reduc’d
to much what the same measure with the common life of man at this time.
It may be observ’d in this, as in many other instances, that for want of
a Theory to make things credible and intelligible, men of wit and parts
have often deprest the sence of Scripture; and that not out of any ill
will to Scripture or Religion, but because they could not otherwise,
upon the stock of their notions, give themselves a rational account of
things recorded there. But I hope when we come to explain the causes of
this longævity, we shall show that it is altogether as strange a thing
that men should have such short lives as they have now, as that they had
such long lives in the first Ages of the World. In the mean time, there
are a great many collateral reasons to assure us that *Lunar* years
cannot be here understood by *Moses*, for all Antiquity gives the same
account of those first Ages of the World, and of the first men, that
they were extreamly long-liv’d. We meet with it generally in the
description of the Golden Age; and not only so, but in their Topical
*Paradises* also they always suppos’d a great vivacity or longevity in
those that enjoy’d them. <span class="margnote">*Book*. I. *Chap*.
4.</span>And *Josephus* speaking upon this subject, saith, the Authors
of all the learned Nations, *Greeks* or *Barbarians*, bear witness to
Moses's doctrine in this particular. And in the *Mosaical* History it
self, there are several circumstances and marks that discover plainly,
that the years of the Patriarchs cannot be understood of *Lunar* years;
as we shall have occasion to show in another place. <span
class="margnote">*Chap*. 4.</span>We proceed in the mean time to the
third and last Character, The extraordinary fertility of the Soil, and
the production of Animals out of the new-made Earth.

The first part of this Character is unquestionable; All Antiquity speaks
of the plenty of the Golden Age, and of their *Paradises*, whether
Christian or Heathen. The fruits of the Earth at first were spontaneous,
and the ground without being torn and tormented, satisfied the wants or
desires of man. When Nature was fresh and full, all things How’d from
her more easily and more pure, like the first running of the Grape, or
the Hony-comb; but now she must be prest and squeez’d, and her
productions tast more of the Earth and of bitterness. The Ancient Poets
have often pleas’d themselves in making descriptions of this happy
state, and in admiring the riches and liberality of Nature at that time,
but we need not transcribe their Poetry here, seeing this point is not,
I think, contested by any. The second part of this Character, concerning
the spontaneous Origin of living Creatures out of that first Earth, is
not so unquestionable; and as to Man, *Moses* plainly implies that there
was a particular action or ministery of Providence in the formation of
his Body, but as to other Animals He seems to suppose that the Earth
brought them forth as it did Herbs and Plants. (*Gen*. 1. 24 compar’d
with the 11 Verse.) And the truth is, there is no such great difference

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

betwixt Vegetable and Animals Egg, or betwixt the Seeds out of which
Plants rise, and the Eggs out of which all Animals rise, but that we may
conceive, the one as well as the other, in the first Earth: And as some
warmth and influence from the Sun is requir’d for the Vegetation of
Seeds, so that influence or impregnation which is necessary to make
animal Eggs fruitful, was imputed by the Ancients to the *Æther*, or to
an active and pure Element which had the same effect upon our great
Mother the Earth, as the irradiation of the Male hath upon the Females
Eggs.

*Tum Pater omnipotens fœcundis imbribus Æther  
Conjugis in gremium lætæ descendit*.

*In fruitful show’rs of Æther* Jove *did glide  
Into the bosom of his joyful Bride*.

\[paragraph continues\] ’Tis true, this opinion of the spontaneous
Origin of Animals in the first Earth, hath lain under some *Odium*,
because it was commonly reckon’d to be *Epicurus*'s opinion peculiarly;
and he extended it not only to all brute Creatures, but to Mankind also,
whom he suppos’d to grow out of the Earth in great numbers, in several
Parts and Countries, like other Animals; which is a notion contrary to
the Sacred writings; for they declare, that all Mankind, though diffus’d
now through the several parts and Regions of the Earth, rise at first
from one Head or single Man and Woman; which is a Conclusion of great
importance, and that could not, I think, by the Light of Nature, have
ever been discover’d. And this makes the *Epicurean* opinion the more
improbable, for why should two rise only, if they sprung from the Earth?
or how could they rise in their full growth and perfection, as *Adam*
and *Eve* did? But as for the opinion of Animals rising out of the Earth
at first, that was not at all peculiar to *Epicurus*; The *Stoicks* were
of the same mind, and the *Pythagoreans*, and the *Ægyptians*, and, I
think, all that suppos’d the Earth to rise from a Chaos. Neither do I
know any harm in that opinion, if duly limited and stated; for what
inconvenience is it, or what diminution of Providence, that there should
be the principles of Life, as well as the principles of Vegetation, in
the new Earth? And unless you suppose all the first Animals, as well as
the first man, to have been made at one stroke, in their full growth and
perfection, which we have neither reason nor authority sufficient to
believe; if they were made young, little and weak, as they come now into
the World, there seems to be no way for their production more proper,
and decorous, than that they should spring from their great Mother the
Earth. Lastly, considering the innumerable little Creatures that are
upon the Earth, Insects and Creeping things: and that these were not
created out of nothing, but form’d out of the ground: I think that an
office most proper for Nature, that can set so many hands to work at
once; and that hath hands fit for all those little operations or
manufactures, how small soever, that would less become the dignity of
Superiour Agents.

Thus much for the Preliminaries, or three general Characters of
*Paradise*, which were common to it with the rest of the Primeval Earth;
and were the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

chief ingredients of the Golden Age, so much celebrated by the Ancients.
I know there were several other differences betwixt that Earth and this,
but these are the original; and such as are not necessary to be premis’d
for the general Explication of Paradise, we reserve for another place.
We may, in the mean time observe, how preposterously they go to work,
that set themselves immediately to find out some pleasant place of the
Earth to fix *Paradise* in, before they have consider’d, or laid any
grounds, to explain the general conditions of it, wheresoever it was.
These must be first known and determin’d, and we must take our aim and
directions from these, how to proceed further in our enquiries after it;
otherwise we sail without a Compass, or seek a Port and know not which
way it lies. And as we should think him a very unskilful Pilot that
sought a place in the new World, or *America*, that really was in the
old; so they commit no less an error, that seek *Paradise* in the
present Earth, as now constituted, which could only belong to the
former, and to the state of the first World: As will appear more plainly
in the following Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](ste18.md)
