[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste09)  [Next](ste11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

*That the Explication we have given of an Universal Deluge is not an*
Idea *only, but an account of what really came to pass in this Earth,
and the true Explication of* Noah*'s Flood; as is prov’d by Argument and
from History. An Examination of* Tehom-Rabba, *or the great Abysse, and
that by it the Sea cannot be understood, nor the Subterraneous Waters,
as they are at present. What the true Notion and Form of it was,
collected from* Moses *and other Sacred Writers; The frequent allusions
in Scripture to the opening and shutting the Abysse, and the particular
stile of Scripture in its reflections on the Origin, and the Formation
of the Earth. Observations on* Deucalion*'s Deluge*.

WE have now given an account of the first great revolution of Nature,
and of the Universal Deluge, in a way that is intelligible, and from
causes that answer the greatness of the effect; We have suppos’d nothing
but what is also prov’d, both as to the first form of the Earth, and as
to the manner of its Dissolution: and how far from that would evidently
and necessarily arise a general Deluge; which was that, which put a
period to the old World, and the first state of things. And though all
this hath been deduc’d in due order, and with connexion and consequence
of one thing upon another, so far as I know, which is the true evidence
of a Theory; yet it may not be sufficient to command the Assent and
Belief of some persons, who will allow, it may be, and acknowledge, that
this is a fair *Idea* of a possible Deluge in general, and of the
destruction of a World by it; but this may be only an *Idea*, they'll
say; we desire it may be prov’d from some collateral arguments, taken
either from Sacred History, or from observation, that this hath really
been exemplified upon the Earth, and that *Noah*'s Flood came to pass
this way. And seeing we have design’d this first Book chiefly for the
Explication of *Noah*'s Deluge, I am willing to add here a Chapter or
two extraordinary upon this occasion; to shew, that what we have
deliver’d is more than an Idea, and that it was in this very way that
*Noah*'s Deluge came to pass. But they who have not this doubt, and have
a mind to see the issue of the Theory, may skip these two Chapters, if
they please, and proceed to the following.

To satisfie then the doubtful in this particular, let us lay down in the
first place that conclusion which they seem to admit, *viz*. That this
is a possible and consistent Explication of an Universal Deluge; and
let's see how far this would go, if well consider’d, towards the proof
of what they desire, or towards the demonstration of *Noah*'s Deluge in
particular. It is granted on both hands, that

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

there hath been an Universal Deluge upon the Earth, which was *Noah*'s
Deluge; and it is also granted, that we have given a possible and
consistent *Idea* of an Universal Deluge; Now we have prov’d *Chap. II*.
and *III*. that all other ways assign’d for the Explication of *Noah*'s
Flood are false or impossible; therefore it came to pass in that
possible way which we have propos’d. And if we have truly prov’d, in the
foremention’d Chapters, the impossibility of it in all other ways, this
argumentation is undeniable. Besides, we may argue thus, As it is
granted that there hath been an Universal Deluge upon the Earth; so I
suppose it will be granted that there hath been but one: Now the
dissolution of the Earth, whensoever it happen’d, would make one
universal Deluge, and therefore the only one, and the same with
*Noah*'s. That such a Dissolution as we have describ'd, would make an
universal Deluge, I think, cannot be question’d; and that there hath
been such a dissolution, besides what we have already alledg’d, shall be
prov’d at large from natural Observations upon the Form and Figure of
the present Earth, in the *Third* Section and last *Chap*. of this Book;
In the mean time we will proceed to History, both Sacred and Profane,
and by comparing our Explication with those, give further assurance of
its truth and reality.

In the first place, it agrees, which is most considerable, with
*Moses*'s Narration of the Deluge; both as to the matter and manner of
it. The matter of the Deluge *Moses* <span class="margnote">*Gen*. 7.
II.</span>makes to be the Waters from above, and the Waters from below;
or he distinguishes the causes of the Deluge, as we do, into Superiour
and Inferiour; and the Inferiour causes he makes to be the disruption of
the Abysse, which is the principal part, and the great hinge of our
Explication. Then as to the manner of the Deluge, the beginning and the
ending, the increase and decrease, he saith it increas’d gradually, and
decreast gradually, by *going* and *coming*; <span
class="margnote">*Vers*. 17, 18, 19, 20. *Chap*. 8. 3, 5.</span>that is
after many repeated fluctuations and reciprocations of the waves, the
waters of the Abysse began to be more compos’d, and to retire into their
Chanels, whence they shall never return to cover the Earth again. This
agrees wholly with our Theory; we suppose the Abysse to have been under
an extream commotion and agitation by the fall of the Earth into it, and
this at first encreast more and more, till the whole Earth was fain;
Then continuing for some time at the height of its rage, overwhelming
the greatest Mountains, it afterwards decreast by the like degrees,
leaving first the tops of the Mountains, then the Hills and the Fields,
till the Waters came to be wholly drawn off the Earth into their
Chanels.

It was no doubt a great oversight in the Ancients, to fancy the Deluge
like a great standing Pool of water, reaching from the bottom of the
Valleys to the tops of the Mountains, every where alike, with a level
and uniform surface; by reason of which mistaken notion of the Deluge,
they made more water necessary to it than was possible to be had, or
being had, than it was possible to get quit of again; for there are no
Chanels in the Earth that could hold so much water, <span
class="margnote">vid. St. *Austin* in loc.</span>either to give it, or
to receive it. And the *Psalmist* speaking of the Deluge, as it seems to
me, notes this violent commotion of the Abysse. *The Waters went up by
the Mountains, came down by the Valleys unto the place which thou hast
founded for them*. <span class="margnote">*Psal*. 104. *vers*. 8,
9.</span> I know some interpret that passage of the state of the waters
in the beginning, when they cover’d the face of the whole Earth, *Gen*.
1. 2. but that

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

cannot be, because of what follows in the next Verse; *Thou hast set a
bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the
Earth*. Which is not true, if the preceding words be understood of the
state of the waters at the beginning of the World; for they did pass
those bounds, and did return since that time to cover the Earth, namely
at the Deluge: But if these words be refer’d to the time of the Deluge,
and the state of the waters then, ’tis both a just description of the
motion of the Abysse, and certainly true, that the waters since that
time are so setled in their Chanels, that they shall never overflow the
Earth again. As we are assured by the promise made to *Noah*, and that
illustrious pledge and confirmation of it, the *Rainbow*, that the
Heavens also shall never pour out so much waters again; their state
being chang’d as well as that of the Earth, or Sea, from what they were
before the Deluge.

But before we leave *Moses*'s Narration of the Deluge, we must examine
further, what is, or can be understood by his <span
class="margnote">*Gen*. 7. ii.</span>TEHOM-RABBA, or *great Abysse*,
which he saith was broken up at the Deluge; for this will help us to
discover, whether our Explication be the same with his, and of the same
Flood. And first we must consider, whether by the *Tehom-Rabba*, or
Mosaical Abysse can be understood the Sea or Ocean, under that form we
see it in at present; and ’tis plain, methinks, that the Sea cannot be
understood by this great Abysse, both because the Sea is not capable
upon any disruption to make such an universal Deluge; and because the
Narration of *Moses*, and his expressions concerning this Abysse, do not
agree to the Sea. Some of the Ancients indeed did imagine, that the
waters of the Sea were much higher than the Land, and stood, as it were,
on an heap; so as when these waters were let loose, they overflow’d the
Earth, and made a Deluge. But this is known to be a gross mistake; the
Sea and the Land make one Globe, and the Waters couch themselves, as
close as may be, to the Center of this Globe in a Spherical convexity;
so that if all the Mountains and Hills were scal’d, and the Earth made
even, the Waters would not overflow its smooth surface; much less could
they overflow it in the form that it is now in, where the Shores are
higher than the Sea, the Inland parts than the Shores, and the Mountains
still far above all: So as no disruption of the Sea could make an
universal Deluge, by reason of its situation. But besides that, the
quantity of Water contain’d in the Sea is no way sufficient to make a
Deluge in the present form of the Earth; for we have shewn before,
*Chap*. 2. that Eight such Oceans as ours would be little enough for
that purpose. Then as to the expressions of *Moses* concerning this
Abysse, if he had meant the Sea by it, and that the Deluge was made by
the disruption of the Sea, why did he not say so? There is no mention of
the Sea in all the History of the Deluge: *Moses* had mention’d the Sea
before, *Gen. 1.* 10. and us’d a word that was common and known to
signifie the Sea; And if he had a mind to express the same thing here,
why should he not use the same word and the same term? In an Historical
relation we use terms that are most proper and best known; but instead
of that he useth the same term here that he did, Gen. 1. 2. when he
saith, *Darkness was upon the face of the Abysse*, or of the Deep, as we
render it; there the Abysse was open, or cover’d with darkness only,
namely before the exteriour Earth was form’d; Here the same Abysse is
mention’d again,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

but cover’d, by the formation of the Earth upon it; and the covering of
this Abysse was broken or *cloven asunder*, and the Waters gusht out
that made the Deluge. This I am sure is the most natural interpretation
or signification of this word, according as it is us’d in *Moses*'s
writings. Furthermore, we must observe what *Moses* saith concerning
this Abysse, and whether that will agree with the Sea or no; he saith
the *Fountains of the great Abysse were broken open*; now if by the
great Abysse you understand the Sea, how are its Fountains broken open?
To break open a Fountain, is to break open the ground that covers it,
and what ground covers the Sea? So that upon all considerations, either
of the word that *Moses* here useth, *Tehom-Rabba*, or of the thing
affirmed concerning it, *breaking open its Fountains*; or of the effect
following the breaking open its Fountains, *drowning of the Earth*; from
all these heads it is manifest, that the Sea cannot be understood by the
great Abysse, whose disruption was the cause of the Deluge.

And as the *Mosaical* Abysse cannot be the Sea, so neither can it be
those Subterraneous waters that are disperst in the Cells and Caverns of
the Earth; for as they are now lodg’d within the Earth, they are not one
*Abysse*, but several Cisterns and Receptacles of water, in several
places, especially under the roots of Mountains and Hills; separate one
from another, sometimes by whole Regions and Countries interpos’d.
Besides what Fountains, if they were broken up, could let out this
water, or bring it upon the face of the Earth? When we sink a Mine, or
dig a Well, the waters, when uncover’d, do not leap out of their places,
or out of those Cavities, and flow upon the Earth; ’Tis not as if you
open’d a Vein, where the Bloud spirts out, and riseth higher than its
Source; but as when you take off the cover of a Vessel, the water doth
not fly out for that: So if we should imagine all the Subterraneous
Caverns of the Earth uncover’d, and the waters laid bare, there they
would lie unmov’d in their beds, if the Earth did not fall into them to
force them up. Furthermore, if these waters were any way extracted and
laid upon the surface of the ground, nothing would be gain’d as to the
Deluge by that, for as much water would run into these holes again when
the Deluge begun to rise; so that this would be but an useless labour,
and turn to no account. And lastly, these waters are no way sufficient
for quantity to answer to the Mosaical Abysse, or to be the principal
cause of the Deluge, as that was.

Now seeing neither the Sea, as it is at present, nor the Subterraneous
waters, as they are at present, can answer to the *Mosaical Abysse*, we
are sure there is nothing in this present Earth that can answer to it.
Let us then on the other hand compare it with that Subterraneous Abysse,
which we have found in the Ante-diluvian Earth, represented *2 Fig.
5*<span class="margnote">p. 59</span>, and examine their characters and
correspondency: First, *Moses*'s Abysse was cover’d, and Subterraneous,
for the *Fountains* of it are said to have been cloven or burst open;
then it was vast and capacious; and thirdly, it was so dispos’d, as to
be capable of a disruption, that would cause an universal Deluge to the
Earth. Our Ante-diluvian Abysse answers truly to all these characters;
’twas in the womb of the Earth; the Earth was founded upon those
*Waters*, as the *Psalmist* saith; or they were enclos’d within the
Earth *as in a Bag*. Then for the capacity of it, it contained both all
the waters now in the Ocean, and all those that are dispers’d in the
Caverns of the Earth: And

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

lastly, it is manifest its situation was such, that upon a disruption or
dissolution of the Earth which cover’d it, an universal Deluge would
arise. Seeing then this answers the description, and all the properties
of the *Mosaical* Abysse, and nothing else will, how can we in reason
judge it otherwise than the same, and the very thing intended and
propos’d in the History of *Noah*'s Deluge under the name of
*Tehom-Rabba*, or the great Abysse, at whose disruption the World was
overflow’d. And as we do not think it an unhappy discovery to have found
out (with a moral certainty) the seat of the *Mosaical* Abysse, which
hath been almost as much sought for, and as much in vain, as the seat of
*Paradise*; so this gives us a great assurance, that the Theory we have
given of a general Deluge, is not a meer *Idea*, but is to be
appropriated to the Deluge of Noah, as a true explication of it.

And to proceed now from *Moses* to other Divine writers; That our
Description is a reality, both as to the Ante-diluvian Earth, and as to
the Deluge, we may further be convinc’d from <span class="margnote">2
*Epist*. 3. 6.</span>St. *Peter*'s discourse concerning those two
things. St. *Peter* saith, that the constitution of the Ante-diluvian
Earth was such, in reference to the Waters, that by reason of that it
was obnoxious to a Deluge; we say these Waters were the great *Abysse*
it stood upon, by reason whereof that World was really expos’d to a
Deluge, and overwhelm’d in it upon the disruption of this Abysse, as
*Moses* witnesses. ’Tis true, St. *Peter* doth not specifie what those
waters were, nor mention either the Sea, or the Abysse; but seeing
*Moses* tells us, that it was by the waters of the Abysse that the Earth
was overwhelm’d, St. *Peter*'s waters must be understood of the same
Abysse, because he supposeth them the cause of the same Deluge. And, I
think, the Apostle's discourse there cannot receive a better
illustration, than from *Moses*'s History of the Deluge. Moses
distinguishes the causes of the Flood into those that belong to the
Heavens, and those that belong to the Earth; the Rains and the Abysse:
St. *Peter* also distinguisheth the causes of the Deluge into the
constitution of the Heavens, in reference to its waters; and the
constitution of the Earth, in reference to its waters; and no doubt they
both aim at the same causes, as they refer to the same effect; only
*Moses* mentions the immediate causes, the Rains and the Waters of the
Abysse; and St. *Peter* mentions the more remote and fundamental causes,
that constitution of the Heavens, and that constitution of the Earth, in
reference to their respective waters, which made that world obnoxious to
a Deluge: And these two speaking of *Noah*'s Deluge, and agreeing thus
with one another, and both with us, or with the Theory which we have
given of a General Deluge, we may safely conclude, that it is no
imaginary *Idea*, but a true account of that Ancient Flood, whereof
*Moses* hath left us the History.

And seeing the right understanding of the *Mosaical Abysse* is
sufficient alone to prove all we have deliver’d concerning the Deluge,
as also concerning the frame of the Ante-diluvian Earth, give me leave
to take notice here of some other places of Scripture that seem
manifestly to describe this same form of the Abysse with the Earth above
it, Psal. 24. 2. *He founded the Earth upon the Seas, and establish’d it
upon the Floods*; and *Psal*. 136. 6. <span class="margnote">4 *Esdr*.
16. 58.</span> *He stretched out the Earth above the Waters*. Now this
Foundation of the Earth upon the Waters, or *extension* of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

it above the Waters, doth most aptly agree to that structure and
situation of the <span class="margnote">*Chap*. 6</span>Abysse and the
Ante-diluvian Earth, which we have assign’d them, and which we have
before describ’d; but very improperly and forc’dly to the present form
of the Earth and the Waters. In that second place of the *Psalmist*, the
word may be render’d either, he *stretch’d*, as we read it, or he *fixt
and consolidated* the Earth above the Waters, as the Vulgate and
Septuagint translate it: For ’tis from the same word with that which is
used for the *Firmament*, *Gen*. 1. So that as the Firmament was
extended over and around the Earth, so was the Earth extended over and
about the Waters, in that first constitution of things; and I remember
some of the Ancients use this very comparison of the Firmament and
Earth, to express the situation of the *Paradisiacal* Earth in reference
to the Sea or Abysse.

There is another remarkable place in the *Psalms*, to shew the
disposition of the Waters in the first Earth; Psal. 33. 7. *He gathereth
the Waters of the Sea as in a Bag, he layeth up the Abysses in
storehouses*. This answers very fitly and naturally to the place and
disposition of the Abysse which it had before the Deluge, inclos’d
within the vault of the Earth, as in a *Bag* or in a *Storehouse*. I
know very well what I render here in a *Bag*, is render’d in the
*English*, *as an heap*; but that translation of the word seems to be
grounded on the old Error, that the Sea is higher than the Land, and so
doth not make a true sence. Neither are the two parts of the Verse so
well suited and consequent one to another, if the first express an high
situation of the Waters, and the second a low one. And accordingly the
Vulgate, Septuagint, and Oriental Versions and Paraphrase, as also
*Symmachus*, St. *Jerome*, and *Basil*, render it as we do here, *in a
Bag*, or by terms equivalent.

To these passages of the *Psalmist*, concerning the form of the Abysse
and the first Earth, give me leave to add this general remark, that they
are commonly ushered in, or followed, with something of Admiration in
the Prophet. We observ’d before, that the formation of the first Earth,
after such a wonderful manner, being a piece of Divine Architecture,
when it was spoken of in Scripture, it was usually ascrib’d to a
particular Providence, and accordingly we see in these places now
mention’d, that it is still made the object of praise and admiration: In
that 136 Psalm ’tis reckon’d among the wonders of God, *Vers*. 4, 5, 6.
*Give praise to him who alone doth great wonders; To him that by wisdom
made the Heavens: To him that stretched out the Earth above the Waters*.
And in like manner, in that 33 *Psalm*, ’tis joyn’d with the forming of
the Heavens, and made the subject of the Divine Power and Wisdom:
*Vers*. 6, 7, 8, 9. *By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and
all the Host of them by the breath of his mouth; He gathereth the Waters
of the Sea together, as in a Bag, he layeth up the Abysse in
Storehouses. Let all the Earth fear the Lord; Let all the Inhabitants of
the World stand in awe of him; For he spake, and it was; he commanded,
and it stood fast*. Namely, all things stood in that wonderful posture
in which the *Word* of his Power and Wisdom had establisht them. *David*
often made the works of Nature, and the External World, the matter of
his Meditations, and of his praises and Philosophical Devotions;
reflecting sometimes upon the present form of the World, and sometimes
upon the primitive form of it: And though Poetical expressions, as the
*Psalms* are, seldom are so determinate and distinct, but that they may
be

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

interpreted more than one way, yet, I think, it cannot but be
acknowledg’d, that those expressions and passages that we have instanc’d
in, are more fairly and aptly understood of the Ancient form of the Sea,
or the Abysse, as it was enclos’d within the Earth, than of the present
form of it in an open Chanel.

There are also in the book of *Job* many noble reflections upon the
works of Nature, and upon the formation of the Earth and the Abysse;
whereof that in Chap. 26. 7. *He stretcheth out the North over the Empty
places, and hangeth the Earth upon nothing*, seems to parallel the
expression of *David*; *He stretched out the Earth upon the Waters*; for
the word we render the *empty place* is TOHU, which is appli’d to the
Chaos and the first Abysse, *Gen*. 1. 2. and *the hanging the Earth upon
nothing* is much more wonderful, if it be understood of the first
habitable Earth, that hung over the Waters, sustain’d by nothing but its
own peculiar form, and the libration of its parts, than if it be
understood of the present Earth, and the whole body of it; for if it be
in its Center or proper place, whither should it sink further, or
whither should it go? But this passage, together with the foregoing and
following Verses, requires a more critical examination than this
Discourse will easily bear.

There is another remarkable discourse in *Job*, that contains many
things to our present purpose, ’tis *Chap*. 38. where God reproaches
*Job* with his ignorance of what pass’d at the beginning of the World,
and the formation of the Earth, Vers. 4, 5, 6. *Where was thou when I
laid the foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou hast understanding:
Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest; or who hath
stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof
fastned, or who laid the corner-stone?* All these questions have far
more force and Emphasis, more propriety and elegancy, if they be
understood of the first and Ante-diluvian form of the Earth, than if
they be understood of the present; for in the present form of the Earth
there is no Architecture, no structure, no more than in a ruine; or at
least none comparatively to what was in the first form of it. And that
the exteriour and superficial part of the Earth is here spoken of,
appears by the rule and line appli’d to it; but what rule or regularity
is there in the surface of the present Earth? what line was us’d to
level its parts? But in its original construction when it lay smooth and
regular in its surface, as if it had been drawn by *rule* and *line* in
every part; and when it hung pois’d upon the Deep, without pillar or
foundation stone, then just proportions were taken, and every thing
plac’d by weight and measure: And this, I doubt not, was that artificial
structure here alluded to, and when this work was finisht, then *the
morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy*.
<span class="margnote">*Vers*. 7.</span>

Thus far the questions proceed upon the form and construction of the
first Earth; in the following *verses* (8, 9, 10, II.) they proceed upon
the demolition of that Earth, the opening the Abysse, and the present
state of both. *Or who shut up the Sea with doors when it brake forth,
as if it had issu’d out of a womb?* Who can doubt but this was at the
breaking open of the *Fountains of the Abysse*, Gen. 7. II. when the
waters gusht out, as out of the great womb of Nature; and by reason of
that confusion and perturbation of Air and Water that rise upon it, a
thick mist and darkness was round the Earth, and all things as in a
second Chaos,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and
thick darkness a swadling band for it, and brake up for it my decreed
place, and made bars and doors*. Namely, (taking the words as thus
usually render’d) the present Chanel of the Sea was made when the Abysse
was broke up, and at the same time were made the shory Rocks and
Mountains which are the bars and boundaries of the Sea. *And said
hitherto shalt thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves
be stay’d*. Which last sentence shows, that this cannot be understood of
the first disposition of the waters as they were before the Flood, for
their proud waves broke those bounds, whatsoever they were, when they
overflow’d the Earth in the Deluge. And that the womb which they broke
out of was the great Abysse, The *Chaldee* Paraphrase <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) in this place doth expressly mention; and
what can be understood by the womb of the Earth, but that Subterraneous
capacity in which the Abysse lay? Then that which followeth, is a
description or representation of the great Deluge that ensu’d, and of
that disorder in Nature, that was then, and how the Waters were setled
and Bounded afterwards. Not unlike the description in the 104 *Psalm*,
*vers*. 6, 7, 8, 9. and thus much for these places in the book of *Job*.

There remains a remarkable discourse in the *Proverbs of Solomon*,
relating to the *Mosaical* Abysse, and not only to that, but to the
Origin of the Earth in general; where *Wisdom* declares her antiquity
and pre-existence to all the works of this Earth, *Chap*. 8. *vers*. 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. *I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
ere the Earth was. When there were no Deeps or Abysses, I was brought
forth; when no fountains abounding with water*. Then in the 27. verse,
*When he prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he set a Compass upon
the face of the Deep or Abysse. When he established the Clouds above,
when he strengthned the fountains of the Abysse*. Here is mention made
of the *Abysse*, and of *the Fountains of the Abysse*, and who can
question, but that the Fountains of the Abysse here, are the same with
the fountains of the Abysse which *Moses* mentions, and were broken
open, as he tells us, at the Deluge? Let us observe therefore what form
Wisdom gives to this Abysse, and consequently to the *Mosaical*: And
here seem to be two expressions that determine the form of it, *verse*
28. *He strengthned the fountains of the Abysse*, that is, the cover of
those Fountains, for the Fountains could be strengthned no other way
than by making a strong cover or Arch over them. And that Arch is
exprest more fully and distinctly in the foregoing *verse*, *When he
prepar’d the Heavens, I was there; when he set a* Compass *on the face
of the Abysse*; we render it *Compass*, the word signifies a Circle or
Circumference, or an Orb or Sphere. So there was in the beginning of the
World a Sphere, Orb or Arch set round the Abysse, according to the
testimony of *Wisdom*, who was then present. And this skews us both the
form of the *Mosaical* Abysse, which was included within this Vault: and
the form of the habitable Earth, which was the outward surface of this
Vault, or the cover of the Abysse that was broke up at the Deluge.

And thus much, I think, is sufficient to have noted out of Scripture,
concerning the *Mosaical* Abysse, to discover the form, place, and
situation of it; which I have done the more largely, because that being
determin’d, it will draw in easily all the rest of our Theory concerning
the Deluge. I will now only add one or two

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

general Observations, and so conclude this discourse; The first
Observation is concerning the Abysse; Namely, that the *opening and
shutting of the Abysse*, is the great hinge upon which Nature turns in
this Earth: This brings another face of things, other Scenes and a new
World upon the stage: And accordingly it is a thing often mention’d and
alluded to in Scripture, sometimes in a Natural, sometimes in a Moral or
Theological sence; and in both sences, our Saviour shuts and opens as he
pleaseth. Our Saviour, who is both Lord of Nature and of Grace, whose
Dominion is both in Heaven and in Earth, hath a double Key; that of the
Abysse, whereby Death and Hell are in his power, and all the
revolutions<span class="margnote">*Job*. 11. 10, 12, 14.  
*Apoc*. 1. 18. 20. 1, 2, 3. 21. 1.  
*Apoc*. 3. 7. *Isa*. 22. 22.</span> of Nature are under his Conduct and
Providence; And the Key of *David*, whereby he admits or excludes from
the City of God and the Kingdom of Heaven whom he pleaseth. Of those
places that refer to the shutting and opening the Abysse in a natural
sence, I cannot but particularly take notice of that in *Job*. *Chap*.
12. vers. 14, 15<span class="margnote">& *Chap*. 11. 10.</span>. *God
breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he shutteth up man, and
there can be no opening: Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry
up; also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the Earth*. Though these
things be true of God in lesser and common instances, yet to me it is
plain, that they principally refer to the Deluge, the opening and
shutting the Abysse, with the dissolution or subversion of the Earth
thereupon; and accordingly they are made the great effects of the Divine
Power and Wisdom in the foregoing Verse<span class="margnote">*Vers*.
13.</span>, *With God is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and
understanding; Behold, he breaketh down*, *&c*. And also in the
conclusion ’tis repeated again, *With him is strength and wisdom*;<span
class="margnote">*Vers*. 6.</span> which solemnity would scarce have
been us’d for common instances of his power. When God is said to build
or pull down, and no body can build again, ’tis not to be understood of
an House or a Town, God builds and unbuilds Worlds; and who shall build
up that Arch that was broke down at the Deluge? Where shall they lay the
Foundation, or how shall the Mountains be rear’d up again to make part
of the Roof? This is the Fabrick, which when God breaketh down, none can
build up again. *He withholdeth the waters and they dry up:* As we
shew’d the Earth to have been immoderately chapt and parcht before its
dissolution. *He sendeth them forth and they overturn the Earth*. What
can more properly express the breaking out of the waters at the
disruption of the Abysse? and the subversion or dissolution of the Earth
in consequence of it? ’Tis true this last passage may be applied to the
breaking out of waters in an ordinary Earthquake, and the subversion of
some part of the Earth, which often follows upon it; but it must be
acknowledg’d, that the sence is more weighty, if it be refer’d to the
great Deluge, and the great Earthquake which laid the World in ruines
and in water. And Philosophical descriptions in Sacred writings, like
Prophecies, have often a lesser and a greater accomplishment and
interpretation.

I could not pass by this place without giving this short Explication of
it. We proceed now to the second Observation, which is concerning the
stile of Scripture, in most of those places we have cited, and others
upon the same subject. The reflections that are made in several parts of
the Divine writings, upon the Origin of the World, and the formation of
the Earth, seem to me to be writ in a stile something approaching to the
nature of a Prophetical stile, and to have more of

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

a Divine Enthusiasm and Elocution in them, than the ordinary text of
Scripture; the expressions are lofty, and sometimes abrupt, and often
figurative and disguis’d, as may be observ’d in most of those places we
have made use of, and particularly in that speech of *Wisdom*, *Prov*.
8. where the 26. *verse* is so obscure, that no two Versions that I have
yet met with, whether Ancient or Modern, agree in the Translation of
that Verse. And therefore though I fully believe that the construction
of the first Earth is really intended in those words, yet seeing it
could not be made out clear without a long and critical discussion of
them, I did not think it proper to be insisted upon here. We may also
observe, that whereas there is a double form or composition of the
Earth, that which it had at first, or till the Deluge, and that which it
hath since; sometimes the one, and sometimes the other may be glanc’d
upon in these Scripture phrases and descriptions; and so there may be in
the same discourse an intermixture of both. And it commonly happens so
in an Enthusiastick or Prophetick stile, that by reason of the eagerness
and trembling of the Fancy, it doth not always regularly follow the same
even thread of discourse, but strikes many times upon some other thing
that hath relation to it, or lies under or near the same view. Of this
we have frequent examples in the *Apocalypse*, and in that Prophecy of
our Saviour's, *Matth*. 24. concerning the destruction of *Jerusalem*,
and of the World. But notwithstanding any such unevenness or
indistinctness in the stile of those places which we have cited
concerning the Origin and form of the Earth, we may at least make this
remark, that if there never was any other form of the Earth but the
present, nor any other state of the Abysse, than what it is in now, ’tis
not imaginable what should give occasion to all those expressions and
passages that we have cited; which being so strange in themselves and
paradoxical, should yet so much favour, and so fairly comply with our
suppositions. What I have observ’d in another place<span
class="margnote">*Tell. Theor*. *lib*. 2. c. 6.</span>, in treating of
*Paradise*, that the expressions of the Ancient Fathers were very
extravagant, if *Paradise* was nothing but a little plot of ground in
*Mesopotamia*, as many of late have fansied; may in like manner be
observ’d concerning the ancient Earth and Abysse, if they were in no
other form, nor other state than what they are under now, the
expressions of the Sacred Writers concerning them are very strange and
inaccountable, without any sufficient ground, or any just occasion for
such uncouth representations. If there was nothing intended or refer’d
to in those descriptions, but the present form and state of the Earth,
that is so well known, that in describing of it there would be nothing
dark or mysterious, nor any occasion for obscurity in the stile or
expression, whereof we find so much in those. So as, all things
consider’d, what might otherwise be made an exception to some of these
Texts alledg’d by us, *viz*. that they are too obscure, becomes an
argument for us: as implying that there is something more intended by
them, than the present and known form of the Earth. And we having
propos’d another form and structure of the Earth, to which those
characters suit and answer more easily, as this opens and gives light to
those difficult places, so it may be reasonably concluded to be the very
sence and notion intended by the holy Writers.

And thus much, I think, is sufficient to have observ’d out of Scripture,
to verifie our Explication of the Deluge, and our Application of it to
*Noah*'s Flood,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

both according to the *Mosaical* History of the Flood, and according to
many occasional reflections and discourses dispers’d in other places of
Scripture, concerning the same Flood, or concerning the Abysse and the
first form of the Earth. And though there may be some other passages of
a different aspect, they will be of no force to disprove our
conclusions, because they respect the present form of the Earth and Sea;
and also because expressions that deviate more from the common opinion,
are more remarkable and more proving; in that there is nothing could
give occasion to such, but an intention to express the very truth. So,
for instance, if there was one place of Scripture that said *the Earth
was mov’d*, and several that seem’d to imply, that the *Sun* was mov’d,
we should have more regard to that one place for the motion of the
Earth, than to all the other that made against it; because those others
might be spoken and understood according to common opinion and common
belief, but that which affirm’d the motion of the Earth, could not be
spoke upon any other ground, but only for truth and instruction sake. I
leave this to be appli’d to the present subject.

Thus much for the Sacred writings. As to the History of the ancient
Heathens, we cannot expect an account or Narration of *Noah*'s Flood,
under that name and notion; but it may be of use to observe two things
out of that History. First, that the Inundations recorded there came
generally to pass in the manner we have describ’d the Universal Deluge;
namely, by Earthquakes and an eruption of Subterraneous waters, the
Earth being broken and falling in: and of this we shall elsewhere give a
full account out of their Authors. Secondly, that *Deucalion*'s Deluge
in particular, which is suppos’d by most of the Ancient Fathers to
represent *Noah*'s Flood, is said to have been accompanied with a gaping
or disruption of the Earth; *Apollodorus* saith<span
class="margnote">*Bibl*. *lib*. 1.</span>, that the Mountains of
*Thessaly* were divided asunder, or separate one from another at that
time: And *Lucian* (*de deâ Syriâ*) tells a very remarkable story to
this purpose, concerning *Deucalion*'s Deluge, and a ceremony observ’d
in the Temple of *Hieropolis*, in commemoration of it; which ceremony
seems to have been of that nature, as impli’d that there was an opening
of the Earth at the time of the Deluge, and that the waters subsided
into that again when the Deluge ceast. He saith, that this Temple at
*Hieropolis* was built upon a kind of Abysse, or has a bottomless pit,
or gaping of the Earth in one part of it, and the people of *Arabia* and
*Syria*, and the Countries thereabouts twice a year repair’d to this
Temple, and brought with them every one a vessel of water, which they
pour’d out upon the floor of the Temple, and made a kind of an
Inundation there in memory of *Deucalion*'s Deluge; and this water sunk
by degrees into a Chasm or opening of a Rock, which the Temple stood
upon, and so left the floor dry again. And this was a rite solemnly and
religiously perform’d both by the Priests and by the People. If *Moses*
had left such a Religious rite among the *Jews*, I should not have
doubted to have interpreted it concerning his Abysse, and the retiring
of the waters into it; but the actual disruption of the Abysse could not
well be represented by any ceremony. And thus much concerning the
present question, and the true application of our Theory to *Noah*'s
Flood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[78:1](ste10.htm#fr_5) תהומָה מן

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](ste11)
