[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste10)  [Next](ste12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

*The particular History of* Noah*'s Flood is explain’d in all the
material parts and circumstances of it, according to the preceding
Theory. Any seeming difficulties removed, and the whole Section
concluded, with a Discourse how far the Deluge may be lookt upon as the
effect of an ordinary Providence, and how far of an extraordinary*.

WE have now proved our Explication of the Deluge to be more than an
Idea, or to be a true piece of Natural History; and it may be the
greatest and most remarkable that hath yet been since the beginning of
the World. We have shown it to be the real account of *Noah*'s Flood,
according to Authority both Divine and Humane; and I would willingly
proceed one step further, and declare my thoughts concerning the manner
and order wherein *Noah*'s Flood came to pass; in what method all those
things happen’d and succeeded one another, that make up the History of
it, as causes or effects, or other parts or circumstances: As how the
Ark was born upon the waters, what effect the Rains had, at what time
the Earth broke, and the Abysse was open’d; and what the condition of
the Earth was upon the ending of the Flood, and such like. But I desire
to propose my thoughts concerning these things only as conjectures,
which I will ground as near as I can upon Scripture and Reason, and am
very willing they should be rectifi’d where they happen to be amiss. I
know how subject we are to mistakes in these great and remote things,
when we descend to particulars; but I am willing to expose the Theory to
a full trial, and to shew the way for any to examine it, provided they
do it with equity and sincerity. I have no other design than to
contribute my endeavours to find out the truth in a subject of so great
importance, and wherein the World hath hitherto had so little
satisfaction: And he that in an obscure argument proposeth an
*Hypothesis* that reacheth from end to end, though it be not exact in
every particular, ’tis not without a good effect; for it gives aim to
others to take their measures better, and opens their invention in a
matter which otherwise, it may be, would have been impenetrable to them:
As he that makes the first way through a thick Forest, though it be not
the streightest and shortest, deserves better, and hath done more, than
he that makes it streighter and smoother afterwards.

Providence that ruleth all things and all Ages, after the Earth had
stood above sixteen hundred Years, thought fit to put a period to that
World, and accordingly, it was reveal’d to *Noah*, that for the
wickedness and degeneracy of men, God would destroy mankind with the
*Earth* (*Gen*. 6. 13) in a Deluge of water; where-upon he was
commanded, in order to the preserving of Himself and Family, as a stock
for the new World, to build a great Vessel or Ark, to float upon the
waters, and had instructions given him for the building of it both as to
the matter and as to the form. Noah believed the word of God, though
against his senses, and all external appearances, and set himself to
work to build an Ark, according to the directions given, which after
many years labour was finish’d; whilst the incredulous World, secure
enough, as they thought, against a Deluge, continu’d still in their
excesses and insolencies, and laught at the admonition of *Noah*, and

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

at the folly of his design of building an extravagant machine, a
floating house, to save himself from an imaginary Inundation; for they
thought it no less, seeing it was to be in an Earth where there was no
Sea, nor any Rain neither in those parts, according to the ordinary
course of Nature; as shall be shown in the second Book of this Treatise.

But when the appointed time was come, the Heavens began to melt, and the
Rains to fall, and these were the first surprizing causes and
preparatives to the Deluge; They fell, we suppose, throughout the face
of the whole Earth; which could not but have a considerable effect on
that Earth, being even and smooth, without Hills and eminencies, and
might lay it all under water to some depth; so as the Ark, if it could
not float upon those Rain-waters, at least taking the advantage of a
River, or of a Dock or Cistern made to receive them, it might be a-float
before the Abysse was broken open. For I do not suppose the Abysse
broken open before any rain fell; And when the opening of the Abysse and
of the Flood-gates of Heaven are mention’d together, I am apt to think
those Flood-gates were distinct from the common rain, and were something
more violent and impetuous. So that there might be preparatory Rains
before the disruption of the Abysse: and I do not know but those Rains,
so covering up and enclosing the Earth on every side, might
providentially contribute to the disruption of it; not only by softning
and weakning the Arch of the Earth in the bottom of those cracks and
Chasms which were made by the Sun, and which the Rain would first run
into, but especially by stopping on a sudden all the pores of the Earth,
and all evaporation, which would make the Vapours within struggle more
violently, as we get a Fever by a Cold; and it may be in that struggle,
the Doors and the Bars were broke, and the great Abysse gusht out, as
out of a womb.

However, when the Rains were faln, we may suppose the face of the Earth
cover’d over with water; and whether it was these waters that St.
*Peter* refers to, or that of the Abysse afterwards, I cannot tell, when
he saith in his first Epistle, *Chap*. 3. 20. *Noah* and his Family
*were sav’d by water*; so as the water which destroy’d the rest of the
World, was an instrument of their conservation, in as much as it bore up
the Ark, and kept it from that impetuous shock, which it would have had,
if either it had stood upon dry land when the Earth fell, or if the
Earth had been dissolv’d without any water on it or under it. However,
things being thus prepar’d, let us suppose the great frame of the
exteriour Earth to have broke at this time, or the Fountains of the
great Abysse, as *Moses* saith, to have been then open’d, from thence
would issue, upon the fall of the Earth, with an unspeakable violence,
such a Flood of waters as would over-run and overwhelm for a time all
those fragments which the Earth broke into, and bury in one common Grave
all Mankind, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Besides, if the
*Flood-gates* of Heaven were any thing distinct from the Forty days
Rain, their effusion, ’tis likely, was at this same time when the Abysse
was broken open; for the sinking of the Earth would make an
extraordinary convulsion of the Regions of the Air, and that crack and
noise that must be in the falling World, and in the collision of the
Earth and the Abysse, would make a great and universal Concussion above,
which things together, must needs so shake, or so squeeze the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Atmosphere, as to bring down all the remaining
Vapours; But the force of these motions not being equal throughout the
whole Air, but drawing or pressing more in some places than in other,
where the Center of the convulsion was, there would be the chiefest
collection, and there would fall, not showers of Rain, or single drops,
but great spouts or caskades of water; and this is that which Moses
seems to call, not improperly, the *Cataracts* of Heaven, or the
*Windows of Heaven being set open*.

Thus the Flood came to its height; and ’tis not easie to represent to
our selves this strange Scene of things, when the Deluge was in its fury
and extremity; when the Earth was broken and swallow’d up in the Abysse,
whose raging waters rise higher than the Mountains, and fill’d the Air
with broken waves, with an universal mist, and with thick darkness, so
as Nature seem’d to be in a second Chaos; and upon this Chaos rid the
distrest Ark, that bore the small remains of Mankind. No Sea was ever so
tumultuous as this, nor is there any thing in present Nature to be
compar’d with the disorder of these waters; All the Poetry, and all the
Hyperboles that are us’d in the description of Storms and raging Seas,
were literally true in this, if not beneath it. The Ark was really
carri’d to the tops of the highest Mountains, and into the places of the
Clouds, and thrown down again into the deepest Gulfs; and to this very
state of the Deluge and of the Ark, which was a Type of the Church in
this World, *David* seems to have alluded in the name of the Church,
*Psal*. 42. 7. *Abysse calls upon Abysse at the noise of thy Cataracts
or water-spouts; all thy waves and billows have gone over me*. It was no
doubt an extraordinary and miraculous Providence, that could make a
Vessel, so ill man’d, live upon such a Sea; that kept it from being
dasht against the Hills, or overwhelm’d in the Deeps. That Abysse which
had devour’d and swallow'd up whole Forests of Woods, Cities, and
Provinces, nay the whole Earth, when it had conquer’d all, and triumph’d
over all, could not destroy this single Ship. I remember in the story of
the *Argonauticks*, <span class="margnote">*Dion*. *Argonaut*. *li*. 1.
*v*. 47.</span> when *Jason* set out to fetch the Golden Fleece, the
Poet saith, all the Gods that day look’d down from Heaven, to view the
Ship; and the *Nymphs* stood upon the Mountain-tops to see the noble
Youth of *Thessaly* pulling at the Oars; We may with more reason suppose
the good Angels to have lookt down upon this Ship of *Noah*'s; and that
not out of curiosity, as idle spectators, but with a passionate concern
for its safety and deliverance. A Ship whose *Cargo* was no less than a
whole World; that carri’d the fortune and hopes of all posterity, and if
this had perisht, the Earth, for any thing we know, had been nothing but
a Desert, a great ruine, a dead heap of Rubbish, from the Deluge to the
Conflagration. But Death and Hell, the Grave, and Destruction have their
bounds. We may entertain our selves with the consideration of the face
of the Deluge, and of the broken and drown’d Earth, in this Scheme, with
the floating Ark, and the guardian Angels.

Thus much for the beginning and progress of the Deluge. It now remains
only that we consider it in its decrease, and the state of the Earth
after the waters were retied into their Chanels, which makes the present
state of it. *Moses* saith, God brought a wind upon the waters, and the
tops of the Hills became bare, and then the lower grounds and Plains by
degrees; the waters being sunk into the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="img_08500"></span>

[![](tn/08500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08500.jpg)

\[paragraph continues\] Chanels of the Sea, and the hollowness of the
Earth, and the whole Globe appearing in the form it is now under. There
needs nothing be added for explication of this, ’tis the genuine
consequence of the Theory we have given of the Deluge; and whether this
wind was a descending wind to depress and keep down the swellings and
inequalities of the Abysse, or whether it was only to dry the Land as
fast as it appear’d, or might have both effects, I do not know; But as
nothing can be perpetual that is violent, so this commotion of the
Abysse abated

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

after a certain time, and the great force that impell’d the waters,
decreasing, their natural gravity began to take effect, and to reduce
them into the lowest places, at an equal height, and in an even surface,
and level one part with another: That is, in short, the Abysse became
our Sea, fixt within its Chanel, and bounded by <span
class="margnote">*Job*. 38. 10, 11.</span>Rocks and Mountains: *Then was
the decreed place establisht for it, and Bars and Doors were set; then
it was said, hitherto shalt thou come, and no further, and here shall
thy proud waves be stopt*. And the Deluge being thus ended, and the
waters setled in their Chanels, the Earth took such a broken Figure as
is represented in those larger Schemes, *p*. [118](ste14.htm#page_118).
And this will be the form and state of it till its great change comes in
the Conflagration, when we expect *a new Heaven and a new Earth*.

But to pursue this prospect of things a little further; we may easily
imagine, that for many years after the Deluge ceast, the face of the
Earth was very different from what it is now, and the Sea had other
bounds than it hath at present. I do not doubt but the Sea reach’d much
further in-land, and climb’d higher upon the sides of the Mountains; And
I have observ’d in many places, a ridge of Mountains some distance from
the Sea, and a Plain from their roots to the shore; which Plain no doubt
was formerly cover’d by the Sea, bounded against those Hills as its
first and natural Ramparts, or as the ledges or lips of its Vessel. And
it seems probable, that the Sea doth still grow narrower from Age to
Age, and sinks more within its Chanel and the bowels of the Earth,
according as it can make its way into all those Subterraneous Cavities,
and crowd the Air out of them. We see whole Countries of Land gain’d
from it, and by several indications, as ancient Sea-ports left dry and
useless, old Sea-marks far within the Land, pieces of Ships, Anchors,
*&c*. left at a great distance from the present shores; from these
signs, and such like, we may conclude that the Sea reach’d many places
formerly that now are dry Land, and at first I believe was generally
bound on either side with a chain of Mountains. So I should easily
imagine the Mediterranean Sea, for instance, to have been bounded by the
continuation of the Alps through *Dauphiné* and *Languedock* to the
*Pyreneans*, and at the other end by the *Darmatick* Mountains almost to
the Black Sea. Then *Atlas major* which runs along with the
Mediterranean from Ægypt to the Atlantick Ocean, and now parts Barbary
and Numidia, may possibly have been the Ancient Barriere on the *Africk*
side. And in our own Island I could easily figure to my self, in many
parts of it, other Sea-bounds than what it hath at present; and the like
may be observ’d in other Countries.

And as the Sea had much larger bounds for some time after the Deluge, so
the Land had a different face in many respects to what it hath now; for
we suppose the Valleys and lower grounds, where the descent and
derivation of the water was not so easie, to have been full of Lakes and
Pools for a long time; and these were often converted into Fens and
Bogs, where the ground being spongy, suckt up the water, and the
loosen’d Earth swell’d into a soft and pappy substance; which would
still continue so, if there was any course of water sensible or
in-sensible, above or within the ground, that fed this moist place: But
if the water stood in a more firm Basin, or on a soil which for its
heaviness or any other reason would not mix with it, it made a Lake or
clear Pool. And we may easily imagine

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

there were innumerable such Lakes, and Bogs and fastnesses for many
years after the Deluge, till the world begun to be pretty well stockt
with people, and humane industry cleans’d and drain’d those unfruitful
and unhabitable places. And those Countries that have been later
cultivated, or by a lazier people, retain still, in proportion to their
situation and soil, a greater number of them.

Neither is it at all incongruous or inconvenient to suppose, that the
face of the Earth stood in this manner for many years after the Deluge;
for while Mankind was small and few, they needed but a little ground for
their seats or sustenance; and as they grew more numerous, the Earth
proportionably grew more dry, and more parts of it fit for habitation.
<span class="margnote">*De Leg. li.* 3.</span>I easily believe that
*Plato*'s observation or tradition is true, that Men at first, after the
Flood, liv’d in the Up-lands and sides of the Mountains, and by degrees
sunk into the Plains and lower Countries, when Nature had prepar’d them
for their use, and their numbers requir’d more room. The History of
*Moses* tells us<span class="margnote">*Gen*. 11.</span>, that sometime
after the Deluge, *Noah* and his posterity, his Sons and his
Grand-children, chang’d their quarters, and fell down into the Plains of
*Shiner*, from the sides of the Hills where the Ark had rested; and in
this Plain was the last general rendezvous of Mankind; so long they seem
to have kept in a body, and from thence they were divided and broken
into companies, and disperst, first, into the neighbouring Countries,
and then by degrees throughout the whole Earth; the several successive
Generations, like the waves of the Sea when it flows, over-reaching one
another, and striking out further and further, upon the face of the
Land. Not that the whole Earth was peopled by an uniform propagation of
Mankind every way, from one place, as a common center: like the swelling
of a Lake upon a Plain, for sometimes they shot out in length, like
Rivers: and sometimes they flew into remote Countries in Colonies, like
swarms from the Hive, and setled there, leaving many places un-inhabited
betwixt them and their first home. Sea-shores and Islands were generally
the last places inhabited: for while the memory or story of the Deluge
was fresh amongst them, they did not care for coming so near their late
Enemy: or, at least, to be enclos’d and surrounded by his forces.

And this may be sufficient to have discourst concerning all the parts of
the Deluge, and the restitution of the Earth to an habitable form, for
the further union of our Theory with the History of *Moses*; There rests
only one thing in that History to be taken notice of, which may be
thought possibly not to agree so well with our account of the Deluge;
namely, that *Moses* seems to shut up the Abysse again at the end of the
Deluge, which our Explication sypposeth to continue open. But besides
that half the Abysse is still really cover’d, *Moses* saith the same
thing of the *windows of Heaven*, that they were shut up too; and he
seemeth in both to express only the cessation of the Effect which
proceeded from their opening: For as *Moses* had ascrib’d the Deluge to
the opening of these two, so when it was to cease, he saith, these two
were shut up; as they were really put" into such a condition, both of
them, that they could not continue the Deluge any longer, nor ever be
the occasion of a second; and therefore in that sence, and as to that
effect were for ever shut up. Some may possibly make that also an
Objection against us, that *Moses* mentions and supposes the *Mountains*
at the Deluge,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

for he saith, the waters reached fifteen Cubits above the tops of them;
whereas we suppose the Ante-diluvian Earth to have had a plain and
uniform surface, without any inequality of Hills and Valleys. But this
is easily answer’d, ’twas in the height of the Deluge that *Moses*
mention’d the Mountains, and we suppose them to have risen then or more
towards the beginning of it, when the Earth was broke; and these
Mountains continuing still upon the face of the Earth, Moses might very
well take them for a standard to measure and express to Posterity the
height of the waters, though they were not upon the Earth when the
Deluge begun. Neither is there any mention made, as is observ’d by some,
of Mountains in Scripture, or of Rain, till the time of the Deluge.

We have now finisht our account of *Noah*'s Flood, both generally and
particularly; and I have not wittingly omitted or conceal’d any
difficulty that occur’d to me, either from the History, or from abstract
reason: Our Theory, so far as I know, hath the consent and authority of
both: And how far it agrees and is demonstrable from natural
observation, or from the form and *Phænomena* of this Earth, as it lies
at present, shall be the subject of the remaining part of this First
Book. In the mean time I do not know any thing more to be added in this
part, unless it be to conclude with an Advertisement to prevent any
mistake or misconstruction, as if this Theory, by explaining the Deluge
in a natural way, or by natural causes, did detract from the power of
God, by which that great judgment was brought upon the World in a
Providential and miraculous manner.

To satisfie all reasonable and intelligent persons in this particular, I
answer and declare, first, That we are far from excluding Divine
Providence, either ordinary or extraordinary, from the causes and
conduct of the Deluge. I know a Sparrow doth not fall to the ground
without the will of our Heavenly Father, much less doth the great World
fall in pieces without his good pleasure and superintendency. In him all
things live, move, and have their being; Things that have Life and
Thought have it from him, he is the Fountain of both: Things that have
motion only, without Thought, have it also from him: And what hath only
naked Being, without Thought or Motion, owe still that Being to him. And
these are not only deriv’d from God at first, but every moment continued
and conserv’d by him. So intimate and universal is the dependance of all
things upon the Divine Will and Power.

In the second place, they are guilty, in my Judgment, of a great Error
or indiscretion, that oppose the course of Nature to Providence. St.
*Paul* says (*Act*. 14. 17.) God hath not left us without witness, in
that he *gives us Rain from Heaven*; yet Rains proceed from natural
causes, and fall upon the Sea as well as upon the Land. <span
class="margnote">*Mat*. 6. 28.</span>In like manner, our Saviour makes
those things instances of Divine Providence, which yet come to pass in
an ordinary course of Nature; In that part of his excellent Sermon upon
the Mount, that concerns Providence, He bids them<span
class="margnote">*Luk*. 12. 24.</span> *Consider the Lilies how they
grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet* Solomon *in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these*; He bids them also *consider
the Ravens, they neither sow nor reap, neither have they Storehouse nor
Barn, and God feedeth them*. The Lilies grow, and the Ravens are fed
according to the ordinary course of Nature, and yet they are justly made
arguments of Providence

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

by our Saviour; nor are these things less Providential, because constant
and regular; on the contrary, such a disposition or establishment of
second causes, as will in the best order, and for a long succession,
produce the most regular effects, assisted only with the ordinary
concourse of the first cause, is a greater argument of wisdom and
contrivance, than such a disposition of causes as will not in so good an
order, or for so long a time produce regular effects, without an
extraordinary concourse and interposition of the First cause. This, I
think, is clear to every man's judgment. We think him a better Artist
that makes a Clock that strikes regularly at every hour from the Springs
and Wheels which he puts in the work, than he that hath so made his
Clock that he must put his finger to it every hour to make it strike:
And if one should contrive a piece of Clock-work so that it should beat
all the hours, and make all its motions regularly for such a time, and
that time being come, upon a signal given, or a Spring toucht, it should
of its own accord fall all to pieces; would not this be look’d upon as a
piece of greater Art, than if the Workman came at that time prefixt, and
with a great Hammer beat it into pieces? I use these comparisons to
convince us, that it is no detraction from Divine Providence, that the
course of Nature is exact and regular, and that even in its greatest
changes and revolutions it should still con-spire and be prepar’d to
answer the ends and purposes of the Divine Will in reference to the
*Moral* World. This seems to me to be the great Art of Divine
Providence, so to adjust the two Worlds, Humane and Natural, Material
and Intellectual, as seeing thorough the possibilities and futuritions
of each, according to the first state and circumstances he puts them
under, they should all along correspond and fit one another, and
especially in their great Crises and Periods.

Thirdly, Besides the ordinary Providence of God in the ordinary course
of Nature, there is doubtless an extraordinary Providence that doth
attend the greater Scenes and the greater revolutions of Nature. This,
methinks, besides all other proof from the Effects, is very rational and
necessary in it self; for it would be a limitation of the Divine Power
and Will so to be bound up to second causes, as never to use, upon
occasion, an extraordinary influence or direction: And ’tis manifest,
taking any Systeme of Natural causes, if the best possible, that there
may be more and greater things done, if to this, upon certain occasions
you joyn an extraordinary conduct. And as we have taken notice before,
that there was an extraordinary Providence in the formation or
composition of the first Earth, so I believe there was also in the
dissolution of it; And I think it had been impossible for the Ark to
have liv’d upon the raging Abysse, or for *Noah* and his Family to have
been preserv’d, if there had not been a miraculous hand of Providence to
take care of them. But ’tis hard to separate and distinguish an ordinary
and extraordinary Providence in all cases, and to mark just how far one
goes, and where the other begins. And writing a Theory of the Deluge
here, as we do, we were to exhibit a Series of causes whereby it might
be made intelligible, or to shew the proximate Natural causes of it;
wherein we follow the example both of *Moses* and St. *Peter*; and with
the same veneration of the Divine Power and Wisdom in the government of
Nature, by a constant ordinary Providence, and an occasional
extraordinary.

So much for the Theory of the Deluge, and the second Section of this
Discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](ste12)
