[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste13)  [Next](ste15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

*Concerning the Mountains of the Earth, their greatness and irregular
Form, their Situation, Causes, and Origin*.

WE have been in the hollows of the Earth, and the Chambers of the Deep,
amongst the damps and steams of those lower Regions; let us now go air
our selves on the tops of the Mountains, where we shall have a more free
and large Horizon, and quite another face of things will present it self
to our observation.

The greatest objects of Nature are, methinks, the most pleasing to
behold; and next to the great Concave of the Heavens, and those
boundless Regions where the Stars inhabit, there is nothing that I look
upon with more pleasure than the, wide Sea and the Mountains of the
Earth. There is something august and stately in the Air of these things,
that inspires the mind with great thoughts and passions; We do
naturally, upon such occasions, think of God and his greatness: and
whatsoever hath but the shadow and appearance of INFINITE, as all things
have

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

that are too big for our comprehension, they fill and over-bear the mind
with their Excess, and cast it into a pleasing kind of stupor and
admiration.

And yet these Mountains we are speaking of, to confess the truth, are
nothing but great ruines; but such as show a certain magnificence in
Nature; as from old Temples and broken Amphitheaters of the *Romans* we
collect the greatness of that people. But the grandeur of a Nation is
less sensible to those that never see the remains and monuments they
have left, and those who never see the mountainous parts of the Earth,
scarce ever reflect upon the causes of them, or what power in Nature
could be sufficient to produce them. The truth is, the generality of
people have not sence and curiosity enough to raise a question
concerning these things, or concerning the Original of them. You may
tell them that Mountains grow out of the Earth like Fuzz-balls, or that
there are Monsters under ground that throw up Mountains as Moles do
Mole-hills; they will scarce raise one objection against your doctrine;
or if you would appear more Learned, tell them that the Earth is a great
Animal, and these are Wens that grow upon its body. This would pass
current for Philosophy; so much is the World drown’d in stupidity and
sensual pleasures, and so little inquisitive into the works of God and
Nature.

There is nothing doth more awaken our thoughts or excite our minds to
enquire into the causes of such things, than the actual view of them; as
I have had experience my self when it was my fortune to cross the *Alps*
and *Appennine* Mountains; for the sight of those wild, vast and
indigested heaps of Stones and Earth, did so deeply strike my fancy,
that I was not easie till I could give my self some tolerable account
how that confusion came in Nature. ’Tis true, the height of Mountains
compar’d with the Diameter of the Earth is not considerable, but the
extent of them and the ground they stand upon, bears a considerable
proportion to the surface of the Earth; and if from *Europe* we may take
our measures for the rest, I easily believe, that the Mountains do at
least take up the tenth part of the dry land. The Geographers are not
very careful to describe or note in their Charts, the multitude or
situation of Mountains; They mark the bounds of Countries, the site of
Cities and Towns, and the course of Rivers, because these are things of
chief use to civil affairs and commerce, and that they design to serve,
and not Philosophy or Natural History. But *Cluverius* in his
description of *Ancient Germany*, *Switzerland* and *Italy*, hath given
Maps of those Countries more approaching to the natural face of them,
and we have drawn (at the end of this Chapter) such a Map of either
Hemisphere, without marking Countries or Towns, or any such artificial
things; distinguishing only Land and Sea, Islands and Continents,
Mountains and not Mountains; and ’tis very useful to imagine the Earth
in this manner, and to look often upon such bare draughts as shew us
Nature undrest; for then we are best able to judge what her true shapes
and proportions are.

’Tis certain that we naturally imagine the surface of the Earth much
more regular than it is; for unless we be in some Mountainous parts,
there seldom occur any great inequalities within so much compass of
ground as we can, at once, reach with our Eye; and to conceive the rest,
we multiply the same *Idea*,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and extend it to those parts of the Earth that we do not see; and so
fancy the whole Globe much more smooth and uniform than it is. But
suppose a man was carri’d asleep out of a Plain Country, amongst the
*Alps*, and left there upon the top of one of the highest Mountains,
when he wak’d and look’d about him, he would think himself in an
inchanted Country, or carri’d into another World; Every thing would
appear to him so different to what he had ever seen or imagin’d before.
To see on every hand of him a multitude of vast bodies thrown together
in confusion, as those Mountains are; Rocks standing naked round about
him; and the hollow Valleys gaping under him; and at his feet it may be,
an heap of frozen Snow in the midst of Summer. He would hear the thunder
come from below, and see the black Clouds hanging beneath him; Upon such
a prospect, it would not be easie to him to perswade himself that he was
still upon the same Earth; but if he did, he would be convinc’d, at
least, that there are some Regions of it strangely rude, and ruine-like,
and very different from what he had ever thought of before. But the
inhabitants of these wild places are even with us; for those that live
amongst the *Alps* and the great Mountains, think that all the rest of
the Earth is like their Country, all broken into Mountains, and Valleys,
and Precipices; They never see other, and most people think of nothing
but what they have seen at one time or another.

These *Alps* we are speaking of are the greatest range of Mountains in
*Europe*; and ’tis prodigious to see and to consider of what extent
these heaps of Stones and Rubbish are; one way they overspread *Savoy*
and *Dauphiné*, and reach through *France* to the *Pyrenean* Mountains,
and so to the Ocean. The other way they run along the skirts of
*Germany*, through *Stiria*, *Pannonia*, and *Dalmatia*, as far as
*Thrace* and the Black Sea. Then backwards they cover *Switzerland* and
the parts adjacent; and that branch of them which we call the
*Appennines*, strikes through *Italy*, and is, as it were, the back-bone
of that Country. This must needs be a large space of ground which they
stand upon; Yet ’tis not this part of *Europe* only that is laden with
Mountains, the Northern part is as rough and rude in the face of the
Country, as in the manners of the people; *Bohemia*, *Silesia*,
*Denmark*, *Norway*, *Sweedland*, *Lapland*, and *Iseland*, and all the
coasts of the *Baltick Sea*, are full of Clifts, and Rocks, and Crags of
Mountains: Besides the *Riphean* Mountains in *Muscovy*, which the
Inhabitants there use to call the Stone girdle, and believe that it
girds the Earth round about.

Nor are the other parts of our Continent more free from Mountains than
*Europe*, nor other parts of the Earth than our Continent: They are in
the New World as well as the Old; and if they could discover two or
three New Worlds or Continents more, they would still find them there.
Neither is there any Original Island upon the Earth, but is either all a
Rock, or hath Rocks and Mountains in it. And all the dry Land, and every
Continent, is but a kind of Mountain: though that Mountain hath a
multitude of lesser ones, and Valleys, and Plains, and Lakes, and
Marshes, and all variety of grounds.

In *America*, the *Andes*, or a ridge of Mountains so call’d, are
reported to be higher than any we have, reaching above a thousand
Leagues in length, and twenty in breadth, where they are the narrowest.
In *Africk* the Mountain *Atlas*,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

that for its height was said to bear the Heavens on its back, runs all
along from the Western Sea to the borders of *Ægypt*, parallel with the
*Mediterranean*. There also are the Mountains of the *Moon*, and many
more whereof we have but an imperfect account, as neither indeed of that
Country in the remote and inner parts of it. *Asia* is better known, and
the Mountains thereof better describ'd: *Taurus*, which is the
principal, was adjudg’d by the ancient Geographers the greatest in the
World. It divides Asia into two parts, which have their denomination
from it: And there is an *Anti-Taurus* the greater and the less, which
accordingly divide *Armenia* into greater and less. Then the *Cruciform*
Mountains of *Imaus*, the famous *Caucasus*, the long Chains of
*Tartary* and *China*, and the Rocky and Mountainous *Arabia*. If one
could at once have a prospect of all these together, one would be easily
satisfied, that the Globe of the Earth is a more rude and indigested
Body than ’tis commonly imagin’d; If one could see, I say, all the
Kingdoms and Regions of the Earth at one view, how they lie in broken
heaps; The Sea hath overwhelm’d one half of them, and what remains are
but the taller parts of a ruine. Look upon those great ranges of
Mountains in *Europe* or in *Asia*, whereof we have given a short
survey, in what confusion do they lie? They have neither form nor
beauty, nor shape, nor order, no more than the Clouds in the Air. Then
how barren, how desolate, how naked are they? how they stand neglected
by Nature? neither the Rains can soften them, nor the Dews from Heaven
make them fruitful.

I have given this short account of the Mountains of the Earth, to help
to remove that prejudice we are apt to have, or that conceit, That the
present Earth *is regularly form’d*. And to this purpose I do not doubt
but that it would be of very good use to have *natural* Maps of the
Earth, as we noted before, as well as *civil*; and done with the same
care and judgment. Our common Maps I call *Civil*, which note the
distinction of Countries and of Cities, and represent the Artificial
Earth as inhabited and cultivated: But natural Maps leave out all that,
and represent the Earth as it would be if there was not an Inhabitant
upon it, nor ever had been; the Skeleton of the Earth, as I may so say,
with the site of all its parts. Methinks also every Prince should have
such a Draught of his own Country and Dominions, to see how the ground
lies in the several parts of them, which highest, which lowest; what
respect they have to one another, and to the Sea; how the Rivers flow,
and why; how the Mountains stand, how the Heaths, and how the Marches
are plac’d. Such a Map or Survey would be useful both in time of War and
Peace, and many good observations might be made by it, not only as to
Natural History and Philosophy, but also in order to the perfect
improvement of a Countrey. But to return to our Mountains.

As this Survey of the multitude and greatness of them may help to
rectifie our mistakes about the form of the Earth, so before we proceed
to examine their causes, it will be good to observe farther, that these
Mountains are plac’d in no order one with another, that can either
respect use or beauty; And if you consider them singly, they do not
consist of any proportion of parts that is referrable to any design, or
that hath the least footsteps of Art or Counsel. There is nothing in
Nature more shapeless and ill-figur’d than an old Rock or a Mountain,
and all

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

that variety that is among them, is but the various modes of
irregularity; so as you cannot make a better character of them, in
short, than to say they are of all forms and figures, except regular.
Then if you could go within these Mountains, (for they are generally
hollow,) you would find all things there more rude, if possible, than
without: And lastly, if you look upon an heap of them together, or a
Mountainous Country, they are the greatest examples of confusion that we
know in Nature; no Tempest or Earthquake puts things into more disorder.
’Tis true, they cannot look so ill now as they did at first; a ruine
that is fresh looks much worse than afterwards, when the Earth grows
discolour’d and skin’d over. But I fancy if we had seen the Mountains
when they were new-born and raw, when the Earth was fresh broken, and
the waters of the Deluge newly retied, the fractions and confusions of
them would have appear’d very gastly and frightful.

After this general Survey of the Mountains of the Earth and their
properties, let us now reflect upon the causes of them. There is a
double pleasure in Philosophy, first that of Admiration, whilst we
contemplate things that are great and wonderful, and do not yet
understand their Causes; for though admiration proceed from ignorance,
yet there is a certain charm and sweetness in that passion. Then the
second pleasure is greater and more intellectual, which is that of
distinct knowledge and comprehension, when we come to have the Key that
unlocks those secrets, and see the methods wherein those things come to
pass that we admir’d before; The reasons why the World is so or so, and
from what causes Nature, or any part of Nature, came into such a state;
and this we are now to enquire after as to the Mountains of the Earth,
what their original was, how and when the Earth came into this strange
frame and structure? In the beginning of our World, when the Earth rise
from a Chaos, ’twas impossible it should come immediately into this
Mountainous form; because a mass that is fluid, as a Chaos is, cannot
lie in any other figure than what is regular; for the constant laws of
Nature do certainly bring all Liquors into that form: And a Chaos is not
call’d so from any confusion or brokenness in the form of it, but from a
confusion and mixture of all sorts of ingredients in the composition of
it. So we have already produc’d, in the precedent Chapters, a double
argument that the Earth was not originally in this form, both becaute it
rise from a Chaos, which could not of it self, or by any immediate
concretion, settle into a form of this nature, as hath been shown in the
Fourth and Fifth Chapters; as also because if it had been originally
made thus, it could never have undergone a Deluge, as hath been prov’d
in the Second and Third Chapters. If this be then a secondary and
succedaneous form, the great question is from what causes it arises.

Some have thought that Mountains, and all other irregularities in the
Earth, have rise from Earthquakes, and such like causes; others have
thought that they came from the universal Deluge; yet not from any
dissolution of the Earth that was then, but only from the great
agitation of the waters, which broke the ground into this rude and
unequal form. Both these causes seem to me very incompetent and
insufficient. Earthquakes seldom make Mountains, they often take them
away, and sink them down into the Caverns that lie under them; Besides,
Earthquakes are not in all Countries and Climates as Mountains are; for,
as we have

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

observ’d more than once, there is neither Island that is original, nor
Continent any where in the Earth, in what latitude soever, but hath
Mountains and Rocks in it. And lastly, what probability is there, or how
is it credible, that those vast tracts of Land which we see fill’d with
Mountains both in *Europe*, *Asia* and *Africa*, were rais’d by
Earthquakes, or any eruptions from below. In what Age of the World was
this done, and why not continued? As for the Deluge, I doubt not but
Mountains were made in the time of the general Deluge, that great change
and transformation of the Earth happen’d then, but not from such causes
as are pretended, that is, the bare rowling and agitation of the waters;
For if the Earth was smooth and plain before the Flood, as they seem to
suppose as well as we do, the waters could have little or no power over
a smooth surface to tear it any way in pieces, no more than they do a
meadow or low ground when they lie upon it; for that which makes
Torrents and Land-floods violent, is their fall from the Mountains and
high Lands, which our Earth is now full of, but if the Rain fell upon
even and level ground, it would only sadden and compress it; there is no
possibility how it should raise Mountains in it. And if we could imagine
an universal Deluge as the Earth is now constituted, it would rather
throw down the Hills and Mountains than raise new ones; or by beating
down their tops and loose parts, help to fill the Valleys, and bring the
Earth nearer to evenness and plainness.

Seeing then there are no hopes of explaining the Origin of Mountains,
either from particular Earthquakes, or from the general Deluge,
according to the common notion and Explication of it; these not being
causes answerable to such vast effects; Let us try our *Hypothesis*
again; which hath made us a Chanel large enough for the Sea, and room
for all subterraneous Cavities, and I think will find us materials
enough to raise all the Mountains of the Earth. We suppose the great
Arch or circumference of the first Earth to have fallen into the Abyss
at the Deluge, and seeing that was larger than the surface it fell upon,
’tis absolutely certain, that it could not all fall flat, or lie under
the water: Now as all those parts that stood above the water made dry
Land, or the present habitable Earth, so such parts of the dry Land as
stood higher than the rest, made Hills and Mountains; And this is the
first and general account of them, and of all the inequalities of the
Earth. But to consider these things a little more particularly; There is
a double cause and necessity of Mountains, first this now mention’d,
because the exteriour Orb of the Earth was greater than the interiour
which it fell upon, and therefore it could not all fall flat; and
secondly, because this exteriour Orb did not fall so flat and large as
it might, or did not cover all the bottom of the Abyss, as it was very
capable to do; but as we shewed before in explaining the Chanel of the
Ocean, it left a gaping in the middle, or an *Abyss-chanel*, as I should
call it; and the broader this Abyss-chanel was, the more Mountains there
would be upon the dry Land; for there would be more Earth, or more of
the falling Orb left, and less room to place it in, and therefore it
must stand more in heaps.

In what parts of the Earth these heaps would lie, and in what particular
manner, it cannot be expected that we should tell; but all that we have
hitherto observ'd

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

concerning Mountains, how strange soever and otherwise unaccountable,
may easily be explain’d, and deduc’d from this original; we shall not
wonder at their greatness and vastness, seeing they are the ruines of a
broken World; and they would take up more or less of the dry Land,
according as the Ocean took up more or less space of our Globe: Then as
to their figure and form, whether External or Internal, ’tis just such
as answers our expectation, and no more than what the *Hypothesis* leads
us to; For you would easily believe that these heaps would be irregular
in all manner of ways, whether consider’d apart, or in their situation
to one another. And they would lie commonly in Clusters and in Ridges,
for those are two of the most general postures of the parts of a ruine,
when they fall inwards. Lastly, we cannot wonder that Mountains should
be generally hollow; For great bodies falling together in confusion, or
bearing and leaning against one another, must needs make a great many
hollownesses in them, and by their unequal Applications empty spaces
will be intercepted. We see also from the same reason, why mountainous
Countries are subject to Earthquakes; and why Mountains often sink and
fall down into the Caverns that lie under them; their joynts and props
being decay’d and worn, they become unable to bear their weight. And all
these properties you see hang upon one and the same string, and are just
consequences from our supposition concerning the dissolution of the
first Earth. And there is no surer mark of a good *Hypothesis*, than
when it doth not only hit luckily in one or two particulars, but answers
all that it is to be appli’d to, and is adequate to Nature in her whole
extent.

But how fully or easily soever these things may answer Nature, you will
say, it may be, that all this is but an *Hypothesis*; that is, a kind of
fiction or supposition that things were so and so at first, and by the
coherence and agreement of the Effects with such a supposition, you
would argue and prove that they were really so. This I confess is true,
this is the method, and if we would know any thing in Nature further
than our senses go, we can know it no otherwise than by an *Hypothesis*.
When things are either too little for our senses, or too remote and
inaccessible, we have no way to know the inward Nature, and the causes
of their sensible properties, but by reasoning upon an *Hypothesis*. If
you would know, for example, of what parts Water, or any other Liquor
consists, they are too little to be discern’d by the Eye, you must
therefore take a supposition concerning their invisible figure and form,
and if that agrees and gives the reason of all their sensible qualities,
you understand the nature of Water. In like manner, if you would know
the nature of a Comet, or of what matter the Sun consists, which are
things inaccessible to us, you can do this no otherwise than by an
*Hypothesis*; and if that *Hypothesis* be easie and intelligible, and
answers all the *Phænomena* of those two bodies, you have done as much
as a *Philosopher* or as *Humane reason* can do. And this is what we
have attempted concerning the Earth and concerning the Deluge; We have
laid down an *Hypothesis* that is easie and perspicuous, consisting of a
few things, and those very intelligible, and from this we have given an
account how the Old World was destroy’d by a Deluge of water, and how
the Earth came into this present form; so distinguish’d and interrupted
with Sea and Land, Mountains and Valleys, and so broken in the surface
and inward parts of it.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span id="img_11600"></span>

[![Fig 1](tn/11600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11600.jpg.md)  
Fig 1  

But to speak the Truth, this Theory is something more than a bare
*Hypothesis*; because we are assur’d that the general ground that we go
upon is true, namely, that the Earth rise at first from a Chaos; for
besides Reason and Antiquity, Scripture it self doth assure as of that;
and that one point being granted, we have deduc’d from it all the rest
by a direct chain of consequences, which I think cannot be broken easily
in part part or link of it. Besides, the great hinge of this Theory upon
which all the rest turns, is the distinction we make of the Antediluvian
Earth and Heavens from the Post-diluvian, as to their form and
constitution.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="img_11700"></span>

[![Fig. 2](tn/11700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11700.jpg.md)  
Fig. 2  

\[paragraph continues\] And it will never be beaten out of my head, but
that St. *Peter*<span class="margnote">2 *Ep*. *Chap*. 3. 5, 6.</span>
hath made the same distinction sixteen hundred years since, and to the
very same purpose; so that we have sure footing here again, and the
Theory riseth above the character of a bare *Hypothesis*. And whereas an
*Hypothesis* that is clear and proportion’d to Nature in every respect,
is accounted morally certain, we must in equity give more than a moral
certitude to this Theory. But I mean this only as to the general parts
of it; for as to particularities, I look upon them only as
problematical, and accordingly I affirm nothing therein but with a power
of revocation,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

and a liberty to change my opinion when I shall be better inform’d.
Neither do I know any Author that hath treated a matter new, remote, and
consisting of a multitude of particulars, who would not have had
occasion, if he had liv’d to have seen his *Hypothesis* fully examin’d,
to have chang’d his mind and manner of explaining things, in many
material instances.

To conclude both this Chapter and this Section, we have here added a Map
or Draught of the Earth, according to the Natural face of it, as it
would appear from the Moon, if we were a little nearer to her; or as it
was at first after the Deluge, before Cities were built, distinctions of
Countries made, or any alterations by humane industry. ’Tis chiefly to
expose more to view the Mountains of the Earth, and the proportions of
Sea and Land, to shew it as it lies in it self, and as a Naturalist
ought to conceive and consider it. ’Tis true, there are far more
Mountains upon the Earth than what are here represented, for more could
not conveniently be plac’d in this narrow Scheme; But the best and most
effectual way of representing the body of the Earth as it is by Nature,
would be, not in plain Tables, but by a *rough Globe*, expressing all
the considerable inequalities that are upon the Earth. The smooth Globes
that we use, do but nourish in us the conceit of the Earth's regularity,
and though they may be convenient enough for Geographical purposes, they
are not so proper for Natural Science; nothing would be more useful, in
this respect, than a rough Globe of the largest dimensions, wherein the
Chanel of the Sea should be really hollow, as it is in Nature, with all
its unequal depths according to the best soundings, and the shores
exprest both according to matter and form, little Rocks standing where
there are Rocks, and Sands and Beaches in the places where they are
found; And all the Islands planted in the Sea-chanel in a due form, and
in their solid dimensions. Then upon the Land should stand all the
ranges of Mountains, in the same order or disorder that Nature hath set
them there; And the in-land Seas, and great Lakes, or rather the beds
they lie in, should be duly represented; as also the vast desarts of
Sand as they lie upon the Earth. And this being done with care and due
Art, would be a true Epitome or true model of our Earth. Where we should
see, besides other instructions, what a rude Lump our World is, which we
are so apt to dote upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](ste15.md)
