[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste19)  [Next](ste21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

*A digression, concerning the Natural Causes of Longævity. That the
Machine of an Animal consists of Springs, and which are the two
principal. The Age of the Ante-diluvians to be computed by* Solar *not*
Lunar *Years*.

TO confirm our opinion concerning the reasons of Longævity in the first
Inhabitants of the World, it will not be amiss to deduce more at large
the Natural Causes of *long* or *short periods of life*. And when we
speak of long or short periods of life, we do not mean those little
difference of ten, twenty or forty Years which we see amongst men now
adays, according as they are of stronger or weaker constitutions, and
govern themselves better or worse, but those grand and famous
differences of several hundreds of Years, which we have examples of in
the different Ages of the World, and particularly in those that liv’d
before and since the Flood. Neither do we think it peculiar to this
Earth to have such an inequality in the lives of men, but the other
Planets, if they be inhabited, have the same property, and the same
difference in their different periods; All Planets that are in their
Ante-diluvian state, and in their first and regular situation to the
Sun, have long-liv’d Inhabitants; and those that are in an oblique
situation, have short-liv’d; unless there be some counter-causes that
hinder this general rule of Nature from taking place.

We are now so us’d to a short life, and to drop away after threescore or
four-score years, that when we compare our lives with those of the
Ante-diluvians, we think the wonder lies wholly on their side, *why*
they liv’d so long; and so it doth, popularly speaking; but if we speak
Philosophically, the wonder lies rather on our side, why we live so
little, or so short a time: For seeing our Bodies are such Machines as
have a faculty of nourishing themselves, that is, of repairing their
lost or decay’d parts, so long as they have good nourishment to make use
of, why should they not continue in good plight, and always the same? as
a flame does, so long as it is supplied with fewel? And that we may the
better see on whether side the wonder lies, and from what causes it
proceeds, we will propose this Problem to be examin’d, *Why the frame or
Machine of an humane Body, or of another Animal, having that
construction of parts and those faculties which it* 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

*hath, lasts so short a time*? And though it fall into no disease, nor
have any unnatural accident, within the space of eighty years, more or
less, fatally and inevitably decays, dies and perisheth?

That the state and difficulty of this question may the better appear,
let us consider a man in the prime and vigour of his life, at the age of
twenty or twenty four years, of an healthful constitution, and all his
Vitals sound; let him be nourisht with good food, use due exercise, and
govern himself with moderation in all other things; The Question is, why
this Body should not continue in the same plight, and in the same
strength, for some Ages? or at least why it should decay so soon, and so
fast as we see it does? We do not wonder at things that happen daily,
though the causes of them be never so hard to find out; We contract a
certain familiarity with common events, and fancy we know as much of
them as can be known, though in reality we know nothing of them but
matter of fact; which the vulgar knows as well as the Wise or the
Learned. We see daily instances of the shortness of mans life, how soon
his race is run, and we do not wonder at it, because ’tis common, yet if
we examine the composition of the Body, it will be very hard to find any
good reasons why the frame of it should decay so soon.

I know ’tis easie to give general and superficial answers and accounts
of these things, but they are such, as being strictly examin’d, give no
satisfaction to an inquisitive mind: You would say, it may be, that the
Interiour parts and Organs of the Body wear and decay by degrees, so as
not performing so well their several offices and functions, for the
digestion and distribution of the food and its juices, all the other
parts suffer by it, and that draws on insensibly a decay upon the whole
frame of the Body. This is all true; but why, and how comes this to
pass? from what causes? where is the first failure, and what are the
consequences of it? The inward parts do not destroy themselves, and we
suppose that there is no want of good food, nor any disease, and we take
the Body in its full strength and vigour, why doth it not continue thus,
as a Lamp does, if you supply it with Oil? The causes being the same,
why doth not the same effect still follow? why should not the flame of
life, as well as any other flame, if you give it fewel, continue in its
force without languishing or decay?

You will say, it may be, The case is not the same in a simple Body, such
as a Lamp or a Fire, and in an Organical Body; which being variously
compounded of multiplicity of parts, and all those parts put in
connexion and dependance one upon another, if any one fail, it will
disorder the whole frame; and therefore it must needs be more difficult
for such a body to continue long in the same state, than for a simple
Body that hath no variety of parts or operations. I acknowledge such a
Body is much more subject to diseases and accidents than a more simple,
but barring all diseases and accidents, as we do, it might be of as long
a duration as any other, if it was suppli’d with nourishment adequately
to all its parts: As this Lamp we speak of, if it consisted of twenty
branches, and each of these branches was to be fed with a different Oil,
and these Oils should be all mixt together in some common Cistern,
whence they were to be distributed into the several branches, either
according to their different degrees of lightness, one rising higher
than another; or according to the capacity and figure of the little

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

pipes they were to pass thorough; such a compounded Lamp, made up of
such artifices, would indeed be more subject to accidents, and to be out
of order, by the obstruction of some of the little pipes, or some unfit
qualities in the Oils, but all these casualties and disorders excepted,
as they are in our case, if it was suppli’d with convenient liquors, it
would burn as long as any other, though more plain and simple.

To instance yet, for more plainness, in another sort of Machine, suppose
a Mill, where the Water may represent the nourishment and humours in our
Body, and the frame of Wood and Stone, the solid parts; If we could
suppose this Mill to have a power of nourishing it self by the Water it
receiv’d, and of repairing all the parts that were worn away, whether of
the Wood-work or of the Stone, feed it but with a constant stream, and
it would subsist and grind for ever. And ’tis the same thing for all
other Artificial Machines of this nature, if they had a faculty of
nourishing themselves, and repairing their parts. And seeing those
natural Machines we are speaking of, the Body of Man, and of other
Animals, have and enjoy this faculty, why should they not be able to
preserve themselves beyond that short period of time which is now the
measure of their life?

Thus much we have said to shew the difficulty propos’d and inforce it;
We must now consider the true answer and resolution of it; and to that
purpose bring into view again those causes which we have assign’d, both
of the long periods of life before the Flood, and of the short ones
since. That there was a perpetual Æquinox and stability of the Heavens
before the Flood, we have show’d both from History and reason; neither
was there then any thing of Clouds, Rains, Winds, Storms or unequal
weather, as will appear in the following Chapter; And to this steddiness
of Nature and universal calmness of the external World we have imputed
those long periods of life which men enjoy’d at that time: As on the
contrary, when that great change and revolution happen’d to Nature at
the Deluge, and the Heavens and the Earth were cast in another mould,
then was brought in, besides many other new Scenes, that shortness and
vanity in the life of Man, and a general instability in all sublunary
things, but especially in the Animate World.

It is not necessary to show, more than we have done already, how that
Primitive state of Nature contributed to long life; neither is it
requir’d that it should actively contribute, but only be permissive, and
suffer our Bodies to act their parts; for if they be not disturb’d, nor
any harm done them by external Nature, they are built with art and
strength enough to last many hundreds of years. And as we observ’d
before concerning the posture of the Earth, that that which it had at
first, being simple and regular, was not so much to be accounted for, as
its present posture, which is irregular; so likewise for the life of
Man, the difficulty is not why they liv’d so long in the old World; that
was their due and proper course; but why our Bodies being made after the
same manner, should endure. so short a time now. This is it therefore
which we must now make our business to give an account of, namely, how
that vissitude of Seasons, inconstancy of the Air, and unequal course of
nature which came in at the Deluge, do shorten *Life*; and indeed hasten
the dissolution of all Bodies, Animate or Inanimate.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

In our Bodies we may consider three several qualities or dispositions,
according to each whereof they suffer decay; First, their continuity;
Secondly, that disposition whereby they are capable of receiving
nourishment, which we may call Nutribility; and Thirdly, the Tone or
Tonick disposition of the Organs whereby they perform their several
functions. In all these three respects they would decay in any state of
Nature, but far sooner and faster in the present state than in the
Primæval. As for their Continuity, we have noted before that all
consistent Bodies must be less durable now, than under that first order
of the World, because of the unequal and contrary motions of the
Elements, or of the Air and Æther that penetrate and pervade them; and
’tis part of that vanity which all things now are subject to, to be more
perishable than in their first Constitution. If we should consider our
Bodies only as breathing Statues, consisting of those parts they do, and
of that tenderness, the Air which we breath, and wherewith we are
continually incompast, changing so often ’twixt moist and dry, hot and
cold, a slow and eager motion, these different actions and restless
changes would sooner weaken and destroy the union of the parts, than if
they were always in a calm and quiet *medium*.

But it is not the gross and visible Continuity of the parts of our Body
that first decays, there are finer Textures that are spoil’d insensibly,
and draw on the decay of the rest; such are those other two we
mention’d, That disposition and temper of the parts whereby they are fit
to receive their full nourishment; and especially that construction and
texture of the Organs that are preparatory to this Nutrition. The
Nutribility of the Body depends upon a certain temperament in the parts,
soft and yielding, which makes them open to the Bloud and Juices in
their Circulation and passage through them, and mixing intimately, and
universally, hold fast and retain many of their Particles; as muddy
Earth doth of the Water that runs into it and mixeth with it: And when
these Nutritious Particles retain’d are more than the Body spends, that
Body is in its growth; as when they are fewer, ’tis in its decay. And as
we compar’d the flesh and tender parts when they are young and in a
growing disposition, to a muddy soil, that opens to the Water, swells
and incorporates with it; so when they become hard and dry, they are
like a sandy Earth, that suffers the Water to glide through it, without
incorporating or retaining many of its parts; and the sooner they come
to this temper, the sooner follows their decay: For the same Causes that
set limits to our Growth, set also limits to our Life; and he that can
resolve that Question, why the time of our *Growth* is so short, will
also be able to resolve the other in a good measure, *why* the time of
our *Life* is so short. In both cases, that which stops our progress is
external Nature, whose course, while it was even and steddy, and the
ambient Air mild and balmy, preserv’d the Body much longer in a fresh
and fit temper to receive its full nourishment, and consequently gave
larger bounds both to our growth and Life.

But the third thing we mention’d is the most considerable, The decay of
the Organick parts; and especially of the Organs preparatory to
Nutrition. This is the point chiefly to be examin’d and explain’d, and
therefore we will endeavour to state it fully and distinctly. There are
several functions in the Body of an

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Animal, and several Organs for the conduct of
them; and I am of opinion, that all the Organs of the Body are in the
nature of Springs, and that their action is Tonical. The action of the
Muscles is apparently so, and so is that of the Heart and the Stomach;
and as for those parts that make secretions only, as the *Glandules* and
*Parenchymata*, if they be any more than meerly passive, as Strainers,
’tis the Tone of the parts, when distended, that performs the
separation: And accordingly in all other active Organs, the action
proceeds from a Tone in the parts. And this seems to be easily prov’d,
both as to our Bodies and all other Bodies, for no matter that is not
fluid, hath any motion or action in it, but in vertue of some Tone; If
matter be fluid, its parts are actually in motion, and consequently may
impel or give motion to other Bodies; but if it be solid or consistent,
the parts are not separate or separately mov’d from one another, and
therefore cannot impel or give motion to any other, but in vertue of
their Tone; they having no other motion themselves. Accordingly we see
in Artificial Machines there are but two general sorts, those that move
by some fluid or volatile matter, as Water, Wind, Air, or some active
Spirit; And those which move by Springs, or by the Tonick disposition of
some part that gives motion to the rest: For as for such Machines as act
by weights, ’tis not the weight that is the active principle, but the
Air or Æther that impels. it ’Tis true, the Body of an Animal is a kind
of mixt Machine, and those Organs that are the Primary parts of it,
partake of both these principles; for there are Spirits and Liquors that
do assist in the motions of the Muscles, of the Heart and of the
Stomach; but we have no occasion to consider them at present, but only
the Tone of the solid Organs.

This being observ’d in the first place, *Wherein* the force of our
Organs consists, we might here immediately subjoyn, how this force is
weaken’d and destroy’d by the unequal course of Nature which now
obtains, and consequently our Life shorten’d; for the whole state and
Oeconomy of the Body depends upon the force and action of these Organs.
But to understand the business more distinctly, it will be worth our
time to examine, upon which of the Organs of the Body Life depends more
immediately, and the prolongation of it; that so reducing our Inquiries
into a narrower compass, we may manage them with more ease and more
certainty.

In the Body of Man there are several Compages, or setts of parts, some
whereof need not be consider’d in this question; There is that Systeme
that serves for sence and local-motion, which is commonly call’d the
ANIMAL Compages; and that which serves for generation, which is call’d
the GENITAL. These have no influence upon long Life, being parts
nourished, not nourishing, and that are fed from others as Rivers from
their Fountain: Wherefore having laid these aside, there remain two
Compages more, the NATURAL and VITAL, which consist of the Heart and
Stomach, with their appendages. These are the Sources of Life, and all
that is absolutely necessary to the constitution of a Living Creature;
what parts we find more, few or many, of one sort or other, according to
the several kinds of Creatures, is accidental to our purpose; The form
of an Animal, as we are to consider it here, lies in this little
compass, and what is superadded is for some new purposes, besides that
of meer Life, as for Sense, Motion, Generation, and such like. As in a
Watch, besides the Movement, which is made to tell

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

you the hour of the day, which constitutes a Watch, you may have a fancy
to have an Alarum added, or a Minute-motion, or that it should tell you
the day of the month; and this sometimes will require a new Spring,
sometimes only new Wheels; however if you would examine the Nature of a
Watch, and upon what its motion, or, if I may so say, its Life depends,
you must lay aside those secondary Movements, and observe the main
Spring, and the Wheels that immediately depend upon that, for all the
rest is accidental. So for the Life of an Animal, which is a piece of
Nature's Clockwork, if we would examine upon what the duration of it
depends, we must lay aside those additional parts or Systems of parts,
which are for other purposes, and consider only the first principles and
fountains of Life, and the causes of their natural and necessary decay.

Having thus reduc’d our Inquiries to these two Organs, The Stomach and
the Heart, as the two Master-Springs in the Mechanism of an Animal, upon
which all the rest depend, let us now see what their action is, and how
it will be more or less durable and constant, according to the different
states of external Nature. We determin’d before, that the force and
action of all Organs in the Body was Tonical, and of none more
remarkable than of these two, the Heart and Stomach; for though it be
not clearly determin’d what the particular structure of these Organs, or
of their Fibres is, that makes them Tonical, yet ’tis manifest by their
actions that they are so. In the Stomach, besides a peculiar ferment
that opens and dissolves the parts of the Meat, and melts them into a
fluor or pulp, the coats of it, or Fibres whereof they consist, have a
motion proper to them, proceeding from their Tone, whereby they close
the Stomach, and compress the Meat when it is receiv’d, and when turn’d
into Chyle, press it forwards, and squeese it into the Intestines; And
the Intestines also partaking of the same motion, push and work it still
forwards into those little Veins that convey it towards the Heart. The
Heart hath the same general motions with the Stomach, of opening and
shutting, and hath also a peculiar ferment which rarifies the Bloud that
enters into it; and that bloud by the Spring of the Heart, and the
particular Texture of its Fibres, is thrown out again to make its
Circulation through the Body. This is, in short, the action of both
these Organs; and indeed the mystery of the Body of an Animal, and of
its operations and Oeconomy, consists chiefly in Springs and Ferments;
The one for the solid parts, the other in the fluid.

But to apply this Fabrick of the Organick parts to our purpose, we may
observe and conclude, that whatsoever weakens the Tone or Spring of
these two Organs, which are the Bases of all Vitality, weaken the
principle of Life, and shorten the Natural duration of it; And if of two
Orders or Courses of Nature, the one be favourable and easie to these
Tonick principles in the Body, and the other uneasie and prejudicial,
that course of Nature will be attended with long periods of Life, and
this with short. And we have shewn, that in the Primitive Earth the
course of Nature was even, steddy and unchangeable, without either
different qualities of the Air, or unequal Seasons of the Year, which
must needs be more easie to these principles we speak of, and permit
them to continue longer in their strength and vigour, than they can
possibly do under all those changes of the Air, of the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Atmosphere, and of the Heavens, which we now
suffer yearly, monthly, and daily. And though Sacred History had not
acquainted us with the Longævity of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, nor
profane History with those of the Golden Age, I should have concluded,
from the Theory alone, and the contemplation of that state of Nature,
that the forms of all things were much more permanent in that World than
in ours, and that the lives of Men and all other Animals had longer
periods.

I confess, I am of opinion, that ’tis this that makes, not only these
living Springs or Tonick Organs of the Body, but all Artificial Springs
also, though made of the hardest Metal, decay so fast. The different
pressure of the Atmosphere, sometimes heavier, sometimes lighter, more
rare or more dense, moist or dry, and agitated with different degrees of
motion, and in different manners; this must needs operate upon that
nicer contexture of Bodies, which makes them Tonical or Elastick;
altering the figure or minuteness of the pores, and the strength and
order of the Fibres upon which that propriety depends: bending and
unbending, closing and opening the parts. There is a subtle and Æthereal
Element that traverseth the pores of all Bodies, and when ’tis
straiten’d and pent up there, or stopt in its usual course and passage,
its motion is more quick and eager, as a Current of Water, when ’tis
obstructed or runs through a narrower Chanel; and that strife and those
attempts which these little active Particles make to get free, and
follow the same tracts they did before, do still press upon the parts of
the Body that are chang’d, to redress and reduce them to their first and
Natural posture, and in this consists the force of a Spring. Accordingly
we may observe, that there is no Body that is Tonical or Elastick, if it
be left to it self, and to that posture it would take naturally; for
then all the parts are at ease, and the subtle matter moves freely and
uninterruptedly within its pores; but if by distention, or by
compression, or by flexion, or any other way, the situation of the parts
and pores be so alter’d, that the Air sometimes, but for the most part
that subtiler Element, is uneasie and comprest too much, if causeth that
renitency or tendency to restitution, which we call the Tone or Spring
of a Body. Now as this disposition of Bodies doth far more easily perish
than their Continuity, so I think there is nothing that contributes more
to its perishing (whether in Natural or Artificial Springs) than the
unequal action and different qualities of the Æther, Air, and
Atmosphere.

It will be objected to us, it may be, that in the beginning of the
Chapter we instanc’d in Artificial things, that would continue for ever,
if they had but the power of nourishing themselves, as Lamps, Mills, and
such like; why then may not Natural Machines that have that power, last
for ever? The case is not the same as to the Bodies of Animals, and the
things there instanc’d in, for those were springless Machines, that act
only by some external cause, and not in vertue of any Tone or interiour
temper of the parts, as our Bodies do; and when that Tone or temper is
destroy’d, no nourishment can repair it. There is something, I say,
irreparable in the Tonical disposition of matter, which, when lost,
cannot be restor’d by Nutrition; Nutrition may answer to a bare
consumption of parts, but where the parts are to be preserv’d in such a
temperament, or in such a degree of humidity and driness, warmth, rarity
or density, to make them capable

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of that nourishment, as well as of their other operations, as Organs;
(which is the case of our Bodies) there the Heavens, the Air, and
external Causes will change the qualities of the matter in spite of all
Nutrition; and the qualities of the matter being chang’d (in a course of
Nature, where the Cause cannot be taken away) that is a fault
incorrigible, and irreparable by the nourishment that follows, being
hinder’d of its effect by the indisposition or incapacity of the
Recipient. And as they say, a fault in the first concoction cannot be
corrected in the second; so neither can a fault in the Prerequisites to
all the concoctions be corrected by any of them.

I know the Ancients made the decay and term of Life to depend rather
upon the humours of the Body, than the solid parts, and suppos’d an
*Humidum radicale* and a *Calidum innatum*, as they call them, a Radical
moisture and Congenit heat to be in every Body from its birth and first
formation; and as these decay’d, life decay’d. But who's wiser for this
account, what doth this instruct us in? We know there is heat and
moisture in the Body, and you may call the one Radical, and the other
*Innate* if you please; this is but a sort of Cant, for we know no more
of the real Physical Causes of that effect we enquir’d into, than we did
before. What makes this heat and moisture fail, if the nourishment be
good, and all the Organs in their due strength and temper? The first and
original failure is not in the fluid, but in the solid parts, which if
they continued the same, the humours would do so too. Besides, what
befel this Radical moisture and heat at the Deluge, that it should decay
so fast afterwards, and last so long before? There is a certain temper,
no doubt, of the juices and humours of the Body, which is more fit than
any other to conserve the parts from driness and decay; but the cause of
that driness and decay, or other inhability in the solid parts, whence
is that, if not from external Nature? ’Tis thither we must come at
length in our search of the reasons of the Natural decay of our Bodies,
we follow the fate and Laws of that: and, I think, by those Causes, and
in that order, that we have already describ’d and explain’d.

To conclude this Discourse, we may collect from it what judgment is to
be made of those Projectors of Immortality, or undertakes to make Men
live to the Age of *Methusalah*, if they will use their methods and
medicines; There is but one method for this, To put the Sun into his old
course, or the Earth into its first posture; there is no other secret to
prolong life; Our Bodies will sympathize with the general course of
Nature, nothing can guard us from it, no Elixir, no Specifick, no
Philosophers-stone. But there are Enthusiasts in Philosophy, as well as
in Religion; men that go by no principles, but their own conceit and
fancy, and by a Light within, which shines very uncertainly, and, for
the most part, leads them out of the way of truth. And so much for this
disquisition, concerning the *Causes of Longævity*, or of the long and
short periods of Life in the different periods of the World.

*That the Age of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs is to be computed by*
Solar *or common Years, not by* Lunar *or Months*.

Having made this discourse of the unequal periods of life, only in
reference to the Ante-diluvians and their fam’d Longævity, lest we
should seem to have proceeded upon an ill-grounded and mistaken
supposition, we are bound to take

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

notice of, and confute, that opinion which makes the Years of the
Ante-diluvian Patriarchs to have been Lunar, not Solar, and so would
bear us in hand, that they liv’d only so many Months, as Scripture saith
they liv’d Years. Seeing there is nothing could drive men to this bold
interpretation, but the incredibility of the thing, as they fansied;
They having no Notions or *Hypothesis* whereby it could appear
intelligible or possible to them; and seeing we have taken away that
stumbling-stone, and show’d it not only possible but necessary,
according to the constitution of that World, that the periods of Life
should be far longer than in this; by removing the ground or occasion of
their misinterpretation, we hope we have undeceiv’d them, and let them
see that there is no need of that subterfuge, either to prevent an
incongruity, or save the credit of the Sacred Historian.

But as this opinion is inconsistent with Nature truly understood, so is
it also with common History; for besides what I have already mention’d
in the first Chapter of this Book, *Josephus* tells us,<span
class="margnote">*Lib*. 1, *Jew. Ant*. *Chap*. 4.</span> that the
Historians of all Nations, both *Greeks* and *Barbarians*, give the same
account of the first Inhabitants of the Earth; Manetho, *who writ the
story of the* Ægyptians, Berosus, *who writ the* Chaldæan *History*,
*and those Authors that have given us an account of the* Phœnician
Antiquities; *besides* Molus *and* Hestiæus, *and* Hieronymus *the*
Ægyptian; *and amongst the Greeks* Hesiodus, Hecateus, Hellanicus,
Acusilaus, Ephorus *and* Nicolaus. *We have the Suffrages of all these,
and their common consent, that in the first Ages of the World Men liv’d
a thousand Years*. Now we cannot well suppose, that all these Historians
meant *Lunar* Years, or that they all conspir’d together to make and
propagate a Fable.

Lastly, as Nature and Profane History do disown and confute this
opinion, so much more doth Sacred History; not indeed in profess’d
terms, for *Moses* doth not say that he useth *Solar* Years, but by
several marks and observations, or collateral Arguments, it may be
clearly collected, that he doth not use *Lunar*. As first, because He
distinguisheth *Months* and *Years* in the History of the Deluge, and of
the life of *Noah*; for *Gen*. 7. 11 he saith in the six hundredth year
of *Noah*'s life, in the second month, *&c*. It cannot be imagin’d that
in the same verse and sentence these two terms of *Year* and *Month*
should be so confounded as to signifie the same thing; and therefore
*Noah*'s Years were not the same with Months, nor consequently those of
the other Patriarchs, for we have no reason to make any difference.
Besides, what ground was there, or how was it proper or pertinent to
reckon, as *Moses* does there, first, second, third Month, as so many
going to a Year, if every one of them was a Year? And seeing the Deluge
begun in the six hundredth year of *Noah*'s life, and in the second
Month, and ended in the six hundredth and first Year (*Chap*. 8. 13) the
first or second Month, all that was betwixt these two terms, or all the
duration of the Deluge, made but one year in *Noah*'s life, or it may be
not so much; and we know Moses reckons a great many months in the
duration of the Deluge; so as this is a demonstration that Noah's years
are not to be understood of *Lunar*. And to imagine that his years are
to be understood one way, and those of his fellow-Patriarchs another,
would be an inaccountable fiction. This Argument therefore extends to
all the Ante-diluvians; And *Noah*'s life will take in the
Post-diluvians too, for you see

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

part of it runs amongst them, and ties together the two Worlds; so that
if we exclude *Lunar* years from his life, we exclude them from all,
those of his Fathers, and those of his Children.

Secondly, If *Lunar* years were understood in the Ages of the
Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, the interval betwixt the Creation and the
Deluge would be too short, and in many respects incongruous. There would
be but 1656 months from the beginning of the World to the Flood; which
converted into common years, make but 127 years, and five months, for
that interval. This perverts all Chronology, and besides, makes the
number of people so small and inconsiderable at the time of the Deluge,
that destroying of the World was not so much as destroying of a Country
Town would be now: For from one couple you cannot well imagine there
could arise above five hundred persons in so short a time; but if there
was a thousand, ’tis not so many as we have sometimes in a good Country
Village. And were the Flood-gates of Heaven open’d, and the great Abysse
broken up to destroy such an handful of people? and the Waters rais’d
fifteen Cubits above the highest Mountains throughout the face of the
Earth, to drown a Parish or two? is not this more incredible than our
Age of the Patriarchs? Besides, this short interval doth not leave room
for Ten generations, which we find from *Adam* to the Flood, nor allows
the Patriarchs age enough at the time when they are said to have got
Children. One hundred twenty seven years for Ten generations is very
strait; and of these you must take off forty six years for one
Generation only, or for *Noah*, for he liv’d six hundred years before
the Flood, and if they were *Lunar*, they would come however to forty
six of our years; so that for the other nine Generations you would have
but eighty one years, that is, nine years a-piece; at which Age they
must all be suppos’d to have begun to get Children; which you cannot but
think a very absurd supposition. Thus it would be, if you divide the
whole time equally amongst the nine Generations, but if you consider
some single instances, as they are set down by *Moses*, ’tis still
worse; for *Mahaleel* and his Grandchild *Enoch* are said to have got
Children at sixty five years of Age, which if you suppose months, they
were but five years old at that time; now I appeal to any one, Whether
it is more incredible that men should live to the age of nine hundred
years, or that they should beget Children at the age of five years.

You will say, it may be, ’tis true these inconveniences follow, if our
*Hebrew* Copies of the Old Testament be Authentick; but if the *Greek*
Translation by the *Septuagint* be of better Authority, as some would
have it to be, that gives a little relief in this case; for the
*Septuagint* make the distance from the Creation to the Flood six
hundred years more than the *Hebrew* Text does, and so give us a little
more room for our Ten Generations: And not only so, but they have so
conveniently dispos’d those additional years, as to salve the other
inconvenience too, of the Patriarchs having Children so young: for what
Patriarchs are found to

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

have got Children sooner than the rest, and so soon, that upon a
computation by *Lunar* years, they would be but meer Children themselves
at that time, to these, more years are added and plac’d opportunely,
before the time of their getting Children; so as one can scarce forbear
to think that it was done on purpose to cure that inconvenience, and to
favour and protect the computation by Lunar years. The thing looks so
like an artifice, and as done to serve a turn, that one cannot but have
a less opinion of that Chronology for it.

But not to enter upon that dispute at present, methinks they have not
wrought the cure effectually enough; for with these six hundred *Lunar*
years added, the summ will be only one hundred seventy three common
years and odd months; and from these deducting, as we did before, for
*Noah*, forty six years, and for *Adam*, or the first Generation, about
eighteen, (for he was two hundred and thirty years old, according to the
*Septuagint*, when he begot Seth) there will remain but one hundred and
nine years for eight Generations; which will be thirteen years a-piece
and odd months; a low age to get Children in, and to hold for eight
Generations together. Neither is the other inconvenience we mention’d,
well cur’d by the *Septuagint* account, namely, the small number of
people that would be in the World at the Deluge; for the *Septuagint*
account, if understood of Lunar years, adds but forty six common years
to the Hebrew account, and to the age of the World at the Deluge, in
which time there could be but a very small accession to the number of
Mankind. So as both these incongruities continue, though not in the same
degree, and stand good in either account, if it be understood of *Lunar*
years.

Thirdly, ’tis manifest from other Texts of Scripture, and from other
considerations, that our first Fathers liv’d very long, and considerably
longer than men have done since; whereas if their years be interpreted
*Lunar*, there is not one of them that liv’d to the age that men do now;
*Methusalah* himself did not reach threescore and fifteen years, upon
that interpretation: Which doth depress them not only below those that
liv’d next to the Flood, but below all following Generations to this
day; and those first Ages of the World, which were always celebrated for
strength and vivacity, are made as weak and feeble as the last dregs of
Nature. We may observe, that after the Flood for some time, till the
pristine *Crasis* of the Body was broken by the new course of Nature,
they liv’d five, four, three, two hundred years, and the Life of Men
shortn’d by degrees; but before the Flood, when the liv’d longer, there
was no such decrease or gradual declension in their lives. For *Noah*,
who was the last, liv’d longer than *Adam*; and *Methusalah* who was
last but two, liv’d the longest of all: So that it was not simply, their
distance from the beginning of the World that made them live a shorter
time, but some change which happen’d in Nature after such a period of
time; namely, at the Deluge, when the declension begun. Let's set down
the Table of both states.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

*A Table of the Ages of the Ante-diluvian Fathers*.

<div align="center">

|              |        |
|--------------|--------|
| * *          | Years. |
| *Adam*       | 930    |
| *Seth*       | 912    |
| *Enos*       | 905    |
| *Cainan*     | 910    |
| *Mahaleel*   | 895    |
| *Jared*      | 962    |
| *Enoch*      | 365    |
| *Methusalah* | 969    |
| *Lamech*     | 777    |
| *Noah*       | 950    |

</div>

*A Table of the Ages of the Post-diluvian Fathers, from* Shem *to*
Joseph

<div align="center">

|            |        |
|------------|--------|
|            | Years. |
| *Shem*     | 600    |
| *Arphaxad* | 438    |
| *Salah*    | 433    |
| *Eber*     | 464    |
| *Peleg*    | 239    |
| *Reu*      | 239    |
| *Serug*    | 230    |
| *Nahor*    | 148    |
| *Terah*    | 205    |
| *Abraham*  | 175    |
| *Isaac*    | 180    |
| *Jacob*    | 147    |
| *Joseph*   | 110    |

</div>

 

From these Tables we see that Mens Lives were much longer before the
Flood, and next after it, than they are now; which also is confirm’d
undiniably by *Jacob*'s complaint of the shortness of his life, in
comparison of his Fore-fathers, when he had liv’d one hundred and thirty
years, Gen. 47. 9. *The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of the years of my
life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life
of my Fathers*. There was then, ’tis certain, long-liv’d men in the
World before *Jacob*'s time; when were they, before the Flood or after?
We say both, according as the Tables shew it: But if you count by
*Lunar* years, there never were any, either before or after, and
*Jacob*'s complaint was unjust and false; for he was the oldest Man in
the World himself, or at least there was none of his Fore-fathers that
liv’d so long as he.

The Patrons of this opinion must needs find themselves at a loss, how or
where to break off the account of *Lunar* years in Sacred History, if
they once admit it. If they say, that way of counting must only be
extended to the Flood, then they make the Post-diluvian Fathers longer
liv’d than the Ante-diluvian; did the Flood bring in Longævity? how
could that be the cause of such an effect? Besides, if they allow the
Post-diluvians to have liv’d six hundred (common) years, that being
clearly beyond the standard of our lives, I should never stick at two or
three hundred years more for the first Ages of the World. If they extend
their *Lunar* account to the Post-diluvians too, they will still be
intangled in worse absurdities; for they must make their lives miserably
short, and their Age of getting Children altogether incongruous and
impossible. *Nahor*, for example, when he was but two years and three
months old must have begot *Terah*, *Abraham*'s Father: And all the rest
betwixt him and Shem must have had Children before they were three years
old: A pretty race of Pigmies. Then their lives were proportionably
short, for this *Nahor* liv’d but eleven years and six months at this

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

rate; and his Grandchild Abraham, who is said to have died *in a good
old age, and full of years*, (Gen. 25. 8) was not fourteen years old.
What a ridiculous account this gives of Scripture-Chronology and
Genealogies? But you'll say, it may be, these *Lunar* years are not to
be carried so far as *Abraham* neither; tell us then where you'll stop,
and why you stop in such a place rather than another. If you once take
in *Lunar* years, what ground is there in the Text, or in the History,
that you should change your way of computing, at such a time, or in such
a place? All our Ancient Chronology is founded upon the Books of
*Moses*, where the terms and periods of time are exprest by years, and
often by Genealogies, and the Lives of Men; now if these years are
sometimes to be interpreted *Lunar*, and sometimes *Solar*, without any
distinction made in the Text, what light or certain rule have we to go
by? let these Authors name to us the parts and places where, and only
where, the *Lunar* years are to be understood, and I dare undertake to
show, that their method is not only arbitrary, but absurd and
incoherent.

To conclude this Discourse, we cannot but repeat what we have partly
observ’d before, How necessary it is to understand Nature, if we would
rightly understand those things in holy Writ that relate to the Natural
World. For without this knowledge, as we are apt to think some things
consistent and credible that are really impossible in Nature; so on the
other hand, we are apt to look upon other things as incredible and
impossible that are really founded in Nature. And seeing every one is
willing so to expound Scripture, as it may be to them good sence, and
consistent with their Notions in other things, they are forc’d many
times to go against the easie and natural importance of the words, and
to invent other interpretations more compliant with their principles,
and, as they think, with the nature of things. We have, I say, a great
instance of this before us in the Scripture-History of the long lives of
the Ante-diluvians, where without any ground or shadow of ground in the
Narration, only to comply with a mistaken Philosophy, and their
ignorance of the Primitive World, many men would beat down the Scripture
account of years into months, and sink the lives of those first Fathers
below the rate of the worst of Ages. Whereby that great Monument, which
Providence hath left us of the first World, and of its difference from
the Second, would not only be defac’d, but wholly demolisht. And all
this sprung only from the seeming incredibility of the thing; for they
cannot show in any part of Scripture, New or Old, that these *Lunar*
years are made use of, or that any computation, literal or Prophetical,
proceeds upon them: Nor that there is any thing in the Text or Context
of that place, that argues or intimates any such account. We have
endeavour’d, upon this occasion, effectually to prevent this
misconstruction of Sacred History, for the future; both by showing the
incongruities that follow upon it, and also that there is no necessity
from Nature of any such shift or evasion, as that is: But rather on the
contrary, that we have just and necessary reasons to conclude, That as
the Forms of all things would be far more permanent and lasting in that
Primitive state of the Heavens and the Earth; so particularly the Lives
of Men, and of other Animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](ste21)
