[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste22)  [Next](ste24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

*The place of* Paradise *cannot be determin’d from the Theory only, nor
from Scripture only; what the sence of Antiquity was concerning it, both
as to the Jews and Heathens, and especially as to the Christian Fathers;
That they generally plac’d it out of this Continent, in the Southern
Hemisphere*.

WE have now prepar’d our work for the last finishing stroaks; describ’d
the first Earth, and compar’d it with the Present; and not only the two
Earths, but in a good measure the whole State and Oeconomy of those two
Worlds. It remains only to determine the place of *Paradise* in that
Primæval Earth; I say, in that Primæval Earth, for we have driven the
point so far already, that the seat of it could not be in the present
Earth, whose Form, Site, and Air are so dispos’d, as could not consist
with the first and most indispensable properties of *Paradise*: And
accordingly, we see with what ill success our modern Authors have rang’d
over the Earth, to find a fit spot of ground to plant *Paradise* in;
some would set it on the top of an high Mountain, that it might have
good Air and fair weather, as being above the Clouds, and the middle
Region; but then they were at a loss for Water, which made a great part
of the pleasure and beauty of that place; Others therefore would seat it
in a Plain, or in a River-Island, that they might have Water enough, but
then it would be subject to the injuries of the Air, and foul weather at
the seasons of the Year, from which, both Reason and all Authority have
exempted *Paradise*. ’Tis like seeking a perfect beauty in a mortal
Body, there are so many things requir’d to it, as to complexion,
Features, Proportions and Air, that they never meet altogether in one
person; neither can all the properties of a Terrestrial *Paradise* ever
meet together in one place, though never so well chosen, in this present
Earth.

But in the Primæval Earth, which we have describ’d, ’tis easie to find a
Seat that had all those beauties and conveniences; we have every where,
through the temperate Climates, a clear and constant Air, a fruitful
Soil, pleasant Waters, and all the general characters of *Paradise*; so
that the trouble will be rather, in that competition, what part or
Region to pitch upon in particular. But to come as near it as we can, we
must remember in the first place, how that Earth was divided into two
Hemispheres, distant and separated from one another, not by an imaginary
line, but by a real boundary that could not be past; so as the first
inquiry will be, in whether of these Hemispheres was the Seat of
*Paradise*. To answer this only according to our Theory, I confess, I
see no natural reason or occasion to place it in one Hemisphere more
than in another, I see no ground of difference

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

or pre-eminence, that one had above the other; and I am apt to think,
that depended rather upon the will of God, and the Series of Providence
that was to follow in this Earth, than upon any natural incapacity in
one of these two Regions more than in the other, for planting in it the
Garden of God. Neither doth Scripture determine, with any certainty,
either Hemisphere for the place of it; for when ’tis said to be in
*Eden*, or to be the Garden of *Eden*, ’tis no more than the Garden of
*pleasure* or *delight*, as the word signifies: And even the
*Septuagint*, who render this word *Eden*, as a proper name twice,
(*Gen*. 2. *ver*. 8 & 10) do in the same story render it twice as a
common name, signifying τρυῳὴ, *pleasure*, (*Chap*. 2. 15 and *Chap*. 3.
24) and so they do accordingly render it in *Ezekiel* (*Chap*. 31. 9,
16, 18) where this Garden of *Eden* is spoken of again. Some have
thought that the word *Mekiddim* (*Geb*. 2. 8) was to be render’d *in
the East*, or *Eastward*, as we read it, and therefore determin’d the
site of *Paradise*; but ’tis only the *Septuagint* Translate it so, all
the other *Greek* Versions, and St. *Jerom*, the *Vulgate*, the
*Chaldee* Paraphrase, and the *Syriack* render it *from the beginning*,
or *in the beginning*, or to that effect. And we that do not believe the
*Septuagint* to have been infallible, or inspir’d, have no reason to
prefer their single authority above all the rest. Some also think the
place of *Paradise* may be determin’d by the four Rivers that are named
as belonging to it, and the Countries they ran thorough; but the names
of those Rivers are to me uncertain, and two of them altogether
unintelligible. Where are there four Rivers in our Continent that come
from one Head, as these are said to have done, either at the entrance or
issue of the Garden. ’Tis true, if you admit our *Hypothesis*,
concerning the fraction and disruption of the Earth at the Deluge, then
we cannot expect to find Rivers now as they were before, the general
Source is chang’d, and their Chanels are all broke up; but if you do not
admit such a dissolution of the Earth, but suppose the Deluge to have
been only like a standing Pool, after it had once cover’d the surface of
the Earth, I do not see why it should make any great havock or confusion
in it; and they that go that way, are therefore the more oblig’d to show
us still the Rivers of *Paradise*. Several of the Ancients, as we shall
show hereafter, suppos’d these four Rivers to have their Heads in the
other Hemisphere, and if so, the Seat of *Paradise* might be there too.
But let them first agree amongst themselves, concerning these Rivers,
and the Countries they run thorough, and we will undertake to show, that
there cannot be any such in this Continent.

Seeing then neither the Theory doth determine, nor Scripture, where the
place of *Paradise* was, nor in whether Hemisphere, we must appeal to
Antiquity, or the opinions of the Ancients; for I know no other Guide,
but one of these three, Scripture, Reason, and ancient Tradition; and
where the two former are silent, it seems very reasonable to consult the
third. And that our Inquiries may be comprehensive enough, we will
consider what the *Jews*, what the *Heathens*, and what the *Christian*
Fathers have said or determin’d concerning the Seat of Paradise. The
*Jews* and *Hebrew* Doctors place it in neither Hemisphere, but betwixt
both, under the Æquinoctial, as you may see plainly in *Abravanel*,
*Manasses Ben-Israel*, *Maimonides*, *Aben Ezra*, and others. But the
reason why they carried it no further than the Line, is because they
suppos’d it certain, as *Aben Ezra* tells us, that the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

days and nights were always equal in *Paradise*, and they did not know
how that could be, unless it stood under the Æquinoctial. But we have
shown another method, wherein that perpetual Æquinox came to pass, and
how it was common to all the parts and Climates of that Earth, which if
they had been aware of, and that the Torrid Zone at that time was
utterly uninhabitable, having remov’d their *Paradise* thus far from
home, they would probably have remov’d it a little further, into the
temperate Climates of the other Hemisphere.

The Ancient Heathens, Poets and Philosophers, had the notion of
*Paradise*, or rather of several *Paradises* in the Earth; and ’tis
remarkable, that they plac’d them generally, if not all of them, out of
this Continent; in the Ocean, or beyond it, or in another Orb or
Hemisphere. The Garden of the *Hesperides*, the Fortunate *Islands*, the
*Elysian Fields*, *Ogygia* and *Toprabane*, as it is describ’d by
*Diodorus Siculus*, with others such like; which as they were all
characteriz’d like so many Paradises, so they were all seated out of our
Continent by their Geography and descriptions of them.

Thus far Antiquity seems to incline to the other Hemisphere, or to some
place beyond the bounds of our Continent for the Seat of *Paradise*; But
that which we are most to depend upon in this affair, is Christian
Antiquity, the Judgment and Tradition of the Fathers upon this Argument.
And we may safely say in the first place, negatively, that none of the
Christian Fathers, *Latin* or *Greek*, ever plac’d *Paradise* in
*Mesopotamia*; that is a conceit and invention of some modern Authors,
which hath been much incouraged of late, because it gave men ease and
rest as to further inquiries, in an argument they could not well manage.
Secondly, we may affirm, that none of the Christian Fathers have plac’d
*Paradise* in any determinate Region of our Continent, *Asia* *Africk*
or *Europe*. I have read of one or two Authors, I think, that fansied
*Paradise* to have been at *Jerusalem*, but ’twas a meer fancy, that no
body regarded or pursu’d. The controversie amongst the Fathers
concerning *Paradise*, was quite another thing from what it is now of
late: They disputed and controverted, whether *Paradise* was Corporeal,
or Intellectual only, and Allegorical; This was the grand point amongst
them. Then of those that thought it Corporeal, some plac’d it high in
the Air, some inaccessible by Desarts or Mountains, and many beyond the
Ocean, or in another World; And in these chiefly consisted the
differences and diversity of opinions amongst them; nor do we find that
they nam’d any particular place or Country in the known parts of the
Earth for the Seat of *Paradise*, or that one contested for one spot of
ground, and another for another, which is the vain temerity of modern
Authors; as if they could tell to an Acre of Land where *Paradise*
stood, or could set their foot upon the Center of the Garden. These have
corrupted and misrepresented the notion of our *Paradise*, just as some
modern Poets have the notion of the *Elysian Fields*, which *Homer* and
the Ancients plac’d remote on the extremities of the Earth, and these
would make a little green Meadow in *Campania Felix* to be the fam’d
*Elysium*.

Thus much concerning the Fathers, negatively; but to discover as far as
we can, what their positive Assertions were in this Argument, we may
observe, that though their opinions be differently exprest, they
generally concenter in this, that

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the *Southern Hemisphere* was the Seat of *Paradise*. This, I say, seems
manifestly to be the sence of Christian Antiquity and Tradition, so far
as there is any thing definitive in the remains we have upon that
subject. Some of the Fathers did not believe *Paradise* to be Corporeal
and Local, and those are to be laid aside in the first place, as to this
point; Others that thought it Local, did not determine any thing (as
most of them indeed did not) concerning the particular place of it; But
the rest that did, though they have exprest themselves in various ways,
and under various forms, yet, upon a due interpretation, they all meet
in one common and general conclusion, That *Paradise* was seated beyond
the Æquinoctial, or in the other Hemisphere.

And to understand this aright, we must reflect, in the first place, upon
the form of the Primæval Earth, and of the two Hemispheres of which it
consisted, altogether incommunicable one with another, by reason of the
Torrid Zone betwixt them; so as those two Hemispheres were then as two
distinct Worlds, or distinct Earths, that had no commerce with one
another. And this Notion or Tradition we find amongst Heathen Authors,
as well as Christian, this Opposite Earth being call’d by them
*Antichthon*, and its Inhabitants *Antichthones*: For those words
comprehend both the *Antipodes* and *Antœci*, or all beyond the Line, as
is manifest from their best Authors, as *Achilles Tatius*, and *Cæsar
Germanicus* upon *Aratus*, *Probus Grammaticus*, *Censorinus*,
*Pomponius Mela*, and *Pliny*. And these were call’d another World, and
lookt upon as another stock and race of Mankind, as appears from
*Cicero* and *Macrobius*;<span class="margnote">*Somn. Scip*.</span> But
as the latter part was their mistake, so the former is acknowledg’d by
Christian Authors, as well as others; and particularly St. *Clement*, in
his Epistle to the *Corinthians*, mentions a *World*, or *Worlds beyond
the Ocean, subject to Divine Providence, and the great Lord of Nature,
as well as ours*. This passage of St. *Clement* is also cited by St.
*Jerom*<span class="margnote">*Lib*. 2. *c*. 3.</span>, in his
Commentary upon *Ephes*. 2. 2 and by *Origen Periarchon*, where the
Inhabittants of that other World are call’d *Antichthones*.

I make this remark in the first place, that we may understand the true
sence and importance of those phrases and expressions amongst the
Ancients, when they say *Paradise* was in *another World*. Which are not
to be so understood, as if they thought *Paradise* was in the Moon, or
in *Jupiter*, or hung above like a Cloud or a Meteor, they were not so
extravagant; but that *Paradise* was in another Hemisphere, which was
call’d *Antichthon*, another *Earth*, or another *World* from Ours; and
justly reputed so, because of an impossibility of commerce or
intercourse betwixt their respective Inhabitants. And this remark being
premis’d, we will now distribute the Christian Authors and Fathers that
have deliver’d their opinion concerning the place of *Paradise*, into
three or four ranks or orders; and though they express themselves
differently, you will see, when duly examin’d and expounded, they all
conspire and concur in the forementioned conclusion, *That* the Seat of
*Paradise* was in the other Hemisphere.

In the first rank then we will place and reckon those that have set
*Paradise* in another *World*, or in another *Earth*; seeing, according
to the foregoing Explication, that is the same thing, as to affirm it
seated beyond the Torrid Zone in the other Hemisphere. In this number
are *Ephrem Syrus*, *Moses Bar Cepha*, *Tatianus*, and

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

of later date *Jacobus de Valentia*. To these are to be added again such
Authors as say, that *Adam*, when he was turn’d out of *Paradise*, was
brought into *our Earth*, or into our Region of the Earth; for this is
tantamount with the former; And this seems to be the sence of St.
*Jerom* in several places against *Jovinian*, as also of *Constantine*,
in his Oration in *Eusebius*, and is positively asserted by *Sulpitius
Severus*. And lastly, those Authors that represent *Paradise* as remote
from our World, and inaccessible, so St. *Austin*, *Procopius Gazeus*,
*Beda*, *Strabus Fuldensis*, *Historia Scholiastica*, and others, these,
I say, pursue the same notion of Antiquity; for what is remote from our
World (that is, from our Continent, as <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md)
we before explain’d it) is to be understood to be that *Antichthon*, or
Anti-hemisphere which the Ancients oppos’d to ours.

Another sett of Authors, that interpret the *Flaming Sword* that guarded
*Paradise* to be the *Torrid Zone*, do plainly intimate, that *Paradise*
in their opinion lay beyond the Torrid Zone, or in the Anti-hemisphere;
And thus *Tertullian* interprets the Flaming Sword, and in such words as
fully confirm our sence: *Paradise*, He says, *by the Torrid Zone, as by
a wall of Fire, was sever’d from the communication and knowledge of our
World*. It lay then on the other side of this Zone. And St. Cyprian, or
the ancient Author that passeth under his name, in his Comment upon
*Genesis*, expresseth himself to the same effect; so also St. *Austin*
and *Isidore Hispalensis* are thought to interpret it: And *Aquinas*,
who makes *Paradise* inaccessible, gives this reason for it, *Propter
vehementiam æstûs in locis intermediis ex propinquitate Solis, & hoc
significatur per Flammeum Gladium: Because of that vehement heat in the
parts betwixt us and that, arising from the nearness of the Sun, and
this is signified by the Flaming Sword*. And this interpretation of the
*Flaming Sword* receives a remarkable force and Emphasis from our Theory
and description of the Primæval Earth, for there the Torrid Zone was as
a wall of Fire indeed, or a Region of flame which none could pass or
subsist in, no more than in a Furnace.

There is another form of expression amongst the Ancients concerning
*Paradise*, which, if deciphered, is of the same force and signification
with this we have already instanc’d in; They say sometimes, *Paradise
was beyond the Ocean*, or that the Rivers of *Paradise* came from beyond
the Ocean. This is of the same import with the former Head, and points
still at the other Hemisphere; for, as we noted before, some of them
fixt their *Antichthon* and *Antichthones* beyond the Ocean; that is,
since there was an Ocean, Since the form of the Earth was chang’d, and
the Torrid Zone become habitable, and consequently could not be a
boundary or separation betwixt the two Worlds. Wherefore, as some run
still upon the old division by the Torrid Zone, others took the new
division by the Ocean. Which Ocean they suppos’d to lie from East to
West betwixt the Tropicks; as may be seen in ancient Authors, *Geminus*,
*Herodotus*, *Cicero de Republicâ*, and *Clemens Romanus*, whom we cited
before. St. *Austin*<span class="margnote">*De Civ. Dei* *lib*. 16. *c*.
9.</span> also speaks upon the same supposition, when he would confute
the doctrine of the *Antipodes*, or *Antichthones*; and *Macrobius*, I
remember, makes it an Argument of Providence, that the Sun and the
Planets, in what part of their course soever they are betwixt the two
Tropicks, have still the Ocean under them, that they may be cool’d and
nourisht by its

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

moisture. They thought the Sea, like a Girdle, went round the Earth, and
the temperate Zones on either side were the habitable Regions, whereof
this was call’d the *Oicouméne*, and the other *Antichthon*.

This being observ’d, ’tis not material, whether their Notion was true or
false, it shows us what their meaning was, and what part of the Earth
they design’d, when they spoke of any thing beyond the Ocean; namely,
that they meant beyond the Line, in the other Hemisphere, or in the
*Antichthon*; and accordingly, when they say *Paradise*, or the
Fountains of its Rivers were beyond the Ocean, they say the same thing
in other terms with the rest of those Authors we have cited. In *Moses
Bar Cepha* above mention’d, we find a Chapter upon this subject,
*Quomodo trajecerint Mortales inde ex Paradisi terrâ in hanc Terram? How
Mankind past out of that Earth or Continent where* Paradise *was, into
that where we are?* Namely, how they past the Ocean, *that lay betwixt
them*, as the answer there given explains it. And so *Ephrem Syrus* is
cited often in that Treatise, placing *Paradise* beyond the Ocean. The
*Essenes* also, who were the most Philosophick Sect of the *Jews*,
plac’d *Paradise*, according to *Josephus*, beyond the Ocean, under a
perfect temperature of Air. And that passage in *Eusebius*, in the
Oration of *Constantine*, being corrected and restor’d to the true
reading, represents *Paradise*, in like manner, as in another Continent,
from whence *Adam* was brought, after his transgression, into this. And
lastly, there are some Authors, whose testimony and authority may
deserve to be consider’d, not for their own Antiquity, but because they
are profess’dly transcribers of Antiquity and Traditions, such as
*Strabus*, *Comestor*, and the like, who are known to give this account
or report of *Paradise* from the Ancients, that it was *interposito
Oceano ab Orbe nostro vel à Zonâ nostrâ habitabili secretus, Separated
from our Orb or Hemisphere by the interposition of the Ocean*.

It is also observable, that many of the Ancients that took *Tigris*,
*Euphrates*, *Nile* and *Ganges* for the Rivers of *Paradise*, said that
those Heads or Fountains of them which we have in our Continent, are but
their *Capita secunda*, their second Sources, and that their first
Sources were in another Orb where *Paradise* was; and thus *Hugo de
Sancto Victore* says, *Sanctos communiter sensisse*, that the Holy men
of old were generally of that opinion. To this sence also *Moses Bar
Cepha* often expresseth himself; as also *Epiphanius*, *Procopius
Gazeus*, and *Severianus in Catenâ*. Which notion amongst the Ancients,
concerning the trajection or passage of the Paradisiacal Rivers
under-ground, or under-Sea, from one Continent into another, is to me, I
confess, unintelligible, either in the first or second Earth; but
however it discovers their sence and opinion of the Seat of *Paradise*,
that it was not to be sought for in *Asia* or in *Africk*, where those
Rivers rise to us, but in some remoter parts of the World, where they
suppos’d their first Sources to be.

This is a short account of what the Christian Fathers have left us,
concerning the Seat of *Paradise*; and the truth is, ’tis but a short
and broken account; yet ’tis no wonder it should be so, if we consider,
as we noted before, that several of them did not believe *Paradise* to
be Local and Corporeal; Others that did believe it so, yet did not offer
to determine the place of it, but left that matter wholly untoucht and
undecided; And the rest that did speak to that point, did

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

it commonly both in general terms, and in expressions that were
disguis’d, and needed interpretation; but all these differences and
obscurities of expression, you see, when duly stated and expounded, may
signifie one and the same thing, and terminate all in this common
Conclusion, *That Paradise* was without our Continent, according to the
general opinion and Tradition of Antiquity. And I do not doubt but the
Tradition would have been both more express and more universal, if the
Ancients had understood Geography better; for those of the Ancients that
did not admit or believe, that there were *Antipodes* or *Antichthones*,
as *Lactantius*, St. *Austin*, and some others, these could not joyn in
the common opinion about the place of *Paradise*, because they thought
there was no Land, nor any thing habitable ἔξω τ῾ οἰκουμγύης, or besides
this Continent. And yet St. *Austin* was so cautious, that as he was
bounded on the one hand by his false *Idea* of the Earth, that he could
not joyn with Antiquity as to the place of *Paradise*; so on the other
hand he had that respect for it, that he would not say any thing to the
contrary; therefore being to give his opinion, he says only, *Terrestrem
esse Paradisum, & locum ejus ab hominum cognitione esse remotissimum:
That it is somewhere upon the Earth, but the place of it very remote
from the knowledge of Men*.

And as their ignorance of the Globe of the Earth was one reason, why the
doctrine of *Paradise* was so broken and obscure, so another reason why
it is much more so at present is, because the chief ancient Books writ
upon that subject, are lost; *Ephrem Syrus*, who liv’d in the Fourth
Century, writ a Commentary *in Genesin sive de Ortu rerum*, concerning
the Origin of the Earth; and by those remains that are cited from it, we
have reason to believe, that it contain’d many things remarkable
concerning the first Earth, and concerning Paradise, *Tertullian* also
writ a Book *de Paradiso*, which is wholly lost; and we see to what
effect it would have been, by his making the Torrid Zone to be the
*Flaming Sword*, and the partition betwixt this Earth and *Paradise*;
which two Earths he more than once distinguisheth as very different from
one another. The most<span class="margnote">*Cont. Marc.* *lib*. 2. *c*.
2. *c*. 5.</span> ancient Author that I know upon this subject, at least
of those that writ of it literally, is *Moses Bar Cepha*, a *Syrian*
Bishop, who liv’d about seven hundred years since, and his Book is
translated into *Latin*, by that Learned and Judicious man, *Andreas
Masius*. *Bar Cepha* writes upon the same Views of *Paradise* that we
have here presented, that it was beyond the Ocean, in another tract of
Land, or another Continent from that which we inhabit: As appears from
the very Titles of his Eighth, Tenth, and Fourteenth Chapters. But we
must allow him for his mistaken Notions about the form of the Earth; for
he seems to have fansied the Earth plain, (not only as oppos’d to rough
and Mountainous, for so it was plain; but as oppos’d to Spherical) and
the Ocean to have divided it in two parts, an Interiour, and an
Exteriour, and in that Exteriour part was *Paradise*. Such allowances
must often be made for Geographical mistakes, in examining and
understanding the writings of the Ancients. The rest of the Syrian
Fathers, as well as *Ephrem* and *Bar Cepha*, incline to the same
doctrine of *Paradise*, and seem to have retain’d more of the ancient
Notions concerning it, than the *Greek* and *Latin* Fathers have; and
yet there is in all some fragments of this doctrine, and but fragments
in the best.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

We might add in that last place, that as the most ancient Treatises
concerning *Paradise* are lost, so also the ancient *Glosses* and
*Catenæ* upon Scripture, where we might have found the Traditions and
Opinions of the Ancients upon this subject, are many of them either lost
or unpublisht; And upon this consideration we did not think it improper
to cite some Authors of small Antiquity, but such as have transcrib’d
several things out of ancient Manuscript-glosses into their
Commentaries: They living however before Printing was invented, or
Learning well restor’d, and *before the Reformation*. I add that also
before the Reformation, for since that time the Protestant Authors
having lessen’d the authority of Traditions, the Pontificial Doctors
content themselves to insist only upon such as they thought were useful
or necessary, left by multiplying others that were but matter of
curiosity, they should bring the first into question, and render the
whole doctrine of Traditions more dubious and exceptionable; And upon
this account, there are some Authors that writ an Age or two before the
Reformation, that have with more freedom told us the Tenets and
Traditions of the Ancients in these Speculations, that are but
collateral to Religion, than any have done since. And I must confess, I
am apt to think that what remains concerning the doctrine of *Paradise*,
and the Primæval Earth, is in a good measure Traditional; for one may
observe, that those that treat upon these subjects, quote the true
Opinions, and tell you some of the Ancients held so and so, as That
*Paradise* was in another Earth, or higher than this Earth, That there
were no Mountains before the Flood, nor any Rain, and such like: yet
they do not name those ancient Authors that held these Opinions; which
makes me apt to believe, either that they were convey’d by a Traditional
communication from one to another, or that there were other Books extant
upon those subjects, or other Glosses, than what are now known.

Finally, to conclude this Discourse concerning the Seat of *Paradise*,
we must mind you again upon what Basis it stands. We declar’d freely,
that we could not by our Theory alone determine the particular place of
it, only by that we are assur’d that it was in the Primæval Earth, and
not in the present; but in what Region, or in whether Hemisphere of that
Earth it was seated, we cannot define from Speculation only. ’Tis true,
if we hold fast to that Scripture-conclusion, That all Mankind rise from
one Head, and from one and the same Stock and Lineage, (which doth not
seem to be according to the sentiments of the Heathens) we must suppose
they were born in one Hemisphere, and after some time translated into
the other, or a Colony of them; But this still doth not determine, in
whether of the two they begun, and were first seated before their
translation; and I am apt to think that depended rather, as we noted
before, upon the Divine pleasure, and the train of affairs that was to
succeed, than upon Natural causes and differences. Some of the Ancients,
I know, made both the Soil and the Stars more noble in the Southern
Hemisphere, than in ours, but I do not see any proof or warrant for it;
wherefore laying aside all natural Topicks, we are willing, in this
particular, to refer our selves wholly to the report and majority of
Votes amongst the Ancients; who yet do not seem to me to lay much stress
upon the notion of a particular and topical Paradise, and therefore use
general and

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

remote expressions concerning it. And finding no place for it in this
Continent, they are willing to quit their hands of it, by placing it in
a Region some-where far off, and inaccessible. This, together with the
old Tradition, that Paradise was in another Earth, seems to me to give
an account of most of their Opinions concerning the Seat of Paradise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[185:1](ste23.htm#fr_8.md) Οἰχουμένη.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](ste24.md)
