[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste25)  [Next](ste27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

*Concerning the Author of Nature*.

SEEING the Theory which we have propos’d in this Work is of that extent
and comprehension, that it begins with the first foundation of this
World, and is to reach to the last Period of it, in one continued Series
or chain of Nature; It will not be improper, before we conclude, to make
some reflections and remarks what *Nature* is, and upon what Superiour
Causes she depends in all her Motions and Operations: And this will lead
us to the discovery of the *Author* of Nature, and to the true Notion
and state of *Natural Providence*, which seems to have been hitherto
very much neglected, or little understood in the World. And ’tis the
more reasonable and fitting, that we should explain these Notions before
we shut up this Treatise, lest those Natural Explications which we have
given of the Deluge, and other things, should be mistaken or misappli’d;
Seeing some are apt to run away with pieces of a Discourse, which they
think applicable to their purpose, or which they can maliciously
represent, without attending to the scope or just limitations of what is
spoken.

By *Nature* in general is understood All the Powers of Finite Beings,
with the Laws establisht for their action and conduct, according to the
ordinary course of things. And this extends both to Intellectual Beings
and Corporeal; but seeing ’tis only the Material World that hath been
the subject of our Discourse, Nature, as to that, may be defin’d, The
Powers of *Matter*, with the Laws establisht for their action and
conduct. Seeing also Matter hath no action, whether from it self, or
imprest upon it, but Motion, as to the Corporeal World Nature is no more
than The powers and capacities of Matter, with the Laws that govern the
Motions of it. And this definition is so plain and easie, that, I
believe, all parties will agree in it; There will also be no great
controversie what these Laws are, As that one part of Matter cannot
penetrate another, nor be in several places at once; That the greater
Body overcomes the less, and the swifter the slower; That all Motion is
in a right line, till something obstruct it or divert it; which are
points little disputed as to the matter of fact; but the points
concerning which the controversie ariseth, and which are to lead us to
the Author of Nature, are these, *Who* or *what* is the Author of these
*Laws*? of this *Motion*? and even of *Matter* it self; and of all those
modes and forms of it which we see in Nature?

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

The Question useth chiefly to be put concerning *Motion*, how it came
into the World; what the first Source of it is, or how Matter came at
first to be mov’d? For the simple notion of Matter, not divided into
parts, nor diversified, doth not imply Motion, but Extension only; ’Tis
true, from Extension there necessarily follows *mobility*, or a capacity
of being mov’d by an External power, but not actual or necessary Motion
springing from it self. For dimensions, or length, breadth, and depth,
which is the *Idea* of Matter, or of a Body, do no way include local
Motion, or translation of parts; on the contrary, we do more easily and
naturally conceive simple Extension as a thing steddy and fixt, and if
we conceive Motion in it, or in its parts, we must superadd something to
our first thought, and something that does not flow from Extension. As
when we conceive a Figure, a Triangle, Square, or any other, we
naturally conceive it fixt or quiescent, and if afterwards we imagine it
in Motion, that is purely accidental to the Figure; in like manner it is
accidental to Matter, that there should be Motion in it, it hath no
inward principle from whence that can flow, and its Nature is compleat
without it; Wherefore if we find Motion and Action in Matter, which is
of it self a dead inactive mass, this should lead us immediately to the
Author of Nature, or to some External power distinct from Matter, which
is the Cause of all Motion in the World.

In single Bodies, and single parts of Matter, we readily believe and
conclude, that they do not move, unless something move them, and why
should we not conclude the same thing of the whole mass? If a Rock or
Mountain cannot move it self, nor divide it self, either into great
gobbets, or into small powder, why should it not be as impossible for
the whole mass of Matter to do so? ’Tis true, Matter is capable both of
motion and rest, yet to conceive it undivided, un-diversified and
unmov’d, is certainly a more simple Notion, than to conceive it divided
and mov’d; and this being first in order of Nature, and an adequate
conception too, we ought to inquire and give our selves an account how
it came out of this state, and by what Causes, or, as we said before,
how *Motion came first into the World*.

In the second place, That diversity which we see in Nature, both as to
the qualities of Matter, and the compositions of it, being one step
further than bare Motion, ought also to be a further indication of the
Author of Nature, and to put us upon inquiry into the Causes of this
diversity. There is nothing more uniform than simple Extension, nothing
more the same throughout, all of a piece, and all of a sort, similar,
and like to it self every where, yet we find the matter of the Universe
diversified a thousand ways, into Heavens and Earth, Air and Waters,
Stars, Meteors, Light, Darkness, Stones, Wood, Animals, and all
Terrestrial Bodies; These diversifications are still further removes
from the natural unity and identity of Matter, and a further argument of
some external and superiour power that hath given these different forms
to the several portions of Matter by the intervention of Motion. For if
you exclude the Author of Nature, and suppose nothing but Matter in the
World, take whether *Hypothesis* you will, either that Matter is without
Motion of it self, or that it is of it self in Motion, there could not
arise this diversity, and these compositions in it. If it was without

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Motion, then the case is plain, for it would be
nothing but an hard inflexible lump of impenetrable extension, without
any diversity at all. And if you suppose it mov’d of it self, or to have
an innate Motion, that would certainly hinder all sort of natural
concretions and compositions, and in effect destroy all Continuity. For
Motion, if it be essential to Matter, it is essential to every Atome of
it, and equally diffus’d throughout all its parts; and all those parts
or Atomes would be equal to one another, and as little as possible; For
if Matter was divided into parts by its own innate Motion, that would
melt it down into parts as little as possible, and consequently all
equal to one another, there being no reason why you should stop those
divisions, or the effect of this innate *impetus* in any one part sooner
than in another, or in any part indeed till it was divided as much as
was possible; Wherefore upon this principle, or in this method, all the
Matter of the Universe would be one liquid or volatile mass, smaller
than pin-dust, nay, than Air or Æther: And there would be no diversity
of forms, only another sort of identity from the former. And so, upon
the whole, you see, that Matter, whether we allow it Motion, or no
Motion, could not come into that variety of tempers and compositions in
which we find it in the World, without the influence and direction of a
Superior external Cause, which we call the Author of Nature.

But there is still a further and stronger Argument from this Head, if we
consider not only the diversity of Bodies, that the mass of Matter is
cut into, but also that that diversity is *regular*, and in some parts
of it admirably artful and ingenious. This will not only lead us to an
Author of Nature, but to such an Author as hath Wisdom as well as Power.
Matter is a brute Being, stupid and senseless, and though we should
suppose it to have a force to move it self, yet that it should be able
to meditate and consult, and take its measures how to frame a World, a
regular and beautiful structure, consisting of such and such parts and
Regions, and adapted to such and such purposes, this would be too
extravagant to imagine; to allow it not only Motion from it self, but
Wit and Judgment too; and that before it came into any Organical or
Animate composition.

You'll say, it may be, The Frame of the World was not the result of
counsel and consultation, but of *necessity*; Matter being once in
Motion under the conduct of those Laws that are essential to it, it
wrought it self by degrees from one state into another, till at length
it came into the present form which we call the World. These are words
thrown out at random, without any pretence of ground, only to see if
they can be confuted; And so they may easily be, for we have shown
already, that if Matter had innate Motion, it would be so far from
running into the orderly and well dispos’d frame of the World, that it
would run into no frame at all, into no forms, or compositions, or
diversity of Bodies; but would either be all fluid, or all solid; either
every single particle in a separate Motion, or all in one continued mass
with an universal tremor, or inclination to move without actual
separation; And either of these two states is far from the form of a
World. Secondly, as to the Laws of Motion, as some of them are essential
to Matter, so others are not demonstrable, but upon supposition of an
Author of Nature. And thirdly, though all the Laws of Motion be
admitted, they cannot bring Matter into the form of a World, unless some
measures be taken at first by an intelligent

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Being; I say some measures be taken to determine
the primary Motions upon which the rest depend, and to put them in a way
that leads to the formation of a World. The mass must be divided into
Regions, and Centers fixt, and Motions appropriated to them; and it must
be consider’d of what magnitude the first Bodies, or the first divisions
of Matter should be, and how mov'd: Besides, there must be a determinate
proportion, and certain degree of motion imprest upon the universal
Matter, to qualifie it for the production of a World; if the dose was
either too strong or too weak, the work would miscarry; And nothing but
infinite Wisdom could see thorough the effects of every proportion, or
every new degree of Motion, and discern which was best for the
beginning, progress, and perfection of a World. So you see the Author of
Nature is no way excluded, or made useless by the Laws of Motion, nor if
Matter was promiscuously mov’d would these be sufficient causes of
themselves to produce a World, or that regular diversity of Bodies that
compose it.

But ’tis hard to satisfie men against their inclinations, or their
interest: And as the regularity of the Universe was always a great
stumbling-stone to the *Epicuræans*; so they have endeavour’d to make
shifts of all sorts to give an account and answer to it, without
recourse to an intelligent Principle; And for their last refuge, they
say, that Chance might bring that to pass, which Nature and Necessity
could not do; The Atoms might hit upon a lucky sett of Motions, which
though it were casual and fortuitous, might happily lead them to the
forming of a World. A lucky hit indeed, for Chance to frame a World: But
this is a meer shuffle and collusion; for if there was nothing in Nature
but Matter, there could be no such thing as Chance, all would be pure
mechanical necessity; and so this answer, though it seem very different,
is the same in effect with the former, and *Epicurus* with his Atomists
are oblig’d to give a just mechanical account, how all the parts of
Nature, the most compound and elaborate parts not excepted, rise from
their Atoms by pure necessity: There could be no accidental concourse or
coalition of them, every step, every motion, every composition was fatal
and necessary. And therefore ’tis non-sence for an *Epicuræan* to talk
of Chance, as Chance is oppos’d to Necessity; And if they oppose it to
*Counsel* and *Wisdom*, ’tis little better than non-sence, to say the
World and all its furniture rise by Chance, in that notion of it. But it
will deserve our patience a little to give a more full and distinct
answer to this, seeing it reacheth all their pleas and evasions at once.

What proof or demonstration of Wisdom and Counsel can be given, or can
be desir’d, that is not found in some part of the World, Animate or
Inanimate? We know but a little portion of the Universe, a meer point in
comparison, and a broken point too, and yet in this broken point, or
some small parcels of it, there is more of Art, Counsel and Wisdom
shewn, than in all the works of men taken together, or than in all our
*Artificial* World. In the construction of the Body of an Animal, there
is more of thought and contrivance, more of exquisite invention, and fit
disposition of parts, than is in all the Temples, Palaces, Ships,
Theaters, or any other pieces of Architecture the World ever yet see:
And not Architecture only, but all other Mechanism whatsoever, Engines,
Clockwork, or any other, is not comparable to the Body of a living
Creature. Seeing then we acknowledge

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

these artificial works, wheresoever we meet with them, to be the effects
of Wit, Understanding and Reason, is it not manifest partiality, or
stupidity rather, to deny the works of Nature, which excel these in all
degrees, to proceed from an intelligent Principle? Let them take any
piece of Humane Art, or any Machine fram’d by the wit of Man, and
compare it with the body of an Animal, either for diversity and
multiplicity of workmanship, or curiosity in the minute parts, or just
connexion and dependance of one thing upon another, or fit subserviency
to the ends propos’d, of life, motion, use and ornament to the Creature,
and if in all these respects they find it superiour to any work of
Humane production, as they certainly must do, why should it be thought
to proceed from inferiour and sense-less Causes? ought we not in this,
as well as in other things, to proportion the Causes to the Effect? and
to speak truth, and bring in an honest Verdict for Nature as well as
Art.

In the composition of a perfect Animal, there are four several frames or
Compages joyn’d together, The Natural, Vital, Animal, and Genital; Let
them examine any one of these apart, and try if they can find any thing
defective or superfluous, or any way inept, for matter or form. Let them
view the whole Compages of the Bones, and especially the admirable
construction, texture and disposition of the Muscles, which are joyn’d
with them for moving the Body, or its parts. Let them take an account of
the little Pipes and Conduits for the juices and the Liquors, of their
form and distribution; Or let them take any single Organ to examine, as
the Eye, or the Ear, the Hand or the Heart; In each of these they may
discover such arguments of Wisdom, and of Art, as will either convince
them, or confound them; though still they must leave greater
undiscover’d. We know little the in-sensible form and contexture of the
parts of the Body, nor the just method of their Action; We know not yet
the manner, order, and causes of the Motion of the Heart, which is the
chief Spring of the whole Machine; and with how little exactness do we
understand the Brain, and the parts belonging to it? why of that temper
and of that form? how Motions are propagated there, and how conserv’d?
how they answer the several operations of the Mind? why such little
discomposures of it disturb our Senses, and upon what little differences
in this the great differences of Wits and Genius's depend. Yet seeing in
all these Organs, whose make and manner of action we cannot discover, we
see however by the Effects, that they are truly fitted for those offices
to which Nature hath design’d them, we ought in reason to admire that
Art which we cannot penetrate; At least we cannot but judge it a thing
absurd, that what we have not wit enough to find out or comprehend, we
should not allow to be an argument of wit and understanding in the
Author, or Inventor of it. This would be against all Logick, common
Sense, and common *Decorum*. Neither do I think it possible to the mind
of man, while we attend to evidence, to believe that these, and such
like works of Nature came by *Chance*, as they call it, or without
Providence, forecast and wisdom, either in the first Causes, or in the
proximate; in the design, or in the execution; in the preparation to
them, or in the finishing of them.

Wherefore, in my judgment, if any be of this perswasion, it cannot be so
much the effect of their understanding, as of their disposition and
inclination; and in

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

moral things, mens opinions do as often spring from the one as from the
other. For my part, I do generally distinguish of two sorts of opinions
in all men, *Inclination-opinions*, and *Reason'd-opinions*; Opinions
that grow upon mens Complexions, and Opinions that are the results of
their Reason; and I meet with very few that are of a temperament so
equal, or a constitution so even pois’d, but that they incline to one
sett of Opinions rather than another, antecedently to all proofs of
Reason: And when they have espous’d their opinions from that secret
sympathy, then they find out as good Reasons as they can to maintain
them, and say, nay think sometimes, that ’twas for the sake of those
Reasons that they first imbrac’d them. We may commonly distinguish these
Inclination-opinions from the Rational, because we find them accompanied
with more Heat than Light, a great deal of eagerness and impatience in
defending of them, and but slender arguments. One might give instances
of this, both in Sects of Religion and Philosophy, in *Platonists*,
*Stoicks*, and *Epicuræans*, that are so by their temper more than their
reason, but to our purpose it will be sufficient to instance in one
hearty *Epicuræan*, *Lucretius*, who is manifestly such, more from his
inclination, and the bent of his Spirit, than from the force of
Argument. For though his suppositions be very precarious, and his
reasonings all along very slight, he will many times strut and triumph,
as if he had wrested the Thunder out of *Jove*'s right hand; and a
Mathematician is not more confident of his demonstration, than he seems
to be of the truth of his shallow Philosophy. From such a principle of
natural Complexion as this, I allow a man may be Atheistical, but never
from the calm dictate of his Reason; yet he may be as confident, and as
tenacious of his Conclusion, as if he had a clear and distinct evidence
for it. For I take it to be a true Maxim in Humane Nature, that *A
strong inclination, with a little evidence, is equivalent to a strong
evidence*. And therefore we are not to be surpris’d, if we find men
confident in their opinions many times far beyond the degree of their
evidence, seeing there are other things, besides evidence, that incline
the Will to one Conclusion rather than another. And as I have instanc’d
in Natural Complexion, so *Interest* hath the same effect upon Humane
Nature, because it always begets an inclination to those opinions that
favour our interest, and a disinclination to the contrary; And this
principle may be another ingredient, and secret perswasive to Atheism;
for when men have run themselves so deep into Vice and Immorality, that
they expect no benefit from a God, ’tis in a manner necessary to their
quiet, and the ease of their mind, that they should fansie there is
none; for they are afraid, if there be a God, that he will not stand
neuter, and let them alone in another World. This, I say, is necessary
to the quiet of their mind, unless they can attain that great Art, which
many labour after, of *non-reflection*, or an *unthinking faculty*, as
to God and a World to come. But to return to our Argument, after this
short digression . . .

As that regular diversity which we see in the forms of Nature, and
especially in the Bodies of Animals, could not be from any blind
principle, either of Necessity or of Chance; So, in the last place, that
*Subordination* which we see in the parts of Nature, and subserviency to
one another, the less Noble to the more Noble, the Inanimate to the
Animate, and all things upon Earth unto Man, must needs

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

have been the effect of some Being higher than Matter; that did wisely
dispose all things so at first, and doth still conserve them in the same
order. If Man had been born into the World, and a numerous host of
Creatures, without any pro-vision or accommodation made for their
subsistence and conveniences, we might have suspected that they had come
by Chance, and therefore were so ill provided for; but which of them can
complain? through their various Kinds and Orders, what is there
awanting? They are all fitted to their several Elements, and their ways
of living, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, both by the form and shape of
their Bodies, the manner of their covering, and the quality of their
food. Besides, they are instructed in little Arts and Instincts for
their conservation; and not only for their proper conservation, but also
to find a way to make and bring up young ones, and leave behind them a
Posterity; And all this in so fit a method, and by such a pretty train
of actions, as is really admirable.

Man is the Master of all, and of him a double care is taken; that he
should neither want what Nature can afford, nor what Art can supply. He
could not be provided of all conveniences by Nature only, especially to
secure him against the injuries of the Air; but in recompence, Nature
hath provided materials for all those Arts which she see would be
needful in Humane Life; as Building, Cloathing, Navigation, Agriculture,
*&c*. that so Mankind might have both wherewithal to answer their
occasions, and also to imploy their time, and exercise their ingenuity.
This Oeconomy of Nature, as I may call it, or well ordering of the great
Family of living Creatures, is an argument both of Goodness and of
Wisdom, and is every way far above the powers of brute Matter. All
regular administration we ascribe to conduct and judgment; If an Army of
men be well provided for in things necessary both for Food, Cloaths,
Arms, Lodging, Security and Defence, so as nothing is awanting in so
great a multitude, we suppose it the effect of care and forcast in those
persons that had the charge of it; they took their measures at first,
computed and proportion’d one thing to another, made good regulations,
and gave orders for convenient supplies. And can we suppose the great
Army of Creatures upon Earth manag’d and provided for with less
fore-thought and Providence, nay, with none at all, by meer Chance? This
is to recede from all rules and analogy of Reason, only to serve a turn,
and gratifie an unreasonable humour.

To conclude this Argument; There are two general Heads of things, if I
recollect aright, which we make the marks and characters of Wisdom and
Reason, Works of Art, and the Conduct of affairs or direction of means
to an end; and wheresoever we meet, either with regular material works,
or a regular ordination of affairs, we think we have a good title and
warrant to derive them from an intelligent Author; Now these two being
found in the Natural World, and that in an eminent degree, the one in
the Frame of it, and the other in the Oeconomy of it, we have all the
evidence and ground that can be in arguing from things visible to things
invisible, that there is an Author of Nature, Superiour both to Humane
Power and Humane Wisdom.

Before we proceed to give any further proofs or discoveries of the
Author of Nature, let us reflect a little upon those we have already
insisted upon; which

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

have been taken wholly from the Material World, and from the common
course of Nature. The very existence of Matter is a proof of a Deity,
for the *Idea* of it hath no connexion with existence, as we shall show
hereafter; however we will take leave now to set it down with the rest,
in order as they follow one another.

1\. *The existence of Matter*.

2\. *The Motion of Matter*.

3\. *The just quantity and degree of that Motion*.

4\. *The first form of the Universe upon Motion imprest; both as to the
Divisions of Matter, and the Leading Motions*.

5\. *The Laws for communication and regulation of that Motion*.

6\. *The regular effects of it, especially in the Animate World*.

7\. *The Oeconomy of Nature, and fit Subordination of one part of the
World to another*.

The five first of these Heads are prerequisites, and preparatives to the
formation of a World, and the two last are as the image and character of
its Maker, of his Power, Goodness and Wisdom, imprest upon it. Every one
of them might well deserve a Chapter to it self, if the subject was to
be treated on at large; but this is only an occasional dissertation, to
state the Powers of Matter, lest they should be thought boundless, and
the Author of Nature unnecessary, as the *Epicuræans* pretend; but
notwithstanding their vain confidence and credulity, I defie them, or
any man else, to make sence of the Material World, without placing a God
at the Center of it.

To these considerations taken wholly from the Corporeal World, give me
leave to add one of a mixt nature, concerning the *Union of our Soul and
Body*. This strange effect, if rightly understood, doth as truly
discover the Author of Nature, as many Effects that are accounted more
Supernatural. The Incarnation, as I may so say, of a Spiritual
substance, is to me a kind of standing miracle; That there should be
such an union and connexion reciprocally betwixt the motions of the
Body, and the actions and passions of the Soul: betwixt a substance
Intellectual, and a parcel of organiz’d Matter: can be no effect of
either of those substances; being wholly distinct in themselves, and
remote in their natures from one another. For instance, when my Finger
is cut, or when ’tis burnt, that my Soul thereupon should feel such a
smart and violent pain, is no consequence of Nature, or does not follow
from any connexion there is betwixt the Motion or Division of that piece
of Matter, I call my Finger, and the passion of that Spirit I call my
Soul; for these are two distinct Essences, and in themselves independent
upon one another, as much as the Sun and my Body are independent; and
there is no more reason in strict Nature, or in the essential chain of
Causes and Effects, that my Soul should suffer, or be affected with this
Motion in the Finger, than that the Sun should be affected with it; nay,
there is less reason, if less can be, for the Sun being Corporeal, as
the finger is, there is some remote possibility that there might be
communication of Motion betwixt them; but Motion cannot beget a thought,
or a passion by its own force; Motion can beget nothing but Motion, and
if it should produce a thought, the Effect would be more noble than the
Cause. Wherefore this Union is not by any necessity of Nature, but only

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

from a positive Institution, or Decree establisht by the Author of
Nature, that there should be such a communication betwixt these two
substances for a time, *viz*. during the Vitality of the Body.

’Tis true indeed, if Thought, Apprehension, and Reason, was nothing but
Corporeal Motion, this Argument would be of no force; but to suppose
this, is to admit an absurdity to cure a difficulty; to make a Thought
out of a local Motion, is like making a God out of a Stock, or a Stone;
for these two are as remote in their Nature, and have as different
*Idea*'s in the Mind, as any two disparate things we can propose or
conceive; Number and Colour, a Triangle and Vertue, Free-will and a
Pyramid are not more unlike, more distant, or of more different forms,
than Thought and local Motion. Motion is nothing but a Bodies changing
its place and situation amongst other Bodies, and what affinity or
resemblance hath that to a *Thought*? how is that like to Pain, or to a
doubt of the Mind? to Hope or to Desire? to the *Idea* of God? to any
act of the Will or Understanding, as judging, consenting, reasoning,
remembring, or any other? These are things of several orders, that have
no similitude, nor any mixture of one another. And as this is the nature
of Motion, so, on the other hand, in a *Thought* there are two things,
*Consciousness*, and a *Representation*; Consciousness is in all
Thoughts indifferently, whether distinct or [confus’d](errata.htm#4),
for no man thinks but he is conscious that he thinks, nor perceives any
thing but he is conscious that he perceives it; there is also in a
Thought, especially if it be distinct, a representation; ’tis the image
of that we think upon, and makes its Object present to the Mind. Now
what hath local Motion to do with either of these two, Consciousness, or
Representativeness? how doth it include either of them, or hold them any
way affixt to its Nature? I think one may with as good sence and reason
ask of what colour a Thought is, green or scarlet, as what sort of
Motion it is; for Motion of what sort soever, can never be conscious,
nor represent things as our Thoughts do. I have noted thus much in
general, only to show the different nature of Motion and Cogitation,
that we may be the more sensible that they have no mutual connexion in
us, nor in any other Creature, from their essence or essential
properties, but by a supervenient power from the Author of Nature, who
hath thus united the Soul and the Body in their operations.

We have hitherto only consider’d the ordinary course of Nature, and what
indications and proofs of its Author, that affords us; There is another
remarkable Head of Arguments from effects extraordinary and
supernatural, such as Miracles, Prophecies, Inspirations, Prodigies,
Apparitions, Witchcraft, Sorceries, *&c*. These, at one step, lead us to
something above Nature, and this is the shortest way, and the most
popular; several Arguments are suited to several tempers, and God hath
not left himself without a proper witness to every temper that is not
wilfully blind. Of these witnesses we now speak of, the most
considerable are Miracles, and the most considerable Records of them are
the Books of Scripture; which if we consider only as an History, and as
having nothing Sacred in them more than other good Histories, that is,
truth in matter of fact, we cannot doubt but there have been miracles in
the World; That *Moses* and the Prophets, our Saviour and his Apostles,
wrought Miracles, I can no more question, than that

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Cæsar* and *Alexander* fought Battles, and took
Cities. So also that there were true Prophecies and Inspirations, we
know from Scripture, only consider’d as a true History. But as for other
supernatural effects that are not recorded there, we have reason to
examine them more strictly before we receive them, at least as to
particular instances; for I am apt to think they are like Lotteries,
where there are ten or twenty Blanks for one Prize; but yet if there
were no Prizes at all, the Lottery would not have credit to subsist, and
would be cri’d down as a perfect Cheat; So if amongst those many stories
of Prodigies, Apparitions, and Witchcrafts, there were not some true,
the very fame and thought of them would die from amongst men, and the
first broachers of them would be hooted at as Cheats. As a false
Religion that hath nothing true and solid mixt with it, can scarce be
fixt upon Mankind; but where there is a mixture of true and false, the
strength of the one supports the weakness of the other. As for Sorcery,
the instances and examples of it are undeniable; not so much those few
scatter’d instances that happen now and then amongst us, but such as are
more constant, and in a manner National, in some Countries, and amongst
barbarous people. Besides, the Oracles, and the Magick that was so
frequent amongst the Ancients, show us that there have been always some
Powers more than Humane tampering with the affairs of Mankind. But this
Topick from effects Extraordinary and Supernatural, being in a great
measure Historical, and respecting evil Spirits as well as the Author of
Nature, is not so proper for this place.

There is a third Sett or Head of Arguments, that to some tempers are
more cogent and convictive than any of these, namely, Arguments
*abstract* and *Metaphysical*; And these do not only lead us to an
Author of Nature in general, but show us more of his properties and
perfections; represent him to us as a supream Deity, infinitely perfect,
the fountain of all Being, and the steddy Center of all things. But
reasons of this order, being of a finer thred, require more attention,
and some preparation of Mind to make us discern them well, and be duly
sensible of them. When a man hath withdrawn himself from the noise of
this busie World, lock’d up his Senses and his Passions, and every thing
that would unite him with it: commanded a general silence in the Soul,
and suffers not a Thought to stir, but what looks inwards; Let him then
reflect seriously, and ask himself, *What am I*, and *How came I into
Being?* If I was Author and Original to my self, surely I ought to feel
that mighty Power, and enjoy the pleasure of it; but, alas, I am
conscious of no such force or Vertue, nor of any thing in my Nature,
that should give me necessary existence; It hath no connexion with any
part of me, nor any faculty in me, that I can discern. And now that I do
exist, from what Causes soever, *Can I secure my self in Being?* now
that I am in possession, am I sure to keep it? am I certain, that three
minutes hence I shall still exist? I may or I may not, for ought I see;
Either seems possible in it self, and either is contingent as to me; I
find nothing in my Nature that can warrant my subsistence for one day,
for one hour, for one moment longer. I am nothing but Thoughts, fleeting
Thoughts, that chase and extinguish one another; and my Being, for ought
I know, is successive, and as dying as they are, and renew’d to me every
moment. This I am sure of, that so far as I know my self, and am
conscious what I am,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

there is no principle of immutability, or of necessary and indefectible
existence in my Nature; and therefore I ought in reason to believe, that
I stand or fall at the mercy of other Causes, and not by my own will, or
my own sufficiency.

Besides, I am very sensible, and in this I cannot be mistaken, that my
Nature is, in several respects, weak and imperfect; both as to Will and
Understanding. I *will* many things in vain, and without effect, and I
wish often what I have no ability to execute or obtain. And as to my
Understanding, how defective is it? how little or nothing do I know in
comparison of what I am ignorant of? Almost all the Intellectual World
is shut up to me, and the far greatest part of the Corporeal; And in
those things that fall under my cognizance, how often am I mistaken? I
am confin’d to a narrow sphere, and yet within that sphere I often erre;
my conceptions of things are obscure and confus’d, my reason
short-sighted; I am forc’d often to correct my self, to acknowledge that
I have judg’d false, and consented to an errour.  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) In summ, all my powers I find are limited,
and I can easily conceive the same kind of perfections in higher degrees
than I possess them, and consequently there are Beings, or may be,
greater and more excellent than my self, and more able to subsist by
their own power. Why should I not therefore believe that my Original is
from those Beings rather than from my self? For every Nature, the more
great and perfect it is, the nearer it approacheth to necessity of
existence, and to a power of producing other things. Yet, the truth is,
it must be acknowledg’d, that so long as the perfections of those other
Beings are limited and finite, though they be far superiour to us, there
is no necessity ariseth from their Nature that they should exist; and
the same Arguments that we have us’d against our selves, they may, in
proportion, use against themselves; and therefore we must still advance
higher to find a self-originated Being, whose existence must flow
immediately from his essence, or have a necessary connexion with it.

And indeed all these different degrees of higher and higher perfections
lead us directly to an highest, or Supream degree, which is Infinite and
unlimited Perfection. As subordinate causes lead to the first, so
Natures more perfect one than another lead us to a Nature infinitely
perfect, which is the Fountain of them all. Thither we must go, if we
will follow the course of Reason, which cannot stop at one more than
another, till it arrive there; And being arriv’d there, at that
Soveraign and Original Perfection, it finds a firm and immoveable ground
to stand upon; the steddy Center of all Being, wherein the Mind rests
and is satisfied. All the scruples or objections that we mov’d against
our selves, or other Creatures, take no place here; This Being is
conscious of an All-sufficiency in it self, and of immutability as to
any thing else, including in it all the causes of existence, or, to
speak more properly, all necessity of existence. Besides, that *we exist
our selves*, notwithstanding the imperfection and insufficiency of our
Nature, is a just, collateral proof of the existence of this Supream
Being; for such an effect as this cannot be without its cause, and it
can have no other competent cause but that we mention. And as this Being
is its own Origin, so it must needs be capable of producing all
Creatures; for whatsoever is possible, must be possible to it; and that
Creatures or finite Beings are possible, we both see by experience, and
may also discern by Reason; for those several degrees of perfection, or
limitations of

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

it, which we mention’d before, are all consistent Notions, and
consequently make consistent Natures, and such as may exist; but
contingently indeed, and in dependance upon the first Cause.

Thus we are come at length to a fair resolution of that great Question,
*Whence we are*, and *how* we continue in Being? And this hath led us by
an easie ascent to the Supream Author of Nature, and the first Cause of
all things; and presents us also with such a Scheme and Draught of the
Universe, as is clear and rational; every thing in its order, and in its
place, according to the dignity of its Nature, and the strength of its
principles. When the Mind hath rais’d it self into this view of a Being
infinitely perfect, ’tis in a Region of Light, hath a free prospect
every way, and sees all things from top to bottom, as pervious and
transparent. Whereas without God and a First Cause, there is nothing but
darkness and confusion in the Mind, and in Nature; broken views of
things, short interrupted glimpses of Light, nothing certain or
demonstrative, no Basis of Truth, no extent of Thought, no Science, no
Contemplation.

You will say, it may be, ’Tis true, something must be *Eternal*, and of
*necessary existence*, but why may not *Matter* be this Eternal
necessary Being? Then our Souls and all other Intellectual things must
be parts and parcels of Matter; and what pretensions can Matter have to
those properties and perfections that we find in our Souls, how limited
soever? much less to *necessary existence*, and those perfections that
are the foundation of it? What exists Eternally, and from it self, its
existence must flow immediately from its essence, as its cause, reason
or ground; for as Existence hath always something antecedent to it in
order of Nature, so that which is antecedent to it must infer it by a
necessary connexion, and so may be call’d the cause, ground, or reason
of it. And nothing can be such a ground, but what is a perfection; nor
every perfection neither, it must be Sovereign and Infinite perfection;
for from what else can necessary existence flow, or be inferr’d?
Besides, if that Being was not infinitely perfect, there might be
another Being more powerful than it, and consequently able to oppose and
hinder its existence; and what may be hinder’d is contingent and
arbitrary. Now *Matter* is so far from being a Nature infinitely
perfect, that it hath no perfection at all, but that of bare
*substance*; neither Life, Sense, Will or Understanding; nor so much as
Motion, from it self; as we have show’d before. And therefore this brute
inactive mass, which is but, as it were, the Drudge of Nature, can have
no right or title to that Sovereign prerogative of Self-existence.

We noted before, as a thing agreed upon, *That something or other must
needs be Eternal*. For if ever there was a time or state, when there was
no Being, there never could be any. Seeing *Nothing* could not produce
*Something*. Therefore ’tis undeniably true on all hands, That there was
some Being from Eternity. Now, according to our understandings, *Truth*
is *Eternal:* therefore, say we, some intellect or intelligent Being. So
also the reasons of *Goodness* and *Justice* appear to us Eternal, and
therefore some Good and Just Being is Eternal. Thus much is plain, that
these perfections which bear the signatures of Eternity upon them, are
things that have no relation to *Matter*, but relate immediately to an
Intellectual Being: therefore some such Being, to whom they originally
belong, must

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

be that *Eternal*. Besides, we cannot possibly but judge such a Being
more perfect than Matter; Now every Nature, the more perfect it is, the
more remote it is from *Nothing:* and the more remote it is from
nothing, the more it approaches to necessity of existence, and
consequently to Eternal existence.

Thus we have made a short Survey, so far as the bounds of a Chapter
would permit, of those evidences and assurances which we have, from
abstract Reason, and the external World, that there is an Author of
Nature; and That, a Being infinitely perfect, which we call *God*. We
may add to these, in the last place, that universal consent of Mankind,
or natural instinct of Religion, which we see, more or less, throughout
all Nations, Barbarous or Civil. For though this Argument, ’tis true, be
more disputable than the rest, yet having set down just grounds already
from whence this Natural judgment or perswasion might spring, we have
more reason to impute it to some of those, and their insensible
influence upon the Mind, than to the artifices of Men, or to make it a
weakness, prejudice, or errour of our Nature. That there is such a
propension in Humane Nature, seems to be very plain; at least so far as
to move us to implore, and have recourse to invisible Powers in our
extremities. Prayer is natural in certain cases, and we do at the meer
motion of our natural Spirit, and indeliberately, invoke God and Heaven,
either in case of extream danger, to help and assist us; or in case of
injustice and oppression, to relieve or avenge us; or in case of false
accusation, to vindicate our innocency; and generally in all cases
desperate and remediless as to Humane power, we seem to appeal, and
address our selves to something higher. And this we do by a sudden
impulse of Nature, without reflexion or deliberation. Besides, as
witnesses of our Faith and Veracity, we use to invoke the Gods, or
Superiour Powers, by way of imprecation upon our selves, if we be false
and perjur’d; And this hath been us’d in most Nations and Ages, if not
in all. These things also argue, that there is a Natural Conscience in
Man, and a distinction of moral *Good* and *Evil*; and that we look upon
those invisible Powers as the Guardians of Vertue and Honesty. There are
also few or no People upon the Earth but have something of External
Religion, true or false; and either of them is an argument of this
natural anticipation, or that they have an opinion that there is
something above them, and above visible Nature; though what that
something was, they seldom were able to make a good judgment. But to
pursue this Argument particularly, would require an Historical deduction
of Times and Places, which is not suitable to our present design.

To conclude this Chapter and this Subject; If we set Religion apart, and
consider the Deist and Atheist only as two Sects in Philosophy, or their
doctrine as two different *Hypotheses* propos’d for the explication of
Nature, and in competition with one another, whether should give the
more rational account of the Universe, of its Origin and *Phænomena*; I
say, if we consider them only thus, and make an impartial estimate,
whether System is more reasonable, more clear, and more satisfactory, to
me there seems to be no more comparison, than betwixt light and
darkness. The *Hypothesis* of the Deist reacheth from top to bottom,
both thorough the Intellectual and Material World, with a clear and
distinct light every where; is genuine, comprehensive, and satisfactory;
hath nothing

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

forc’d, nothing confus’d, nothing precarious; whereas the *Hypothesis*
of the Atheist is strain’d and broken, dark and uneasie to the Mind,
commonly pre-carious, often incongruous and irrational, and sometimes
plainly ridiculous. And this judgment I should make of them abstractly
from the interest of Religion, considering them only as matter of Reason
and Philosophy; *And* I dare affirm with assurance, if the faculties of
our Souls be true, that no Man can have a System of Thoughts reaching
thorough Nature, coherent and consistent in every part, without a Deity
for the Basis of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[215:1](ste26.htm#fr_9) Τὸ τέλοιον πρότερον τῆ
ουσει τοῦ ἀτελοῦς. *Arist*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Concerning NATURAL PROVIDENCE](ste27)
