[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste23)  [Next](ste25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

*The uses of this Theory for the illustration of Antiquity; The ancient
Chaos explain’d; The inhabitability of the Torrid Zone; The change of
the Poles of the World; The doctrine of the Mundane Egg; How* America
*was first peopled; How* Paradise *within the Circle of the Moon*.

WE have now dispatch’d the Theory of the Primæval Earth, and reviv’d a
forgotten World; ’Tis pity the first and fairest works of Nature should
be lost out of the memory of Man, and that we should so much dote upon
the Ruines, as never to think upon the Original Structure. As the modern
Artists from some broken pieces of an ancient Statue, make out all the
other parts and proportions; so from the broken and scatter’d limbs of
the first World we have shown you how to raise the whole Fabrick again;
and renew the prospect of those pleasant Scenes that first see the
light, and first entertain’d Man, when he came to act upon this
new-erected Stage.

We have drawn this Theory chiefly to give an account of the Universal
Deluge, and of *Paradise*; but as when one lights a Candle to look for
one or two things which they want, the light will not confine it self to
those two objects, but shows all the other in the room; so, methinks, we
have unexpectedly cast a light upon all Antiquity, in seeking after
these two things, or in retrieving the Notion and Doctrine of the
Primæval Earth, upon which they depended. For in ancient Learning there
are many Discourses, and many Conclusions deliver’d to us, that are so
obscure and confus’d, and so remote from the present state of things,
that one cannot well distinguish, whether they are fictions or
realities; and there is no way to distinguish with certainty, but by a
clear Theory upon the same subjects; which showing us the truth
directly, and independently upon them, shows us also by reflection, how
far they are true or false, and in what sence they are to be interpreted
and understood. And the present Theory being of great extent, we shall
find it serviceable in many things, for the illustration of such dubious
and obscure doctrines in Antiquity.

To begin with their Ancient CHAOS, what a dark story have they made of
it, both their Philosophers and Poets; and how fabulous in appearance?
’Tis deliver’d as confus’dly as the Mass it self could be, and hath not
been reduc’d to order, nor indeed made intelligible by any. They tell us
of *moral* [principles in](errata.htm#3.md) the Chaos instead of *natural*,
of *strife*, and *discord*, and *division* on the one hand, and *Love*,
*Friendship*, and *Venus* on the other; and, after a long contest, Love
got the better of Discord, and united the disagreeing principles: This
is one part of their story. Then they make the forming of the World out
of the Chaos a kind of

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Genealogie* or Pedigree; *Chaos* was the common
Parent of all, and from Chaos sprung, first, Night, and Tartarus, or
Oceanus; Night was a teeming Mother, and of her were born *Æther* and
the *Earth*; The Earth conceiv’d by the influences of Æther, and brought
forth Man and all Animals.

This seems to be a Poetical fiction rather than Philosophy; yet when
’tis set in a true light, and compar’d with our Theory of the Chaos,
’twill appear a pretty regular account, how the World was form’d at
first, or how the Chaos divided it self successively into several
Regions, rising one after another, and propagated one from another, as
Children and Posterity from a common Parent. We show’d in the first
Book, *Chap*. 5, how the Chaos, from an uniform mass, wrought it self
into several Regions or Elements; the grossest part sinking to the
Center, upon this lay the mass of Water, and over the Water was a Region
of dark, impure, caliginous Air; This impure, caliginous Air is that
which the Ancients call *Night*, and the mass of Water *Oceanus* or
*Tartarus*, for those two terms with them are often of the like force,
*Tartarus* being *Oceanus* inclos’d and lock’d up: Thus we have the
first off-spring of the Chaos, or its first-born twins, *Nox* and
*Oceanus*. Now this turbid Air purifying it self by degrees, as the more
subtle parts flew upwards, and compos’d the Æther; so the earthy parts
that were mixt with it dropt down upon the surface of the Water, or the
liquid mass; and that mass on the other hand sending up its lighter and
more oily parts towards its surface, these two incorporate there, and by
their mixture and union compose a Body of Earth quite round the mass of
Waters: And this was the first habitable Earth, which as it was, you
see, the Daughter of *Nox* and *Oceanus*, so it was the Mother of all
other things, and all living Creatures, which at the beginning of the
World sprung out of its fruitful womb.

This doctrine of the Chaos, for the greater pomp of the business, the
Ancients call’d their *Theogonia*, or the Genealogy of the Gods; for
they gave their Gods, at least their Terrestrial Gods, an original and
beginning; and all the Elements and greater portions of Nature they made
Gods and Goddesses, or their Deities presided over them in such a
manner, that the names were us’d promiscuously for one another. We also
mention’d before some moral principles, which they plac’d in the Chaos,
*Eris* and *Eros*; Strife, discord, and disaffection which prevail’d at
first, and afterward Love, kindness and union got the upper hand, and in
spite of those factious and dividing principles gather’d together the
separated Elements, and united them into an habitable World. This is all
easily understood, if we do but look upon the Schemes of the rising
World, as we have set them down in that fifth Chapter; for in the first
commotion of the Chaos, after an intestine struggle of all the parts,
the Elements separated from one another into so many distinct bodies or
masses, and in this state and posture things continued a good while,
which the Ancients, after their Poetick or Moral way, call’d the Reign
of Eris or Contention, of hatred, flight and disaffection; and if things
had always continued in that System, we should never have had an
habitable World. But Love and good Nature conquer’d at length, Venus
rise out of the Sea, and receiv’d into her bosom, and intangled in her
imbraces the falling Æther, *viz*. The parts of lighter earth, which
were mixt with the Air in that

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

first separation, and gave it the name of *Night*, fell down upon the
oily parts of the Sea-mass, which lay floating upon the surface of it,
and by that union and conjunction, a new Body, and a new World was
produc’d, which was the first habitable Earth. This is the
interpretation of their mystical Philosophy of the Chaos, and the
resolution of it into plain natural History: Which you may see more
fully discust in the *Latin* Treatise.<span class="margnote">*Lib*. 2.
*c*. 7.</span>

We have already explain’d, in several places, the *Golden Age* of the
Ancients, and laid down such grounds as will enable us to discern what
is real, and what Poetical, in the reports and characters that Antiquity
hath given of those first Ages of the World. And if there be any thing
amongst the Ancients that refers to another Earth, as *Plato*'s
*Atlantis*, which he says, was absorpt by an Earthquake, and an
inundation, as the Primæval Earth was; or his *Æthereal* Earth mention’d
in his *Phædo*, which he opposeth to this broken hollow Earth; makes it
to have long-liv’d inhabitants, and to be without Rains and Storms, as
that first Earth was also; or the pendulous *Gardens* of *Alcinous*, or
such like, to which nothing answers in present Nature, by reflecting
upon the state of the first Earth, we find an easie explication of them.
We have also explain’d what the *Antichthon* and *Antichthones* of the
Ancients were, and what the true ground of that distinction was. But
nothing seems more remarkable than the *inhabitability of the Torrid
Zone*, if we consider what a general fame and belief it had amongst the
Ancients, and yet in the present form of the Earth we find no such
thing, nor any foundation for it. I cannot believe that this was so
universally receiv’d upon a slight presumption only, because it lay
under the course of the Sun, if the Sun had then the same latitude from
the Æquator in his course and motion that he hath now, and made the same
variety of seasons; whereby even the honest parts of the Earth have a
Winter, or something equivalent to it. But if we apply this to the
Primæval Earth, whose posture was direct to the Sun, standing always
fixt in its Equinoctial, we shall easily believe that the Torrid Zone
was then uninhabitable by extremity of heat, there being no difference
of seasons, noge ofr any chan(*sic*) weather, the Sun hanging always
over head at the same distance, and in the same direction. Besides this,
the descent of the Rivers in that first Earth was such, that they could
never reach the Equinoctial parts, as we have shown before; by which
means, and the want of Rain, that Region must necessarily be turn’d into
a dry Desart. Now this being really the state of the first Earth, the
fame and general belief that the Torrid Zone was uninhabitable had this
true Original, and continued still with posterity after the Deluge,
though the causes then were taken away; for they being ignorant of the
change that was made in Nature at that time, kept up still the same
Tradition and opinion currant, till observation and experience taught
later Ages to correct it. As the true miracles that were in the
Christian Church at first, occasion’d a fame and belief of their
continuance long after they had really ceast.

This gives an easie account, and, I think, the true cause, of that
opinion, amongst the Ancients generally receiv’d, *That the Torrid Zone
was uninhabitable*. I say generally receiv’d; for not only the Poets,
both *Greek* and *Latin*, but their Philosophers, Astronomers and
Geographers, had the same notion, and deliver'd

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

the same doctrine; as *Aristotle*, *Cleomedes*, *Achilles Tatius*,
*Ptolomy*, *Cicero*, *Strabo*, *Mela*, *Pliny*, *Macrobius*, *&c*. And
to speak truth, the whole doctrine of the Zones is calculated more
properly for the first Earth, than for the present; for the divisions
and bounds of them now, are but arbitrary, being habitable all over, and
having no visible distinction; whereas they were then determin’d by
Nature, and the Globe of the Earth was really divided into so many
Regions of a very different aspect and quality; which would have
appear’d at a distance, if they had been lookt upon from the Clouds, or
from the Moon, as *Jupiter*'s Belts, or as so many Girdles or
Swathing-bands about the body of the Earth: And so the word imports, and
so the Ancients use to call them *Cinguli* and *Fasciæ*. But in the
present form of the Earth, if it was seen at a distance, no such
distinction would appear in the parts of it, nor scarce any other but
that of Land and Water, and of Mountains and Valleys, which are nothing
to the purpose of Zones. And to add this note further, When the Earth
lay in this regular form, divided into Regions or Walks, if I may so
call them, as this gave occasion of its distinction by Zones, so if we
might consider all that Earth as a *Paradise*, and *Paradise* as a
Garden, (for it is always call’d so in Scripture, and in *Jewish*
Authors) as this Torrid Zone, bare of Grass and Trees, made a kind of
Gravel-walk in the middle: so there was a green Walk on either hand of
it, made by the temperate Zones; and beyond those lay a Canal, which
water’d the Garden from either side.<span class="margnote">See *Fig*. 3.
*c*. 5.</span>

But to return to Antiquity; We may add under this Head another
observation or doctrine amongst the Ancients, strange enough in
appearance, which yet receives an easie explication from the preceding
Theory; They say, *The Poles* of the World did once change their
situation, and were at first in another posture from what they are in
now, till that inclination happen’d; <span class="margnote">*See the
Lat. Treat. lib*. 2. *c*. 10.</span>This the ancient Philosophers often
make mention of, as *Anaxagoras*, *Empedocles*, *Diogenes*, *Leucippus*,
*Democritus*; as may be seen in *Laertius*, and in *Plutarch*; and the
Stars, they say, at first were carried about the Earth in a more uniform
manner. This is no more than what we have observ’d and told you in other
words, namely, that the Earth chang’d its posture at the Deluge, and
thereby made these seeming changes in the Heavens; its Poles before
pointed to the Poles of the Ecliptick, which now point to the Poles of
the Æquator, and its Axis is become parallel with that Axis; and this is
the mystery and interpretation of what they say in other terms; this
makes the different aspect of the Heavens, and of its Poles: And I am
apt to think, that those changes in the course of the Stars, which the
Ancients sometimes speak of, and especially the *Ægyptians*, if they did
not proceed from defects in their Calendar, had no other Physical
account than this.

And as they say the Poles of the World were in another situation at
first, so at first they say, there was no variety of seasons in the
Year, as in their Golden Age. Which is very coherent with all the rest,
and still runs along with the Theory. And you may observe, that all
these things we have instanc’d in hitherto, are but links of the same
chain, in connexion and dependance upon one another. When the Primæval
Earth was made out of the Chaos, its form and posture was such, as, of
course, brought on all those Scenes which Antiquity hath kept the
remembrance of: though now in another state of Nature they seem very
strange;

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

especially being disguis’d, as some of them are, by their odd manner of
representing them. That the Poles of the World stood once in another
posture; That the Year had no diversity of Seasons; That the Torrid Zone
was uninhabitable; That the two Hemispheres had no possibility of
intercourse, and such like: These all hang upon the same string; or lean
one upon another as Stones in the same Building; whereof we have, by
this Theory, laid the very foundation bare, that you may see what they
all stand upon, and in what order.

There is still one remarkable Notion or Doctrine amongst the Ancients,
which we have not spoken to; ’tis partly Symbolical, and the propriety
of the Symbol, or of the Application of it, hath been little understood;
’Tis their doctrine of the *Mundane Egg*, or their comparing the World
to an Egg, and especially in the original composition of it. This seems
to be a mean comparison, the World and an Egg, what proportion, or what
resemblance betwixt these two things? And yet I do not know any
Symbolical doctrine, or conclusion, that hath been so universally
entertain’d by the *Mystæ*, or Wise and Learned, of all Nations; as hath
been noted before in the Fifth Chapter of the First Book, and at large
in the *Latin* Treatise. <span class="margnote">*Lib*. 2. *c*.
10.</span>’Tis certain, that by the *World* in this similitude, they do
not mean the Great Universe, for that hath neither Figure, nor any
determinate form of composition, and it would be a great vanity and
rashness in any one to compare this to an Egg; The works of God are
immense, as his nature is infinite, and we cannot make any image or
resemblance of either of them; but this comparison is to be understood
of the *Sublunary World*, or of the *Earth*; And for a general key to
Antiquity upon this Argument, we may lay this down as a Maxim or Canon,
*That what the Ancients have said concerning the form and figure of the
World, or concerning the Original of it from a Chaos, or about its
periods and dissolution, are never to be understood of the Great
Universe, but of our Earth, or of this Sublunary and Terrestrial World*.
And this observation being made, do but reflect upon our Theory of the
Earth, the manner of its composition at first, and the figure of it,
being compleated, and you will need no other interpreter to understand
this mystery. We have show’d there, that the figure of it, when finisht,
was Oval, and the inward form of it was a frame of four Regions<span
class="margnote">*Book* I. *c*. 5.</span> incompassing one another,
where that of Fire lay in the middle like the Yolk, and a shell of Earth
inclos’d them all. This gives a solution so easie and natural, and shows
such an aptness and elegancy in the representation, that one cannot
doubt, upon a view, and compare of circumstances, but that we have truly
found out the Riddle of the Mundane Egg.

To these illustrations of Antiquity in things Natural and Geographical,
give me leave to add, and to resolve from the same Theory, one
Historical difficulty; and ’twill seem, ’tis likely, of no less moment
than any we have hitherto insisted upon, and I am sure hath exercis’d
the Pens of many Learned men with small or no success. ’Tis to give an
account of the Original of the people of *America*, how that Continent
was first peopled and inhabited, or any other Continent distinct from
ours, wherein we suppose *Adam* to have liv’d, and to have propagated
his posterity. ’Tis certain, that all Mankind came from one Head, or
from one common Parent; *Certain*, I say, according to the History of
*Moses*, confirm'd

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

by Apostolical authority;<span class="margnote">*Acts* 17. 26.</span>
and ’tis also admitted on all hands that *Adam* after his expulsion out
of *Paradise*, wheresoever he was before, liv’d in this Continent, which
being encompass’d with great Seas, and separate from *America* on either
side, how could the children of *Adam* pass the wide Ocean, to hunt out
remote habitations in *America*? How easie is the answer to this great
Question, which hath imploy’d the time of so many Learned men to
resolve? Or rather how suddenly doth it vanish at the sight of truth, as
a phantom at the approach of light? The ground sinks under it that it
seem’d to stand upon; *Adam*'s Earth was not broken into Continents and
Islands, as ours is, nor the parts of it separated by Seas and
Mountains; ’twas one continued and smooth surface, and gave free and
easie passage from the rising to the setting Sun: So according as his
progeny increast, and new swarms were ready to go abroad, they might
spread themselves on either hand, East and West, without any
interruption or impediment; neither Sea, Mountain, nor Desart would
stand in their way. ’Tis true, the passage was not so free North and
South, they could not go out of one Hemisphere into another, but
Providence seems to have made provision for that, in transplanting
*Adam* into this Hemisphere, after he had laid the foundation of a World
in the Other.

We see then the great difficulty concerning the peopling the several
Continents and Islands of the Earth, and particularly of *America*,
easily remov’d by this *Hypothesis*; The propagation of Mankind, and of
all sorts of Animals into those several portions of the World, may
readily be understood, if you admit the true form of the first Earth:
But without that ’tis an endless controversie, as those commonly are
that proceed upon a false supposition. I will not examine here the
several projects and methods that have been propos’d, some by one
Author, and some by another, for getting people into *America*; they
confute one another, methinks, very well; and to show, as we have done,
that the ground they go upon is imaginary, is a compendious way of
confuting them all together. However, those that will not admit our
*Hypothesis*, concerning the continuity and uniformity of the first
Earth, stand oblig’d still to give us an account of the propagation of
Mankind from one Head, and how the posterity of *Adam* got into
*America*.

’Twill be said, possibly, that this doth not intirely remove the
difficulty, because it returns again after the Flood; and then we
suppose the Earth broken into Continents and Islands, in the same manner
that it is now; How then did the posterity of *Noah* get into *America*,
to people it after the Flood? I do not know that ever they got into
*America* till *Columbus* went thither in the last Age, who, for any
thing I know, was the first of *Noah*'s progeny that ever set foot in
that Continent. Scripture tells us, that all Mankind rise from one Head,
namely, from *Adam*, and his fault was derived to posterity, but no
where that *Noah* was the common Head of Mankind that hath been since
his time, nor does any doctrine of faith, that I know of, depend upon
that supposition. When the great frame of the Earth broke at the Deluge,
Providence fore-see into how many Continents it would be divided after
the ceasing of the Flood, and accordingly, as we may reasonably suppose,
made provision to save a remnant in every Continent, that the race of
Mankind might not be quite extinct in any of them. What

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

provision he made in our Continent we know from Sacred History, but as
that takes notice of no other Continent but ours, so neither could it
take notice of any method that was us’d there for saving of a remnant of
men; but ’twere great presumption, methinks, to imagine that Providence
had a care of none but us, or could not find out ways of preservation in
other places, as well as in that where our habitations were to be.
*Asia*, *Africk* and *Europe* were repeopled by the Sons of *Noah*,
*Shem*, *Ham*, and *Japhet*, but we read nothing of their going over
into *America*, or sending any Colonies thither; and that World which is
near as big as ours, must have stood long without people, or any thing
of Humane race in it, after the Flood, if it stood so till this was
full, or till men navigated the Ocean, and by chance discovered it: It
seems more reasonable to suppose, that there was a stock providentially
reserv’d there, as well as here, out of which they sprung again; but we
do not pretend in an Argument of this nature to define or determine any
thing positively. To conclude, as this is but a secondary difficulty,
and of no great force, so neither is it any thing peculiar to us, or to
our *Hypothesis*, but alike common to both; and if they can propose any
reasonable way, whereby the Sons of *Noah* might be transplanted into
*America*, with all my heart; but all the ways that I have met with
hitherto, have seem’d to me meer fictions, or meer presumptions.
Besides, finding Birds and Beasts there, which are no where upon our
Continent, nor would live in our Countries if brought hither, ’tis a
fair conjecture that they were not carried from us, but originally bred
and preserv’d there.

Thus much for the illustration of Antiquity in some points of Humane
literature, by our Theory of the Primæval Earth; There is also in
*Christian Antiquity* a Tradition or Doctrine, that appears as obscure
and as much a Paradox as any of these, and better deserves an
illustration, because it relates more closely and expressly to our
present subject: ’Tis that Notion or Opinion amongt the Ancients
concerning *Paradise*, that it was seated as high as the Sphere of the
Moon, or *within the Lunar Circle*. This looks very strange, and indeed
extravagantly, at first sight, but the wonder will cease, if we
understand this not of Paradise taken apart from the rest of the Earth,
but of the whole Primæval Earth, wherein the Seat of *Paradise* was;
That was really seated much higher than the present Earth, and may be
reasonably suppos’d to have been as much elevated as the tops of our
Mountains are now. And that phrase of reaching to *the Sphere of the
Moon*, signifies no more than those other expressions of *reaching to
Heaven*, or *reaching above the Clouds*, which are phrases commonly us’d
to express the height of Buildings, or of Mountains, and such like
things: So the Builders of *Babel* said, they would make a Tower should
reach to Heaven; *Olympus* and *Parnassus* are said by the Poets to
reach to Heaven, or to rise above the Clouds; And *Pliny* and *Solinus*
use this very expression of the *Lunar Circle*, when they describe the
height of Mount *Atlas*, *Eductus in viciniam Lunaris Circuli*. <span
class="margnote">*Solin*. *c*. 17.</span>The Ancients, I believe, aim’d
particularly by this phrase, to express an height above the middle
Region, or above our Atmosphere, that *Paradise* might be serene; and
where our Atmosphere ended, they reckon’d the Sphere of the Moon begun,
and therefore said it reach’d to the Sphere of the Moon. Many of the
Christian Fathers exprest their opinion concerning the high situation of
*Paradise* in plain and

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

formal terms, as *St. Basil*, *Damascen*, *Moses Bar Cepha*, *&c*. but
this phrase of reaching to the *Lunar Circle* is repeated by several of
them, and said to be of great Antiquity. *Aquinas*, *Albertus*, and
others, ascribe it to *Bede*, but many to St. *Austin*; <span
class="margnote">*Com. in Gen. c*. 2</span> and therefore *Ambrosius
Catharinus* is angry with their great Schoolman, that he should derive
it from *Bede*, seeing St. *Austin* writing to *Orosius*, deliver’d this
doctrine, which surely, says He, St. *Austin* *neither feign’d nor
dream’d only, but had receiv’d it from Antiquity:* <span
class="margnote">*Sum. Theol.* *par*. 2. *tract*. 13. *q*. 79</span>And
from so great Antiquity, that it was no less than Apostolical, if we
credit *Albertus Magnus*, and the ancient Books he appeals to; for He
says this Tradition was deriv’d as high as from St. *Thomas* the
Apostle. His words are these, after he had deliver’d his own opinion.
*Hoc tamen dico*, *&c*. *But this I say, without prejudice to the better
opinion, for I have found it in some most ancient Books, that* Thomas
*the Apostle was the Author of that opinion, which is usually attributed
to* Bede *and* Strabus*, namely, that* Paradise *was so high as to reach
to the Lunar Circle*. But thus much concerning this Opinion, and
concerning Antiquity.

To conclude all, we see this Theory, which was drawn only by a thred of
Reason, and the Laws of Nature, abstractly from all Antiquity,
notwithstanding casts a light upon many passages there, which were
otherwise accounted fictions, or unintelligible truths; and though we do
not alledge these as proofs of the Theory, for it carries its own light
and proof with it, yet whether we will or no, they do mutually confirm,
as well as illustrate, one another; And ’tis a pleasure also, when one
hath wrought out truth by meer dint of thinking, and examination of
causes, and propos’d it plainly and openly, to meet with it again
amongst the Ancients, disguis’d, and in an old fashion’d dress: scarce
to be known or discover’d, but by those that before-hand knew it very
well. And it would be a further pleasure and satisfaction, to have
render’d those Doctrines and Notions, for the future, intelligible and
useful to others, as well as delightful to our selves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](ste25.md)
