[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste21)  [Next](ste23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

*A Recollection and Review of what hath been said concerning the
Primitive Earth; with a more full Survey of the State of the first
World, Natural and Civil, and the comparison of it with the present
World*.

WE have now, in a good measure, finisht our description of the first and
Ante-diluvian Earth; And as Travellers, when they see strange Countries,
make it part of their pleasure and improvement, to compare them with
their own, to observe the differences, and wherein they excel, or come
short of one another: So it will not be unpleasant, nor unuseful, it may
be, having made a discovery, not of a new Country, but of a new World,
and travell’d it over in our thoughts and fancy, now to sit down and
compare it with our own: And ’twill be no hard task, from the general
differences which we have taken notice of already, to observe what
lesser would arise, and what the whole face of Nature would be.

’Tis also one fruit of travelling, that by seeing variety of places and
people, of humours, fashions, and forms of living, it frees us, by
degrees, from that pedantry and littleness of Spirit, whereby we are apt
to censure every thing for absurd and ridiculous, that is not according
to our own way, and the mode of our own

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Country; But if instead of crossing the Seas, we
could waft our selves over to our neighbouring Planets, we should meet
with such varieties there, both in Nature and Mankind, as would very
much enlarge our thoughts and Souls, and help to cure those diseases of
little minds, that make them troublesome to others, as well as uneasie
to themselves.

But seeing our heavy Bodies are not made for such Voyages, the best and
greatest thing we can do in this kind, is to make a Survey and
reflection upon the Ante-diluvian Earth, which in some sence was another
World from this, and it may be, as different as some two Planets are
from one another. We have declar’d already the general grounds upon
which we must proceed, and must now trace the consequences of them, and
drive them down into particulars, which will show us in most things,
wherein that Earth, or that World, differ’d from the present. The form
of that Earth, and its situation to the Sun, were two of its most
fundamental differences from ours; As to the form of it, ’twas all one
smooth Continent, one continued surface of earth, without any Sea, any
Mountains, or Rocks; any Holes, Dens or Caverns: And the situation of it
to the Sun was such as made a perpetual Æquinox. These two joyn’d
together, lay the foundation of a new Astronomy, Meteorology,
Hydrography and Geography; such as were proper and peculiar to that
World. The Earth by this means having its Axis parallel to the Axis of
the Ecliptick, the Heavens would appear in another posture: And their
diurnal motion, which is imputed to the *Primum Mobile*, and suppos’d to
be upon the Poles of the Æquator, would then be upon the same Poles with
the second and Periodical motions of the Orbs and Planets, namely, upon
the Poles of the Ecliptick; by which means the *Phænomena* of the
Heavens would be more simple and regular, and much of that intangledness
and perplexity, which we find now in Astronomy, would be taken away.
Whether the Sun and the Moon would suffer any Eclipses then, cannot well
be determin’d, unless one knew what the course of the Moon was at that
time, or whether she was then come into our neighbourhood: Her presence
seems to have been less needful when there were no long Winter-nights,
nor the great Pool of the Sea to move or govern.

As for the Regions of the Air and the Meteors, we have in the preceding
Chapter set down what the state of them would be, and in how much a
better order, and more peaceable, that Kingdom was, till the Earth was
broken and displac’d, and the course of Nature chang'd: Nothing violent,
nothing frightful, nothing troublesome or incommodious to Mankind, came
from above, but the countenance of the Heavens was always smooth and
serene. I have often thought it a very desirable piece of power, if a
man could but command a fair day, when he had occasion for it, for
himself, or for his friends; ’tis more than the greatest Prince or
Potentate upon Earth can do; yet they never wanted one in that World,
nor ever see a foul one. Besides, they had constant breezes from the
motion of the Earth, and the course of the Vapours, which cool’d the
open Plains, and made the weather temperate, as well as fair. But we
have spoken enough in other places upon this subject of the Air and the
Heavens, Let us now descend to the Earth.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

The Earth was divided into two Hemispheres, separated by the Torrid
Zone, which at that time was uninhabitable, and utterly unpassable; so
as the two Hemispheres made two distinct Worlds, which, so far as we can
judge, had no manner of commerce or communication one with another. The
Southern Hemisphere the Ancients call’d *Antichthon*, *the Opposite
Earth*, or the *Other World*. And this name and notion remain’d long
after the reason of it had ceast. Just as the Torrid Zone was generally
accounted uninhabitable by the Ancients, even in their time, because it
really had been so once, and the Tradition remain’d uncorrected, when
the causes were taken away; namely, when the Earth had chang’d its
posture to the Sun after the Deluge.

This may be lookt upon as the first division of that Primæval Earth,
into two Hemispheres, naturally sever’d and disunited: But it was also
divided into five Zones, two Frigid, two Temperate, and the Torrid
betwixt them. And this distinction of the Globe into five Zones, I
think, did properly belong to that Original Earth, and Primitive
Geography, and improperly, and by translation only, to the present. For
all the Zones of our Earth are habitable, and their distinctions are in
a manner but imaginary, not fixt by Nature; whereas in that Earth where
the Rivers fail’d, and the Regions became uninhabitable, by reason of
driness and heat, there begun the Torrid Zone; and where the Regions
became uninhabitable, by reason of cold and moisture, there begun the
Frigid Zone; and these being determin’d, they became bounds on either
side to the Temperate. But all this was alter’d when the posture of the
Earth was chang’d; and chang’d for that very purpose, as some of the
Ancients have said, *That the uninhabitable parts of the Earth might
become habitable*. Yet though there was so much of the first Earth
uninhabitable, there remain’d as much to be inhabited as we have now;
for the Sea, since the breaking up of the Abysse, hath taken away half
of the Earth from us, a great part whereof was to them good Land.
Besides, we are not to suppose, that the Torrid Zone was of that extent
we make it now, twenty three degrees and more on either side of the
Æquator; these bounds are set only by the Tropicks, and the Tropicks by
the obliquity of the course of the Sun, or of the posture of the Earth,
which was not in that World. Where the Rivers stopt, there the Torrid
Zone would [begin](errata.htm#2), but the Sun was directly perpendicular
to no part of it, but the middle.

How the Rivers flow’d in the first Earth we have before explain’d
sufficiently, and what parts the Rivers did not reach, were turn’d into
Sands and Desarts by the heat of the Sun; for I cannot easily imagine,
that the Sandy Desarts of the Earth were made so at first, immediately
and from the beginning of the World; from what causes should that be,
and to what purpose? But in those Tracts of the Earth that were not
refresht with Rivers and moisture, which cement the parts, the ground
would moulder and crumble into little pieces, and then those pieces by
the heat of the Sun were bak’d into Stone. And this would come to pass
chiefly in the hot and scorch’d Regions of the Earth, though it might
happen sometimes where there was not that extremity of heat, if by any
chance a place wanted Rivers and Water to keep the Earth in due temper;
but those Sands would not be so early or ancient as the other. As for
greater loose Stones, and

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

rough Pebbles, there were none in that Earth; *Deucalion* and *Pyrrha*,
when the Deluge was over, found new-made Stones to cast behind their
backs; the bones of their mother Earth, which then were broken in
pieces, in that great ruine.

As for Plants and Trees, we cannot imagine but that they must needs
abound in the Primitive Earth, seeing it was so well water’d, and had a
soil so fruitful; A new unlabour’d soil, replenisht with the Seeds of
all Vegetables; and a warm Sun that would call upon Nature early for her
First-fruits, to be offer’d up at the beginning of her course. Nature
had a wild luxuriancy at first, which humane industry by degrees gave
form and order to; The Waters How’d with a constant and gentle Current,
and were easily led which way the Inhabitants had a mind, for their use,
or for their pleasure; and shady Trees, which grow best in moist and
warm Countries, grac’d the Banks of their Rivers or Canals. But that
which was the beauty and crown of all, was their perpetual Spring, the
Fields always green, the Flowers always fresh, and the Trees always
cover’d with Leaves and Fruit: But we have occasionally spoken of these
things in several places, and may do again hereafter, and therefore need
not inlarge upon them here.

As for Subterraneous things, Metals and Minerals, I believe they had
none in the first Earth; and the happier they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor
courser Metals. The use of these is either imaginary, or in such works,
as, by the constitution of their World, they had little occasion for.
And Minerals are either for Medicine, which they had no need of further
than Herbs; or for Materials to certain Arts, which were not then in
use, or were suppli’d by other ways. These Subterraneous things, Metals
and metallick Minerals, are Factitious, not Original bodies, coeval with
the Earth; but are made in process of time, after long preparations and
concoctions, by the action of the Sun within the bowels of the Earth.
And if the Stamina or principles of them rise from the lower Regions
that lie under the Abysse, as I am apt to think they do, it doth not
seem probable, that they could be drawn through such a mass of Waters,
or that the heat of the Sun could on a sudden penetrate so deep, and be
able to loosen them, and raise them into the exterior Earth. And as the
first Age of the World was call’d *Golden*, though it knew not what Gold
was; so the following Ages had their names from several Metals, which
lay then asleep in the dark and deep womb of Nature, and see not the Sun
till many Years and Ages afterwards.

Having run through the several Regions of Nature, from top to bottom,
from the Heavens to the lower parts of the Earth, and made some
observations upon their order in the Ante-diluvian World; Let us now
look upon Man and other living Creatures, that make the Superiour and
Animate part of Nature. We have observ’d, and sufficiently spoken to
that difference betwixt the men of the old World, and those of the
present, in point of Longævity, and given the reasons of it; but we must
not imagine, that this long life was peculiar to Man, all other Animals
had their share of it, and were in their proportion longer-liv’d than
they are now. Nay, not only Animals, but also Vegetables, and the forms
of all living things were far more permanent; <span
class="margnote">Ezek. 31. 8.</span>The Trees of the Field and of the
Forest, in all probability, out-lasted the lives of Men; and I do not
know but the first Groves of Pines and Cedars that grew out of the
Earth, or that were planted in the Garden

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

of God, might be standing when the Deluge came, and see, from first to
last, the entire course and period of a World.

We might add here, with St. *Austin*, <span class="margnote">*Civ. Dei*
*lib*. 15. *c*. 9</span> another observation, both concerning Men and
other lying Creatures in the first World, that They were greater, as
well as longer-liv’d, than they are at present. This seems to be a very
reasonable conjecture, for the state of every thing that hath life, is
divided into the time of its growth, its consistency, and its decay; and
when the whole duration is longer, every one of these parts, though not
always in like proportions, will be longer. We must suppose then, that
the growth both in Men and other Animals lasted longer in that World
than it doth now, and consequently carried their Bodies both to a
greater height and bulk. And in like manner, their Trees would be both
taller, and every way bigger than ours; neither were they in any danger
there to be blown down by Winds and Storms, or struck with Thunder,
though they had been as high as the *Ægyptian* Pyramids; and whatsoever
their height was, if they had Roots and Trunks proportionable, and were
streight and well pois’d, they would stand firm, and with a greater
majesty. *The Fowls of Heaven making their Nests in their Boughs, and
under their shadow the Beasts of the Field bringing forth their Young*.
When things are fairly possible in their causes, and possible in several
degrees, higher or lower, ’tis weakness of Spirit in us, to think there
is nothing in Nature, but in that one way, or in that one degree, that
we are us’d to. And whosoever believes those accounts given us, both by
the Ancients <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) and Moderns, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7) of the *Indian* Trees, will not think it
strange that those of the first Earth, should much exceed any that we
now see in this World. That Allegorical description of the glory of
*Assyria* in *Ezekiel* (*Chap*. 31) by allusion to Trees, and
particularly to the Trees of *Paradise*, was chiefly for the greatness
and stateliness of them; and there is all fairness of reason to believe,
that in that first Earth, both the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of
the Field, and the Trees, and their Fruit, were all, in their several
kinds, more large and goodly than Nature produces any now.

So much in short concerning the Natural World, Inanimate or Animate; We
should now take a prospect of the Moral World of that time, or of the
Civil and Artificial World; what the order and Oeconomy of these was,
what the manner of living, and how the Scenes of humane life were
different from ours at present. The Ancients, especially the Poets, in
their description of the Golden Age, exhibit to us an Order of things,
and a Form of life, very remote from any thing we see in our days; but
they are not to be trusted in all particulars, many times they
exaggerate matters on purpose, that they may seem more strange, or more
great, and by that means move and please us more. A *Moral* or
*Philosophick* History of the World well writ, would certainly be a very
useful work, to observe and relate how the Scenes of Humane life have
chang’d in several Ages, the Modes and Forms of living, in what
simplicity Men begun at first, and by what degrees they came out of that
way, by luxury, ambition, improvement, or changes in Nature; then what
new forms and modifications were superadded by the invention of Arts,
what by Religion, what by Superstition. This would be a view

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

of things more instructive, and more satisfactory, than to know what
Kings Reign’d in such an Age, and what Battles were fought; which common
History teacheth, and teacheth little more. Such affairs are but the
little underplots in the Tragi-comedy of the World; the main design is
of another nature, and of far greater extent and consequence. But to
return to the subject;

As the Animate World depends upon the Inanimate, so the Civil World
depends upon them both, and takes its measures from them: Nature is the
foundation still, and the affairs of Mankind are a superstructure that
will be always proportion’d to it. There fore we must look back upon the
model or picture of their natural World, which we have drawn before, to
make our conjectures or judgment of the Civil and Artificial that were
to accompany it. We observ’d from their perpetual Æquinox, and the
smoothness of the Earth, that the Air would be always calm, and the
Heavens fair, no cold or violent Winds, Rains, or Storms, no extremity
of weather in any kind, and therefore they would need little protection
from the injuries of the Air in that state; whereas now one great part
of the affairs of life, is to preserve our selves from those
inconveniences, by building and cloathing. How many Hands, and how many
Trades are imploy’d about these two things, which then were in a manner
needless, or at least in such plainness and simplicity, that every man
might be his own workman. Tents and Bowers would keep them from all
incommodities of the Air and weather, better than Stone-walls, and
strong Roofs defend us now; and men are apt to take the easiest ways of
living, till necessity or vice put them upon others that are more
laborious, and more artificial. We also observ’d and prov’d, that they
had no Sea in the Primitive and Ante-diluvian World, which makes a vast
difference ’twixt us and them; This takes up half of our Globe, and a
good part of Mankind is busied with Sea-affairs and Navigation. They had
little need of Merchandizing then, Nature suppli’d them at home with all
necessaries, which were few, and they were not so greedy of
superfluities as we are. We may add to these what concern’d their Food
and Diet; Antiquity doth generally suppose that men were not Carnivorous
in those Ages of the World, or did not feed upon Flesh, but only upon
Fruit and Herbs. And this seems to be plainly confirm’d by Scripture;
for after the Deluge God Almighty gives *Noah* and his Posterity a
Licence to eat Flesh, (Gen. 9. 2, 3.) *Every moving thing that liveth
shall be meat for you*. Whereas before in the new-made Earth God had
prescrib’d them Herbs and Fruit for their Diet, *Gen*. 1. 29. *Behold, I
have given you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the face of all
the Earth; and every Tree, in the which is the Fruit of a Tree yielding
Seed, to you it shall be for meat*. And of this Natural Diet they would
be provided to their hands, without further preparation, as the Birds
and the Beasts are.

Upon these general grounds we may infer and conclude, that the Civil
World then, as well as the Natural, had a very different face and aspect
from what it hath now; for of these Heads, Food and Cloathing, Building
and Traffick, with that train of Arts, Trades and Manufactures that
attend them, the Civil order of things is in a great measure constituted
and compounded: These make the business of life, the several occupations
of Men, the noise and hurry of the World;

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

\[paragraph continues\] These fill our Cities, and our Fairs, and our
Havens and Ports; Yet all these fine things are but the effects of
indigency and necessitousness, and were, for the most part, needless and
unknown in that first state of Nature. The Ancients have told us the
same things in effect, but telling us them without their grounds, which
they themselves did not know, they lookt like Poetical stories, and
pleasant fictions, and with most men past for no better. We have shewn
them in another light, with their Reasons and Causes, deduc’d from the
state of the natural World, which is the Basis upon which they stand;
and this doth not only give them a just and full credibility, but also
lays a foundation for after-thoughts, and further deductions, when they
meet with minds dispos’d to pursue Speculations of this Nature.

As for Laws, Government, natural Religion, Military and Judicial
affairs, with all their Equipage, which make an higher order of things
in the Civil and Moral World, to calculate these upon the grounds given,
would be more difficult, and more uncertain; neither do they at all
belong to the present Theory. But from what we have already observ’d, we
may be able to make a better judgment of those Traditional accounts
which the Ancients have left us concerning these things, in the early
Ages of the World, and the Primitive state of Nature. No doubt in these,
as in all other particulars, there was a great easiness and simplicity
in comparison of what is now, we are in a more pompous, forc’d, and
artificial method, which partly the change of Nature, and partly the
Vices and Vanities of men have introduc’d and establisht. But these
things, with many more, ought to be the subject of a *Philosophick
History* of the World, which we mention’d before.

This is a short and general Scheme of the Primæval World, compar’d with
the Modern; yet these things did not equally run through all the Parts
and Ages of it, there was a declension and degeneracy, both Natural and
Moral, by degrees, and especially towards the latter end; but the
principal form of Nature remaining till the Deluge and the dissolution
of that Heavens and Earth, till then also this Civil frame of things
would stand in a great measure. And though such a state of Nature, and
of Mankind, when ’tis propos’d crudely, and without its grounds, appear
fabulous or imaginary, yet ’tis really in it self a state, not only
possible, but more easie and natural, than what the World is in at
present. And if one of the old Ante-diluvian Patriarchs should rise from
the dead, he would be more surpris’d to see our World in that posture it
is, than we can be by the story and description of his. As an *Indian*
hath more reason to wonder at the *European* modes, than we have to
wonder at their plain manner of living. ’Tis we that have left the tract
of Nature, that are wrought and screw’d up into artifices, that have
disguis’d our selves; and ’tis in our World that the Scenes are chang’d,
and become more strange and Fantastical.

I will conclude this Discourse with an easie remark, and without any
particular Application of it. ’Tis a strange power that custom hath upon
weak and little Spirits; whose thoughts reach no further than their
Senses; and what they have seen and been us’d to, they make the standard
and measure of Nature, of Reason, and of all *Decorum*. Neither are
there any sort of men more positive and tenacious

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

of their petty opinions, than they are; nor more censorious, even to
bitterness and malice. And ’tis generally so, that those that have the
least evidence for the truth of their beloved opinions, are most peevish
and impatient in the defence of them. This sort of men are the last that
will be made wise men, if ever they be; for they have the worst of
diseases that accompany ignorance, and do not so much as know themselves
to be sick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[178:1](ste22.htm#fr_6) *Plin*. *li*. 7, *c*. 2.
*Strab*. *l*. 17.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[178:2](ste22.htm#fr_7) *Hort. Malabr.* *vol*. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](ste23)
