[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste24)  [Next](ste26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

*A general objection against this Theory,* viz*. That if there had been
such a* Primitive Earth*, as we pretend, the fame of it would have
sounded throughout all Antiquity. The Eastern and Western Learning
consider’d, the most considerable Records of both are lost; what
footsteps remain relating to this Subject. The* Jewish *and* Christian
*Learning consider’d; how far lost as to this Argument, and what Notes
or Traditions remain. Lastly, how far the Sacred Writings bear witness
to it. The Providential conduct of Knowledge in the World. A
recapitulation and state of the Theory*.

HAVING gone through the two first Parts, and the two first Books of this
Theory, that concern the Primitive World, the Universal Deluge, and the
state of *Paradise*, We have leizure now to reflect a little, and
consider what may probably be objected against a Theory of this nature.
I do not mean single objections against single parts, for those may be
many, and such as I cannot fore-see; but what may be said against the
body and substance of the Theory,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

and the credibility of it, appearing new and surprising, and yet of
great extent and importance. This, I fancy, will induce many to say,
surely this cannot be a reality; for if there had been such a Primitive
Earth, and such a Primitive World as is here represented, and so
remarkably different from the present, it could not have been so utterly
forgotten, or lain hid for so many Ages; all Antiquity would have rung
of it; the memory of it would have been kept fresh by Books or
Traditions. Can we imagine, that it should lie buried for some thousands
of years in deep silence and oblivion; and now only when the second
World is drawing to an end, we begin to discover that there was a first,
and that of another make and order from this?

To satisfie this objection, or surmise rather, it will be convenient to
take a good large scope and compass in our Discourse; We must not
suppose, that this Primitive World hath been wholly lost out of the
memory of man, or out of History, for we have some History and
Chronology of it preserv’d by *Moses*, and likewise in the Monuments of
the Ancients, more or less; for they all suppos’d a World before the
Deluge. But ’tis the Philosophy of this Primitive World that hath been
lost in a great measure, what the state of Nature was then, and wherein
it differ’d from the present or Post-diluvian order of things. This, I
confess, hath been little taken notice of; it hath been generally
thought or presum’d, that the World before the Flood was of the same
form and constitution with the present World; This we do not deny, but
rather think it design’d and Providential, that there should not remain
a clear and full knowledge of that first state of things; and we may
easily suppose how it might decay and perish, if we consider how little
of the remote Antiquities of the World have ever been brought down to
our knowledge.

The *Greeks* and *Romans* divided the Ages of the World into three
periods or intervals, whereof they call’d the first the *Obscure*
Period, the second the *Fabulous*, and the third *Historical*. The dark
and obscure Period was from the beginning of the World to the Deluge;
what pass’d then, either in Nature or amongst Men, they have no Records,
no account, by their own confession; all that space of time was cover’d
with darkness and oblivion; so that we ought rather to wonder at those
remains they have, and those broken notions of the Golden Age, and the
conditions of it, how they were sav’d out of the common shipwrack, than
to expect from them the Philosophy of that World, and all its
differences from the present. And as for the other Nations that pretend
to greater Antiquities, to more ancient History and Chronology, from
what is left of their Monuments many will allow only this difference,
that their fabulous Age begun more high, or that they had more ancient
Fables.

But besides that our expectations cannot be great from the learning of
the *Gentiles*, we have not the means or opportunity to inform our
selves well what Notions they did leave us concerning the Primitive
World; for their Books and Monuments are generally lost, or lie hid
unknown to us. The Learning of the World may be divided into the Eastern
learning and the Western; and I look upon the Eastern as far more
considerable for Philosophical Antiquities, and Philosophical
Conclusions; I say *Conclusions*, for I do not believe either of them
had

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

any considerable Theory, or Contexture of Principles and Conclusions
together: But ’tis certain, that in the East, from what Source soever it
came, Humane or Divine, they had some extraordinary Doctrines and
Notions disperst amongst them. Now as by the Western learning we
understand that of the *Greeks* and *Romans*; so by the Eastern, that
which was amongst the *Ægyptians*, *Phœnicians*, *Chaldæans*,
*Assyrians*, and *Persians*; and of the Learning of these Nations, how
little have we now left? except some fragments and Citations in *Greek*
Authors, what do we know of them? But if we had, not only those Books
intire, whereof we have now the gleanings and reversions only, but all
that have perisht besides, especially in that famous Library at
*Alexandria*; if these, I say, were all restor’d to the World again, we
might promise our selves the satisfaction of seeing more of the
Antiquities, and Natural History of the first World, than we have now
left, or can reasonably expect. That Library we speak of, at
*Alexandria*, was a Collection, besides *Greek* Books, of *Ægyptian*,
*Chaldæan*, and all the Eastern Learning; and *Cedrenus* makes it to
consist of an hundred thousand Volumes: But *Josephus* saith, when the
Translation of the Bible by the *Septuagint* was to be added to it,
*Demetrius Phalereus* (who was Keeper or Governour of it) told the King
then, that he had already two hundred thousand Volumes, and that he
hop’d to make them up five hundred thousand; And he was better than his
word, or his Successors for him, for *Ammianus Marcellinus*, and other
Authors, report them to have increas’d to seven hundred thousand. This
Library was unfortunately burnt in the sacking of *Alexandria* by
*Cæsar*, and considering that all these were ancient Books, and
generally of the Eastern wisdom, ’twas an inestimable and irreparable
loss to the Commonwealth of Learning. In like manner we are told of a
vast Library of Books of all Arts and Sciences, in *China*, burnt by the
command or caprice of one of their Kings. Wherein, the *Chineses*,
according to their vanity, were us’d to say, greater riches were lost,
than will be in the last Conflagration.

As for the Western Learning, we may remember what the *Ægyptian* Priest
says to *Solon* in Plato's *Timæus*, *You Greeks are always Children*,
and know nothing of Antiquity; And if the *Greeks* were so, much more
the *Romans*, who came after them in time, and for so great a People,
and so much civiliz’d, never any had less Philosophy, and less of the
Sciences amongst them than the *Romans* had; They studied only the Art
of Speaking, of Governing, and of Fighting: and left the rest to the
*Greeks* and Eastern Nations, as unprofitable. Yet we have reason to
believe, that the best Philosophical Antiquities that the *Romans* had,
perisht with the Books of *Varro*, of *Numa* *Pompilius*, and of the
ancient *Sibyls*. <span class="margnote">*De Civ. Dei* *lib*. 6 *Dion.
Halic. Ant. Rom*. *lib*. 4.</span>*Varro* writ, as St. *Austin* tells
us, a multitude of Volumes, and of various sorts, and I had rather
retrieve his works, than the works of any other *Roman* Author; not his
Etymologies and Criticisms, where we see nothing admirable, but his
*Theologia Physica*, and his *Antiquitates*; which in all probability
would have given us more light into remote times, and the Natural
History of the past World, than all the *Latin* Authors besides have
done. He has left the foremention’d distinction of three Periods of
time; He had the doctrine of the *Mundane Egg*, as we see in *Probus
Grammaticus*; and he gave us that observation of the Star *Venus*,
concerning the great change she suffer’d about the time of our Deluge.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

*Numa* *Pompilius* was doubtless a contemplative man, and ’tis thought
that he understood the true System of the World, and represented the Sun
by his *Vestal Fire*; though, methinks, *Vesta* does not so properly
refer to the Sun, as to the Earth, which hath a Sacred fire too, that is
not to be extinguisht. He order’d his Books to be buried with him, which
were found in a Stone-Chest by him, four hundred years after his death;
They were in all twenty-four, whereof twelve contain’d Sacred Rites and
Ceremonies, and the other twelve the Philosophy and Wisdom of the
*Greeks*; The *Romans* gave them to the *Prætor Petilius* to peruse; and
to make his report to the Senate, whether they were fit to be publisht
or no: The *Prætor* made a wise politick report, that the Contents of
them might be of dangerous consequence to the establisht Laws and
Religion; and thereupon they were condemn’d to be burnt, and Posterity
was depriv’d of that ancient treasure, whatsoever it was. What the nine
Books of the *Sibyl* contain’d, that were offer’d to King *Tarquin*, we
little know; She valued them high, and the higher still, the more they
seem’d to slight or neglect them; which is a piece of very natural
indignation or contempt, when one is satisfied of the worth of what they
offer. ’Tis likely they respected, besides the fate of *Rome*, the fate
and several periods of the World, both past and to come, and the most
mystical passages of them. And in these Authors and Monuments are lost
the greatest hopes of Natural and Philosophick Antiquities, that we
could have had from the *Romans*.

And as to the *Greeks*, their best and Sacred Learning was not
originally their own; they enricht themselves with the spoils of the
East, and the remains we have of that Eastern Learning, is what we pick
out of the *Greeks*; whose works, I believe, if they were intirely
extant, we should not need to go any further for witnesses to confirm
all the principal parts of this Theory. With what regret does one read
in *Laertius*, *Suidas*, and others, the promising titles of Books writ
by the *Greek* Philosophers, hundreds or thousands, whereof there is not
one now extant; and those that are extant are generally but fragments:
Those Authors also that have writ their Lives, or collected their
Opinions, have done it confus’dly and injudiciously. I should hope for
as much light and instruction, as to the Original of the World, from
*Orpheus* alone, if his works had been preserv’d, as from all that is
extant now of the other *Greek* Philosophers. We may see from what
remains of him, that he understood in a good measure, how the Earth rise
from a Chaos, what was its external Figure, and what the form of its
inward structure; The opinion of the *Oval* Figure of the Earth is
ascrib’d to *Orpheus* and his Disciples; and the doctrine of the
*Mundane Egg* is so peculiarly his, that ’tis call’d by *Proclus*, The
*Orphick Egg*; not that he was the first Author of that doctrine, but
the first that brought it into *Greece*.

Thus much concerning the Heathen Learning, Eastern and Western, and the
small remains of it in things Philosophical; ’tis no wonder then if the
account we have left us from them of the Primitive Earth, and the
Antiquities of the natural World be very imperfect. And yet we have
trac’d (in the precedent Chapter, and more largely in our *Latin*
Treatise) the foot-steps of several parts of this Theory amongst the
writings and Traditions of the Ancients: and even of those parts that
seem the most strange and singular, and that are the Basis upon which
the rest

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

stand. We have shown there, that their account of the Chaos, though it
seem’d to many but a Poetical Rhapsody, contain’d the true mystery of
the formation of the Primitive Earth.<span class="margnote">*Tell.
Theor*. *lib*. 2. *c*. 7.</span> We have also shown upon the same
occasion, that both the external Figure and internal form of that Earth
was compriz’d and signified in their ancient doctrine of the Mundane
Egg, which hath been propagated through all the Learned Nations.<span
class="margnote">*Ibid*. *Cap*. 10.</span> And lastly, as to the
situation of that Earth, and the change of its posture since, that the
memory of that has been kept up, we have brought several testimonies and
indications from the *Greek* Philosophers.<span
class="margnote">*Ibid*.</span> And these were the three great and
fundamental properties of the Primitive Earth, upon which all the other
depend, and all its differences from the present Order of Nature. You
see then, though Providence hath suffer’d the Heathen Learning and their
Monuments, in a great part, to perish, yet we are not left wholly
without witnesses amongst them, in a speculation of this great
importance.

You will say, it may be, though this account, as to the Books and
Learning of the Heathen, may be lookt upon as reasonable, yet we might
expect however, from the *Jewish* and *Christian* Authors, a more full
and satisfactory account of that Primitive Earth, and of the Old World.
First, as to the *Jews*, ’tis well known that they have no ancient
Learning, unless by way of Tradition, amongst them. There is not a Book
extant in their Language, excepting the Canon of the Old Testament, that
hath not been writ since our Saviour's time. They are very bad Masters
of Antiquity, and they may in some measure be excus’d, because of their
several captivities, dispersions, and desolations. In the *Babylonish*
captivity their Temple was ransack’d, and they did not preserve, as is
thought, so much as the Autograph or original Manuscript of the Law, nor
the Books of those of their Prophets that were then extant, and kept in
the Temple; And at their return from the Captivity after seventy years,
they seem to have had forgot their Native Language so much, that the Law
was to be interpreted to them in *Chaldee*, after it was read in
*Hebrew*; for so I understand that interpretation in *Nehemiah*.<span
class="margnote">*C*. 8. 7, 8.</span> ’Twas a great Providence,
methinks, that they should any way preserve their Law, and other Books
of Scripture, in the Captivity, for so long a time; for ’tis likely they
had not the liberty of using them in any publick worship, seeing they
return’d so ignorant of their own Language, and, as ’tis thought, of
their Alphabet and Character too. And if their Sacred Books were hardly
preserv’d, we may easily believe all others perisht in that publick
desolation.

Yet there was another destruction of that Nation, and their Temple,
greater than this, by the *Romans*; and if there were any remains of
Learning preserv’d in the former ruine, or any recruits made since that
time, this second desolation would sweep them all away. And accordingly
we see they have nothing left in their Tongue, besides the Bible, so
ancient as the destruction of *Jerusalem*. These and other publick
calamities of the *Jewish* Nation, may reasonably be thought to have
wasted their Records of ancient Learning, *if they had any*; for, to
speak truth, the *Jews* are a people of little curiosity, as to Sciences
and Philosophical enquiries: They were very tenacious of their own
customs, and careful of those Traditions that did respect them, but were
not remarkable, that I know of, or thought great Proficients in any
other sort of Learning. There has been a great

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

fame, ’tis true, of the *Jewish Cabala*, and of great mysteries
contain’d in it; and, I believe, there was once a Traditional doctrine
amongst some of them, that had extraordinary Notions and Conclusions:
But where is this now to be found? The *Essenes* were the likeliest
Sect, one would think, to retain such doctrines, but ’tis probable they
are now so mixt with things fabulous and fantastical, that what one
should alledge from thence would be of little or no authority. One Head
in this *Cabala* was the doctrine of the *Sephiroth*, and though the
explication of them be uncertain, the Inferiour *Sephiroth* in the
Corporeal World cannot so well be<span class="margnote">*Vid*. *Men. ben
Isr*. *de Creat. probl*. 28.</span> appli’d to any thing, as to those
several Orbs and Regions, infolding one another, whereof the Primigenial
Earth was compos’d. Yet such conjectures, I know, are of no validity,
but in consort with better Arguments. I have often thought also, that
their first and second Temple represented the first and second Earth or
World; and that of *Ezekiel*'s, which is the third, is still to be
erected, the most beautiful of all, when this second Temple of the World
shall be burnt down. If the Prophecies of *Enoch* had been preserv’d,
and taken into the Canon by *Ezra*, after their return from *Babylon*,
when the Collection of their Sacred Books is suppos’d to have been made,
we might probably have had a considerable account there, both of times
past and to come, of Antiquities and Futuritions; for those Prophecies
are generally suppos’d to have contain’d both the first and second fate
of this Earth, and all the Periods of it. But as this Book is lost to
us, so I look upon all others that pretend to be Ante-Mosaical or
Patriarchal, as Spurious and Fabulous.

Thus much concerning the *Jews*. As for *Christian* Authors, their
knowledge must be from some of these fore-mention’d, *Jews* or
*Heathens*; or else by Apostolical Tradition: For the *Christian*
Fathers were not very speculative, so as to raise a Theory from their
own thoughts and contemplations, concerning the Origin of the Earth. We
have instanc’d, in the last Chapter, in a *Christian* Tradition,
concerning *Paradise*, and the high situation of it, which is fully
consonant to the site of the Primitive Earth, where Paradise stood, and
doth seem plainly to refer to it, being unintelligible upon any other
supposition. And ’twas, I believe, this elevation of *Paradise*, and the
pensile structure of that *Paradisiacal* Earth, that gave occasion to
*Celsus*, as we see by *Origen*'s answer, to say, that the *Christian
Paradise* was taken from the pensile Gardens of *Alcinous:* But we may
see now what was the ground of such expressions or Traditions amongst
the Ancients, which Providence left to keep mens minds awake; not fully
to instruct them, but to confirm them in the truth, when it should come
to be made known in other methods. We have noted also above, that the
ancient Books and Authors amongst the *Christians*, that were most
likely to inform us in this Argument, have perisht, and are lost out of
the World, such as *Ephrem Syrus* *de ortu rerum*, and *Tertullian* *de
Paradiso*; and that piece which is extant, of *Moses Bar Cepha*'s upon
this subject, receives more light from our *Hypothesis*, than from any
other I know; for correcting some mistakes about the Figure of the
Earth, which the Ancients were often guilty of, the obscurity or
confusion of that Discourse in other things, may be easily rectifi’d, if
compar’d with this Theory.

Of this nature also is that Tradition that is common both to *Jews* and
*Christians*, and which we have often mention’d before, that there was a
perpetual serenity,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and perpetual Equinox in *Paradise*; which cannot be upon this Earth,
not so much as under the Equinoctial; for they have a sort of Winter and
Summer there, a course of Rains at certain times of the Year, and great
inequalities of the Air, as to heat and cold, moisture and drought.
<span class="margnote">*Lat. Treat*. *lib*. 2. *c*. 10.</span>They had
also Traditions amongst them, *That there was no Rain from the beginning
of the World till the Deluge*, and that there were no Mountains till the
Flood, and such like; These, you see, point directly at such an Earth,
as we have describ’d. And I call these *Traditions*, because we cannot
find the Original Authors of them; The ancient *ordinary Gloss* (upon
*Genesis*) which some make Eight hundred years old, mentions both these
Opinions; so does *Historia Scholastica*, *Alcuinus*, *Rabanus Maurus*,
*Lyranus*, and such Collectors of Antiquity. *Bede* also relates that of
the *plainness* or smoothness of the *Ante-diluvian* Earth. Yet these
are reported Traditionally, as it were, naming no Authors or Books from
whence they were taken; Nor can it be imagin’d that they feign’d them
themselves; to what end or purpose? it serv’d no interest; or upon what
ground? seeing they had no Theory that could lead them to such Notions
as these, or that could be strengthen’d and confirm’d by them. Those
opinions also of the Fathers, which we recited in the seventh Chapter,
placing *Paradise* beyond the Torrid Zone, and making it thereby
inaccessible, suit very well to the form, qualities, and bipartition of
the Primæval Earth, and seem to be grounded upon them.

Thus much may serve for a short Survey of the ancient Learning, to give
us a reasonable account, why the memory and knowledge of the Primitive
Earth should be so much lost out of the World; and what we retain of it
still; which would be far more, I do not doubt, if all Manuscripts were
brought to light, that are yet extant in publick or private Libraries.
The truth is, one cannot judge with certainty, neither what things have
been recorded and preserv’d in the monuments of Learning, nor what are
still; not what have been, because so many of those Monuments are lost:
The *Alexandrian* Library, which we spoke of before, seems to have been
the greatest Collection that ever was made before Christianity, and the
*Constantinopolitan* (begun by *Constantine*, and destroy’d in the Fifth
Century, when it was rais’d to the number, as is said, of one hundred
twenty thousand Volumes) the most valuable that was ever since, and both
these have been permitted by Providence to perish in the merciless
Flames. Besides those devastations of Books and Libraries that have been
made in Christendom, by the *Northern* barbarous Nations overflowing
*Europe*, and the *Saracens* and *Turks* great parts of *Asia* and
*Africk*. It is hard therefore to pronounce what knowledge hath been in
the World, or what accounts of Antiquity; Neither can we well judge what
remain, or of what things the memory may be still latently conserv’d;
for besides those Manuscripts that are yet unexamin’d in these parts of
Christendom, and those that have been scarce view’d in the great
*Abyssine* or *Æthiopick* Library, there are many, doubtless, of good
value in other parts; and we know particularly of two fam’d Libraries,
that of *Buda*, and that of *Fez*, both in the hands of *Mahometans*;
who keep them as the Dragon did the Golden Apples, will neither make use
of them themselves, nor suffer others to peruse them. The Library of
*Fez* is said to contain thirty two thousand Volumes in

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Arabick*; and though the *Arabick* Learning was
mostwhat *Western*, and therefore of less account, yet they did deal in
*Eastern* Learning too; for *Avicenna* writ a Book with that Title,
*Philosophia Orientalis*. There may be also in the East thousands of
Manuscripts unknown to us, of greater value than most books we have: And
as to those subjects we are treating of, I should promise my self more
light and confirmation from the *Syriack* Authors than from any others.
These things being consider’d, we can make but a very imperfect
estimate, what evidences are left us, and what accounts of the Primitive
Earth; and if these deductions and defalcations be made, both for what
Books are wholly lost, and for what lie asleep or dead in Libraries, we
have reason to be satisfied in a Theory of this nature, to find so good
attestations as we have produc’d for the several parts of it; which we
purpose to inlarge upon considerably at another time and occasion.

But to carry this Objection as far as may be, let us suppose it to be
urg’d still in the last place, that though these Humane writings have
perisht, or be imperfect, yet in the Divine writings at least, we might
expect, that the memory of the Old World, and of the Primitive Earth
should have been preserv’d. To this I answer in short, That we could not
expect in the Scriptures any Natural Theory of that Earth, nor any
account of it, but what was general; and this we have, both by the
*Tehom-Rabba* of *Moses*, and the description of the same Abysse in
other places of Scripture, as we have shown at large in the First Book,
*Chap*. 7. And also by the description which St. *Peter* hath given of
the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and their different constitution
from the present. You will say, it may be, that that place of St.
*Peter*<span class="margnote">2 *Pet*. 3. 5, 6, *&c*.</span> is capable
of another interpretation; so are most places of Scripture, if you speak
of a bare capacity; they are capable of more than one interpretation;
but that which is most natural, proper and congruous, suitable to the
words, suitable to the Argument, and suitable to the Context, wherein is
nothing superfluous or impertinent, that we prefer and accept of as the
most reasonable interpretation. Besides, in such Texts as relate to the
Natural World, if of two interpretations propos’d, one agrees better
with the Theory of Nature than the other, *cæteris paribus*, that ought
to be prefer’d. And by these two rules we are willing to be tri’d, in
the exposition of that remarkable Discourse of St. *Peter*'s, and to
stand to that sence which is found most agreeable to them.

Give me leave to conclude the whole Discourse with this general
Consideration; ’Tis reasonable to suppose, that there is a Providence in
the conduct of *Knowledge*, as well as of other affairs on the Earth;
and that it was not design’d that all the mysteries of Nature and
Providence should be plainly and clearly understood throughout all the
Ages of the World; but that there is an Order establisht for this, as
for other things, and certain Periods and Seasons; And what was made
known to the Ancients only by broken Conclusions and Traditions, will be
known (in the later Ages of the World) in a more perfect way, by
Principles and Theories. The increase of Knowledge being that which
changeth so much the face of the World, and the state of Humane affairs,
I do not doubt but there is a particular care and superintendency for
the conduct of it; by what steps and degrees it should come to light, at
what Seasons and in what Ages; what evidence should

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

be left, either in Scripture, Reason, or Tradition, for the grounds of
it; how clear or obscure, how disperst or united; all these things were
weigh’d and consider’d, and such measures taken as best suit the designs
of Providence, and the general project and method propos’d in the
government of the World. And I make no question but the state both of
the Old World, and of that which is to come, is exhibited to us in
Scripture in such a measure and proportion, as is fit for this
foremention’d purpose; not as the Articles of our Faith, or the precepts
of a good Life, which he that runs may read; but to the attentive and
reflexive, to those that are unprejudic’d, and to those that are
inquisitive, and have their minds open and prepar’d for the discernment
of mysteries of such a nature.

Thus much in answer to that general Objection which might be made
against this Theory, *That* it is not founded in Antiquity. I do not
doubt but there may be many particular Objections against Parts and
Sections of it, and the exposing it thus in our own Tongue may excite
some or other, it may be, to make them; but if any be so minded, I
desire (if they be Scholars) that it may rather be in *Latin*, as being
more proper for a subject of this nature; and also that they would keep
themselves close to the substance of the Theory, and wound that as much
as they can; but to make excursions upon things accidental or
collateral, that do not destroy the *Hypothesis*, is but to trouble the
World with impertinencies. Now the substance of the Theory is this, THAT
there was a *Primitive Earth* of another form from the present, and
inhabited by Mankind till the Deluge; That it had those properties and
conditions that we have ascrib’d to it, namely, a perpetual Equinox or
Spring, by reason of its *right* situation to the Sun; Was of an Oval
Figure, and the exteriour face of it smooth and uniform, without
Mountains or a Sea. That in this Earth stood *Paradise*; the doctrine
whereof cannot be understood but upon supposition of this Primitive
Earth, and its properties. Then that the disruption and fall of this
Earth into the Abysse, which lay under it, was that which made the
Universal Deluge, and the destruction of the Old World; And that neither
*Noah*'s Flood, nor the present form of the Earth can be explain’d in
any other method that is rational, nor by any other Causes that are
intelligible. These are the Vitals of the Theory, and the primary
Assertions, whereof I do freely profess my full belief: and whosoever by
solid reasons will show me in an Errour, and undeceive me, I shall be
very much oblig’d to him. There are other lesser Conclusions which flow
from these, and may be call’d Secondary, as that the Longævity of the
Ante-diluvians depended upon their perpetual Equinox, and the perpetual
equality and serenity of the Air; That the Torrid Zone in the Primitive
Earth was uninhabitable; And that all their Rivers flow’d from the
extreme parts of the Earth towards the Equinoctial; there being neither
Rain, nor Rainbow, in the temperate and habitable Regions of it; And
lastly, that the place of *Paradise*, according to the opinion of
Antiquity, was in the Southern Hemisphere. These, I think, are all truly
deduc’d and prov’d in their several ways, though they be not such
essential parts of the Theory, as the former. There are also besides,
many particular Explications that are to be consider’d with more liberty
and latitude, and may be perhaps upon better thoughts, or better
observations, corrected, without any prejudice to the general Theory.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Those places of Scripture which we have cited, I
think, are all truly appli’d; and I have not mention’d *Moses*'s
*Cosmopœia*, because I thought it deliver’d by him as a Lawgiver, not as
a Philosopher; which I intend to show at large in another Treatise, not
thinking that discussion proper for the Vulgar Tongue. Upon the whole,
we are to remember, that some allowances are to be made for every
*Hypothesis* that is new-propos’d and untri'd: and that we ought not out
of levity of wit, or any private design, discountenance free and fair
Essays: nor from any other motive, but the only love and concern of
Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](ste26.md)
