[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste31)  [Next](ste33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

#### THE

### THEORY

##### OF THE

# EARTH

#### BOOK III

#### Concerning the Conflagration.

### CHAPTER I

THE INTRODUCTION

*With the Contents and Order of this Work*.

SEEING Providence hath planted in all Men a natural desire and curiosity
of knowing things to come; and such things especially as concern our
particular Happiness, or the general Fate of mankind: This Treatise may,
in both respects, hope for a favourable reception amongst inquisitive
persons; seeing the design of it is, to give an account of the greatest
revolutions of Nature that are expected in future Ages; and in the first
place, of the *Conflagration of the World*. In which Universal Calamity,
when all Nature suffers, every man's particular concern must needs be
involv’d.

We see with what eagerness men pry into the Stars, to see if they can
read there the Death of a King, or the fall of an Empire: ’Tis not the
fate of any single Prince or Potentate, that we Calculate, but of all
Mankind: Nor of this or that particular Kingdom or Empire, but of the
whole Earth. Our enquiries must reach to that great period of Nature,
when all things are to be dissolv'd: both humane affairs, and the Stage
whereon they are acted. When the Heavens and the Earth will pass away,
and the Elements melt with fervent heat. We desire, if possible, to know
what will be the face of that Day, that great and terrible Day, when the
Regions of the Air will be nothing but mingled Flame and Smoak, and the
habitable Earth turn’d into a Sea of molten Fire.

But we must not leave the World in this disorder and confusion, without
examining what will be the Issue and Consequences of it. Whether this
will be the End of all things, and Nature, by a sad fate, lie eternally
dissolv’d and desolate in this manner: or whether we may hope for a
Restauration: *New Heavens* and a *New Earth*, which the Holy Writings
make mention of, more pure and perfect than the former. As if this was
but as a *Refiner's fire*, to purge out the dross and courser parts, and
then cast the Mass again into a new and better Mould. These things, with
God's assistance, shall be matter of our present enquiry; These make the
general subject of this Treatise, and of the remaining parts of this
*Theory* of the Earth. Which now, you see, begins to be a kind of
Prophecy, or Prognostication of things to come: as it hath been hitherto
an History of things pass’d; of

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

such states and changes as Nature hath already undergone. And if that
account which we have given of the Origine of the Earth, its first and
Paradisiacal form, and the dissolution of it at the universal Deluge,
appear fair and reasonable: The Second dissolution by Fire, and the
renovation of it out of a second Chaos, I hope will be deduc’d from as
clear grounds and suppositions. And Scripture it self will be a more
visible Guide to us in these following parts of the Theory, than it was
in the former. In the mean time, I take occasion to declare here again,
as I have done heretofore, that neither this, nor any other great
revolutions of Nature, are brought to pass, by causes purely natural,
without the conduct of a particular Providence. And ’tis the Sacred
Books of Scripture that are the records of this Providence, both as to
times past, and times to come: as to all the signal Changes either of
the Natural World, or of Mankind, and the different Oeconomies of
Religion. In which respects, these Books, tho’ they did not contain a
Moral Law, would notwithstanding be, as the most mystical, so also the
most valuable Books in the World.

This Treatise, you see, will consist of Two Parts: The former whereof is
to give an account of the *Conflagration*; and the latter, of the *New
Heaven*s and *New Earth* following upon it; together with the state of
Mankind in those new Habitations. As to the Conflagration, we first
enquire, what the Antients thought concerning the present frame of this
World; whether it was to perish or no: whether to be destroyed, or to
stand eternally in this posture. Then in what manner they thought it
would be destroy’d; by what force or violence; whether by Fire or other
ways. And with these opinions of the Antients we will compare the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, to discover and confirm the truth
of them. In the Second place, We will examine what Calculations or
Conjectures have been made concerning the time of this great
Catastrophe, or of the end of this World. Whether that period be
defineable or no: and whether by natural Arguments, or by Prophecies.
Thirdly, We will consider the Signs of the approaching Conflagration:
Whether such as will be in Nature, or in the State of humane Affairs;
but especially such as are taken notice of and recorded in Scripture.
Fourthly, which is the principal point, and yet that wherein the
Antients have been most silent, *What Causes* there are in Nature, what
preparations, for this Conflagration: Where are the Seeds of this
universal Fire, or fewel sufficient for the nourishing of it? Lastly, in
what order and by what degrees the Conflagration will proceed: In what
manner the frame of the Earth will be dissolv'd: and what will be the
dreadful countenance of a *Burning World*.

These heads are set down more fully in the Arguments of each Chapter;
and seem to be sufficient for the explication of this whole matter:
Taking in some additional discourses, which, in pursuing these heads,
enter of their own accord, and make the work more even and intire. In
the second Part, we restore the World that we had destroy'd: Build new
Heavens and a new Earth, *wherein Righteousness shall dwell*. Establish
that new order of things, which is so often celebrated by the Prophets:
A Kingdom of Peace and of Justice, where the Enemy of Mankind shall be
bound, and the Prince of Peace shall rule. A Paradise without a Serpent,
and a Tree of Knowledge, not to wound, but to heal the Nations.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Where will be neither *curse*, nor *pain*, nor
*death*, nor *disease*. Where all things are new, all things are more
perfect: both the World it self, and its Inhabitants. Where the
First-born from the Dead, have the First-fruits of glory.

We dote upon this present World, and the enjoyments of it: and ’tis not
without pain, and fear, and reluctancy, that we are torn from them: as
if our hopes lay all within the compass of this life. Yet, I know not by
what good fate, my thoughts have been always fixt upon things to come,
more than upon things present. These I know, by certain experience, to
be but trifles; and if there be nothing more considerable to come, the
whole Being of Man is no better than a trifle. But there is room enough
before us in that we call *Eternith*, for great and noble Scenes: and
the mind of Man feels it self lessen’d and straiten’d in this low and
narrow state: wishes and waits to see something greater. And if it could
discern another World a coming, on this side eternal life; a beginning
Glory, the best that Earth can bear, It wou’d be a kind of Immortality
to enjoy that prospect before-hand; To see, when this Theater is
dissolv’d, where we shall act next, and what parts. What Saints and
Hero's, if I may so say, will appear upon that Stage; and with what
luster and excellency. How easie would it be, under a view of these
futurities, to despise the little pomps and honours, and the momentary
pleasures of a mortal life. But I proceed to our Subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The true state of the Question is propos’d](ste33)
