[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste30)  [Next](ste32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CONTENTS

###### OF THE

# CHAPTERS

### THE THIRD BOOK

#### CHAPTER I

*THE Introduction; with the Contents and Order of this Treatise*.

#### CHAPTER II

*The true state of the Question is propos’d. ’Tis the general doctrine
of the Ancients, That the present World, or the present Frame of Nature,
is mutable and perishable: To which the Sacred Books agree: And natural
Reason can alledge nothing against it*.

#### CHAPTER III

*That the World will be destroy’d by Fire, is the doctrine of the
Ancients, especially of the Stoicks. That the same doctrine is more
ancient than the Greeks, and deriv’d from the* Barbarick *Philosophy,
and That probably from* Noah*, the Father of all Traditionary Learning.
The same doctrine expresly authoriz’d by Revelation, and inroll’d into
the Sacred Canon*.

#### CHAPTER IV

*Concerning the Time of the Conflagration, and the End of the World.
What the Astronomers say upon this Subject, and upon what they ground
their Calculations. The true notion of the Great Year, or of the
Platonick Year, stated and explain’d*.

#### CHAPTER V

*Concerning Prophecies that determine the End of the World; Of what
order soever, Prophane or Sacred: Jewish or Christian. That no certain
judgment can be made from any of them, at which distance we are from the
Conflagration*.

#### CHAPTER VI

*Concerning the Causes of the Conflagration. The difficulty of
conceiving how this Earth can be set on fire. With a general answer to
that difficulty. Two suppos’d Causes of the Conflagration, by the Sun's
drawing nearer to the Earth, or the Earth's throwing out the Central
Fire, examin’d and rejected*.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

#### CHAPTER VII

*The true bounds of the last Fire, and how far it is Fatal. The natural
Causes and Materials of it, cast into three ranks. First, such as are
exteriour and visible upon Earth. Where the Volcano's of this Earth, and
their Effects are consider’d. Secondly, such Materials as are within the
Earth. Thirdly, such as are in the Air*.

#### CHAPTER VIII

*Some new dispositions towards the Conflagration, as to the Matter,
Form, and Situation of the Earth. Concerning miraculous Causes, and how
far the ministery of Angels may be engag’d in this work*.

#### CHAPTER IX

*How the Sea will be diminish’d and consum’d. How the Rocks and
Mountains will he thrown down and melted, and the whole exteriour Frame
of the Earth dissolv’d into a Deluge of Fire*.

#### CHAPTER X

*Concerning the beginning and progress of the Conflagration, what part
of the Earth will first be burnt. The manner of the future destruction
of Rome. The last state and consummation of the general Fire*.

#### CHAPTER XI

*An Account of those Extraordinary Phenomena and Wonders in Nature,
that, according to Scripture, will precede the coming of Christ, and the
Conflagration of the World*.

#### CHAPTER XII

*An imperfect description of the coming of our Saviour, and of the World
on fire*.

*The Conclusion*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### THE FOURTH BOOK

#### CHAPTER I

*THE Introduction: That the World will not be annihilated in the last
fire. That we are to expect, according to Scripture, and the Christian
doctrine, New Heavens and a New Earth, when these are dissolv’d or burnt
up*.

#### CHAPTER II

*The Birth of the New Heavens and the New Earth, from the second Chaos,
or the remains of the old World. The form, order and qualities of the
new Earth, according to Reason and Scripture*.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

#### CHAPTER III

*Concerning the Inhabitants of the New Earth. That natural reason cannot
determine this point. That, according to Scripture, The Sons of the
first Resurrection, or the heirs of the Millennium, are to be the
Inhabitants of the New Earth. The Testimony of the Philosophers, and of
the Christian Fathers, for the Renovation of the World. The first
Proposition laid down*.

#### CHAPTER IV

*The Proof of a Millennium, or of a blessed Age to come, from Scripture.
A view of the Apocalypse, and of the Prophecies of Daniel, in reference
to this kingdom of Christ, and of his Saints*.

#### CHAPTER V

*A view of other places of Scripture, concerning the Millennium, or
future kingdom of Christ. In what sence all the Prophets have born
Testimony concerning it*.

#### CHAPTER VI

*The sence and testimony of the Primitive Church, concerning the
Millennium, or future kingdom of Christ: from the times of the Apostles
to the Nicene Council. The second Proposition laid down. When, by what
means, and for what reasons, that doctrine was afterwards neglected or
discountenanc’d*.

#### CHAPTER VII

*The true state of the Millennium, according to Characters taken from
Scripture. Some mistakes concerning it rectified*.

#### CHAPTER VIII

*The third Proposition laid down, concerning the Time and Place of the
Millennium. Several arguments us’d to prove, that it cannot be till
after the Conflagration: and that the New Heavens and New Earth are the
true Seat of the Blessed Millennium*.

#### CHAPTER IX

*The chief employment of the Millennium, DEVOTION and CONTEMPLATION*.

#### CHAPTER X

*Objections against the Millennium, answer’d. With some conjectures
concerning the state of things after the Millennium: and what will be
the final Consummation of this World*.

*A Review of the whole Theory*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Introduction](ste32)
