[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste29)  [Next](ste31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

# PREFACE

###### TO THE

# READER

I HAVE not much to say to the Reader in this Preface to the Third Part
of the Theory: seeing it treats upon a Subject own’d by all, and out of
dispute: *The Conflagration of the World*. The question will be only
about the bounds and limits of the Conflagration, the Causes and the
Manner of it. These I have fix’d according to the truest measures I
could take from Scripture, and from Nature. I differ, I believe, from
the common Sentiment in this, that, in following St. *Peter*'s
Philosophy, I suppose, that the burning of the Earth will be a true
Liquefaction or dissolution of it, as to the exteriour Region. And that
this lays a foundation for *New Heavens* and a *New Earth*; which seems
to me as plain a doctrine in Christian Religion, as the Conflagration it
self.

I have endeavour’d to propose an intelligible way, whereby the Earth may
be consum’d by Fire. But if any one can propose another, more probable
and more consistent, I will be the first man that shall give him thanks
for his discovery. He that loves Truth for its own sake, is willing to
receive it from any hand: as he that truly loves his Country, is glad of
a Victory over the Enemy, whether himself, or any other, has the glory
of it. I need not repeat here, what I have already said upon several
occasions, That ’tis the substance of this Theory, whether in this part
or in other parts, that I mainly regard and depend upon. Being willing
to suppose that many single explications and particularities may be
rectified, upon further thoughts and clearer light. I know our best
writings, in this life, are but *Essays*, which we leave to Posterity to
review and correct.

As to the Style, I always endeavour to express my self, in a plain and
perspicuous manner: that the Reader may not lose time, nor wait too
long, to know my meaning. To give an Attendant quick dispatch, is a
civility, whether you do his business or no. I would not willingly give
any one the trouble of reading a period twice over, to know the sence of
it: lest when he comes to know it, he should not think it a recompence
for his pains. Whereas, on the contrary, if you are easie to your
Reader, he will certainly make you an allowance for it, in his censure.

You must not think it strange however, that the Author sometimes, in
meditating upon this subject, is warm in his thoughts and expressions.
For to see a World perishing in Flames, Rocks melting, the Earth
trembling, and an Host of Angels in the clouds, one must be very much a
Stoick, to be a cold and unconcerned Spectator of all this. And when we
are mov’d our selves, our words

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

will have a tincture of those passions which we feel. Besides, in moral
reflections which are designed for use, there must be some heat, as well
as dry reason, to inspire this cold clod of clay, this dull body of
earth, which we carry about with us; and you must soften and pierce that
crust, before you can come at the Soul. But especially when things
future are to be represented, you cannot use too strong Colours, if you
would give them life, and make them appear present to the mind. Farewel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents of the Chapters (Books 3 and 4)](ste31)
