[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste35)  [Next](ste37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V

*Concerning Prophecies that determine the end of the World; Of what
order soever, Prophane or Sacred: Jewish or Christian. That no certain
judgment can be made from any of them, at what distance we are now from
the* Conflagration.

THE bounds of humane knowledge are so narrow, and the desire of knowing
so vast and illimited, that it often puts Mankind upon irregular methods
of inlargeing their knowledge. This hath made them find out arts of
commerce with evil Spirits, to be instructed by them in such Events as
they could not of themselves discover. We meddle not with those
mysteries of iniquity: but what hath appear’d under the notion of Divine
Prophecy, relating to the Chronology of the World: giving either the
whole extent of it, or certain marks of its expiration: these we purpose
to examine in this place. How far any thing may, or may not, be
concluded from them, as to the resolution of our Problem, *How long the
World will last*.

Amongst the Heathens I do not remember any Prophecies of this nature,
except the *Sibylline Oracles*, as they are usually call’d. The ancient
Eastern Philosophers have left us no account that I can call to mind,
about the time of this fatality. They say when the *Phœnix* returns we
must expect the Conflagration to follow; but the age of the *Phœnix*
they make as various and uncertain, as they do the computation of their
*Great Year*: <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) which two things are
indeed one and the same in effect. Some of them, I confess, mention Six
Thousand years for the whole age of the World: which being the famous
Prophecy of the *Jews*, we shall speak to it largely hereafter: and
reduce to that head what broken Traditions remain amongst the Heathens
of the same thing. As to the Sibylline Oracles, which were so much in
reputation amongst the *Greeks* and *Romans*, they have been tamper’d
with so much, and chang’d so often, that they are become now of little
authority. They seem to have divided the duration of the World into Ten
Ages, and the last of these they make a Golden Age, a state of peace,
righteousness and perfection: but seeing they have not determin’d, in
any definite numbers, what the length of every Age will be, nor given us
the summ of all, we cannot draw any conclusion from this account as to
the point in question before us. But must proceed to the Jewish and
Christian Oracles.

The *Jews* have a remarkable Prophecy, which expresseth both the whole
and the parts of the World's duration. The World, they say, will stand
Six Thousand Years: *Two thousand before the Law, Two Thousand under the
Law, and Two thousand under the Messiah*. This Prophecy they derive from
*Elias*; but there were two of the Name, *Elias* the *Thesbite*, and
*Elias* the *Rabbin*, or *Cabalist*: and ’tis suppos’d to belong
immediately to the later of these. Yet this does not hinder, in my
opinion, but that it might come originally from the former *Elias*, and
was preserv’d in the School of this *Elias* the *Rabbin*, and first made
publick by him.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Or he added, it may be, that division of the
time into three parts, and so got a Title to the whole. I cannot easily
imagine that a Doctor that liv’d two hundred years, or thereabouts,
before Christ, when Prophecy had ceas’d for some Ages amongst the
*Jews*, should take upon him to dictate a Prophecy about the duration of
the World, unless he had been supported by some antecedent Cabalistical
Tradition: which, being kept more secret before, he took the liberty to
make publick, and so was reputed the Author of the Prophecy. As many
Philosophers amongst the *Greeks*, were the reputed Authors of such
doctrines as were much more ancient than themselves: But they were the
publishers of them in their Country, or the revivers of them after a
long silence; and so, by forgetful posterity, got the honour of the
first invention.

You will think, it may be, the time is too long and the distance too
great betwixt *Elias* the *Thesbite*, and this *Elias* the *Rabbin*, for
a Tradition to subsist all the while, or be preserv’d with any competent
integrity. But it appears from St. *Jude*'s Epistle, that the
*Prophecies of Enoch*, (who liv’d before the Floud) relating to the day
of judgment and the end of the World, were extant in his time, either in
writing or by Tradition: And the distance betwixt *Enoch* and St. *Jude*
was vastly greater than betwixt the two *Elias*'s. Nor was any fitter to
be inspir’d with that knowledge, or to tell the first news of that fatal
period, than the old Prophet *Elias*, who is to come again and bring the
alarum of the approaching Conflagration. But however this conjecture may
prove as to the original Author of this Prophecy, the Prophecy it self
concerning the *Sexmillennial* duration of the World, is very much
insisted upon by the Christian Fathers. Which yet I believe is not so
much for the bare Authority of the Tradition, as because they thought it
was founded in the History of the *Six days Creation*, and the *Sabbath*
succeeding: as also in some other Typical precepts and usages in the Law
of *Moses*. But before we speak of that, give me leave to name some of
those Fathers to you, that were of this judgment, and supposed the great
Sabbatism would succeed after the World had stood Six thousand years. Of
this opinion was St. *Barnabas* in his Catholick Epistle, ch. 15. Where
he argues that the Creation will be ended in Six Thousand years, as it
was finish’d in Six Days: Every day according to the Sacred and mystical
account, being a Thousand Years. Of the same judgment is St. *Irenæus*,
both as to the conclusion and the reason of it. He saith, <span
class="margnote">*Li*. 5. *c*. 28, 29, 30.</span> the History of the
Creation in six days, *is a narration as to what is pass’d, and a
Prophecy of what is to come*. As the Work was said to be consummated in
six days, and the Sabbath to be the seventh: So the consummation of all
things will be in six thousand years, and then the great Sabbatism to
come on in the blessed reign of Christ. *Hippolitus* Martyr, disciple of
*Irenæus*, is of the same judgment, as you may see in *Photius*, ch.
202. *Lactantius* in his *Divine Institutions*, li. 7. c. 14. gives the
very same account of the state and continuance of the World, and the
same proofs for it. And so does St. *Cyprian*, in his *Exhortation to
Martyrdom*, ch. 11. St. *Jerome* more than once declares himself of the
same opinion; and St. *Austin*, <span class="margnote">*C. D*. *li*. 20.
*c*. 7.</span> tho’ he wavers and was doubtful as to the *Millennium*,
or Reign of Christ upon Earth, yet he receives this computation without
hesitancy, and upon the foremention’d grounds. So *Johannes Damascenus
de fide Orthodoxâ*,

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

takes seven Millenaries for the entire space of the World, from the
Creation to the general Resurrection, the Sabbatism being included. And
that this was a received and approv’d opinion in early times, we may
collect from the Author of the *Questions and answers ad Orthodoxos in
Justin Martyr*. Who giving an answer to that enquiry about the six
thousand-years-term of the World, says, *We may conjecture from many
places of Scripture, that those are in the right, that say six thousand
years is the time prefixt for the duration of this present frame of the
World*. These Authors I have examin’d my self: but there are many others
brought in confirmation of this opinion: as St. *Hilary*, *Anastatius
Sinaita*, *Sanctus Gaudentius*, *Q. Julius Hilarion*, *Junilius
Africanus*, *Isidorus Hispalensis*, *Cassiodorus*, *Gregorius Magnus*,
and others, which I leave to be examin’d by those that have curiosity
and leisure to do it.

In the mean time it must be confest that many of these Fathers were
under a mistake in one respect, in that they generally thought, the
World was near an end in their time. An errour, which we need not take
pains to confute now; seeing we, who live twelve hundred or fourteen
hundred years after them, find the World still in being, and likely to
continue so for some considerable time. But it is easie to discern
whence their mistake proceeded: not from this Prophecy alone, but
because they reckon’d this Prophecy according to the Chronology of the
Septuagint: which setting back the beginning of the World many Ages
beyond the *Hebrew*, these six thousand years were very near expir’d in
the time of those Fathers; and that made them conclude that the World
was very near an end. We will make no reflections, in this place, upon
that Chronology of the Septuagint, lest it should too much interrupt the
thred of our discourse. But it is necessary to show how the Fathers
grounded this computation of six thousand years, upon Scripture. ’Twas
chiefly, as we suggested before, upon the *Hexameron*, or the Creation
finish’d in *six days*, and the *Sabbath* ensuing. The Sabbath, they
said, was a type of the Sabbatism, that was to follow at the end of the
World, according to St. *Paul* to the *Hebrews*<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 4.</span>; and then by analogy and consequence,
the six days preceding the Sabbath, must note the space and duration of
the World. If therefore they could discover how much a Day is reckon’d
for, in this mystical computation, the sum of the six days would be
easily found out. And they think, that according to the Psalmist,
(*Psal*. 90. 4.) and St. *Peter*, (2 *Epist*. 3. 8.) *a Day* may be
estimated *a thousand years*; and consequently six days must be counted
six thousand years, for the duration of the World. This is their
interpretation, and their inference: but it must be acknowledged, that
there is an essential weakness in all typical and allegorical
argumentations, in comparison of literal. And this being allow’d in
diminution of the proof, we may be bold to say, that nothing yet
appears, either in nature, or Scripture, or humane affairs, repugnant to
this supposition of six thousand years: which hath Antiquity, and the
Authority of the Fathers, on its side.

We proceed now to the Christian Prophecies concerning the end of the
World. I do not mention those in *Daniel*, because I am not satisfied
that any there (excepting that of the fifth kingdom it self) extend so
far. But in the *Apocalypse* of St. *John*, which is the last Revelation
we are to expect, there are several Prophecies

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

that reach to the Consummation of this World, and the first
Resurrection. The *seven Seals*, the *seven Trumpets*, the *seven
Vials*, do all terminate upon that great period. But they are rather
Historical Prophecies than Chronological: they tell us, in their
Language, the Events, but do not measure or express the time wherein
they come to pass. Others there are that may be call’d Chronological, as
the *Treading under foot the holy City, forty and two months*. Apoc. 11.
2. The *Witnesses* opposing Antichrist, *one thousand two hundred and
sixty days*, Apoc. 11. 3. The flight of the *Woman into the Wilderness*,
for the same number of days, or for a Time, Times, and half a Time.
Apoc. 12. 6. & 14. And lastly, the War of the Beast against the Saints,
*forty two months*, Apoc. 13. 5. These all, you see, express a time for
their completion; And all the same time, if I be not mistaken: but they
do not reach to the end of the World. Or if some of them did reach so
far, yet because we do not certainly know where to fix their beginning,
we must still be at a loss, when, or in what year they will end. As for
instance, If the Reign of the Beast, or the preaching of the Witnesses
be 1260 years, as is reasonably suppos’d; yet if we do not know
certainly when this Reign, or this preaching begun, neither can we tell
when it will end. And the Epocha's or beginnings of these Prophecies are
so differently calculated, and are things of so long debate, as makes
the discussion of them altogether improper for this place. Yet it must
be confest, that the best conjectures that can be made concerning the
approaching end of the World, must be taken from a judicious examination
of these points: and according as we gather up the Prophecies of the
Apocalypse, in a successive completion, we see how by degrees we draw
nearer and nearer to the conclusion of all. But till some of these
enlightening Prophecies be accomplish’d, we are as a Man that awakes in
the Night, all is dark about him, and he knows not how far the Night is
spent: but if he watch till the light appears, the first glimpses of
that will resolve his doubts. We must have a little patience, and, I
think, but a little; still eyeing those Prophecies of the *Resurrection*
of the *Witnesses*, and the *depression* of *Antichrist*: till by their
accomplishment, the day dawn, and the Clouds begin to change their
colour. Then we shall be able to make a near guess, when the Sun of
righteousness will arise.

So much for Prophecies. There are also *Signs*, which are look’d upon as
forerunners of the coming of our Saviour: and therefore may give us some
direction how to judge of the distance or approach of that great Day.
Thus many of the Fathers thought the *coming* of *Antichrist* would be a
sign to give the World notice of its approaching end. But we may easily
see, by what hath been noted before, what it was that led the Fathers
into that mistake. They thought their six thousand years were near an
end, as they truly were, according to that Chronology they followed; and
therefore they concluded the Reign of Antichrist must be very short,
whensoever he came, and that he could not come long before the end of
the World. But we are very well assur’d from the Revelation of St.
*John*, that the reign of Antichrist is not to be so short and
transient; and from the prospect and history of Christendom, that he
hath been already upon his Throne many hundreds of Years. Therefore this
Sign wholly falls to the ground; unless you will take it from the fall
of Antichrist, rather than from his first entrance.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Others expect the *coming* of *Elias* to give
warning of that day, and prepare the way of the Lord. I am very willing
to admit that *Elias* will come, according to the sence of the Prophet
*Malachi*,<span class="margnote">*c*. 4. 5, 6.</span> but he will not
come *with observation*, no more than he did in the Person of *John* the
Baptist; He will not bear the name of *Elias*, nor tell us he is the Man
that went to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, and is now come down again to
give us warning of the last Fire. But some divine person may appear
before the second coming of our Saviour, as there did before his first
coming: and by giving a new light and life to the Christian Doctrine,
may dissipate the mists of error, and abolish all those little
controversies amongst good men, and the divisions and animosities that
spring from them: enlarging their Spirits by greater discoveries, and
uniting them all in the bonds of love and charity, and in the common
study of truth and perfection. Such an *Elias*, the Prophet seems to
point at; And may he come, and be the great Peace-maker and preparer of
the ways of the Lord. But at present, we cannot from this Sign make any
judgment when the World will end.

Another Sign preceeding the end of the World, is, *The Conversion of the
Jews*; and this is a wonderful sign indeed. St. *Paul* seems expresly to
affirm it, Rom. II. 25, 26. But it is differently understood, either of
their Conversion only, or of their Restoration to their own Countrey,
Liberties and Dominion. The Prophets bear hard upon this sence
sometimes, as you may see in *Isaiah*, *Ezekiel*, *Hosea*, *Amos*. And
to the same purpose the ancient promise of *Moses* is interpreted,
*Deut*. 30. Yet this seems to be a thing very unconceivable; unless we
suppose the Ten Tribes to be still in some hidden corner of the World,
from whence they may be conducted again into their own Countrey, as once
out of *Egypt*, by a miraculous Providence, and establish’d there. Which
being known, will give the alarum to all the other Jews in the World,
and make an universal confluence to their old home.<span
class="margnote">*Joh*. 19. 37.  
*Apoc*. 1. 7.  
*Mat*. 23. 39.</span> Then our Saviour by an extraordinary appearance to
them, as once to St. *Paul*: and by Prophets rais’d up amongst them for
that purpose, may convince them that he is the true Messiah, and convert
them to the Christian Faith; which will be no more strange, than was the
first Conversion of the Gentile World. But if we be content with a
Conversion of the *Jews*, without their restoration; and of those Two
Tribes only which are now disperst throughout the Christian World and
other known parts of the Earth: That these should be Converted to the
Christian Faith, and incorporated into the Christian Common-wealth,
losing their national character and distinction. If this, I say, will
satisfie the Prophecies, it is not a thing very difficult to be
conceived. For when the World is reduc’d to a better and purer state of
Christianity, and that Idolatry in a great measure, remov’d, which gave
the greatest scandal to the *Jews*, they will begin to have better
thoughts of our Religion, and be dispos’d to a more ingenuous and
unprejudic’d examination of their Prophecies concerning the Messiah: God
raising up men amongst them of divine and enlarged Spirits, Lovers of
Truth more than of any particular Sect or Opinion; with light to discern
it, and courage to profess it. Lastly, it will be a cogent argument upon
them, to see the Age of the World so far spent, and no appearance yet of
their long expected Messiah. So far spent, I say, that there is no room
left, upon any computation

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

whatsoever, for the Oeconomy of a Messiah yet to come. This will make
them reflect more carefully and impartially upon him whom the Christians
propose, *Jesus of Nazareth*, whom their Fathers Crucified at
*Jerusalem*. Upon the Miracles he wrought, in his life and after his
death: and upon the wonderful propagation of his Doctrine throughout the
World, after his Ascension. And lastly, upon the desolation of
*Jerusalem*, upon their own scatter’d and forlorn condition, foretold by
that Prophet, as a judgment of God upon an ungrateful and wicked People.

This I have said to state the case of the Conversion of the *Jews*,
which will be a sign of the approaching reign of Christ. But alas, what
appearance is there of this Conversion in our days, or what judgment can
we make from a sign that is not yet come to pass? ’Tis ineffectual as to
us, but may be of use to posterity. Yet even to them it will not
determine at what distance they are from the end of the World, but be a
mark only that they are not far from it. There will be Signs also, in
those last days, in the Heavens, and in the Earth, and in the Sea,
forerunners of the *Conflagration*; as the obscuration of the Sun and
Moon, Earthquakes, roarings of the troubled Sea, and such like disorders
in the natural World. ’Tis true, but these are the very pangs of death,
and the strugglings of Nature just before her dissolution, and it will
be too late then to be aware of our ruine when it is at the door. Yet
these being Signs or Prodigies taken notice of by Scripture, we intend,
God willing, after we have explained the causes and manner of the
*Conflagration*, to give an account also whence these unnatural
commotions will proceed, that are the beginnings or immediate
introductions to the last Fire.

Thus we have gone through the Prophecies and Signs that concern the last
day and the last fate of the World. And how little have we learned from
them as to the time of that great revolution? Prophecies rise sometimes
with an even gradual light, as the day riseth upon the Horizon: and
sometimes break out suddenly like a fire, and we are not aware of their
approach till we see them accomplish’d. Those that concern the end of
the World are of this latter sort to unobserving men; but even to the
most observing, there will still be a latitude; We must not expect to
calculate the coming of our Saviour like an Eclipse, to minutes and
half-minutes. There are *Times and Seasons which the Father hath put in
his own power*. If it was designed to keep these things secret, we must
not think to out-wit Providence, and from the Prophecies that are given
us, pick out a discovery that was not intended we should ever make. It
is determin’d in the Councils of Heaven just how far we shall know these
events before-hand, and with what degree of certainty: and with this we
must be content whatsoever it is. The *Apocalypse* of St. *John* is the
last Prophetical declaration of the Will of God, and contains the fate
of the Christian Religion to the end of the World, its purity,
degeneracy, and reviviscency. The head of this degeneracy is call’d *The
Beast, the false Prophet, the whore of Babylon*, in Prophetical terms:
and in an Ecclesiastical term is commonly call’d *Antichrist*. Those
that bear Testimony against this degeneracy, are call’d the *Witnesses*:
who, after they have been a long time, in a mean and persecuted
condition, are to have their Resurrection and Ascension: that is, be
advanc’d to power and Authority. And this Resurrection of the Witnesses
and depression of *Antichrist*, is that which will make the great turn
of the

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

\[paragraph continues\] World to righteousness, and the great Crisis
whereby we may judge of its drawing to an end. ’Tis true, there are
other marks, as the passing away of the *Second Woe*:<span
class="margnote">*Apoc*. *c*. 9.  
*Apoc*. *c*. 16.  
*ch*. 11. 14.</span> which is commonly thought to be the Ottoman Empire:
and the Effusion of the *Vials*. The first of these will be indeed a
very conspicuous mark, if it follow upon the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, as by the Prophecy it seems to do. But as to the Vials, tho’
they do plainly reach in a Series to the end of the World, I am not
satisfied with any exposition I have yet met with, concerning their
precise time or contents.

In a word, Tho’ the sum and general contents of a Prophecy be very
intelligible, yet the application of it to Time and Persons may be very
lubricous. There must be obscurity in a Prophecy, as well as shadow in a
Picture. All its lines must not stand in a full light. For if Prophecies
were open and bare-fac’d as to all their parts and circumstances, they
would check and obstruct the course of humane affairs; and hinder, if it
was possible, their own accomplishment. Modesty and Sobriety are in all
things commendable, but in nothing more than in the explication of these
Sacred Mysteries; and we have seen so many miscarry by a too close and
particular application of them, that we ought to dread the Rock about
which we see so many shipwrecks. He that does not err above a Century in
calculating the last period of Time, from what evidence we have at
present, hath, in my opinion, cast up his accounts very well. But the
Scenes will change fast towards the Evening of this long day, and when
the Sun is near setting, they will more easily compute how far he hath
to run.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[258:1](ste36.htm#fr_13.md) Symbolum ἀποκαταζάσεως
πολυχρονὶου, *Phœnix. Hor. Apol.* *l*. 2. *c*. 57.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Concerning the Causes of the Conflagration](ste37.md)
