[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste32)  [Next](ste34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

*The true state of the Question is propos’d*.

*’Tis the general doctrine of the Ancients, that the present World, or
the present frame of Nature, is mutable and perishable: To which the
Sacred Books agree: and natural reason can alledge nothing against it*.

WHEN we speak of the End or destruction of the World, whether by Fire or
otherwise, ’Tis not to be imagin’d that we understand this of the *Great
Universe*; Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the highest Heavens: as if these
were to perish or be destroy’d, some few years hence, whether by Fire or
any other way. This Question is only to be understood of the *Sublunary
World*, of this Earth and its Furniture; which had its original about
six thousand years ago, according to the History of *Moses*; and hath
once already been destroy’d, when the exteriour region of it broke, and
the Abyss issuing forth, as out of a womb, overflow’d all the habitable
Earth. <span class="margnote">*Gen*. 7. II. *Job* 38. 8.</span>The next
Deluge is that of Fire; which will have the same bounds, and overflow
the Surface of the Earth much-what in the same manner. But the celestial
Regions, where the Stars and Angels inhabit, are not concern’d in this
fate: Those are not made of combustible matter, nor, if they were, cou’d
our flames reach them. Possibly those Bodies may have changes and
revolutions peculiar to themselves, but in ways unknown to us, and after
long and unknown periods of time. Therefore when we speak of the
Conflagration of the World, These have no concern in the question; nor
any other part of the Universe, than the Earth and its dependances. As
will evidently appear when we come to explain the manner and causes of
the Conflagration.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

And as this Conflagration can extend no further than to the Earth and
its Elements, so neither can it destroy the matter of the Earth; but
onely the form and fashion of it, as it is an habitable World. Neither
Fire, nor any other natural Agent can destroy Matter, that is, reduce it
to nothing: It may alter the modes and qualities of it, but the
substance will always remain. And accordingly the Apostle,<span
class="margnote">1 *Cor*. 7. 31.</span> when he speaks of the mutability
of this World, says onely, *The figure* or fashion of *this World passes
away*. This structure of the Earth and disposition of the Elements: And
all the *works* of the Earth, as St. *Peter* says<span
class="margnote">2 *Epist*. 3.</span>; All its natural productions, and
all the works of art or humane industry; these will perish, melted or
torn in pieces by the Fire; but without an annihilation of the Matter,
any more than in the former Deluge. And this will be further prov’d and
illustrated in the beginning of the following Book.

The question being thus stated, we are next to consider the sense of
Antiquity upon these two Points: First, whether this Sublunary World is
mutable and perishable. Secondly, by the force and action of what
causes, and in what manner it will perish: whether by Fire or otherwise.
*Aristotle* is very irregular in his Sentiments about the state of the
World; He allows it neither beginning nor ending, rise nor fall, but
wou’d have it eternal and immutable. And this he understands not onely
of the great Universe, but of this Sublunary World, this Earth which we
inhabit: wherein he will not admit there ever have been or ever will be,
either general Deluges or Conflagrations. And as if he was ambitious to
be thought singular in his opinion about the eternity of the World, He
says, *All* the *Ancients* before him, gave some beginning or origine to
the World: but were not indeed so unanimous as to its future fate. Some
believing it immutable, or as the Philosophers call it, incorruptible;
Others, that it had its fatal times and periods, as lesser Bodies have;
and a term of age prefixt to it, by Providence.

But before we examine this Point any further, it will be necessary to
reflect upon that which we noted before, an ambiguity in the use of the
word *World*, which gives frequent occasion of mistakes in reading the
Ancients: when that which they speak of the *great Universe*, we apply
to the *Sublunary World:* or on the contrary, what they speak of this
Earth, we extend to the whole Universe. And if some of them, besides
*Aristotle*, made the World incorruptible, they might mean that of the
*great Universe*, which they thought would never be dissolv’d or perish
as to its Mass and bulk: But single parts and points of it (and our
Earth is no more) may be variously transform’d, and made habitable and
unhabitable, according to certain periods of time, without any prejudice
to their Philosophy. So *Plato*, for instance, thinks this World will
have no Dissolution: for, being a work so beautiful and noble, the
goodness of God, he says, will always preserve it. It is most reasonable
to understand this of the Great Universe; for, in our Earth, *Plato*
himself admits such dissolutions, as are made by general Deluges and
Conflagrations; and we contend for no other. So likewise in other
Authors, if they speak of the immortality of the World, you must observe
what world they apply it to; and whether to the matter or the form of
it: and if you remember that our Discourse proceeds onely upon the
Sublunary World, and the dissolution of its form, you will find little
in antiquity contrary to this doctrine.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I always except *Aristotle*, (who allow’d of no
Providence in this inferiour World) and some *Pythagoreans* falsly so
call’d, that were Apostates from the doctrine of their Master. These
being excepted, upon a view of the rest, you will find very few
dissenters from this general doctrine.

*Plato*'s argument against the dissolution of the world, from the
goodness and wisdom of God, wou’d not be altogether unreasonable, tho’
apply’d to this Earth, if it was so to be dissolv’d, as never to be
restor’d again. But we expect *new Heavens* and a *new Earth* upon the
dissolution of these: better in all respects, more commodious and more
beautiful. And the several perfections of the divine nature, wisdom,
power, goodness, justice, sanctity, cannot be so well display’d and
exemplifi’d in any one single state of Nature, as in a succession of
States: fitted to receive one another according to the dispositions of
the Moral World, and the order of Divine Providence. Wherefore *Plato*'s
argument from the Divine Attributes, all things consider’d, doth rather
prove a succession of Worlds, than that one single world should remain
the same throughout all ages, without change or variation. Next to the
*Platonists*, the *Stoicks* were most considerable in matters relating
to Morality and Providence: And their opinion, in this case, is well
known; they being lookt upon by the Moderns, as the principal authors of
the doctrine of the *Conflagration*. Nor is it less known that the
School of *Democritus* and *Epicurus* made all their worlds subject to
dissolution; and by a new concourse of Atomes restor’d them again.
Lastly, The *Ionick* Philosophers, who had *Thales* for their Master,
and were the first Naturalists amongst the *Greeks*, taught the same
doctrine. We have indeed but an imperfect account left us of this Sect,
and ’tis great pity; for as it was one of the most ancient, so it seems
to have been one of the most considerable amongst the *Greeks* for
Natural Philosophy. In those remains which *Diogenes Laertius* hath
preserv’d, of *Anaxagoras*, *Anaximenes*, *Archelaus*, *&c*. All great
men in their time, we find that they treated much of the Origine of the
world, and had many extraordinary Notions about it, which come lame and
defective to us. The doctrine of their founder, Thales, which made all
things to consist of Water, seems to have a great resemblance to the
doctrine of *Moses* and St. *Peter*, <span class="margnote">*Gen*. 1.  
2 *Pet*. 2. 5.</span> about the constitution of the first Heavens and
Earth. But there is little in *Laertius* what their opinion was about
the Dissolution of the world. Other Authors inform us more of that.
*Stobæus*<span class="margnote">*Ecl. Phys.* *l*. 1. *c*. 24.</span>
joyns them with *Leucippus* and the *Epicureans*: *Simplicius* with
*Heraclitus* and the *Stoicks*, in this doctrine about the
corruptibility of the World. So that all the Schools of the Greek
Philosophers, as we noted before, were unanimous in this point,
excepting the *Peripateticks*; whose Master, *Aristotle*, had neither
modesty enough to follow the doctrine of his Predecessors, not wit
enough to invent any thing better.

Besides these Sects of Philosophers, there were Theologers amongst the
Greeks, more antient than these Sects, and more mystical. *Aristotle*
often distinguisheth the *Naturalists* and the *Theologues*. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) Such were *Orpheus* and his followers, who
had more of the antient Oriental Learning than the succeeding
Philosophers. But they writ their Philosophy, or Theology rather,
Mythologically and Poetically, in Parables and Allegories, that needed
an interpretation. All these Theologers supposed the Earth to rise from
a Chaos: and as they said that *Love* was

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the principle at first, that united the loose and severed Elements, and
formed them into an habitable World: So they supposed that if *Strife*
or *Contention* prevail’d, that would again dissolve and disunite them,
and reduce things into a Chaos: Such as the Earth will be in, upon the
Conflagration. And it further appears, that both these Orders of the
Learned in *Greece* suppos’d this present frame of Nature might perish,
by their doctrine of *Periodical Revolutions*, or of the Renovation of
the World after certain periods of time: which was a doctrine common
amongst the learned *Greeks*, and received by them from the ancient
Barbarick Nations. As will appear more at large in the following
Book.<span class="margnote">Ch. 3. li. 5.</span> In the mean time we may
observe that *Origen* in answering *Celsus*, about the point of the
Resurrection, tells him, that Doctrine ought not to appear so strange or
ridiculous to him, seeing their own Authors did believe and teach the
*Renovation of the World*, after certain Ages or periods. And the truth
is, this Renovation of the World, rightly stated, is the same thing with
the *first Resurrection* of the Christians. And as to the second and
general Resurrection, when the Righteous shall have Celestial bodies;
’tis well known that the *Platonists* and *Pythagoreans* cloath’d the
Soul with a Celestial body, or, in their Language, an Ethereal Vehicle,
as her last Beatitude or Glorification. So that *Origen* might very
justly tell his adversary, he had no reason to ridicule the Christian
doctrine of the Resurrection, seeing their own Authors had the main
strokes of it in their Traditionary Learning.

I will only add one remark more, before we leave this Subject, to
prevent a mistake in the word *Immortal* or *Immortality*, when applyed
to the World. As I told you before, the equivocation that was in that
term *World*, it being us’d sometimes for the whole Universe, sometimes
for this inferiour part of it where we live; so likewise we must
observe, that when this inferiour World is said to be *immortal*, by the
Philosophers, as sometimes it is, that commonly is not meant of any
single state of Nature, or any single World, but of a succession of
Worlds, consequent one upon another. As a family may be said immortal,
not in any single person, but in a succession of Heirs. So as, many
times, when the Ancients mention the immortality of the World, they do
not thereby exclude the Dissolution or Renovation of it: but suppose a
vicissitude, or series of Worlds succeeding one another. This
observation is not mine, but was long since made by *Simplicius*,
*Stobæus*, and others, who tell us in what sense some of those
Philosophers who allowed the World to be perishable, did yet affirm it
to be immortal: namely, by successive renovations.

Thus much is sufficient to shew the sence and judgment of Antiquity, as
to the changeableness or perpetuity of the World. But ancient learning
is like ancient Medals, more esteemed for their rarity, than their real
use; unless the Authority of a Prince make them currant. So neither will
these testimonies be of any great effect, unless they be made good and
valuable by the Authority of Scripture. We must therefore add the
Testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles to these of the Greeks and
Barbarians, that the evidence may be full and undeniable. That the
Heavens and the Earth will perish or be chang’d into another form, is,
sometimes, plainly exprest, sometimes supposed and alluded to in
Scripture. The Prophet *David*'s testimony is express, both for the
beginning and ending of the

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

\[paragraph continues\] World: in the 102. *Psalm*,<span
class="margnote">Ver. 25, 26, 27.</span> *Of old hast thou laid the
foundation of the Earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They
shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like
a garment; as a Vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be
changed. But thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no end*. The
Prophet *Esay*'s testimony is no less express, to the same purpose.<span
class="margnote">Ca. 51. 6.</span> *Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
and look upon the Earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like
smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner*. These Texts are plain and explicite;
And in allusion to this day of the Lord, and this destruction of the
World, the same Prophet often useth phrases that relate to it. <span
class="margnote">*Isa*. 13. 13. *c*. 24. 18, 19. *c*. 34. 4.</span> As
the *Concussion of the Heavens and the Earth.* The *shaking of the
foundations of the World.* The *dissolution of the Host of Heaven*. And
other Sacred Writers have expressions of the like force, and relating to
the same effect. As the *Hills melting like wax, at the presence of the
Lord:* Psal. 97. 5. Shattering once more all the parts of the Creation:
*Hagg*. 2. 6. *Overturning the mountains, and making the pillars of the
Earth to tremble:* Job 9. 5, 6. If you reflect upon the explication
given of the Deluge in the first part of this Theory, and attend to the
manner of the Conflagration, as it will be explain’d in the sequel of
this Discourse, you will see the justness and fitness of these
expressions: That they are not poëtical hyperboles, or random
expressions, of great and terrible things in general, but a true account
of what hath been, or will be, at that great day of the Lord. ’Tis true,
the Prophets sometimes use such-like expressions figuratively, for
commotions in States and Kingdoms, but that is onely by way of metaphor
and accommodation; the true basis they stand upon, is that ruine,
overthrow, and dissolution of the natural World, which was once at the
Deluge, and will be again, after another manner, at the general
Conflagration.

As to the new Testament, our Saviour says, *Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but his words shall not pass away:* Matt. 24. 35. St. Paul says,
the Scheme of this world; the fashion, form, and composition of it,
*passeth away:* 1 Cor. 7. 31. And when mention is made of *new Heavens*
and a *new Earth*, which both the Prophet *Isaiah*,<span
class="margnote">*Isa*. 65. 17. & 66. 22.*  
Rev*. 21. 1.  
2 *Pet*. 3. 13.</span> and the Apostles, St. *Peter* and St. *John*,
mention, ’tis plainly imply’d that the old ones will be dissolv’d. The
same thing is also imply’d, when our Saviour speaks of a *Renascency* or
*Regeneration:* Matt. 19. 28. and St. *Peter*, of a *Restitution* of all
things: *Act*. 3. 21. For what is now, must be abolish’d, before any
former order of things can be restor’d or reduc’d. In a word, If there
was nothing in Scripture concerning this subject, but that discourse of
St. *Peter*'s, in his 2*d*. Epistle and 3*d*. Chapter, concerning the
triple order and succession of the Heavens and the Earth; past, present,
and to come; that alone wou’d be a conviction and demonstration to me,
that this present World will be dissolv’d.

You will say, it may be, in the last place, we want still the testimony
of natural reason and Philosophy to make the evidence compleat. I
answer, ’tis enough if They be silent, and have nothing to say to the
contrary. Here are witnesses, humane and divine, and if none appear
against them, we have no reason to refuse their testimony, or to
distrust it. Philosophy will very readily yield to this doctrine, that
All material compositions are dissolvable: and she will not wonder to

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

see that die, which she had seen born; I mean, this Terrestrial World.
She stood upon the Chaos, and see it rowl it self, with difficulty and
after many struglings, into the form of an habitable Earth: And that
form she see broken down again at the Deluge; and can as little hope or
expect now, as then, that it should be everlasting and immutable. There
would be nothing great or considerable in this inferiour World, if there
were not such revolutions of nature. The Seasons of the Year, and the
fresh Productions of the Spring, are pretty in their way; But when the
*Great Year*<span class="margnote">*Annus Magnus*</span> comes about,
with a new order of all things, in the Heavens and on the Earth; and a
new dress of nature throughout all her regions, far more goodly and
beautiful than the fairest Spring; This gives a new life to the
Creation, and shows the greatness of its Author. Besides, These Fatal
Catastrophes are always a punishment to degenerate Mankind, that are
overwhelm’d in the ruines of these perishing Worlds. And to make nature
her self execute the divine vengeance against rebellious Creatures,
argues both the power and wisdom of that Providence that governs all
things here below. These things Reason and Philosophy approve of; but if
you further require that they should shew a *Necessity* of this future
destruction of the World, from *Natural Causes*, with the time and all
other circumstances of this effect; your demands are unreasonable,
seeing these things do not depend solely upon Nature. But if you will
content your self to know what dispositions there are in Nature towards
such a change, how it may begin, proceed, and be consummate, under the
conduct of Providence, be pleased to read the following Discourse for
your further satisfaction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[243:1](ste33.htm#fr_11.md) Οἱ φυσικοὶ οἱ θεόλογος.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](ste34.md)
