[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste40)  [Next](ste42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

*Concerning the beginning and progress of the Conflagration, what part
of the Earth will first be Burnt. The manner of the future destruction
of Rome. The last state and consummation of the general Fire*.

HAVING remov’d the chief obstructions to our design, and drawn a method
for weakning the strength of Nature, by draining the Trench, and beating
down those Bulwarks, wherein she seems to place her greatest confidence:
we must now go to work; making choice of the weakest part of Nature for
our first attack, where the fire may be the easiest admitted, and the
best maintain’d and preserv’d.

And for our better direction, it will be of use to consider what we
noted before, *viz*. That the Conflagration is not a pure *Natural
Fatality*, but a *mixt Fatality*; or a Divine judgment supported by
Natural Causes. And if we can find some part of the Earth, or of the
Christian World, that hath more of these natural dispositions to
Inflammation than the rest; and is also represented by Scripture as a
more peculiar object of God's Judgments at the comeing of our Saviour,
we may justly pitch upon that part of the World as first to be
destroyed. Nature and Providence conspiring to make that the first
Sacrifice to this Fiery Vengeance.

Now as to Natural dispositions, in any Country or Region of the Earth,
to be set on Fire, They seem to be chiefly these two, Sulphureousness of
the Soil, and an hollow, mountainous construction of the ground. Where
these two dispositions

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

meet in the same tract or territory, (the one as to the quality of the
matter, and the other as to the form) it stands like a Pile of fit
materials, ready set to have the Fire put to it. And as to Divine
Indications where this General Fire will begin, the Scripture points to
the Seat of Antichrist wheresoever that is, for the beginning of it. The
Scripture, I say, points at this, two ways, First,<span
class="margnote">2 *Thess*. 1. 7, *ch*. 2. 8.</span> in telling us that
our Saviour at his coming *in flames of Fire shall consume the wicked
one, The Man of sin, the Son of perdition, with the Spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy him with the brightness of his presence*. Secondly,
under the name of *Mystical Babylon*; which is allowed by all to be the
Seat of Antichrist, and by Scripture always condemn’d to the Fire. This
we find in plain words asserted by St. John in the 18*th* *chap*. of his
*Revelations*, and in the 19*th*. (*ver*. 3)<span
class="margnote">*ver*. 8, & *ver*. 19.</span> under the name of the
*Great Whore*; which is the same City and the same Seat, according to
the interpretation of Scripture it self. And the Prophet *Daniel*<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 17. 18.</span> when he had set the *Ancient of
Days* upon his fiery Throne, says, *The Body of the Beast was given to
the burning flame*.<span class="margnote">*Dan*. 7, 9, 10, 11.</span>
Which I take to be the same thing with what St. *John* says afterwards,
(*Apoc*. 19. 20.) *The Beast and the false Prophet were cast alive into
a Lake of fire burning with brimstone*. By these places of Scripture it
seems manifest, that Antichrist, and the Seat of Antichrist, will be
consumed with Fire, at the coming of our Saviour. And ’tis very
reasonable and decorous, that the Grand Traitor and Head of the
Apostasie should be made the first example of the divine vengeance.

Thus much being allow’d from Scripture, let us now return to Nature
again; to seek out that part of the Christian World, that from its own
constitution is most subject to burning; by the sulphureousness of its
Soil, and its fiery Mountains and Caverns. This we shall easily find to
be the *Roman Territory*, or the Countrey of *Italy*: which, by all
accounts, ancient and modern, is a store-house of fire; as if it was
condemn’d to that fate by God and Nature, and to be an Incendiary, as it
were, to the rest of the World. And seeing *Mystical Babylon*, the Seat
of Antichrist, is the same *Rome*, and its Territory; as it is
understood by most Interpreters, of former and later Ages; you see both
our lines meet in this point; And that there is a fairness, on both
hands, to conclude, that, at the glorious appearance of our Saviour, the
Conflagration will begin at the City of *Rome* and the *Roman*
Territory.

Nature hath sav’d us the pains of kindling a fire in those parts of the
Earth, for, since the memory of man, there have always been
subterraneous fires in *Italy*. And the *Romans* did not preserve their
Vestal fire with more constancy, than Nature hath done her fiery
Mountains in some part or other of that Territory. Let us then suppose,
when the fatal time draws near, all these Burning Mountains to be fill’d
and replenish’d with fit materials for such a design; and when our
Saviour appears in the Clouds, with an Host of Angels, that they all
begin to play, as Fire-works at the Triumphal Entry of a Prince. Let
*Vesuvius*, *Ætna*, *Strongyle*, and all the *Vulcanian* Islands, break
out into flames; and by the Earthquakes, which then will rage, let us
suppose new Eruptions, or new Mountains open’d, in the *Apennines*, and
near to *Rome*; and to vomit out fire in the same manner as the old
Volcano's. Then let the sulphureous ground take fire; and

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

seeing the Soil of that Countrey, in several places, is so full of
brimstone, that the steams and smoke of it visibly rise out of the
Earth; we may reasonably suppose, that it will burn openly, and be
inflam’d, at that time. Lastly, the Lightnings of the Air, and the
flaming streams of the melting Skies, will mingle and joyn with these
burnings of the Earth. And these three Causes meeting together, as they
cannot but make a dreadful Scene, so they will easily destroy and
consume whatsoever lies within the compass of their fury.

Thus you may suppose the beginning of the General Fire; And it will be
carried on by like causes, tho’ in lesser degrees, in other parts of the
Earth. But as to *Rome*, there is still, in my opinion, a more dreadful
fate that will attend it; namely, to be absorpt or swallowed up in a
Lake of fire and brimstone, after the mariner of *Sodom* and *Gomorrha*.
This, in my judgment, will be the fate and final conclusion of *Mystical
Babylon*, to sink as a great Milstone into the Sea, and never to appear
more. Hear what the Prophet says,<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 18.
21.</span> *A mighty Angel took up a stone, like a great Milstone, and
cast it into the Sea, saying, thus, with violence, shall that great City
Babylon be thrown down; and shall be found no more at all*. Simply to be
burnt, does not at all answer to this description of its perishing, by
*sinking like a Milstone into the Sea, and never appearing more*, nor
of, *not having its place ever more found;* that is, leaving no remains
or marks of it. A City that is onely burnt, cannot be said to *fall like
a Milstone into the Sea*; or that it *can never more be found*: For
after the burning of a City, the ruines stand, and its place is well
known. Wherefore, in both respects, besides this exteriour burning,
there must be an absorption of this *Mystical Babylon*, the Seat of the
Beast; and thereupon a total disappearance of it. This also agrees with
the suddenness of the judgment, which is a repeated character of it:
*Chap*. 18. 8, 10, 17, 19. Now what kind of absorption this will be,
into what, and in what manner, we may learn from what St. *John* says
afterwards, (ch. 19. 20) *The Beast and the false Prophet were cast
alive into a Lake of fire and brimstone*. You must not imagine that they
were bound, hand and foot, and so thrown headlong into this Lake, but
they were swallowed up alive, they and theirs, as *Corah* and his
company. Or, to use a plainer example, after the manner of *Sodom* and
*Gomorrha*; which perish’t by fire, and at the same time sunk into a
Dead Sea, or a Lake of brimstone.

This was a lively type of the fate of *Rome*, or *Mystical Babylon*; and
’tis fit it should resemble *Sodom*, as well in its punishment, as in
its crimes. Neither is it a hard thing to conceive how such an
absorption may come to pass; That being a thing so usual in Earthquakes,
and Earthquakes being so frequent in that Region. And lastly, that this
should be after the manner of *Sodom*, turn’d into a Lake of fire, will
not be at all strange, if we consider, that there will be many
subterraneous Lakes of fire at that time, when the bowels of the Earth
begin to melt, and the Mountains spew out streams of liquid fire. The
ground therefore being hollow and rotten in those parts, when it comes
to be shaken with a mighty Earthquake, the foundations will sink, and
the whole frame fall into an Abyss of fire below, as a Milstone into the
Sea. And this will give occasion to that Cry, *Babylon the Great is
fallen, is fallen*, and shall never more be found.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

This seems to be a probable account, according to Scripture and reason,
of the beginning of the general fire, and of the particular fate of
*Rome*. But it may be propos’d here as an objection against this
Hypothesis, that the Mediterranean Sea, lying all along the Coast of
*Italy*, must needs be a sufficient guard to that Countrey against the
invasion of fire; or at least must needs extinguish it, before it can do
much mischief there, or propagate it self into other Countreys. I
thought we had in a good measure prevented this objection before, by
showing how the Ocean would be diminish’d before the Conflagration, and
especially the Arms and Sinus's of the Ocean; and of these none would be
more subject to this diminution than the Mediterranean, for receiving
its supplies from the Ocean and the Black Sea, if these came to sink in
their chanels, they would not rise so high, as to be capable to flow
into the Mediterranean, at either end. And these supplies being cut off,
it would soon empty it self so far, partly by evaporation, and partly by
subterraneous passages, as to shrink from all its shores, and become
onely a standing Pool of water in the middle of the Chanel: Nay, ’tis
possible, by flouds of fire descending from the many Volcano's upon its
shores, it might it self be converted into a Lake of fire, and rather
help than obstruct the progress of the Conflagration.

It may indeed be made a question, whether this fiery Vengeance upon the
seat of Antichrist, will not precede the general Conflagration, at some
distance of time, as a fore-runner and forewarner to the World, that the
rest of the People may have space to repent; And particularly the
*Jews*, being Spectators of this Tragedy, and of the miraculous
appearance of our Saviour, may see the hand of God in it, and be
convinc’d of the truth and divine authority of the Christian Religion. I
say, this supposition would leave room for these and some other
prophetick Scenes, which we know not well where to place; But seeing
*The Day of the Lord* is represented in Scripture as one entire thing,
without interruption or discontinuation, and that it is to begin with
the destruction of Antichrist, we have warrant enough to pursue the rest
of the Conflagration from this beginning and introduction.

Let us then suppose the same preparations made in the other parts of the
Earth to continue the fire; for the Conflagration of the World being a
work of providence, we may be sure such measures are taken, as will
effectually carry it on when once begun. The Body of the Earth will be
loosen’d and broken by Earthquakes, the more solid parts impregnated
with sulphur, and the cavities fill’d with unctuous fumes and
exhalations; so as the whole Mass will be but as one great funeral Pile,
ready built, and wanting nothing but the hand of a destroying Angel, to
give it fire. I will not take upon me to determine which way this
devouring Enemy will steer his course from *Italy*, or in what order he
will advance and enter the several Regions of our Continent; that would
be an undertaking, as uncertain, as useless. But we cannot doubt of his
success, which way soever he goes: unless where the Chanel of the Ocean
may chance to stop him. But as to that, we allow, that different
Continents may have different Fires; not propagated from one another,
but of distinct sources and originals; and so likewise in remote
Islands; and therefore no long passage or trajection will be requir’d
from

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

shore to shore. And even the Ocean it self, will at length be as Fiery
as any part of the Land; But that, with its Rocks, like Death, will be
the last thing subdued.

As to the Animate World, the Fire will over-run it with a swift and
rapid course, and all living Creatures will be suffocated or consumed,
at the first assault. And at the same time, the beauty of the Fields and
the external decorations of Nature will be defac’d. Then the Cities and
the Towns, and all the works of man's hands, will burn like stubble
before the wind. These will be soon dispatch’d; but the great burthen of
the Work still remains; which is that *Liquefaction* we mention’d
before, or a *melting fire*, much more strong and vehement than these
transient blazes, which do but sweep the surface of the Earth. This
<span class="margnote">*ch*. 9.</span>Liquefaction, I say, we prov’d
before out of Scripture, as the last state of the fiery Deluge. And ’tis
this, which, at length, will make the Sea it self a *Lake of fire and
brimstone*. When instead of rivers of Waters which used to flow into it
from the Land, there come streams and rivulets of Sulphureous Liquors,
and purulent melted matter, which, following the tract of their natural
gravity will fall into this great drain of the Earth. Upon which
mixture, the remaining parts of sweet water will soon evaporate, and the
salt mingling with the Sulphur will make a Dead Sea, an *Asphaltites*, a
Lake of *Sodom*, a Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of God's wrath.

We noted before two remarkable effects of the *Burning Mountains*, which
would contribute to the Conflagration of the World; and gave instances
of both in former Eruptions of *Ætna* and *Vesuvius*. One was, of those
Balls or lumps of Fire, which they throw about in the time of their
rage; and the other, of those torrents of liquid Fire, which rowl down
their sides to the next Seas or Valleys. In the first respect these
Mountains are as so many Batteries, planted by Providence in several
parts of the Earth, to fling those fiery Bombs into such places, or such
Cities, as are marked out for destruction. And in the second respect,
they are to dry up the Waters, and the Rivers, and the Sea it self, when
they fall into its chanel. *T. Fazellus*, a *Sicilian*, who writ the
History of that Island,<span class="margnote">*Annal. Sic. dec*. 1,
*li*. 2, *c*. 4.</span> tells us of such a River of fire (upon an
eruption of *Ætna*) near twenty eight miles long; reaching from the
Mountain to Port *Longina*; and might have been much longer if it had
not been stopt by the Sea. Many such as these, and far greater, we ought
in reason to imagin, when all the Earth begins to melt, and to ripen
towards a dissolution. It will then be full of these Sulphureous juices,
as Grapes with Wine; and these will be squeez’d out of the Earth into
the Sea, as out of a wine-press into the Receiver; to fill up that *Cup
with the wine of the fierceness of God's wrath*.

If we may be allow’d to bring Prophetical passages of Scripture to a
natural sence, as doubtless some of those must that respect the end of
the World, these phrases<span class="margnote">Apoc. 14. 10, 19.  
*c*. 16. 19.  
*c*. 19. 15.</span> which we have now suggested, of the *Wine press of
the wrath of God. Drinking the fierceness of his wine, poured, without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation*, with expressions of the like
nature that occur sometimes in the old Prophets, but especially in the
Apocalypse; These, I say, might receive a full and emphatical
explication from this state of things which now lies before us. I would
not exclude any other explication of less force, as that of alluding to
the

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

*bitter cup* or *mixt potion* that us’d to be given to malefactors: but
that, methinks, is a low sence when applyed to these places in the
Apocalypse. That these phrases signifie God's remarkable judgments, all
allow, and here they plainly relate to the end of the World, to the last
Plagues, and the Last of the last Plagues, chap. 16. 19. Besides, the
Angel that presided over this judgment, is said to be an Angel that *had
power over fire*; And those who are to drink this potion, are said to be
*tormented with fire and brimstone*, ch. 14. 10. This presiding Angel
seems to be our Saviour himself (c. 19. 15.) who when he comes to
execute Divine Vengeance upon the Earth, gives his orders in these
words, <span class="margnote">*ch*. 14. 18, 19.</span> *Gather the
clusters of the Vine of the Earth, for her grapes are fully ripe*. And
thereupon the Destroying Angel *thrust in his sickle into the Earth, and
gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great Wine press of
the Wrath of God*. And this made a potion, *compounded of several
ingredients, but not diluted with water*; (ch. 14. 10.)  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) and was indeed a potion of fire and
brimstone and all burning materials mixt together. The similitudes of
Scripture are seldom nice and exact, but rather bold, noble and great;
and according to the circumstances which we have observ’d, This
*Vineyard* seems to be the *Earth*, and this *Vintage* the end of the
World; The pressing of the Grapes into the cup or vessel that receives
them, the distillation of burning liquors from all parts of the Earth
into the trough of the Sea; and that lake of red Fire, the bloud of
those Grapes so flowing into it.

’Tis true, this judgment of the Vintage and Wine-press, and the effects
of it, seem to aim more especially at some particular region of the
Earth, ch. 14. 20. And I am not against that, provided the substance of
the explication be still retained, and the universal Sea of Fire be that
which follows in the next Chapter, under the name of a *Sea of Glass,
mingled with Fire*;<span class="margnote">*ch*. 16. 2.</span> This I
think expresses the highest and compleat state of the Conflagration;
when the Mountains are fled away, and not only so, but the exteriour
region of the Earth quite dissolv’d, like wax before the Sun; The Chanel
of the Sea fill’d with a mass of fluid fire, and the same fire
overflowing all the Globe, and covering the whole Earth, as the Deluge,
or the first Abyss. Then will the Triumphal Songs and Hallelujah's be
sung for the Victories of the Lamb over all his Enemies and over Nature
it self. <span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 15. 3, 4.</span>*Great and
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: just and true are thy ways
thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorifie thy
name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship
before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[293:1](ste41.htm#fr_14) τοῦ κεκουρασμένου
ἀκράτου.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](ste42)
