[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste48)  [Next](ste50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

*Concerning the Inhabitants of the New Earth. That Natural Reason cannot
determine this point. That according to Scripture; The Sons of the first
Resurrection, or the Heirs of the* Millennium*, are to be the
Inhabitants of the New Earth. The Testimony of the Philosophers, and of
the Christian Fathers, for the Renovation of the World. The first
Proposition laid down*.

THUS we have setled the true notion, according to Reason and Scripture,
of the *New Heavens* and *New Earth*. But where are the Inhabitants,
you’l say? You have taken the pains to make us a New World, and now that
it is made, it must stand empty. When the first World was destroyed,
there were eight persons preserv’d, with a Set of living Creatures of
every kind, as a Seminary or foundation of another World: But the Fire,
it seems, is more merciless than the Water; for in this destruction of
the World, it does not appear that there is one living Soul left, of any
sort, upon the face of the Earth. No hopes of posterity, nor of any
continuation of Mankind, in the usual way of propagation. And Fire is a
barren Element, that breeds no living Creatures in it, nor hath any
nourishment proper for their food or sustenance.

We are perfectly at a loss, therefore, so far as I see, for a new race
of Mankind, or how to people this new-form’d World. The Inhabitants, if
ever there be any, must either come from Heaven, or spring from the
Earth: There are but these two ways. But *Natural Reason* can determine
neither of these: sees no tract to follow in these unbeaten paths, nor
can advance one step further. Farewel then, dear Friend, I must take
another Guide: and leave you here, as *Moses* upon Mount *Pisgah*, only
to look into that Land, which you cannot enter. I acknowledge the good
service you have done, and what a faithful Companion you have been, in a
long journey; from the beginning of the World to this hour, in a tract
of time

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

of six thousand years. We have travel’d together through the dark
regions of a First and Second *Chaos*: seen the World twice shipwrackt.
Neither Water, nor Fire, could separate us. But now you must give place
to other Guides.

Welcome, *Holy Scriptures*, The Oracles of God, a Light shining in
darkness, a Treasury of hidden knowledge, and, where *humane faculties*
cannot reach, a seasonable help and supply to their defects. We are now
come to the utmost bounds of their dominion: They have made us a New
World, but, how it shall be inhabited, they cannot tell: know nothing of
the History or affairs of it. This we must learn from other Masters,
inspir’d with the knowledge of things to come. And such Masters we know
none, but the holy Prophets and Apostles. We must therefore now put our
selves wholly under their conduct and instruction, and from them only
receive our information concerning the moral state of the future
habitable Earth.

In the first place therefore, The Prophet *Isaiah*<span
class="margnote">*Isa*. 45. 18.</span> tells us, as a preparation to our
further enquiries, *The Lord God created the Heavens, God himself that
formed the Earth, He created it not in vain, he formed it to be
inhabited*. This is true, both of the present Earth and the *Future*,
and of every habitable World whatsoever. For to what purpose is it made
habitable, if not to be inhabited? That would be, as if a man should
manure, and plough, and every way prepare his ground for seed, but never
sow it. We do not build houses that they should stand empty, but look
out for Tenants as fast as we can; as soon as they are made ready, and
become Tenantable. But if man could do things in vain and without use or
design, yet God and Nature never do any thing *in vain*; much less so
great a work as the making of a World. Which if it were in vain, would
comprehend ten thousand vanities or useless preparations in it. We may
therefore in the first place, safely conclude, *That the New Earth will
be inhabited*.

But *by whom will it be inhabited?* This makes the second enquiry. St.
*Peter* answers this question for us, and with a particular application
to this very subject of the New Heavens and New Earth. They shall be
inhabited, he says, by the *Just* or the *Righteous*. His words, which
we cited before, are these. When he had describ’d the Conflagration of
the World, he adds, But we *expect new Heavens and a new Earth, WHEREIN
DWELLETH RIGHTEOUSNESS*. By *righteousness* here, it is generally agreed
must be understood Righteous Persons. For Righteousness cannot be
without righteous Persons: It cannot hang upon Trees, or grow out of the
ground; ’Tis the endowment of reasonable Creatures. And these righteous
Persons are eminently such, and therefore call’d Righteousness in the
abstract, or purely righteous without mixture of Vice.

So we have found Inhabitants for the New Earth: Persons of an high and
noble Character. Like those describ’d by St. *Peter*, (1 Epist. 2. 9.)
*A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People*. As if into that World, as into St. *John*'s *New
Jerusalem*,<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 21. 27.</span> nothing impure
or unrighteous was to be admitted. These being then the happy and holy
Inhabitants: The next enquiry is, *Whence do they come?* From what
off-spring, or from what Original? We noted before, that there was no
remnant of Mankind left at the Conflagration, as there was at the
Deluge: nor any hopes of a Restauration that way. Shall we then imagine
that these new Inhabitants are a Colony wafted over from some

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

neighbouring World: as from the Moon, or Mercury, or some of the higher
Planets. You may imagine what you please, but that seems to me not
imaginary onely but impracticable; And that the Inhabitants of those
Planets are Persons of so great accomplishments, is more than I know:
but I am sure they are not the Persons here understood. For these must
be such as inhabited this Earth before. WE look for new Heavens and new
Earth, says the Apostle: Surely to have some share and interest in them;
otherwise there would be no comfort in that expectation. And the Prophet
*Isaiah* said before, I create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the
former shall come no more into remembrance: But be *YOU glad and rejoyce
for ever in that which I create*. The truth is, none can have so good
pretensions to this spot of ground we call the Earth, as the Sons of
Men, seeing they once possest it. And if it be restor’d again, ’tis
their propriety and inheritance. But ’tis not Mankind in general that
must possess this new World, but the *Israel of God*, according to the
Prophet *Isaiah*; or the *Just*, according to St. *Peter*. And
especially those that have suffer’d for the sake of their Religion. For
this is that *Palingenesia*, as we noted before, that *Renovation*, or
*Regeneration* of all things, where our Saviour says, Those, that suffer
loss for his sake, shall be recompenced: *Matt*. 19. 28. 29.

But they must then be raised from the Dead. For all Mankind was
destroy’d at the Conflagration: and there is no resource for them any
other way, than by a Resurrection. ’Tis true: and St. *John*<span
class="margnote">*Apoc*. 20.</span> gives us a fair occasion to make
this supposition, *That* there will be some raised from the Dead, before
the General Day of Judgment. For he plainly distinguisheth of a *First*
and *Second* Resurrection, and makes the first to be a thousand Years
before the second, and before the general Day of Judgment. Now, if there
be truly and really a two-fold Resurrection, as St. *John* tells us; and
at a thousand Years distance from one another: It may be very rationally
presum’d, that Those that are raised in the first Resurrection, are
those *Just* that will inhabit the *new Heavens and new Earth*. Or whom
our Saviour promis’d to reward in the Renovation of the World.

For otherwise, who are those *Just* that shall inhabit the *new Earth*,
and whence do they come? Or when is that Restauration which our Saviour
speaks of, wherein those that suffer’d for the sake of the Gospel shall
be rewarded? St. *John* says, the *Martyrs*, at this first Resurrection,
shall live again and reign with Christ. Which seems to be the reward
promis’d by our Saviour, to those that suffer’d for his sake: and the
same Persons in both places. *And I saw the Souls of them* says St.
John,<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 20. 4.</span> *that were beheaded
for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God: and which had not
worshipped the Beast, &c. and They lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years*. These, I say, seem to be the same Persons to whom
Christ had before promis’d and appropriated a particular reward. And
this reward of theirs, or this Reign of theirs, is upon Earth: upon some
Earth, new or old: not in Heaven. For, besides that we read nothing of
their Ascension- into Heaven after their Resurrection: There are several
marks that shew it must necessarily be understood of a state upon Earth.
For *Gog* and *Magog*<span class="margnote">*Ver*. 9.</span> came from
the *four quarters of the Earth*, and besieged the *Camp of the Saints,
and the beloved City*. That Camp and that City therefore were upon the
Earth. And *fire* 

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

*came down from Heaven and devoured them*. If it came down from Heaven,
it came upon the Earth. Furthermore, those Persons that are rais’d from
the Dead, are said to be<span class="margnote">Ver. 6.</span> *Priests
of God and of Christ, and to reign with him a thousand years*. Now these
must be the same Persons with the *Priests* and *Kings*, mention’d in
the Fifth Chapter:<span class="margnote">Ver. 10.</span> which are there
said expresly *to reign upon Earth*, or that they *should reign upon
Earth*. It remains therefore onely to determine, *What Earth* this is,
where the *Sons of the first Resurrection* will live and reign. It
cannot be the present Earth, in the same state, and under the same
circumstances it is now. For what happiness or priviledge would that be,
to be call’d back into a mortal life, under the necessities and
inconveniences of sickly Bodies, and an incommodious World? such as the
present state of mortality is, and must continue to be, till some change
be made in Nature. We may be sure therefore, that a change will be made
in Nature before that time, and that the state they are rais’d into, and
the Earth they are to inhabit, will be, at least, *Paradisiacal:* And
consequently can be no other than the *new Heavens* and *new Earth*,
which we are to expect after the Conflagration.

From these Considerations, there is a great fairness to conclude, both
as to the Characters of the Persons, and of the place or state, that
*the Sons of the first Resurrection*, will be Inhabitants of the *New
Earth*, and reign there with Christ a thousand years. But seeing this is
one of the principal and peculiar Conclusions of this Discourse, and
bears a great part in this last Book of the Theory of the Earth, it will
deserve a more full explication, and a more ample proof, to make it out.
We must therefore take a greater compass in our discourse, and give a
full account of that State which is usually call’d the *Millennium*: The
Reign of the Saints a thousand years, or the Kingdom of Christ upon
Earth. But before we enter upon this new Subject, give me leave to close
our present Argument, about the *Renovation of the World*, with some
Testimonies of the Ancient Philosophers, to that purpose. ’Tis plain to
me, that there were amongst the Ancients several Traditions, or
traditionary conclusions, which they did not raise themselves, by reason
and observation, but receiv’d them from an unknown Antiquity. An
instance of this is the *Conflagration of the World*. A Doctrine, as
ancient, for any thing I know, as the World it self. At least as ancient
as we have any Records. And yet none of those Ancients that tell us of
it, give any argument to prove it. Neither is it any wonder, for they
did not invent it themselves, but receiv’d it from others without proof,
by the sole authority of Tradition. In like manner the *Renovation of
the World*, which we are now speaking of, is an ancient Doctrine: both
amongst the *Greeks* and *Eastern* Philosophers: but they shew us no
method how the World may be *renew’d*, nor make any proof of its future
Renovation; For it was not a discovery which they first made, but
receiv’d it, with an implicite faith, from their Masters and Ancestors.
And these Traditionary Doctrines were all fore-runners of that Light
that was to shine more clearly at the opening of the Christian
dispensation; to give a more full account of the fate and revolutions of
the Natural World, as well as of the Moral.

The *Jews*, ’tis well known, held the *Renovation* of the World, and a
*Sabbath* after six thousand years: according to the Prophecy that was
currant amongst them, whereof we have given a larger account in the
precedent Book, ch. 5. And

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

that future state they call’d *Olam Hava*, or the *World to come*,
 <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) which is the very same with St.
*Paul*'s *Habitable Earth to come*, *Heb*. 2. 6. Neither can I easily
believe, that those constitutions of *Moses* that proceed so much upon a
*Septenary*, or the number Seven, and have no ground or reason, in the
nature of the thing, for that particular number: I cannot easily
believe, I say, that they are either accidental or humoursome: without
design or signification. But that they are typical, or representative of
some *Septenary* state, that does eminently deserve and bear that
Character. *Moses*, in the History of the Creation, makes six days work,
and then a Sabbath. Then, after six years, he makes a *Sabbath-year*:
and after a Sabbath of years a year of Jubilee, *Levit*. 25. All these
lesser revolutions seem to me to point at the grand Revolution, the
great Sabbath or jubilee, after six Millenaries, which as it answers the
type in point of time, so likewise in the nature and contents of it:
Being a state of Rest from all labour and trouble and servitude: a state
of joy and triumph: and a state of *Renovation*, when things are to
return to their first condition and pristine order. So much for the
*Jews*.

The Heathen Philosophers, both *Greeks* and *Barbarians*, had the same
doctrine of the *Renovation of the World*, currant amongst them. And
that under several names and phrases; as of the *Great Year*, the
*Restauration*, the *Mundane periods*, and such like. They suppos’d
stated and fix’d periods of time, upon expiration whereof there would
always follow some great revolution of the World, and the face of Nature
would be renew’d. Particularly after the Conflagration, the Stoicks
always suppos’d a new World to succeed, or another frame of Nature to be
erected in the room of that which was destroy’d. And they use the same
words and phrases upon this occasion that Scripture useth; *Chrysippus*
calls it *Apocatastasis*, as St. *Peter*<span class="margnote">*Lact*.
*l*. 7. *c*. 23.</span> does, Act. 3. 21. *Marcus Antoninus*<span
class="margnote">*Euseb. præp. Ev*. *l*. 7. *c*. 23.</span> in his
*Meditations* several times calls it *Palingenesia*, as our Saviour
does, *Matt*. 19. 28. And *Numenius* hath two Scripture-words,
*Resurrection* and *Restitution*, to express this renovation of the
World. Then as to the *Platonicks*, that Revolution of all things hath
commonly been call’d the *Platonick* year, as if *Plato* had been the
first author of that opinion; But that's a great mistake; he receiv’d it
from the *Barbarick* Philosophers, and particularly from the *Ægyptian*
Priests, amongst whom he liv’d several years, to be instructed in their
learning. But I do not take *Plato* neither to be the first that brought
this doctrine into *Greece:* for, besides that the Sibylls, whose
antiquity we do not well know, sung this Song of old, as we see it
copyed from them by *Vigil* in his fourth Eclogue: *Pythagoras* taught
it before *Plato*: and *Orpheus* before them both. And that's as high as
the Greek Philosophy reaches.

The Barbarick Philosophers were more ancient: namely the *Ægyptians*,
*Persians*, *Chaldeans*, *Indian Brackmans*, and other Eastern Nations.
Their Monuments indeed are in a great measure lost, yet from the remains
of them which the *Greeks* have transcrib’d, and so preserv’d, in their
writings, we see plainly they all had this doctrine of the *Future
Renovation*. And to this day the posterity of the *Brackmans* in the
East Indies, retain the same notion, *That* the World will be renewed
after the last Fire. You may see the citations, if you please, for all
these Nations, in the *Latin* Treatise, ch. 5. Which I thought would be
too dry and tedious to be render’d into English.

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

To these Testimonies of the Philosophers of all Ages, for the Future
Renovation of the World, we might add the Testimonies of the Christian
Fathers: Greek and Latin, ancient and modern. I will only give you a
bare List of them, and refer you to the Latin Treatise for the words or
the places. Amongst the Greek Fathers,<span class="margnote">chap.
9.</span> *Justin Martyr*, *Irenæus*, *Origen*, The Fathers of the
*Council of Nice*, *Eusebius*, *Basil*; The two *Cyrills*, of
*Jerusalem* and *Alexandria*; The two *Gregorys*, *Nazianzen* and
*Nyssen*; St. *Chrysostom*, *Zacharias Mitylenensis*; and of later date,
*Damascen*, *Oecumenaus*, *Futhymius*, and others. These have all set
their hands and Seals to this doctrine. Of the Latin Fathers,
*Tertullian*, *Lactantius*, St. *Hilary*, St. *Ambrose*, St. *Austin*,
St. *Jerome*; and many later Ecclesiastical Authors. These, with the
Philosophers before mentioned, I count good authority, Sacred and
prophane: which I place here as an out-guard upon Scripture, where our
principal force lies. And these three united and acting in conjunction,
will be sufficient to secure this first post, and to prove our <span
class="margnote">*Propos*. I.</span>first Proposition, which is this:
*That after the Conflagration of this World, there will be New Heavens
and a New Earth: and that Earth will be inhabited*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[331:1](ste49.htm#fr_17) הבא עולם, ἡ οἰκουμένη ἡ
μέλλουσα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](ste50)
