[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste39)  [Next](ste41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

*How the Sea will be diminish’d and consum’d. How the Rocks and
Mountains will be thrown down and melted, and the whole exteriour frame
of the Earth dissolv’d into a Deluge of Fire*.

WE have now taken a view of the Causes of the Conflagration, both
ordinary and extraordinary: It remains to consider the manner of it; How
these Causes will operate, and bring to pass an effect so great and so
prodigious. We took notice before that the grand obstruction would be
from the Sea, and from the Mountains; we must therefore take these to
task in the first place; and if we can remove them out of our way, or
overcome what resistance and opposition they are capable to make, the
rest of the work will not be uneasie to us.

The Ocean indeed is a vast Body of Waters; and we must use all our art
and skill to dry it up, or consume it in a good measure, before we can
compass our design. I remember the advice a Philosopher gave *Amasis*
King of Egypt, when he had a command sent him from the King of
*Æthiopia*, *That he should drink up the Sea*. *Amasis* being very
anxious and solicitous what answer he should make to this strange
command, the Philosopher Bias advis’d him to make this round answer to
the King; *That he was ready to perform his command and to drink up the
Sea, provided he would stop the rivers from flowing into his cup while
he was drinking*. This answer baffled the King, for he could not stop
the rivers; but this we must do, or we shall never be able to drink up
the Sea, or burn up the Earth.

Neither will this be so impossible as it seems at first sight, if we
reflect upon those preparations we have made towards it, by a general
drought all over the Earth. This we suppose will precede the
Conflagration, and by drying up the Fountains and Rivers, which daily
feed the Sea, will by degrees starve that Monster, or reduce it to such
a degree of weakness, that it shall not be able to make any great
resistance. More than half an Ocean of Water flows into the Sea every
day, from the Rivers of the Earth, if you take them all together. This

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I speak upon a moderate computation. *Aristotle*
says the Rivers carry more water into the Sea, in the space of a year,
than would equal in bulk the whole Globe of the Earth. Nay some have
ventur’d to affirm this of one single River, The *Volga*, that runs into
the *Caspian* Sea. ’Tis a great River indeed, and hath seventy mouths;
and so it had need have, to disgorge a mass of Water equal to the Body
of the Earth, in a years time. But we need not take such high measures;
There are at least an hundred great Rivers that flow into the Sea, from
several parts of the Earth, Islands and Continents, besides several
thousands of lesser ones; Let us suppose these, all together, to pour as
much water into the Sea-chanel, every day, as is equal to half the
Ocean. And we shall be easily convinc’d of the reasonableness of this
supposition, if we do but examine the daily expence of one River, and by
that make an estimate of the rest. This we find calculated to our hands
in the *River Po* in *Italy*; a River of much what the same bigness with
our *Thames*, and disburthens it self into the Gulph of *Venice*.
*Baptista Riccioli*, hath computed how much water this River discharges
in an hour, *viz*. 18 000 000 cubical paces of Water, and consequently
432 000 000 in a day; which is scarce credible to those that do not
distinctly compute it. Suppose then an hundred Rivers as great as this
or greater, to fall into the Sea from the land; besides thousands of
lesser, that pay their tribute at the same time into the great Receit of
the Ocean; These all taken together, are capable to renew the Sea every
twice four and twenty hours. Which suppositions being admitted, if by a
great and lasting drought these Rivers were dryed up, or the Fountains
from whence they flow, what would then become of that vast Ocean, that
before was so formidable to us?

’Tis likely you will say, These great Rivers cannot be dry’d up, tho’
the little ones may; and therefore we must not suppose such an Universal
stop of waters, or that they will all fail, by any drought whatsoever.
But great Rivers being made up of little ones, if these fail, those must
be diminish’d, if not quite drain’d and exhausted. It may be all
Fountains and Springs do not proceed from the same causes, or the same
original; and some are much more copious than others; for such
differences we will allow what is due; but still the driness of the Air
and of the Earth continuing, and all the sources and supplies of
moisture, both from above and from below, being lessen’d or wholly
discontinued, a general decay of all Fountains and Rivers must
necessarily follow, and consequently of the Sea, and of its fulness that
depends upon them. And that's enough for our present purpose.

The first step therefore towards the Consumption of the Ocean will be
the diminution or suspension of the Rivers that run into it. The next
will be an Evacuation by Subterraneous passages; And the last, by
Eruptions of fires in the very Chanel of it, and in the midst of the
waters. As for Subterraneous evacuations, we cannot doubt but that the
Sea hath out-lets (*sic*.) at the bottom of it; whereby it discharges
that vast quantity of water that flows into it every day, and that could
not be discharg’d so fast as it comes from the wide mouths of the
Rivers, by percolation or straining thorough the Sands. Seas also
communicate with one another by these internal passages; as is manifest
from those particular

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Seas that have no external outlet or issue, tho’
they receive into them many great Rivers, and sometimes the influx of
other Seas. So the *Caspian* Sea receives not onely *Volga*, which we
mention’d before, but several other Rivers, and yet hath no visible
issue for its waters. The *Mediterranean* Sea, besides all the Rivers it
receives, hath a current flowing into it, at either end, from other
Seas; from the *Atlantick* Ocean at the streights of *Gibraltar*, and
from the Black Sea, above *Constantinople:* and yet there is no passage
above-ground, or visible derivation of the *Mediterranean* waters out of
their Chanel; which seeing they do not over-fill, nor overflow the
Banks, ’tis certain they must have some secret conveyances into the
bowels of the Earth, or subterraneous communication with other Seas.
Lastly, from the Whirl-pools of the Sea, that suck in Bodies that come
within their reach, it seems plainly to appear, by that attraction and
absorption, that there is a descent of waters in those places.

Wherefore when the current of the Rivers into the Sea is stopt, or in a
great measure diminish’d; The Sea continuing to empty it self by these
subterraneous passages, and having little or none of those supplies that
it us’d to have from the Land, it must needs be sensibly lessen’d; and
both contract its Chanel into a narrower compass, and also have less
depth in the waters that remain. And in this last place, we must expect
fiery eruptions in several parts of the Sea-chanel, which will help to
suck up or evaporate the remaining waters. In the present state of
Nature there have been several instances of such eruptions of fire from
the bottom of the Sea; and in that last state of Nature, when
Earthquakes and Eruptions will be more frequent every where, we must
expect them also more frequently by Sea, as well as by Land. ’Tis true,
neither Earthquakes nor Eruptions can happen in the middle of the Great
Ocean, or in the deepest Abyss, because there are no cavities, or mines
below it, for the vapours and exhalations to lodge in; But ’tis not much
of the Sea-chanel that is so deep, and in other parts, especially in
streights and near Islands, such Eruptions, like Sea-Volcano's, have
frequently happen’d, and new Islands have been made by such fiery matter
thrown up from the bottom of the Sea. Thus, they say, those Islands in
the Mediterranean call’d the *Vulcanian* Islands, had their original;
being matter cast up from the bottom of the Sea, by the force of fire;
as new Mountains sometimes are rais’d upon the Earth. Another Island in
the *Archipelago* had the same original, whereof *Strabo* gives an
account.<span class="margnote">*li*. 1.</span> The *flames*, he says,
*sprung up thorough the waters, four days together, so as the whole Sea
was hot and burning; and they rais’d by degrees, as with Engines, a mass
of Earth, which made a new Island, twelve furlongs in compass*. And in
the same *Archipelago*, flames and smoak have several times
(particularly in the year 1650) rise out of the Sea, and fill’d the Air
with sulphureous scents and vapours. In like manner, in the Island of
St. *Michel*, one of the *Tercera*'s, there have been, of later years,
such eructations of fire and flames; so strong and violent, that, at the
depth of an hundred and sixty fathoms, they forc’d their way through the
midst of the waters, from the bottom of the Sea into the open Air. As
has been related by those that were eye-witnesses.

In these three ways, I conceive, the great force of the Sea will be
broken, and the mighty Ocean reduc’d to a standing Pool of putrid
waters, without vent and

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

without recruits. But there will still remain in the midst of the Chanel
a great mass of troubled liquors, like dregs in the bottom of the
vessel; which will not be drunk up till the Earth be all on fire, and
torrents of melted and sulphureous matter flow from the Land, and mingle
with this Dead Sea. But let us now leave the Sea in this humble posture,
and go on to attack the Rocks and Mountains which stand next in our way.

See how scornfully they look down upon us, and bid defiance to all the
Elements. They have born the thunder and lightning of Heaven, and all
the artillery of the Skies, for innumerable Ages; and do not fear the
crackling of thorns and of shrubs that burn at their feet. Let the Towns
and Cities of the Earth, say they, be laid in ashes; Let the Woods and
Forests blaze away; and the fat Soyl of the Earth fry in its own grease;
These things will not affect us; We can stand naked in the midst of a
Sea of fire, with our roots as deep as the foundations of the Earth, and
our heads above the Clouds of the Air. Thus they proudly defie Nature;
and it must be confect, that these, being, as it were, the Bones of the
Earth, when the Body is burning, will be the last consum’d; And I am apt
to think, if they could keep in the same posture they stand in now, and
preserve themselves from falling, the fire could never get an entire
power over them. But Mountains are generally hollow, and that makes them
subject to a double casualty; first, of Earth-quakes, secondly, of
having their roots eaten away by water or by fire; but by fire
especially in this case: for we suppose there will be innumerable
subterraneous fires smothering under ground, before the general fire
breaks out; and these by corroding the bowels of the Earth, will make it
more hollow and more ruinous; And when the Earth is so far dissolv’d,
that the cavities within the Mountains are fill’d with Lakes of fire,
then the Mountains will sink, and fall into those boyling Caldrons;
which, in time, will dissolve them, tho’ they were as hard as Adamant.

To conclude this point, the Mountains will all be brought low, in that
state of nature, either by Earthquakes or subterraneous fires; <span
class="margnote">Isa. 40. 4.</span>*Every valley shall be exalted, and
every mountain and hill shall be made low*. Which will be literally true
at the second coming of our Saviour,<span class="margnote">*Luk*. 3.
5.</span> as it was figuratively apply’d to his first coming. Now, being
once level’d with the rest of the Earth, the question will onely be, how
they shall be dissolv’d. But there is no Terrestrial Body indissolvable
to Fire, if it have a due strength and continuance; and this last fire
will have both, in the highest degrees; So that it cannot but be capable
of dissolving all Elementary compositions, how hard or solid soever they
be.

’Tis true, these Mountains and Rocks, as I said before, will have the
priviledge to be the last destroy’d. These, with the deep parts of the
Sea, and the Polar regions of the Earth, will undergo a slower fate, and
be consum’d more leisurely. The action of the last Fire may be
distinguish’d into two Times, or two assaults; The first assault will
carry off all Mankind, and all the works of the Earth that are easily
combustible, and this will be done with a quick and sudden motion. But
the second assault, being employ’d about the consumption of such Bodies
or such Materials as are not so easily subjected to fire, will be of
long continuance, and the work of some years. And ’tis fit it should be
so; that

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

this Flaming World may be view’d and consider’d by the neighbouring
Worlds about it, as a dreadful spectacle, and monument of God's wrath
against disloyal and disobedient Creatures. That by this example, now
before their eyes, they may think of their own fate, and what may befal
them, as well as another Planet of the same Elements and composition.

Thus much for the Rocks and Mountains; which, you see, according to our
Hypothesis, will be level’d, and the whole face of the Earth reduc’d to
plainness and equality; nay, which is more, melted and dissolved into a
Sea of liquid Fire. And because this may seem a Paradox, being more than
is usually supposed, or taken notice of, in the doctrine of the
Conflagration, it will not be improper in this place to give an account,
wherein our Idea of the Conflagration and its effects, differs from the
common opinion and the usual representation of it. ’Tis commonly
suppos’d, that the Conflagration of the World is like the burning of a
City, where the Walls and materials of the Houses are not melted down,
but scorch’d, inflam’d, demolish’d, and made unhabitable. So they think
in the Burning of the World; such Bodies, or such parts of Nature, as
are fit Fewel for the Fire, will be inflam’d, and, it may be, consum’d,
or reduc’d to smoak and ashes; But other Bodies that are not capable of
Inflammation, will only be scorch’d and defac’d, the beauty and
furniture of the Earth spoil’d, and by that means, say they, it will be
laid wast and become unhabitable. This seems to me a very short and
imperfect Idea of the Conflagration; neither agreeable to Scripture, nor
to the deductions that may be made from Scripture. We therefore suppose
that this is but half the work, this destroying of the outward garniture
of the Earth is but the first onset, and that the Conflagration will end
in a Dissolution and liquefaction of the Elements and all the exteriour
region of the Earth; so as to become a true Deluge of Fire, or a Sea of
Fire overspreading the whole Globe of the Earth. This state of the
Conflagration I think may be plainly prov’d, partly by the expressions
of Scripture concerning it, and partly from the *Renovation* of the
Earth that is to follow upon it. St. *Peter*, who is our chief Guide in
the doctrine of the Conflagration, says<span class="margnote">2 *Pet*.
3. 10, 11.</span>, *The Elements will be melted with fervent heat*;
besides burning up the works of the Earth. Then adds, *Seeing all these
things shall be dissolv’d*, *&c*. These terms of *Liquefaction* and
*Dissolution* cannot, without violence, be restrained to simple
devastation and superficial scorching. Such expressions carry the work a
great deal further, even to that full sence which we propose. Besides,
the Prophets<span class="margnote">*Isa*. 34. 3, 4 & 44. 1, 2.  
*Nah*. 1. 5.  
*Ps*. 97. 5.</span> often speak of the melting of the Earth, or of the
hills and mountains, at the presence of the Lord, in the day of his
wrath. And St. *John* (Apoc. is. 2.) tells us of a *Sea of Glass,
mingled with Fire*; where the Saints stood, singing the song of *Moses*,
and triumphing over their enemies, the Spiritual *Pharaoh* and his host,
that were swallowed up in it. That *Sea of Glass* must be a Sea of
*molten* glass; it must be fluid, not solid, if a Sea; neither can a
solid substance be said to be *mingled with Fire*, as this was. And to
this answers the *Lake of fire and brimstone*, which the Beast and false
Prophet were thrown into alive, *Apoc*. 19. 20. These all refer to the
end of the World and the last Fire, and also plainly imply, or express
rather, that state of Liquefaction which we suppose and assert.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Furthermore, The *Renovation* of the World, or *The New Heavens* and
*New Earth*, which St. *Peter*, out of the Prophets, tells us shall
spring out of these that are burnt and dissolved, do suppose this Earth
reduc’d into a fluid Chaos, that it may lay a foundation for a second
World. If you take such a Skeleton of an Earth, as your scorching Fire
would leave behind it; where the flesh is torn from the bones, and the
Rocks and Mountains stand naked and staring upon you; the Sea, half
empty, gaping at the Sun, and the Cities all in ruines and in rubbish;
How would you raise a New World from this? and a World fit to be an
*habitation for the Righteous*; for so St. *Peter*<span
class="margnote">2 *Pet*. 3. 13.</span> makes that to be, which is to
succeed after the Conflagration. And a World also *without a Sea*, so
St. *John*<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 21. 1.</span> describes the New
Earth he saw. As these characters do not agree to the present Earth, so
neither would they agree to your Future one; for if that dead lump could
revive and become habitable again, it would however retain all the
imperfections of the former Earth, besides some scars and deformities of
its own. Wherefore if you would cast the Earth into a new and better
mould, you must first melt it down; and the last Fire, being as a
*Refiner*'s fire, will make an improvement in it, both as to matter and
form. To conclude, it must be reduc’d into a fluid Mass, in the nature
of a Chaos, as it was at first; but this last will be a Fiery Chaos, as
that was Watery; and from this state it will emerge again into a
Paradisiacal World. But this being the Subject of the following Book, we
will discourse no more of it in this place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](ste41.md)
