[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste51)  [Next](ste53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

*The sence and testimony of the Primitive Church concerning the*
Millennium*, or future kingdom of Christ: from the times of the Apostles
to the* Nicene Council*. The second Proposition laid down. When, by what
means, and for what reasons, that doctrine was afterwards neglected or
discountenanc’d*.

YOU have heard the voice of the *Prophets* and *Apostles*, declaring the
future kingdom of Christ. Next to these, the *Primitive Fathers* are
accounted of good authority; Let us therefore now enquire into their
Sence concerning this Doctrine, that we may give satisfaction to all
parties; And both those that are guided by Scripture alone, and those
that have a Veneration for Antiquity, may find proofs suitable to their
inclinations and judgment.

And to make few words of it, we will lay down this Conclusion, *That the
Millennial kingdom of Christ was the general doctrine of the Primitive
Church, from the times of the Apostles to the* Nicene *Council*;
inclusively. St. *John* out-liv’d all the rest of the Apostles,<span
class="margnote">*Iren*.</span> and towards the latter end of his life,
being banish’d into the Isle of *Pathmos*, he writ his *Apocalypse*;
wherein he hath given us a more full and distinct account of the
Millennial kingdom of Christ, than any of the Prophets or Apostles
before him. *Papias*, Bishop of *Hierapolis*, and Martyr; one of

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

\[paragraph continues\] St. *John*'s Auditors, as *Irenæus* testifies;
taught the same doctrine after St. *John*.<span class="margnote">*lib*.
5, *c*. 33.</span> He was the familiar friend of *Polycarp*, another of
St. *John*'s Disciples; and either from him, or immediately from St.
John's mouth, he might receive this doctrine. That he taught it in the
Church, is agreed on by all hands; both by those that are his followers,
as *Irenæus*; and those that are not well-wishers to this doctrine, as
*Eusebius* and *Jerome*.

There is also another chanel wherein this doctrine is traditionally
deriv’d from St. *John*, namely by the Clergy of *Asia*; as *Irenæus*
tells us in the same Chapter. For, arguing the point, he shows that the
Blessing promis’d to *Jacob* from his Father *Isaac*, was not made good
to him in this life, and therefore he says, *without doubt those words
had a further aim and prospect upon the times of the kingdom*: (so they
us’d to call the Millennial state) *when the Just rising from the dead,
shall reign: and when Nature renew’d and set at liberty, shall yield
plenty and abundance of all things; being blest with the dew of Heaven,
and a great fertility of the Earth. According as has been related by
those Ecclesiasticks or Clergy, who see St.* John*, the Disciple of
Christ: and heard of him WHAT OUR LORD HAD TAUGHT CONCERNING THOSE
TIMES*. This, you see, goes to the Fountain-head. The Christian Clergy
receive it from St. *John*, and St. *John* relates it from the mouth of
our Saviour.

So much for the Original authority of this doctrine, as a Tradition:
that it was from St. *John*, and by him from Christ. And as to the
propagation and prevailing of it in the primitive Church, we can bring a
witness beyond all exception, *Justin Martyr*, contemporary with
*Irenæus*, and his Senior. He says,<span class="margnote">*Dial. with*
Tryphon *the Jew*.</span> *that himself, and all the Orthodox Christians
of his time, did acknowledge the Resurrection of the flesh* (suppose the
first resurrection) *and a thousand years reign in Jerusalem restor’d*,
or in the new Jerusalem. *According as the Prophets, Ezekiel, and
Isaiah, and Others, attest with common consent*. As St. *Peter* had said
before, *Act*. 3. 21. *That all the Prophets had spoken of it*. Then he
quotes the 65*th*. *Chapter of Isaiah*, which is a bulwork for this
doctrine, that never can be broken. And to shew the *Jew*, with whom he
had this discourse, that it was the sence of our Prophets, as well as of
theirs, He tells him, that *a certain Man amongst us Christians, by name
John, one of the Apostles of Christ, in a Revelation made to him did
prophesie, that the faithful believers in Christ should live a thousand
years in the new Jerusalem; and after that should be the general
Resurrection and day of Judgment*. Thus you have the thoughts and
sentiment of *Justin Martyr*, as to himself: as to all the reputed
Orthodox of his time; As to the sence of the Prophets in the old
Testament, and as to the sence of St. *John* in the *Apocalypse*. All
conspiring in confirmation of the Millenary doctrine.

To these three witnesses, *Papias*, *Irenæus*, and *Justin Martyr*, we
may add two more within the second age of the Church: *Melito*, Bishop
of *Sardis*, and St. *Barnabas*, or whosoever was the Author of the
Epistle under his name. This *Melito*, by some is thought to be the
Angel of the Church of *Sardis*, to whom St. *John* directs the Epistle
to that Church: *Apoc*. 3. 1. But I do not take him to be so ancient;
However he was Bishop of that place, at least in the second Century, and
a Person of great Sanctity and Learning. He writ many Books, as you may

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

see in St. *Jerome*:<span class="margnote">*de Script. Eccles*.</span>
and, as He notes out of *Tertullian*, *was by most Christians reputed a
Prophet*. He was also a declar’d *Millenary*, and is recorded as such,
both by *Jerome* and *Gennadius*. As to the Epistle of *Barnabas*,<span
class="margnote">*Dogm. Eccl*. *c*. 55.</span> which we mention’d, it
must be very ancient, whosoever is the Author of it, and before the
third Century; seeing it is often cited by *Clemens Alexandrinus*, who
was himself within the second Century. The genius of it is very much
Millenarian, in the interpretation of the *Sabbath*, the *promis’d
Land*, a *Day* for a *thousand years*, and concerning the *Renovation of
the World*. In all which, He follows the foot-steps of the Orthodox of
those times: that is, of the *Millenarians*.

So much for the first and second Centuries of the Church. By which short
account it appears, that the Millenary doctrine was *Orthodox* and
*Catholick* in those early days. For these Authors do not set it down as
a private opinion of their own, but as a *Christian doctrine*, or an
*Apostolical Tradition*. ’Tis remarkable what *Papias* says of himself,
and his way of learning, In his Book call’d, *The Explanation of the
Words of the Lord*, as St. *Jerome* gives us an account of it:<span
class="margnote">*De Scrip. Eccles*.</span> He says in his Preface, *He
did not follow various opinions, but had the Apostles for his Authors.
And that he consider’d what* Andrew*, what* Peter *said; what* Philip*,
what* Thomas*, and other Disciples of the Lord. As also what* Aristion*,
and* John *the Senior, Disciples of the Lord, what they spoke. And that
he did not profit so much by reading Books, as by the living voice of
these persons which resounded from them to that day*. This hath very
much the air of truth and sincerity, and of a Man that, in good earnest,
sought after the Christian doctrine, from those that were the most
authentick Teachers of it. I know *Eusebius* in his *Ecclesiastical
History*,<span class="margnote">*Vide* *Hieron*.  
*Epist*. 28. *ad Lucinium*.</span> gives a double Character of this
*Papias*; In one place, he calls him, *A very eloquent Man in all
things, and skilful in Scripture*; and in another, he makes him a man of
a *small understanding*. But what reason there is to suspect *Eusebius*
of partiality in this point of the *Millennium*; we shall make appear
hereafter. However, we do not depend upon the learning of *Papias*, or
the depth of his understanding: allow him but to be an honest man, and a
fair witness, and ’tis all we desire. And we have little reason to
question his testimony in this point, seeing it is backt by others of
good credit; and also because there is no counter-evidence, nor any
witness that appears against him. For there is not extant, either the
Writing, Name, or Memory, of any Person, that contested this doctrine in
the first or second Century. I say, that call’d in question this
Millenary doctrine, propos’d after a Christian manner; unless such
Hereticks as deny’d the Resurrection wholly: or such Christians as
deny’d the divine authority of the Apocalypse.

We proceed now to the third Century. Where you find *Tertullian*,
*Origen*, *Victorinus*, Bishop and Martyr: *Nepos*, *Ægyptius*,
*Cyprian*, and, at the end of it, *Lactantius:* All openly professing,
or implicitly favouring the Millenary doctrine. We do not mention
*Clemens Alexandrinus*, contemporary with *Tertullian*, because he hath
not any thing, that I know of, expresly either for, or against the
*Millennium*. But he takes notice that the *Seventh Day* hath been
accounted *Sacred*, both by the Hebrews and Greeks, because of the
*Revolution* of the *World*, and the *Renovation of all things*. And
giving this as a reason why they kept that day

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Holy*, seeing there is not a Revolution of the
World every seven days, it can be in no other sence than as the *Seventh
Day* represents the *seventh Millenary*, in which the Renovation of the
World and the kingdom of Christ, is to be. As to *Tertullian*, St.
*Jerome* reckons him, in the first place, amongst the Latin
*Millenaries*. And tho’ his Book, about the *Hope* of the *Faithful*, as
also that about *Paradise*, which should have given us the greatest
light in this affair, be both lost or suppress’d; yet there are
sufficient indications of his Millenary opinion in his Tracts against
*Marcion*, and against *Hermogenes*. St. *Cyprian* was *Tertullian*'s
admirer, and inclines to the same opinion, so far as one can judge, in
this particular; for his period of *Six thousand years*, and making the
*Seventh Millenary* the Consummation of all, is wholly according to the
Analogy of the Millenary doctrine. As to the two Bishops, *Victorinus*
and *Nepos*, St. *Jerome* vouches for them. The writings of the one are
lost, and of the other so chang’d, that the sence of the Author does not
appear there now. But *Lactantius*, whom we nam’d in the last place,
does openly and profusely teach this doctrine, in his *Divine
Institutions:*<span class="margnote">*Book* 7.</span> and with the same
assurance that he does other parts of the Christian Doctrine. For he
concludes thus, speaking of the *Millennium*, *This is the Doctrine of
the Holy Prophets, which we Christians follow. This is our wisdom*, &c.
Yet he acknowledges there that it was kept as a mystery or secret
amongst the Christians, lest the Heathens should make any perverse or
odious interpretation of it. And for the same or like reason, I believe,
The Book of the *Apocalypse* was kept out of the hands of the Vulgar for
some time, and not read publickly, lest it should be found to have
spoken too openly of the fate of the *Roman* Empire, or of this
Millennial State.

So much for the first, second, and third Century of the Church. But, by
our conclusion, we engag’d to make out this proof as far as the *Nicene
Council*, Inclusively. The *Nicene Council* was about the year of Christ
325. and we may reasonably suppose *Lactantius* was then living; at
least he came within the time of *Constantine*'s Empire. But however the
Fathers of that Council are themselves our witnesses in this point. For,
in their *Ecclesiastical Forms* or *Constitutions*, in the *chapter
about the Providence of God*, and *about the World*, they speak thus;
*The World was made meaner or less perfect, providentially; for God
foresee that man would sin. Wherefore we expect New Heavens and a New
Earth, according to the holy Scriptures: at the appearance and kingdom
of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ*. And then, as *Daniel*
says (ch. 7. 18.) *The Saints of the most High shall take the kingdom.
And the Earth shall be pure, holy, the land of the living, not of the
dead*. *Which* David *foreseeing by the eye of Faith*, cryes out (Ps.
27. 13.) *I believe to see the good things of the Lord, in the land of
the living*. *Our Saviour says, Happy are the meek, for they shall
inherit the Earth*, Matt. 5. 5. *and the Prophet* Isaiah *says*,
(*chap*. 26. 6.) *the feet of the meek and lowly shall tread upon it*.
So you see, according to the judgment of these Fathers, there will be a
kingdom of Christ upon Earth; and moreover, that it will be in the *New
Heavens* and the *New Earth*. And, in both these points, they cite the
Prophets and our Saviour in confirmation of them.

Thus we have discharg’d our promise and given you an account of the
doctrine of the *Millennium*, or future kingdom of Christ, throughout
the three first Ages

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

of the Church: before any considerable corruptions were crept into the
Christian Religion. And those Authorities of single and successive
Fathers, we have seal’d up all together, with the declaration of the
*Nicene* Fathers, in a Body. Those that think Tradition a rule of Faith,
or a considerable motive to it, will find it hard to turn off the force
of these Testimonies. And those that do not go so far, but yet have a
reverence for Antiquity and the Primitive Church, will not easily
produce better authorities, more early, more numerous, or more
uncontradicted, for any article that is not fundamental. Yet these are
but Seconds to the Prophets and Apostles, who are truly the Principals
in this cause. I will leave them altogether, to be examin’d and weigh’d
by the impartial Reader. And because they seem to me to make a full and
undeniable proof, I will now at the foot of the account set down our
second Proposition, <span class="margnote">Propos. 2.</span> which is
this, *That there is a Millennial State, or a Future Kingdom of Christ
and his Saints, Prophesied of and Promised, in the Old and New
Testament; and receiv’d by the Primitive Church as a Christian and
Catholick Doctrine*.

 

HAVING dispatch’d this main point, To conclude the Chapter and this head
of our discourse, It will be some satisfaction possibly to see, *How* a
Doctrine so generally receiv’d and approv’d, came to decay and almost
wear out of the Church, in following Ages. The Christian Millenary
doctrine was not call’d into question, so far as appears from History,
before the middle of the third Century; when *Dionysius Alexandrinus*
writ against *Nepos*, an *Ægyptian* Bishop, who had declar’d himself
upon that subject. But we do not find that this Book had any great
effect; for the declaration or constitution of the *Nicene Fathers* was
after: and in St. *Jerome*'s time, who writ towards the end of the
fourth Century, this doctrine had so much Credit, that, He, who was its
greatest adversary, yet durst not condemn it, as he says himself. *Quæ
licet non sequamur, tamen damnare non possumus; quià multi
Ecclesiasticorum virorum & Martyres ista dixerunt*. *Which things, or
doctrines*, speaking of the Millennium, *tho’ we do not follow, yet we
cannot condemn. Because many of our Church-men, and Martyrs, have
affirmed these things*. And when *Apollinarius* replyed to that Book of
*Dionysius*, St. *Jerome* says, that, *not only those of his own Sect,
but a great multitude of other Christians did agree with Apollinarius in
that particular. Ut præsagâ mente jam cernam, quantorum in me rabies
concitanda sit. That I now foresee, how many will be enrag’d against me,
for what I have spoken against the Millenary doctrine*.

We may therefore conclude that in St. *Jerome*'s time the Millenaries
made the greater party in the Church; for a little matter would not have
frighted him from censuring their opinion. St. *Jerome* was a rough and
rugged Saint, and an unfair adversary, that usually run down, with heat
and violence, what stood in his way. As to his unfairness, he shews it
sufficiently in this very cause, for he generally represents the
Millenary doctrine after a Judaical rather than a *Christian* manner.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And in reckoning up the chief Patrons of it, he
always skips *Justin Martyr*. Who was not a man so obscure as to be
overlook’d: and he was a man that had declar’d himself sufficiently upon
this point, for he says, *both himself and all the Orthodox of his time,
were of that judgment*, and applyes both the *Apocalypse* of St. *John*,
and the 65*th* chap. of *Isaiah*, for the proof of it. As we noted
before.

As St. *Jerome* was an open enemy to this doctrine, so *Eusebius* was a
back friend to it; and represented every thing to its disadvantage, so
far as was tolerably consistent with the fairness of an Historian. He
gives a slight character of *Papias*, without any authority for it;<span
class="margnote">*Eccles*. *Hist*. 3. 22.</span>  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) and brings in one *Gaius* that makes
*Cerinthus* to be the author of the *Apocalypse* and of the
*Millennium*: and calls the Visions there *monstrous stories*. He
himself is willing to shuffle off that Book from *John* the *Evangelist*
to another *John* a *Presbyter*: and to shew his skill in the
interpretation of it, he makes the *New Jerusalem* in the 21*st* *chap*.
to be *Constantine*'s *Jerusalem*,<span class="margnote">*l*. 3. 32. *de
vit. Constan*.</span> when he turn’d the Heathen Temples there into
Christian. A wonderful invention. As St. *Jerome* by his flouts, so
*Eusebius* by sinister insinuations, endeavour’d to lessen the
reputation of this doctrine; and the art they both us’d, was, to
misrepresent it as *Judaical*. But we must not cast off every doctrine
which the Jews believ’d, only for that reason; for we have the same
Oracles which they had, and the same Prophets: and they have collected
from them the same general doctrine that we have, namely, that *there
will be an happy and pacifick state of the Church, in future times*. But
as to the circumstances of this state we differ very much; They suppose
the Mosaical Law will be restor’d, with all its pomp, rites, and
ceremonies; whereas we suppose the Christian Worship, or something more
perfect, will then take place. Yet St. *Jerome* has the confidence, even
there where he speaks of the many Christian Clergy and Martyrs that held
this doctrine: has the confidence, I say, to represent it, as if they
held that *Circumcision*, *Sacrifices*, and all the Judaical rites,
should then be restor’d. Which seems to me to be a great slander, and a
great instance how far mens passions will carry them, in misrepresenting
an opinion which they have a mind to disgrace.

But as we have reason to blame the partiality of those that opposed this
doctrine, so, on the other hand, we cannot excuse the Patrons of it from
all indiscretions. I believe they might partly themselves make it
obnoxious; by mixing some things with it, from pretended traditions, or
the Books of the Sibylls, or other private authorities, that had so
sufficient warrant from Scripture; and things, sometimes, that Nature
would not easily bear. Besides, in later ages, they seem to have dropt
one half of the doctrine, namely, the *Renovation of Nature*, which
*Irenæus*, *Justin Martyr*, and the Ancients, joyn inseparably with the
Millennium. And by this omission, the doctrine hath been made less
intelligible, and one part of it inconsistent with another. And when
their pretensions were to reign upon this present Earth, and in this
present state of Nature, it gave a jealousie to Temporal Princes, and
gave occasion likewise to many of fanatical Spirits, under the notion of
Saints, to aspire to dominion, after a violent and tumultuary manner.
This I reckon as one great cause that brought the doctrine into
discredit. But I hope by reducing of it to the true state, we shall cure
this and other abuses, for the future.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

Lastly, It never pleas’d the Church of *Rome*; and so far as the
influence and authority of that would go, you may be sure it would be
deprest and discountenanc’d. I never yet met with a Popish Doctor that
held the *Millennium*; and *Baronius* would have it pass for an Heresie,
and *Papias* for the Inventor of it; whereas, if *Irenæus* may be
credited, it was receiv’d from St. *John*, and by him from the mouth of
our Saviour. And neither St. *Jerome*, nor his friend *Pope Damasus*,
durst ever condemn it for an *heresie*. It was always indeed uneasie,
and gave offence, to the Church of *Rome*, because it does not suite to
that Scheme of Christianity, which they have drawn. They suppose Christ
reigns already, by his Vicar, the Pope: and treads upon the Necks of
Emperours and Kings. And if they could but suppress the *Northern
Heresie*, as they call it, they do not know what a Millennium would
signifie, or how the Church could be in an happier condition than she
is. The *Apocalypse* of St. *John* does suppose the true Church under
hardship and persecution, more or less, for the greatest part of the
Christian Ages: namely for 1260 years, while the witnesses are in
Sack-cloth. But the Church of *Rome* hath been in prosperity and
greatness, and the commanding Church in Christendom, for so long or
longer, and hath rul’d the Nations with a Rod of Iron; so as that mark
of the true Church, does not favour her at all. And the *Millennium*
being properly a reward and triumph for those that come out of
Persecution, such as have liv’d always in pomp and prosperity can
pretend to no share in it, or benefit by it. This has made the Church of
*Rome* have always an ill eye upon this doctrine, because it seem’d to
have an ill eye upon her. And as she grew in splendor and greatness, she
eclips’d and obscur’d it more and more: so that it would have been lost
out of the World as an obsolete errour, if it had not been reviv’d by
some of the Reformation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[351:1](ste52.htm#fr_19) τερατολογὶας.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](ste53)
