[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste50)  [Next](ste52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V

*A view of other places of Scripture concerning the Millennium or future
kingdom of Christ. In what sence all the Prophets have born Testimony
concerning it*.

THE Wife of *Zebedee* came to our Saviour,<span class="margnote">*Matt*.
20. 21.</span> and begg’d of him, like a fond Mother, that her two Sons
might sit, one at his right hand, th’other at his left, when he came
into his kingdom. Our Saviour does not deny the supposition, or general
ground of her request, that *he was to have a kingdom*; but tells her,
The honours of that kingdom were not then in his disposal. He had not
drunk his Cup, nor been baptiz’d with his last baptism: which were
conditions, both to him and others, of entring into that kingdom. Yet,
in another place,<span class="margnote">*Matt*. 19. 28.</span> our
Saviour is so well assur’d of his interest and authority there, by the
good will of his Father, that he promises to his Disciples and
followers, that for the losses they should sustain here, upon his
account, and for the sake of his Gospel, they should receive there an
hundred fold; and sit upon Thrones with him, judging the Tribes of
*Israel*. The words are these: *And Jesus said unto them, verily I say
unto you, that ye which have followed me*, in the Regeneration or
Renovation, *when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel*. These Thrones, in all reason, must be understood to be the same
with those which we mention’d in the foregoing Chapter, out of *Daniel*
and the *Apocalypse*:<span class="margnote">*Dan*. 7. 9.  
*Apoc*. 20. 4.</span> and therefore mark the same time and the same
state. And seeing, in those places, they plainly signified the
*Millennial* state, or the kingdom of Christ and of his Saints, they
must here signifie the same, in this promise of our Saviour to his
suffering Followers. And as to the word *Palingenesia*, which is here
translated *Regeneration*, ’tis very well known, that, both the *Greek*
Philosophers, and *Greek* Fathers, use that very word for the
*Renovation of the World*. Which is to be, as we shall hereafter make
appear, at or before the *Millennial* state.

Our Saviour also, in his Divine Sermon upon the Mount, makes this one of
his *Beatitudes, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the
Earth*. But how, I pray, or where, or when, do the Meek inherit the
Earth? neither at present, I am sure, nor in any past Ages. ’Tis the
Great Ones of the World, ambitious Princes and Tyrants, that slice the
Earth amongst them: and those that can flatter them

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

best, or serve them in their interests or pleasures, have the next best
shares. But a meek, modest, and humble Spirit, is the most unqualified
Person that can be for a Court, or a Camp: to scramble for Preferment,
or Plunder. Both He, and his self-denying notions, are ridicul’d, as
things of no use, and proceeding from meanness and poorness of Spirit.
*David*, who was a Person of an admirable devotion, but of an unequal
Spirit; subject to great dejections, as well as elevations of mind; was
so much affected with the prosperity of the wicked in this World, that
he could scarce forbear charging Providence with injustice. You may see
several touches of a repining Spirit in his Psalms: and in the
Seventy-third *Psalm*, compos’d upon that Subject, you have both the
wound and the cure. Now this Beatitude pronounc’d here by our Saviour,
was spoken before by *David*, *Psal*. 37. 11. The same *David* that was
always so sensible of the hard usage of the Just in this life. Our
Saviour also, and his Apostles, preach the Doctrine of the Cross every
where, and foretell the sufferings that shall attend the Righteous, in
this World. Therefore neither *David*, nor our Saviour, could understand
this *inheritance of the Earth*, otherwise than of some future state, or
of a state yet to come. But as it must be a future state, so it must be
a Terrestrial state; for it could not be call’d the *inheritance of the
Earth*, if it was not so. And ’tis to be a state of *peace*, as well as
*plenty*, according to the words of the *Psalmist*, *But the meek shall
inherit the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace*. It follows therefore from these premisses, that, both our
Saviour, and *David*, must understand some future state of the Earth,
wherein the *Meek* will enjoy both peace and plenty. And this will
appear to be the future kingdom of Christ, when, upon a fuller
description, we shall have given you the marks and characters of it.

In the mean time, why should we not suppose, this Earth, which the Meek
are to inherit, to be that *habitable Earth to come*, which St. *Paul*
mentions (*Hebr*. 2. 6.) and represents as subject to our Saviour in a
peculiar manner: at his disposal and under his government, as his
kingdom; Why should not that Earth be the subject of this Beatitude: The
promis’d Land, the Lot of the Righteous? This I am sure of, that both
this Text and the former deserve our serious thoughts; and tho’ they do
not expresly, and in terms, prove the future kingdom of our Saviour, yet
upon the fairest interpretations they imply such a state. And it will be
very uneasie to give a satisfactory account, either of the
*Regeneration* or *Renovation*, when our Saviour and his Disciples shall
sit upon Thrones: Or of that *Earth* which the *Meek shall inherit:* Or
lastly, of that *Habitable World*, which is peculiarly subject to the
dominion of Jesus Christ, without supposing, on this side Heaven, some
other reign of Christ and his Saints, than what we see, or what they
enjoy, at present.

But to proceed in this argument. It will be necessary, as I told you, to
set down some notes and characters of this Reign of Christ and of his
Saints, whereby it may be distinguish’d from the present state, and
present kingdoms of the World. And these characters are chiefly three,
*Justice*, *Peace*, and *Divine Presence* or conduct, which uses to be
called *Theocrasie*. By these characters it is sufficiently
distinguish’d from the kingdoms of this World; which are generally
unjust in

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

their titles or exercise: stain’d with bloud: and so far from being
under a particular divine conduct, that humane passions and humane
vices, are the Springs that commonly give motion to their greatest
designs. But more particularly and restrainedly, the Government of
Christ, is opposed to the kingdom and government of Antichrist, whose
characters are diametrically opposite to these, being *injustice*,
*cruelty*, and *humane or diabolical artifices*.

Upon this short view of the kingdom of Christ, let us make enquiry after
it amongst the Prophets of the Old Testament. And we shall find, upon
examination, that there is scarce any of them, greater or lesser, but
take notice of this mystical kingdom; either expresly, or under the
types of *Israel*, *Sion*, *Jerusalem*, and such like. And therefore I
am apt to think, that, when St. *Peter* in his Sermon to the *Jews*,
*Act*. 3. says, All the holy Prophets spoke of *The Restitution of all
things*, he does not mean the Renovation of the World separately from
the kingdom of Christ, but complexly, as it may imply both. For there
are not many of the old Prophets that have spoken of the Renovation of
the *Natural* World; but a great many have spoken of the Renovation of
the *Moral*, in the kingdom of Christ. These are St. *Peter*'s words:
*Act*. 3. 19, 20, 21. *Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ which before
was preached unto you: whom the heavens must receive until the times of
RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS*. The Apostle here mentions three things, The
*Times of refreshing*, The *Second Coming* of our Saviour, And the
*Times of Restitution of all things*. And to the last of these he
immediately subjoins, *which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his
holy Prophets, since the world began*. This *Restitution of all things*,
I say, must not be understood abstractly from the reign of Christ, but
as in conjunction with it; and in that sence, and no other, it is the
general subject of the Prophets.

To enter therefore into the Schools of the Prophets, and enquire their
sence concerning this mystery, let us first address our selves to the
Prophet *Isaiah*, and the Royal Prophet *David*; who seem to have had
many noble thoughts, or inspirations, upon this subject. *Isaiah* in the
65*th* *chap*. from the 17*th* *ver*. to the end, treats upon this
argument: and joyns together the Renovation of the Natural and Moral
World; as St. *Peter*, in the place forementioned, seems to do. And
accordingly the Prophet, having set down several natural characters of
that State, as indolency and joy, longevity, ease, and plenty, from
*ver*. 18. to the 24*th*. He there begins the moral characters, of
divine favour, and such a particular protection, that they are heard and
answer’d before they pray. And lastly, He represents it as a state of
universal peace and innocency, *ver*. 23. *The Wolf and the Lamb shall
feed together*, &c.

This last character, which comprehends *Peace*, *Justice*, and
*Innocency*, is more fully display’d by the same Prophet, in the i a th
chap. where he treats also of the Kingdom of Christ. Give me leave to
set down his words, *ver*. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. *But with righteousness
shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the
Earth: and he shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall
be the girdle of* 

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

*his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. The Wolf also
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lye down with the kid:
and the Calf and the young Lyon, and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together: and the Lyon shall eat straw like the Ox.
And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned
child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice-den. They shall not hurt, nor
destroy in all my holy mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea*. Thus far the
Prophet: Now if we joyn this to what we noted before, from his 65*th*
chap. concerning the same state, ’twill be impossible to understand it
of any order of things, that is now, or hath been hitherto in the World.
And consequently it must be the Idea of some state to come, and
particularly of that which we call the Future Kingdom of Christ.

The same pacifick temper, Innocency and Justice, are celebrated by this
Prophet when the *Mountain of the Lord shall be established in the top
of the mountains*, chap. 2. 2, 4. *And he shall judge amongst the
nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords
into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. Nation shall not
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more*.
And as to righteousness, he says in the 23. chap. *Behold a king shall
reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment*, &c. These
places, I know, usually are applyed to the first coming of our Saviour;
the peaceableness of his doctrine, and the propagation of it through all
the World. I willingly allow this to be a true sence, so far as it will
go. But ’tis one thing to be a true sence, to such a degree; and another
thing to be the final sence and accomplishment of a Prophecy. The
affairs of the first and second coming of our Saviour are often mingled
together in the Prophecies of the Old Testament; but in that mixture
there are some characters whereby you may distinguish what belongs to
his first, and what to his second coming: what to the time when he came
to suffer, and what to the time when he shall come to reign. For
instance, In these Prophecies recited, though there are many things very
applicable to his first coming, yet that *Regality* which is often
spoken of, and that universal Peace and Innocency that will accompany
it, cannot be verified of his coming in the flesh. Seeing it is plain,
that in his state of humiliation he did not come as a King, to rule over
the nations of the Earth. And he says himself expresly,<span
class="margnote">Matt. 20. 21.  
Luke 23. 42.</span> *That his Kingdom is not of this World*. *Joh*. 18.
36. And the Prayer of *Salome*, and of the good Thief upon the Cross,
suppose it not then present, but to come. Then as to the establishment
of *Peace* in his kingdom, it does not at all appear to me that there is
more peace in the World now than there was before our Saviour came into
it; or that the Christian parts of the World are more peaceable than the
unchristian. Therefore these great promises of a *Pacifick kingdom*,
which are exprest in terms as high and emphatical as can be imagin’d,
must belong to some other days, and some other ages, than what we have
seen hitherto.

You’l say, it may be, ’tis not the fault of the Gospel that the World is
not peaceable, but of those that profess it, and do not practise it.
This is true, but it does not answer the Prophecy; for that makes no
such exception. And by such a reserve as this, you may elude any
Prophecy. So the *Jews* say, Their *Messiah* 

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

defers his coming beyond the time appointed by Prophecy, because of
their sins: but we do not allow this for a good reason. The *Israelites*
had their promised *Canaan*, tho’ they had render’d themselves unworthy
of it; and by this method of interpreting Prophecies, all the happiness
and glory promised in the Millennial kingdom of Christ may come to
nothing, upon a pretended forfeiture. Threatnings indeed may have a
tacit condition; God may be better than his word, and, upon repentance,
divert his judgments; but he cannot be worse than his word, or fail of
performance, when, without any condition exprest, he promises or
prophesies good things to come. This would destroy all assurance of hope
or faith. Lastly, This Prophecy concerning Pacifick times or a *Pacifick
kingdom*, is in the 65*th* chap.<span class="margnote">*Isa*. 65.</span>
subjoyn’d to the *Renovation of the [Heavens](errata.htm#5.md) and the
Earth*, and several marks of a change in the Natural World; which things
we know did not come to pass at the first coming of our Saviour: there
was no change of Nature then, nor has been ever since. And therefore
this happy change, both in the Natural and Moral World, is yet to come.

But, as we said before, we do not speak this exclusively of the first
coming of our Saviour, as to other parts of these Prophecies; for no
doubt that was one great design of them. And in the Prophecies of the
old Testament, there are often three gradations, or gradual
accomplishments; The first, in some King of *Israel*, or some Person or
affair relating to *Israel*, as National onely. The second, in the
Messiah at his first coming. And the last, in the Messiah, and his
Kingdom at his second coming. And that which we affirm and contend for,
is, that the Prophecies foremention’d have not a final and total
accomplishment, either in the Nation of the *Jews*, or at the first
coming of our Saviour. And this we ’bide by.

The next Prophet that we mention’d, as a witness of the future kingdom
of Christ, is *David*. Who, in his Psalms, seems to be pleas’d with this
subject above all others; And when he is most exalted in his thoughts
and Prophetical raptures, the Spirit carries him into the kingdom of the
Messiah, to contemplate its glory, to sing praises to its King, and
triumph over his Enemies: *Psal*. 68. *Let God arise, let his enemies be
scattered: Let them also that hate him flie before him. As smoke is
driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let
the wicked perish at the presence of God. But let the Righteous be
glad*, &c. The plain ground he goes upon in this Psalm, is the
Deliverance out of *Ægypt*, and bringing the *Israelites* into the Land
of *Canaan*; But when he is once upon the wing, he soars to an higher
pitch: from the type to the Antitype:<span class="margnote">*Ver*.
18.</span> To the days of the Messiah, the Ascension of our Saviour;
and, at length, to his kingdom and dominion over all the Earth. The
45*th*. Psalm<span class="margnote">*Ver*. 32, *&c*.</span> is an
*Epithalamium* to Christ and the Church, or to the *Lamb* and his
*Spouse*. And when that will be, and in what state, we may learn from
St. *John*, *Apoc*. 19. 7, 8. and *ch*. 21. 2, 9. Namely, after the
destruction of *Babylon*, in the *new Jerusalem* glory. The words and
matter of the two Prophets answer to one another; Here, in this Psalm,
there is a fight and victory celebrated, as well as a marriage: and so
there is in that 19*th*. Chapter of St. *John*. Here,<span
class="margnote">*Ps*. 45. 3, 4, 6.</span> the Prophet says, *Gird thy
Sword upon thy thigh, O most Mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. And
in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
Thy* 

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; The
Scepter of thy kingdom is a right Scepter*, &c. There St. *John*
says,<span class="margnote">Apoc. 19. 15, 16.</span> having describ’d a
Conquerour on a white Horse, *Out of his mouth goeth a sharp Sword, that
with it he should smite the Nations: and he shall rule them with a rod
of Iron: and he treadeth the Wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God. And he hath on his Vesture and on his thigh a Name
written, KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS*. This is the same glorious
Conquerour and Bridegroom in both places: And this Victory is not
gain’d, nor these Nuptials compleated till the second coming of our
Saviour.

In many other Psalms, there are reflections upon this happy kingdom, and
the triumph of Christ over his Enemies: as *Psal*. 2. *Psal*. 9. *Psal*.
21. and 24. and 47. and 85. and 110. and others. In these, and such like
Psalms, there are lineaments and colours of a fairer state, than any we
have yet seen upon Earth. Not but that in their first instances and
grounds they may sometimes respect the state of *Israel*, or the
Evangelical state: but the eye of the Prophet goes further, this does
not terminate his sight: His Divine enthusiasme reaches into another
World: A world of *Peace* and *Justice*, and *Holiness:* of Joy, and
Victory, and Triumph over all the wicked: and consequently such a World,
as neither we, nor our Fathers, have yet seen.

This is an account of two Prophets, *David* and *Isaiah:* and of what
they have more openly declar’d concerning the future kingdom of Christ.
But to verifie St. *Peter*'s words, in that foremention’d place, *Act*.
3. 21. *viz*. that all the *Holy Prophets since the World began*, have
spoken of the Restauration of all things at the second coming of Christ.
I say, to verifie this assertion of St. *Peter*'s, we must suppose,
that, where the Prophets speak of the Restauration and future glory of
*Judah* and *Jerusalem*, they do, under those Types, represent to us the
glory and happiness of the Church in the future kingdom of Christ. And
most of the Prophets, in this sence, and under these forms, have spoken
of this kingdom: In foretelling the Restauration of *Jerusalem* and
*Sion*; and happy days, peace, plenty, and prosperity to the People of
*Israel*.

Most of the Prophets, I say, from *Moses* to *Malachy*, have spoken of
this *Restauration*. *Moses* in the 30*th*. of *Deut*. *ver*. 4, 5, 9.
*David*, in many of those Psalms we have cited. *Isaiah*, besides the
places foremention’d, treats amply of this subject, *Chap*. 51. and in
several other places. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) So likewise
the Prophet *Ezekiel*, *Daniel*, *Hosea*, *Joel*, *Amos*, *Obadiah*,
*Micah*, *Zephany*, *Haggai*, *Zachary*, *Malachy*. All these have,
either expresly, or under the types of *Jerusalem* and *Sion*, foretold
happy days, and a glorious triumph to the Church of God. And seeing in
the new Testament, and in the Prophecies of St. *John*, the Christian
Church is still represented, as under persecution and distress, till the
fall of Anti-christ, and the Millennial Kingdom; ’Tis then, and not till
then, that we must expect the full accomplishment of these Prophecies;
The *Restauration* that St. *Peter* says was spoken of, by *all the
Prophets:* and the *mystery*, which St. *John* says, (*Apoc*. 10. 7.)
was *declared by his Servants the Prophets*, and would be finish’d under
the 7*th*. *Trumpet*, which ushers in the Kingdom of Christ.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

It would be too long to examine all these places in the Prophets, which
you may consult at leisure. However it cannot seem strange that
*Jerusalem* should be us’d in a typical or allegorical sence, seeing we
often find such applications of it in the new Testament: as *Gal*. 4.
26. *Hebr*. 12. 22. *Apoc*. 3. 12. And ’tis very natural that Jerusalem
restor’d, should signifie the same thing as *New Jerusalem*; and
therefore that St. *John*, by his *New Jerusalem*, intended the same
thing, or the same state, that the ancient Prophets did by their
Restauration of *Jerusalem*. And if neither can be understood in a
literal sence, which, I believe, you will not contend for: they must
both be interpreted of the future happiness and glory of the Church in
the Kingdom of Christ.

But to conclude this point wholly as to Scripture; If we make reflection
upon all the passages alledg’d in this and the foregoing Chapter,
whether out of the Old or New Testament, we must at least acknowledge
thus much; That there are happy days, at one time or other: Days of
Peace and Righteousness: of Joy and Triumph: of external Prosperity and
internal Sanctity: when Vertue and Innocency shall be in the Throne, and
Vice and vitious Men out of power or credit. That there are such happy
days prophesied of in Scripture, and promised to the Church of God.
Whether you call this the *Reign of Christ* and of his Saints, or by any
other name, it is not material at present to determine; let the title be
what you will, as to the substance it cannot be denied to be a general
doctrine of Prophetical Scripture. And we must not imagine, that the
Prophets writ like the Poets: feigned an Idea of a Romantick state, that
never was, nor ever will be; only to please their own fancies, or the
credulous people. Neither is it the state of Heaven and eternal life
that is here meant or intended: For, besides that they had little or no
light concerning those Notions, in the Old Testament: The Prophets
generally in their description of this happiness, either express the
Earth, or at least give plain marks of a Terrestrial state. Wherefore
the only question that remains, is this, *Whether* these happy Days are
past already, or to come: Whether this blessed state of the Church is
behind us, or before us: whether our predecessors have enjoy’d it, or
our posterity is to expect it? For we are very sure that it is not
present; The World is full of Wars, and rumours of wars: of vice and
knavery, of oppression and persecution: and these are things directly
contrary to the genius and characters of the state which we look after.

And if we look for it in times past, we can go no further back than the
beginning of Christianity. For St. *John*, the last of the Apostles,
prophesied of these times, as to come: and plac’d them at the end of his
systeme of Prophecies; whereby one might conclude that they are not only
within the compass of the Christian ages, but far advanc’d into them.
But however, not to insist upon that at present, where will you find a
thousand years, from the birth of Christianity to this present age, that
deserves the name, or answers to the characters of this Pure and
Pacifick state of the Church. The first ages of Christianity, as they
were the most pure, so likewise were they the least peaceable.
Continually, more or less, under the Persecution of the Heathen
Emperours; and so far from being the reign and Empire of Christ and his
Saints over the Nations, that Christians were then, every where, in
subjection or slavery; A poor, feeble, helpless people,

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

thrust into Prisons, or thrown to the Lyons, at the pleasure of their
Princes or Rulers. ’Tis true, when the Empire became Christian under
*Constantine*, in the fourth Century, there was, for a time, peace and
prosperity in the Church, and a good degree of Purity and Piety. But
that peace was soon disturb’d, and that piety soon corrupted. The
growing pride and ambition of the Ecclesiasticks, and their easiness to
admit or introduce Superstitious Practices, destroy’d the purity of the
Church. And as to the peace of it, Their contests about opinions and
doctrines, tore the Christians themselves into pieces; and, soon after,
an inundation of Barbarous People fell into Christendom, and put it all
into flames and confusion. After this Eruption of the Northern Nations,
*Mahometanism* rose in the East; and swarms of *Saracens*, like armies
of Locusts, invaded, conquer’d, and planted their religion in several
parts of the *Roman* Empire and of the Christianiz’d World. And can we
call such times the Reign of Christ, or the imprisonment of Satan? In
the following ages, the *Turks* over-run the Eastern Empire and the
*Greek* Church, and still hold that miserable people in slavery.
Providence seems to have so order’d affairs, that the Christian World
should never be without a WOE upon it, lest it should fansie it self
already in those happy days of Peace and Prosperity, which are reserv’d
for future times. Lastly, whosoever is sensible of the corruptions and
persecutions of the Church of *Rome*, since she came to her greatness;
whosoever allows her to be *mystical Babylon*, which must fall before
the kingdom of Christ comes on; will think that kingdom duly plac’d by
St. *John* at the end of his Prophecies, concerning the Christian
Church: and that there still *remains*, *according* to the words of St.
*Paul*, (*Hebr*. 4. 9.) *a Sabbatism to the people of God*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[344:1](ste51.htm#fr_18.md) *Isaiah* *ch*. 11,
*ch*. 43. *ch*. 49. 13, *&c*. *ch*. 66. *Ezekiel*, *ch*. 28. *ch*. 37.
*Hos*. *ch*. 3, & *ch*. 14. *Joel* 3. 18. *Amos*, *ch*. 9. *Obad*. ver.
17, *&c*. *Mich*. *ch*. 4. *ch*. 5. *Zeph*. 3. 14, *&c*. *Haggai*, *ch*.
2. *Zac*. 2. 10, *&c*. & *ch*. 9. 9, *&c*. & *ch*. 14. *Mala*. *ch*. 3.
*ch*. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](ste52.md)
