[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste58)  [Next](ste60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

SO much for Natural Evidence, from the Causes or Effects. We now proceed
to Scripture, which will make the greatest part of this Review. The
Sacred Basis upon which the whole Theory stands, is the doctrine of St.
*Peter*, deliver’d in his *Second Epistle* and *Third Chapter*,
concerning the *Triple Order* and Succession of the Heavens and the
Earth. That comprehends the whole extent of our Theory: which indeed is
but a large Commentary upon St. *Peter*'s Text. The Apostle sets out a
threefold state of the Heavens and Earth: with some

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

general properties of each: taken from their different Constitution and
different Fate. The Theory takes the same threefold state of the Heavens
and the Earth: and explains more particularly, wherein their different
Constitution consists: and how, under the conduct of Providence, their
different fate depends upon it. Let us set down the Apostle's words,
with the occasion of them: and their plain sence, according to the most
easie and natural explication.

<span class="margnote">2 Pet. 3.</span>Ver. 3. *Knowing this first, that
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts*.

4\. *And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation*.  
5. *For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God,
the heavens were of old, and the earth consisting of water and by
water*.  
6. *Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished*.  
7. *But the heavens and the earth that are now, by the same word, are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men*. . . . . .  
10. *The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up*.  
13. *Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and
a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness*.

This is the whole Discourse so far as relates to our Subject. St.
*Peter*, you see, had met with some that scoff’d at the future
destruction of the World, and the coming of our Saviour; and they were
men, it seems, that pretended to Philosophy and Argument; and they use
this argument for their opinion, *Seeing there hath been no change in
Nature, or in the World, from the beginning to this time, why should we
think there will be any change for the future?* 

The Apostle answers to this, That they willingly forget or are ignorant
that there were Heavens of old, and an Earth, so and so constituted;
consisting of Water and by Water; by reason whereof that World, or those
Heavens and that Earth, perish’d in a Deluge of Water. But, saith he,
the Heavens and the Earth that are now, are of another constitution,
fitted and reserved to another fate, namely to perish by Fire. And after
these are perish’d, there will be New Heavens and a New Earth, according
to God's promise.

This is an easie Paraphrase, and the plain and genuine sence of the
Apostle's discourse; and no body, I think, would ever look after any
other sence, if this did not draw them into paths they do not know, and
to conclusions which they do not fancy. This sence, you see, hits the
objection directly, or the Cavil which these scoffers made; and tells
them, that they vainly pretend that there hath been no change in the
World since the beginning, for there was one sort of Heavens and Earth
before the Flood, and another sort now; the first having been destroyed
at the Deluge. So that the Apostle's argument stands upon this
Foundation, That there is a diversity betwixt the present Heavens and
Earth, and the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth; take away that, and you
take away all the force of his Answer.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

Then as to his *New Heaven*s and *New Earth* after the Conflagration,
they must be material and natural, in the same sence and signification
with the former Heavens and Earth; unless you will offer open violence
to the Text. So that this Triplicity of the Heavens and the Earth, is
the first, obvious, plain sence of the Apostle's discourse: which every
one would readily accept, if it did not draw after it a long train of
Consequences, and lead them into other Worlds than they ever thought of
before, or are willing to enter upon now.

But we shall have occasion by and by, to examine this Text more fully in
all its circumstances. Give me leave in the mean time to observe, that
St. *Paul* also implyes that *triple Creation* which St. *Peter*
expresses. St. *Paul*, I say, in the 8*th* *chap*. to the *Rom*. *ver*.
20, 21. tells us of a *Creation* that will be *redeem’d from Vanity:*
which are the new Heavens and new Earth to come. *A Creation in
subjection to Vanity:* which is the present state of the World. And a
Creation that was subjected to Vanity, in hopes of being restor'd: which
was the first Paradisiacal Creation. And these are the three states of
the Natural World, which make the subject of our Theory.

To these two places of St. *Peter* and St. *Paul*, I might add that
third in St. *John*, concerning the new Heavens and new Earth; with that
distinguishing Character, that the Earth was *without a Sea*. As this
distinguisheth it from the present Earth, so, being a *Restitution* or
*Restauration*, as we noted before, it must be the same with some former
Earth: and consequently, it implies that there was another precedent
state of the natural World, to which this is a Restitution. These three
places I alledge, as comprehending and confirming the Theory in its full
extent. But we do not suppose them all of the same force and clearness.
St. *Peter* leads the way, and gives light and strength to the other
two. When a Point is prov’d by one clear Text, we allow others, as
auxiliaries, that are not of the same clearness; But being open’d,
receive light from the primary Text, and reflect it upon the Argument.

So much for the Theory in general. We will now take one or two principal
heads of it, which vertually contain all the rest, and examine them more
strictly and particularly, in reference to their agreement with
Scripture. The two Heads we pitch upon, shall be, our Explication of the
Deluge, and our Explication of the new Heavens and new Earth. We told
you before, these two were as the Hinges, upon which all the Theory
moves, and which holds the parts of it in firm union one with another.
As to the Deluge, if I have explain’d that aright, by the Disruption of
the Great Abyss, and the Dissolution of the Earth that cover’d it, all
the rest follows in such a chain of consequences, as cannot be broken.
Wherefore in order to the proof of that explication, and of all that
depends upon it, I will make bold to lay down this Proposition, *That
our Hypothesis concerning the universal Deluge, is not onely more
agreeable to Reason and Philosophy than any other yet propos’d to the
World, but is also more agreeable to Scripture*. Namely, to such places
of Scripture, as reflect upon the *Deluge*, the *Abyss*, and the form of
the *first Earth*. And particularly, to the *History of Noah's Flood*,
as *recorded by Moses*. If I can make this good, it will, doubtless,
give satisfaction to all intelligent Persons. And I desire their
patience, if I proceed slowly.

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

\[paragraph continues\] We will divide our task into. parts, and examine
them separately: First, by Scripture in general, and then by *Moses* his
history and description of the Flood.

Our Hypothesis of the Deluge consists of three principal Heads, or
differs remarkably in three things from the common explication. First,
in that we suppose the Antediluvian Earth to have been of another Form
and constitution from the present Earth: with the Abyss placed under it.

Secondly, in that we suppose the Deluge to have been made, not by any
inundation of the Sea, or overflowing of Fountains and Rivers: nor
(principally) by any excess of rains: but by a real dissolution of the
exteriour Earth, and disruption of the Abyss which it cover’d. These are
the two principal points, to which may be added, as a Corollary.

Thirdly, that the Deluge was not in the nature of a standing Pool: the
Waters lying every where level, of an equal depth and with an uniform
Surface: but was made by a fluctuation and commotion of the Abyss upon
the disruption: which commotion being over, the Waters retired into
their Chanels, and let the dry Land appear.

These are the most material and fundamental parts of our Hypothesis: and
these being prov’d consonant to Scripture, there can be no doubt of the
rest.

We begin with the first: That the Ante-diluvian Earth was of another
form and constitution from the present Earth, with the Abyss placed
under it. This is confirm’d in Scripture, both by such places as assert
a diversity in general: and by other places that intimate to us, wherein
that diversity consisted, and what was the form of the first Earth. That
discourse of St. *Peter*'s, which we have set before you, concerning the
past, present, and future, Heavens and Earth, is so full a proof of this
diversity in general, that you must either allow it, or make the
Apostle's argumentation of no effect. He speaks plainly of the natural
World, *The Heavens and the Earth*: And he makes a plain distinction, or
rather opposition, betwixt those before and after the Flood: so that the
least we can conclude from his words, is a diversity betwixt them; In
answer to that Identity or immutability of Nature, which the Scoffers
pretended to have been ever since the beginning.

But tho’ the Apostle, to me, speaks plainly of the *Natural World*, and
distinguishes that which was before the Flood, from the present: Yet
there are some that will allow neither of these to be contain’d in St.
*Peter*'s words; and by that means would make this whole Discourse of
little or no effect, as to our purpose. And seeing we, on the contrary,
have made it the chief Scripture-basis of the whole Theory of the Earth,
we are oblig’d to free it from those false glosses or
misinterpretations, that lessen the force of its testimony, or make it
wholly ineffectual.

These Interpreters say, that St. *Peter* meant no more than to mind
these Scoffers, that the World was once destroy’d by ..a Deluge of
Water: meaning the *Animate World*, Mankind and living Creatures. And
that it shall be destroy’d again by another Element, namely by Fire. So
as there is no opposition or diversity betwixt the two Natural Worlds,
taught or intended by the Apostle; but onely in reference to their
different fate or manner of perishing, and not of their different nature
or constitution.

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

Here are two main points, you see, wherein our interpretations of this
discourse of the Apostles, differ. First, in that they make the Apostle
(in that *sixth verse*) to understand onely the World *Animate*, or men
and brute Creatures. That these were indeed destroy’d, but not the
Natural World, or the form and constitution of the then Earth and
Heavens. Secondly, that there is no diversity or opposition made by St.
*Peter* betwixt the ancient Heavens and Earth, and the present, as to
their form and constitution. We pretend that these are misapprehensions,
or misrepresentations of the sence of the Apostle in both respects, and
offer these reasons to prove them to be so.

For the first point; That the Apostle speaks here of the natural World,
particularly in the 6*th*. Verse; and that it perish’d, as well as the
animate, these Considerations seem to prove.

First, because the argument or ground these Scoffers went upon, was
taken from the natural World, its constancy and permanency in the same
state from the beginning; therefore if the Apostle answers *ad idem*,
and takes away their argument, he must understand the same natural
World, and show that it hath been chang’d, or hath perish’d.

You will say, it may be, the Apostle doth not deny, nor take away the
ground they went upon, but denies the consequence they made from it;
that *therefore there would be no change, because there had been none*.
No, neither doth he do this, if by the *World* in the 6*th*. Verse, he
understands Mankind onely; for their ground was this, *there hath been
no change in the natural World*; Their consequence, this, *therefore
there will be none*, nor any Conflagration. Now the Apostle's answer,
according to you, is this, *you forget that Mankind hath been destroyed
in a Deluge*. And what then? what's this to the natural World, whereof
they were speaking? this takes away neither antecedent nor consequent,
neither ground nor inference; nor any way toucheth their argument, which
proceeded from the natural World to the natural World. Therefore you
must either suppose that the Apostle takes away their ground, or he
takes away nothing.

Secondly, what is it that the Apostle tells these Scoffers they were
ignorant of? that there was a Deluge, that destroyed Mankind? They could
not be ignorant of that, nor pretend to be so; It was therefore the
constitution of those old Heavens and Earth, and the change or
destruction of them at the Deluge, that they were ignorant of, or did
not attend to; and of this the Apostle minds them. These Scoffers appear
to have been *Jews* by the phrase they use, *since the Fathers fell
asleep*, which in both parts of it is a Judaical expression; And does
St. *Peter* tell the *Jews* that had *Moses* read to them every Sabbath,
*that they were ignorant that Mankind was once destroyed with a Deluge
in the Days of Noah*? or could they pretend to be ignorant of that
without making themselves ridiculous both to *Jews* and Christians?
Besides, these do not seem to have been of the vulgar amongst them, for
they bring a Philosophical argument for their opinion; and also in their
very argument they refer to the History of the Old Testament, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

in saying, *Since the Fathers fell asleep*, amongst which Fathers,
*Noah* was one of the most remarkable.

Thirdly, the design of the Apostle is to prove to them, or to dispose
them to the belief of the Conflagration, or future destruction of the
World; which I suppose you will not deny to be a destruction of the
natural World; therefore to prove or perswade this, he must use an
argument taken from a precedent destruction of the natural World; for to
give an instance of the perishing of Mankind onely, would not reach home
to his purpose. And you are to observe here that the Apostle does not
proceed against them barely by authority; for what would that have
booted? If these Scoffers would have submitted to authority, they had
already the authority of the Prophets and Apostles in this point: but he
deals with them at their own weapon, and opposes reasons to reasons;
What hath been done may be done, and if the natural World hath been once
destroyed, ’tis not hard, nor un-reasonable, to suppose those Prophecies
to be true, that say it shall be destroyed again.

Fourthly, unless we understand here the natural World, we make the
Apostle both redundant in his discourse, and also very obscure in an
easie argument. If his design was onely to tell them that Mankind was
once destroy’d in a Deluge, what's that to the Heavens and the Earth?
the 5*th*. Verse would be superfluous; which yet he seems to make the
foundation of his discourse. He might have told them how Mankind had
perish’d before with a Deluge, and aggravated that destruction as much
as he pleas’d, without telling them how the Heavens and the Earth were
constituted then; what was that to the purpose, if it had no dependance
or connection with the other? In the precedent Chapter, Verse 5*th*.
when he speaks onely of the Floods destroying Mankind, he mentions
nothing of the Heavens or the Earth: and if you make him to intend no
more here, what he says more is superfluous.

I also add, that you make the Apostle very obscure and operose in a very
easie argument. How easie had it been for him, without this *Apparatus*,
to have told them, as he did before, that God brought a Flood upon the
World of the ungodly; and not given us so much difficulty to understand
his sence, or such a suspicion and appearance, that he intended
something more; for that there is at least a great appearance and
tendency to a further sence, I think none can deny; And St. *Austin*,
*Didymus*, *Alex. Bede*, as we shall see hereafter, understood it
plainly of the natural World: Also modern Expositors and Criticks; as
*Cajetan*, *Estius*, *Drusius*, *Heinsius*, have extended it to the
natural World, more or less; tho’ they had no Theory to mislead them,
nor so much as an hypothesis to support them; but attended onely to the
tenor of the Apostle's discourse, which constrain’d them to that sence,
in whole or in part.

Fifthly, the opposition carries it upon the natural World. The
opposition lies betwixt the of οἱ ἔκπαλαι οὐρανοὶ καὶ γῆ and οἱ νῦν
οὐρανοὶ καὶ γῆ the Heavens that were of old, and the Earth, and the
present Heavens and Earth, or the two natural Worlds. And if they will
not allow them to be oppos’d in their natures (which yet we shall prove
by and by) at least they must be oppos’d in their fate; and as This is
to perish by fire, so That perish’d by water; And if it perish’d by
water, it perish’d; which is all we contend for at present.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

Lastly, if we would be as easily govern’d in the exposition of this
place, as we are of other places of Scripture, it would be enough to
suggest, that in reason and fairness of interpretation, the same World
is destroy’d in the 6*th* *verse*, that was describ’d in the foregoing
verse; but it is the Natural World that is describ’d there, the Heavens
and the Earth, so and so constituted; and therefore in fairness of
interpretation they ought to be understood here; that World being the
subject that went immediately before, and there being nothing in the
words that restrains them to the animate World or to Mankind. In the 2d
*ch*. *ver*. 5. the Apostle does restrain the word κόσμος by adding
ἀσεβῶν, *the World of the ungodly*; but here ’tis not only illimited,
but according to the context, both preceding and following, to be
extended to the Natural World. I say by the following context too, for
so it answers to the World that is to perish by Fire; which will reach
the frame of Nature as well as Mankind.

For a conclusion of this first point, I will set down St. *Austin*'s
judgment in this case; who in several parts of his works hath
interpreted this place of St. *Peter*, *of the natural world*. As to the
heavens, he hath these words in his Exposition upon *Genesis*, *Hosetiam
aerios cœlos quondam periisse Diluvio, in quâdam earum quæ Canonica
appellantur, Epistolâ legimus*. *We read in one of the Epistles called
Canonical*, meaning this of St. *Peter*'s *that the aerial heavens
perish’d in the Deluge*. And he concerns himself there to let you know
that it was not the starry heavens that were destroy’d; the waters could
not reach so high; but the regions of our air. Then afterwards he hath
these words *Faciliùs eos* (cœlos) *secundum illius Epistolæ
authoritatem credimus periisse, & alios, sicut ibi scribitur,
repositos*. *We do more easily believe, according to the authority of
that Epistle, those heavens to have perish’d; and others, as it is there
written, substituted in their place*. In like manner, and to the same
sence, he hath these words upon Psal. 101. *Aerii utique cœli perierunt
ut propinqui Terris, secundum quod dicuntur volucres cœli; sunt autem &
cœli cœlorum, superiores in Firmamento, sed utrùm & ipsi perituri sint
igni, an hi soli, qui etiam diluvio perierunt, disceptatio est aliquanto
scrupulosior inter doctos*. And in his Book *de Civ. Dei*, he hath
several passages to the same purpose, *Quemadmodum in Apostolicâ illâ
Epistolâ â toto pars accipitur, quod diluvio periisse dictus est mundus,
quamvis sola ejus cum suis cœlis pars ima perierit*. These being to the
same effect with the first citation, I need not make them English; and
this last place refers to the Earth as well as the Heavens, as several
other places in St. *Austin* do, whereof we shall give you an account,
when we come to shew his judgment concerning the second point, *the
diversity of the ante-diluvian and post-diluvian World*. This being but
a foretaste of his good will and inclinations towards this doctrine.

These considerations alledg’d, so far as I can judge, are full and
unanswerable proofs, that this discourse of the Apostle's comprehends
and refers to the Natural World; and consequently they warrant our
interpretation in this particular, and destroy the contrary. We have but
one step more to make good, *That there was a change made in this
natural world at the Deluge*, according to the Apostle; and this is to
confute the second part of their interpretation, which supposeth that
St. *Peter* makes no distinction or opposition betwixt the antediluvian
Heavens and Earth, and the present Heavens and Earth, in that respect.

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

This second difference betwixt us, methinks, is still harsher than the
first; and contrary to the very form, as well as to the matter of the
Apostle's discourse. For there is a plain antithesis, or opposition made
betwixt the Heavens and the Earth of old (*ver*. *the* 5*th*) and the
Heavens and the Earth that are now (*verse the* 7*th*) of οἱ ἔκπαλαι
οὐρανοὶ καὶ ἡ γῆ and of οἱ νῦν οὐρανοὶ καὶ ἡ γῆ, and the adversative
particle, *but*, <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) you see marks the
opposition; so that it is full and plain according to Grammar and
Logick. And that the parts or members of this opposition differ in
nature from one another, is certain from this, because otherwise the
Apostle's argument or discourse is of no effect, concludes nothing to
the purpose; he makes no answer to the objection, nor proves any thing
against the Scoffers, unless you admit that diversity. For they said,
*All things had been the same from the beginning in the Natural World*,
and unless he say, as he manifestly does, that there hath been a change
in Nature, and that the Heavens and Earth that are now, are different
from the ancient Heavens and Earth, which perish’d at the Flood, he says
nothing to destroy their argument, nor to confirm the Prophetical
doctrine of the future destruction of the Natural World.

This, I think, would be enough to satisfie any clear and free mind
concerning the meaning of the Apostle; but because I desire to give as
full a light to this place as I can, and to put the sence of it out of
controversie, if possible, for the future, I will make some further
remarks to confirm this exposition.

And we may observe that several of those reasons which we have given to
prove, That the *Natural World* is understood by St. *Peter*, are double
reasons; and do also prove the other point in question, a diversity
betwixt the two Natural Worlds, the Anti-diluvian and the present. As
for instance, unless you admit this diversity *betwixt the two natural
Worlds*, you make the 5*th* *verse* in this *Chapter* superfluous and
useless: and you must suppose the Apostle to make an inference here
without premises. In the 6*th* *verse* he makes an inference, <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md) *Whereby* the World, that then was,
perish’d in a Deluge; what does this *whereby* relate to? *by reason* of
what? sure of the particular constitution of the Heavens and the Earth
immediately before describ’d. Neither would it have signified any thing
to the Scoffers, for the Apostle to have told them how the Ante-diluvian
Heavens and Earth were constituted, if they were constituted just in the
same manner as the present.

Besides, what is it, as I ask’d before, that the Apostle tells these
Scoffers they were ignorant of? does he not say formally and expresly
(*ver*. 5.) that they were ignorant that the Heavens and the Earth were
constituted so and so, before the Flood? but if they were constituted as
these present Heavens and Earth are, they were not ignorant of their
constitution; nor did pretend to be ignorant, for their own (mistaken)
argument supposeth it.

But before we proceed any further, give me leave to note the impropriety
of our Translation, in the 5th. Verse, or latter part of it; Ἐξ ὕδατος
καὶ δἰ ὑδάτων (vel δἰ ὕδατος) συνεϛῶσα, This we translate *standing in
the water, and out of* 

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

*the water*, which is done manifestly in compliance with the present
form of the Earth, and the notions of the Translators: and not according
to the natural force and sence of the *Greek* words. If one met with
this sentence <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) in a Greek Author, who
would ever render it *standing in the water and out of the water?* nor
do I know any Latin Translator that hath ventur’d to render them in that
sence; nor any Latin Father; St. *Austin* and St. *Jerome* I’me sure do
not, but *Consistens ex aquâ*, or *de aquâ*, & *per aquam:* for that
later phrase also συνεϛάναι δἰ ὕδατος does not with so good propriety
signifie to *stand in the water*, as to consist or subsist by water, or
by the help of water, *Tanquam per causam sustinentem*; as St. *Austin*
and *Jerome* render it. Neither does that instance they give from 1
*Pet*. 3. 20. prove any thing to the contrary, for the Ark was sustain’d
by the waters, and the *English* does render it accordingly.

The Translation being thus rectified, you see the ante-diluvian Heavens
and Earth consisted of Water, and by water; which makes way for a second
observation to prove our sence of the Text; for if you admit no
diversity betwixt those Heavens and Earth, and the present, shew us
’pray how the present Heavens and Earth consist of water, and by water.
What watery constitution have they? The Apostle implies rather, that
*The now Heavens and Earth* have a fiery constitution. We have now
Meteors of all sorts in the air, winds, hail, snow, lightning, thunder,
and all things engender’d of fiery exhalations, as well as we have rain;
but according to our Theory,<span class="margnote">*Book* 2. *c*. 5, p.
233.</span> the ante-diluvian Heavens, of all these Meteors had none but
dews and rain, or watery Meteors onely; and therefore might very aptly
be said by the Apostle to be *constituted of water*, or to have a watery
σύϛασις. Then the Earth was said to consist by water, because it was
built upon it, and at first was sustain’d by it. And when such a Key as
this is put into our hands, that does so easily unlock this hard
passage, and makes it intelligible, according to the just force of the
words, why should we pertinaciously adhere to an interpretation, that
neither agrees with the words, <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md) nor
makes any sence that is considerable?

Thirdly, If the Apostle had made the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth the
same with the present, his apodosis in the 7th. Verse, should not have
beenὅι δε νῦν οὐρανοὶ, but καὶ οἱ ἀυτοὶ οὐρανοὶ καὶ ἡ γῆ τεθησαυρισμένοι
εἰσί, *&c*. I say, it should not have been by way of antithesis, but of
identity or continuation; *And the same Heavens and Earth are kept in
store reserv’d unto fire*, &c. Accordingly we see the Apostle speaks
thus, as to the Logos, or the *Word of God*, Verse 7. τῷ ἀυτοῷ λόγῳ, *by
the same Word of God*; where the thing is the same, he expresseth it as
the same; And if it had been the same Heavens and Earth, as well as the
same Word of God, Why should he use a mark of opposition for the one,
and of identity for the other? to this I do not see what can be fairly
answer’d.

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

Fourthly, the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were different from the
present, because, as the Apostle intimates, they were such, and so
constituted, as made them obnoxious to a Deluge; whereas ours are of
such a form, as makes them incapable of a Deluge, and obnoxious to a
Conflagration; the just contrary fate.<span class="margnote">*Theor* I
*Book*, *c*. 2.</span>

If you say there was nothing of natural tendency or disposition in
either World to their respective fate, but the first might as well have
perish’d by fire, as water, and this by water as by fire, you unhinge
all Nature and natural providence in that method, and contradict one
main scope of the Apostle in this discourse. His first scope is to
assert, and mind them of that diversity there was betwixt the ancient
Heavens and Earth, and the present; and from that, to prove against
those Scoffers, that there had been a change and revolution in Nature;
And his second scope seems to be this, to show that diversity to be
such, as, under the Divine conduct, leads to a different fate, and
expos’d that World to a Deluge; for when he had describ’d the
constitution of the first Heavens and Earth, he subjoyns, δἰ ὧν ὃ τοτε
κόσμος ὕδατι κατακλυσθεὶς ἀπόλετο. *Quià talis erat*, saith *Grotius*,
*qualem diximus, constitutio & Terra & Cœli*. *WHEREBY the then World
perish’d in a Flood of Water*. This *whereby* notes some kind of causal
dependance, and must relate to some means or conditions precedent. It
cannot relate to Logos, or the *Word of God*, Grammar will not permit
that; therefore it must relate to the state of the ante-diluvian Heavens
and Earth immediately premis’d. And to what purpose indeed should he
premise the description of those Heavens and Earth, if it was not to lay
a ground for this inference?

Having given these Reasons for the necessity of this Interpretation; in
the last place, let's consider St. *Austin*'s judgment, and his sence
upon this place, as to the point in question. As also the reflections
that some other of the Ancients have made upon this doctrine of St.
*Peter*'s. *Didymus Alexandrinus*, who was for some time St. *Jerome*'s
Master, made such a severe reflection upon it, that he said this Epistle
was corrupted, and should not be admitted into the Canon, because it
taught the doctrine of a *Triple* or *Triform World* in this third
Chapter. As you may see in his *Enarr. in Epist. Canonicas*. Now this
threefold World is first that in the 6*th* Verse, *The World that then
was*. In the 7*th*. Verse, *The Heavens and the Earth, that are now*.
And in the 13*th*. Verse, *We expect new Heavens and a new Earth,
according to his promise*. This seems to be a fair account that St.
*Peter* taught the doctrine of a triple World; And I quote this
testimony, to show what St. *Peter*'s words do naturally import, even in
the judgment of one that was not of his mind. And a Man is not prone to
make an exposition against his own Opinion, unless he think the words
very pregnant and express.

But St. *Austin* owns the authority of this Epistle, and of this
doctrine, as deriv’d from it, taking notice of this Text of St.
*Peter*'s in several Parts of his Works. We have noted three or four
places already to this purpose, and we may further take notice of
several passages in his Treatise, *de Civ. Dei*, which confirm our
exposition. In his 10th. Book, ch. 24. he disputes against *Porphyry*,
who had the same Principles with these Æternalists in the Text; or, if I
may so call them, Incorruptarians; and thought the World never had, nor
ever would undergo any change, especially as to the Heavens. St.
*Austin* could not urge *Porphyry* 

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

with the authority of St. *Peter*, for he had no veneration for the
Christian Oracles; but it seems he had some for the *Jewish*, and
arguing against him, upon that Text in the Psalms, *Cœli peribunt*, he
shows upon occasion how he understands St. *Peter*'s destruction of the
Old World. *Legitur Cœlum & Terra transibunt, Mundus transit, sed puto
quod præterit, transit, transibunt aliquantò mitiùs dicta sunt quàm
peribunt. In Epistolâ quoque Petri Apostoli, ubi aquâ inundatus, qui tum
erat, periisse dictus est Mundus, satis clarum est quæ pars mundi à toto
significata est, & quatenùs periisse dicta sit, & qui cœli repositi igni
reservandi*. This he explains more fully afterwards by subjoyning a
caution (which we cited before) that we must not understand this passage
of St. *Peter*'s, concerning the destruction of the ante-diluvian World,
to take in the whole Universe, and the highest Heavens, but onely the
aerial Heavens, and the sublunary World. *In Apostolicâ iliâ Epistolâ à
toto pars accipitur, quod Diluvio periisse dictus est mundus, quamvis
sola ejus, cum suis cœlis, pars ima perierit. In that Apostolical
Epistle, a part is signified by the whole, when the World is said to
have perish’d in the Deluge, although the lower part of it onely, with
the Heavens belonging to it, perished:* that is, the Earth with the
regions of the Air that belong to it. And consonant to this, in his
exposition of that hundred and first Psalm, upon those words, *The
Heavens are the work of thy hands, They shall perish, but thou shalt
endure*. This perishing of the Heavens, he says, St. *Peter* tells us,
hath been once done already, namely, at the Deluge; *Apertè dixit hoc
Apostolus Petrus, Cœli erant olim & Terra, de aquâ & per aquam
constituti, Dei verbo; per quod qui factus est mundus, aquâ inundatus
deperiit; Terra autem & cœli qui nunc sunt, igni reservantur. Jam ergo
dixit periisse cœlos per Diluvium*.

These places shew us that St. *Austin* understood St. *Peter*'s
discourse to aim at the natural World, and his *periit* or *periisse*
(*verse* 6.) to be of the same force as *peribunt* in the Psalms, when
’tis said the Heavens *shall perish*; and consequently that the Heavens
and the Earth, in this Father's opinion, were as really chang’d and
transform’d at the time of the Flood, as they will be at the
Conflagration. But we must not expect from St. *Austin* or any of the
Ancients a distinct account of this Apostolical doctrine, as if they
knew and acknowledg’d the Theory of the first World; that does not at
all appear; but what they said was either from broken Tradition, or
extorted from them by the force of the Apostle's words and their own
sincerity.

There are yet other places in St. *Austin* worthy our consideration upon
this subject; especially his exposition of this 3*d*. *chap*. of St.
*Peter*, <span class="margnote">*cap*. 18.</span> as we find it in that
same Treatise *de Civ. Dei*. There he compares again, the destruction of
the World at the Deluge, with that which shall be at the Conflagration,
and supposeth both the Heavens and Earth to have perish’d. *Apostolus
commemorans factum ante Diluvium, videtur admonuisse quodammodò quatenùs
in fine hujus seculi mundum istum periturum esse credamus. Nam & illo
tempore periisse dixit, qui tunc erat, mundum; nec solum orbem terra,
verùm etiam cœlos*, Then giving his usual caution, That the Stars and
starry heavens should not be comprehended in that mundane destruction,
He goes on, *Atque hoc modo* (penè totus aer) *cum terra perierat; cujus
Terræ utique prior facies* (nempe ante-diluviana) *fuerat deleta
Diluvio. Qui* 

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

*autem nunc sunt cœli & terra eodem verbo repositi sunt igni reservandi;
Proinde qui cœli & qua Terra, id est, qui mundus, pro eo mundo qui
Diluvio periit, ex eâdem aquâ repositus est, ipse igni novissimo
reservatur*. Here you see St. *Austin*'s sence upon the whole matter;
which is this, That the natural World, the Earth with the Heavens about
it, was destroyed and changed at the Deluge into the present Heavens and
Earth; which shall again in like manner be destroyed and chang’d by the
last fire. <span class="margnote">*cap*. 16.</span> Accordingly in
another place, to add no more, he saith the figure of the (sublunary)
world shall be chang’d at the Conflagration, as it was chang’d at the
Deluge. *Tunc figura hujus mundi, &c.* *cap*. 16.

Thus you see, we have St. *Austin* on our side, in both parts of our
interpretation; that St. *Peter*'s discourse is to be referr’d to the
natural inanimate World, and that the present natural World is distinct
and different from that which was before the Deluge. And St. *Austin*
having applyed this expresly to St. *Peter*'s doctrine by way of
Commentary, it will free us from any crime or affectation of singularity
in the exposition we have given of that place.

Venerable *Bede* hath followed St. *Austin*'s footsteps in this
doctrine; for, interpreting St. *Peter*'s *Original World* (Αρχαῖος
Κόσμος) 2 *Pet*. 2. 5. he refers both that and this (*chap*. 3. 6.) to
the natural inanimate World, which he supposeth to have undergone a
change at the Deluge. His words are these, *idem ipse mundus est* (nempe
quoad materiam) *in uqo nunc humanum genus habitat, quem inhabitaverunt
hi qui ante diluvium fuerunt, sed tamen rectè Originalis Mundus, quasi
alius, dicitur; quia sicut in consequentibus hujus Epistolæ scriptum
continetur, Ille tune mundus aquâ inundatus periit. Cœlis videlicet qui
erant priùs, id est, cunctis aeris hujus turbulenti spaciis, aquarum
accrescentium altitudine consumptis, ac Terrâ in alteram faciem,
excedentibus aquis, immutatâ. Nam etsi montes aliqui atque convalles ab
initio facti creduntur, non tamen tanti quanti nunc in orbe cernuntur
universo*. *’Tis the same World* (namely, as to the matter and substance
of it) *which mankind lives in now, and did live in before the Flood,
but yet that is truly call’d the ORIGINAL WORLD, being as it were
another from the present. For ’tis said in the sequel of this Epistle
that the World that was then, perish’d in the Deluge; namely, the
regions of the air were consumed by the height and excess of the waters,
and by the same waters the Earth was chang’d into another form or face.
For although some Mountains and Valleys are thought to have been made
from the beginning, yet not such great ones as now we see throughout the
whole Earth*.

You see this Author does not only own a change made at the Deluge, but
offers at a further explication wherein that change consisted, *viz*.
that the Mountains and inequalities of the Earth were made greater than
they were before the Flood; and so he makes the change or the difference
betwixt the two Worlds gradual, rather than specifical, if I may so term
it. But we cannot wonder at that, if he had no principles to carry it
further, or to make any other sort of change intelligible to him.
Bede<span class="margnote">*De* 6 *dier. treat*.</span> also pursues the
same sence and notion in his interpretation of that *fountain*, *Gen*.
2. 5. that watered the face of the Earth before the Flood. And many
other transcribers of Antiquity have recorded this Tradition concerning
a difference, gradual or specifical, both in the Ante-diluvian heavens
(*Gloss. Ordin. Gen*. 9. *de Iride. Lyran. ibid. Hist. Scholast*: *c*.
35. *Rab. Maurus* &

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Gloss. Inter. Gen*. 2. 5, 6. *Alcuin. Quæst. in
Gen. inter*. 135.) and in the Ante-diluvian Earth, as the same Authors
witness in other places. As *Hist. Schol. c.* 34. *Gloss. Ord. in Gen.*
7. *Alcuin. Inter.* 118, *&c*. Not to instance in those that tell us the
properties of the Ante-diluvian World under the name and notion of
Paradise.

Thus much concerning this remarkable place in St. *Peter*, and the true
exposition of it; which I have the more largely insisted upon, because I
look upon this place as the chief repository of that great natural
mystery, which in Scripture is communicated to us, concerning the Triple
state or revolution of the World. And of those men that are so
scrupulous to admit the Theory we have propos'd, I would willingly know
whether they believe the Apostle in what he says concerning the *New
Heavens* and the *New Earth to come*, *ver*. 13. and if they do, why
they should not believe him as much concerning the *Old Heavens* and the
*Old Earth*, past; *ver*. 5, & 6. which he mentions as formally, and
describes more distinctly than the other. But if they believe neither
past nor to come, in a natural sence, but an unchangeable state of
Nature from the Creation to its annihilation, I leave them then to their
Fellow Eternalists in the Text, and to the character or censure the
Apostle gives them, Κατὰ τὰς ἰδίας αὐτῶν ἐπιθυμίας πορευόμγυοι, men that
go by their own private humour and passions, and prefer that to all
other evidence.

They deserve this censure, I am sure, if they do not only disbelieve,
but also scoff, at this Prophetick and Apostolick doctrine concerning
the Vicissitudes of Nature and a triple World; The Apostle in this
discourse does formally distinguish three Worlds (for ’tis well known
that the *Hebrews* have no word to signifie the natural World, but use
that Periphrasis, *The Heavens* and *the Earth*) and upon each of them
engraves a name and title, that bears a note of distinction in it; He
calls them the *Old Heavens and Earth*, the *Present Heavens and Earth*,
and the *New Heavens and Earth*. ’Tis true, these three are one, as to
matter and substance; but they must differ as to form and properties;
otherwise what is the ground of this distinction and of these three
different appelations? Suppose the *Jews* had expected *Ezekiel*'s
Temple for the Third, and last, and most perfect; and that in the time
of the second Temple they had spoke of them with this distinction, or
under these different names, The *Old Temple*, the *Present Temple*, and
the *New Temple* we expect: Would any have understood those three of one
and the same Temple; never demolish’d, never chang’d, never rebuilt;
always the same both as to materials and form? no, doubtless, but of
three several Temples succeeding one another. And have we not the same
reason to understand this Temple of the World, whereof St. *Peter*
speaks, to be threefold in succession? seeing he does as plainly
distinguish it into the *Old* heavens and earth, the *Present* heavens
and earth, and the *New* heavens and earth. And I do the more willingly
use this comparison of the Temple, because it hath been thought an
Emblem of the outward World.

I know we are naturally averse to entertain any thing that is
inconsistent with the general frame and texture of our own thoughts;
That's to begin the World again; and we often reject such things without
examination. Neither do I wonder

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

that the generality of Interpreters beat down the Apostle's words and
sence to their own notions; They had no other grounds to go upon, and
Men are not willing, especially in natural and comprehensible things, to
put such a meaning upon Scripture, as is unintelligible to themselves;
They rather venture to offer a little violence to the words, that they
may pitch the sence at such a convenient height, as their Principles
will reach to. And therefore though some of our modern Interpreters,
whom I mention’d before, have been sensible of the natural tendency of
this discourse of St. *Peter*'s, and have much ado to bear off the force
of the words, so as not to acknowledge that they import a real diversity
betwixt the two worlds spoken of; yet having no Principles to guide or
support them in following that Tract, they are forc’d to stop or divert
another way. ’Tis like entering into the mouth of a Cave, we are not
willing to venture further than the light goes. Nor are they much to
blame for this; the fault is onely in those Persons that continue
wilfully in their darkness, and when they cannot otherwise resist the
light, shut their eyes against it, or turn their head another way. . . .
. . but I am afraid I have staid too long upon this argument: not for my
own sake, but to satisfie others.

You may please to remember that all that I have said hitherto, belongs
onely to the first Head: To prove a *Diversity in general* betwixt the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and the present: not expressing what
their particular form was. And this general diversity may be argued also
by observations taken from *Moses* his history of the World, before and
after the Flood. From the Longevity of the Ante-diluvians: The Rain-bow
appearing after the Deluge: and the breaking open an Abyss capable to
overflow the Earth. <span class="margnote">See *Theor*. *Book* 2. *ch*.
5.</span>The Heavens that had no Rainbow, and under whose benign and
steddy influence, Men liv’d seven, eight, nine hundred years and
upwards, must have been of a different aspect and constitution from the
present Heavens. And that Earth that had such an Abyss, that the
disruption of it made an universal Deluge, must have been of another
form than the present Earth. And those that will not admit a diversity
in the two worlds, are bound to give us an intelligible account of these
Phænomena: How they could possibly be in Heavens and Earth, like the
present. Or if they were there once, why they do not continue so still,
if Nature be the same.

We need say no more, as to the Ante-diluvian Heavens: but as to the
Earth, we must now, according to the second Part of the first Head;
enquire, If that *Particular Form*, which we have assign’d it before the
Flood, be agreeable to Scripture. You know how we have describ’d the
Form and situation of that Earth: namely, that it was built over the
Abyss, as a regular Orb, covering and incompassing the waters round
about: and founded, as it were, upon them. There are many passages of
Scripture that favour this description: Some more expresly, others upon
a due explication. To this purpose there are two express Texts in the
Psalms: as *Psal*. 24. 1, 2. *The Earth is the Lords, and the fulness
thereof: The habitable World, and they that dwell therein. FOR he has
founded it upon <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) the Seas, and
establish’d it upon the Floods*. An Earth founded upon the

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Seas, and establish’d upon the Waters, is not
this the Earth we have describ’d? the first Earth, as it came from the
hands of its Maker. Where can we now find in Nature, such an Earth as
has the Seas and the Water for its foundation? Neither is this Text
without a second, as a fellow-witness to confirm the same truth: For in
the 136. *Psalm*, *ver*. 4, 5, 6, we read to the same effect, in these
words: *To him, who alone does great wonders: To him that by wisdom made
the Heavens: To him that stretched out the Earth above the Waters*. We
can hardly express that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, in words more
determinate than these are; Let us then in the same simplicity of heart,
follow the words of Scripture; seeing this literal sence is not
repugnant to Nature, but, on the contrary, agreeable to it upon the
strictest examination. And we cannot, without some violence, turn the
words to any other sence. What tolerable interpretation can these admit
of, if we do not allow the Earth once to have encompass’d and overspread
the face of the Waters? To be *founded* upon the waters, to be
*establish’d* upon the waters, to be *extended* upon the waters, what
rational or satisfactory account can be given of these phrases and
expressions from any thing we find in the present situation of the
Earth: or how can they be verified concerning it? Consult Interpreters,
ancient or modern, upon these two places: see if they answer your
expectation, or answer the natural importance of the words, unless they
acknowledge another form of the Earth, than the present. Because a Rock
hangs its nose over the Sea, must the body of the Earth be said to be
*stretched over the waters?* Or because there are waters in some
subterraneous cavities, is the Earth therefore *founded upon the Seas?*
Yet such lame explications as these you will meet with; and while we
have no better light, we must content our selves with them; but when an
explication is offer’d, that answers the propriety, force, and extent of
the words, to reject it, onely because it is not fitted to our former
opinions, or because we did not first think of it, is to take an ill
method in expounding Scripture. This *Foundation* or *Establishment* of
the Earth upon the Seas, this *Extension* of it above the waters,
relates plainly to the body, or whole circuit of the Earth, not to
parcels and particles of it; as appears from the occasion, and its being
joyn’d with the Heavens, the other part of the World. Besides, *David*
is speaking of the Origin of the World, and of the Divine power and
wisdom in the construction and situation of our Earth, and these
attributes do not appear from the holes of the Earth, and broken Rocks;
which have rather the face of a ruine, than of wisdom; but in that
wonderful libration and expansion of the first Earth over the face of
the waters, sustained by its own proportions, and the hand of his
Providence.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

These two places in the Psalms being duly consider’d, we shall more
easily understand a third place, to the same effect, in the *Proverbs*;
delivered by *WISDOM*, concerning the Origin of the World, and the form
of the first Earth, in these words, *Chap*. 8. 27. *When he prepared the
Heavens I was there, when HE SET an Orb or Sphere upon the face of the
Abyss*. We render it, when we set a *Compass* upon the face of the
Abyss; but if we have rightly interpreted the Prophet *David*, ’tis
plain enough what compass is here to be understood; not an imaginary
circle, (for why should that be thought one of the wonderful works of
God) but that exterior Orb of the Earth that was set upon the waters.
That was the Master-piece of the Divine art in framing of the first
Earth, and therefore very fit to be taken notice of by *Wisdom*. And
upon this occasion, I desire you to reflect upon St. *Peter*'s
expression, concerning the first Earth, and to compare it with
*Solomon*'s to see if they do not answer one another. St. *Peter* calls
it γῆ καθεϛῶσα δἰ ὑδάτων, *An Earth consisting, standing, or sustained
by the waters*. And *Solomon* calls it חוּג צַל פְנֵי תְהום. *An Orb
drawn upon the face of the Abyss*. And St. *Peter* says, that was done
τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ Θεοῦ· by the *wisdom of God*: which is the same Λόγος or
*wisdom*, that here declares her self, to have been present at this
work. Add now to these two places, the two foremention’d out of the
Psalmist; *An Earth founded upon the Seas*, (*Psal*. 24. 2.) and an
*Earth stretched out above the waters:* (*Psal*. 136. 6.) Can any body
doubt or question, but all these four Texts refer to the same thing? And
seeing St. *Peter*'s description refers certainly to the Ante-diluvian
Earth, they must all refer to it; and do all as certainly and evidently
agree with our Theory concerning the form and situation of it.

The pendulous form and posture of that first Earth being prov’d from
these four places, ’tis more easie and emphatical to interpret in this
sence that passage in *Job* *ch*. 26. 7. *He stretcheth out the North
over the Tohu*, (for so it is in the original) *and hangeth the Earth
upon nothing*. And this strange foundation or no foundation of the
exteriour Earth seems to be the ground of those noble questions propos’d
to Job by God Almighty, ch. 38. *Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou hast understanding. Whereupon
are the foundations thereof fastned, and who laid the corner stone?*
There was neither foundation, nor corner stone, in that piece of
Architecture; and that was it which made the art and wonder of it. But I
have spoken more largely to these places in the Theory it self.<span
class="margnote">*Book* 1. *p*. 88.</span> And if the four Texts
before-mentioned be consider’d without prejudice, I think there are few
matters of natural Speculation that can be so well prov’d out of
Scripture, as the Form which we have given to the Antediluvian Earth.

But yet it may be thought a just, if not a necessary appendix to this
discourse, concerning the form of the ante-diluvian Earth, to give an
account also of the *ante-diluvian Abyss*, and the situation of it
according to Scripture; for the relation which these two have to one
another, will be a further means to discover if we have rightly
determin’d the form of that Earth. The *Abyss* or *Tehom-Rabbah* is a
Scripture notion, and the word is not us’d, that I know of, in that
distinct and peculiar sence in Heathen Authors. ’Tis plain that in
Scripture it is

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

not always taken for the Sea (as *Gen*. 1. 2. & 7. 11. & 49. 25. *Deut*.
33. 13. *Job* 28. 14. & 38. 16. *Ps*. 33. 7. & 71. 20. & 78. 15. & 135.
6. *Apoc*. 20. 1. 3.) but for some other mass of waters, or
subterraneous storehouse. And this being observ’d, we may easily
discover the nature, and set down the history of the Scripture-Abyss.

The Mother-Abyss is no doubt that in the beginning of *Genesis*, *ver*.
2. which had nothing but darkness upon the face of it, or a thick
caliginous air. The next news we hear of this Abyss is at the Deluge,
(*Gen*. 7. 11.) where ’tis said to be broke open, and the waters of it
to have drowned the World. It seems then this Abyss was clos’d up some
time betwixt the Creation and the Deluge, and had got another cover than
that of darkness. And if we will believe *Wisdom*, (*Prov*. 8. 27.) who
was there present at the formation of the Earth, an *Orb was set upon
the face of the Abyss at the beginning of the World*.

That these three places refer to the same Abyss, I think, cannot be
questioned by any that will compare them and consider them. That of the
Deluge, *Moses* calls there *Tehom-Rabbah*, the *Great Abyss*; and can
there be any greater than the forementioned Mother-Abyss? And *WISDOME*,
in that place in the *Proverbs*, useth the same phrase and words with
*Moses*, *Gen*. 1. 2. ;צַל פְּנֵיּ תְחומ֥ *upon the face of the Deep* or
of the *Abyss*; changing *darkness* for that *Orb* of the exteriour
Earth which was made afterwards to inclose it. And in this vault it lay,
and under this cover, when the Psalmist speaks of it in these words
(*Ps*. 33. 7.) *He gathereth the waters of the Sea, as in a* <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) *bag; he layeth up the Abyss in
storehouses*. Lastly, we may observe that ’twas this Mother-Abyss whose
womb was burst at the Deluge, when the Sea was born, and broke forth as
if it had issued out of a womb; as God expresseth it to *Job*, *ch*. 38.
8. in which place the *Chaldee* Paraphrase reads it, when it broke
forth, *coming out of the Abyss*. Which disruption at the Deluge seems
also to be alluded to *Job* 12. 14, 15, and more plainly, *Prov*. 3. 20.
*by his knowledge the Abysses are broken up*.

Thus you have already a threefold state of the Abyss, which makes a
short History of it; first, *Open*, at the beginning; then *covered*,
till the Deluge. Then *broke open* again, as it is at present. And we
pursue the History of it no further; but we are told, *Apoc*. 20. 3.
That it shall be shut up again, and the great Dragon in it, for a
Thousand years. In the mean time we may observe from this form and
posture of the Ante-diluvian Abyss, how suitable it is and coherent with
that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth which St. *Peter* and the
*Psalmist* had describ’d, *sustain’d by the waters; founded upon the
waters; strecht above the waters*; for if it was the cover of this Abyss
(and it had some cover that was broke at the Deluge) it was spread as a
Crust or Ice upon the face of those waters, and so made an *orbis
Terrarum*, an habitable sphere of Earth about the Abyss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[389:1](ste59.htm#fr_27.md) There was a Sect
amongst the *Jews* that held this perpetuity and immutability of Nature;
and *Maimonides* himself was of this principle, and gives the same
reason for it with the Scoffers here in the Text, *Quod mundus retinet &
sequitur consuetudinem suam*. And as to those of the Jews that were
*Aristoteleans*, it was very suitable to their principles to hold the
incorruptibility of the World, as their Master did. *Vid*. *Med*. *in
loc*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[392:1](ste59.htm#fr_28.md) δὲ

<span id="fn_29"></span>[392:2](ste59.htm#fr_29.md) δἰ ὧν, *per que*.
Vulgat. *Quamobrem*, Beza. *Quâ de causâ*, Grot. *Nemo interpretum
reddidit* δἰ ὧν per quas; *subintelligendo* aquas. *Hoc enim
argumentationem Apostolicana tolleret, supponeretque illusores illos
ignorâsse quod olim fuerit Diluvium; Quod supponi non posse supra
ostendimus*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[393:1](ste59.htm#fr_30.md) This phrase or manner
of speech συνιζάναὶ ἐκvel ὄξ is not unusual in *Greek* Authors, and upon
a like subject; *Plato* saith, τόν δε κόσμον συνιϛάναι ἐκ πυρὲς, ὔδατος,
ἄερος, γῖς, but he that should translate Plato, *The world stands out of
fire, water*, *&c*. would be thought neither *Græcian*, nor Philosopher.
The same phrase is us’d in reciting *Heraclitus* his opinion, τὰ πάντα
ἐκ πυρὸς συνεϛὰναι, καὶ οίς τοῦτο ἀναλὶεως. And also in *Thales* his,
which is still nearer to the subject, ἐκ τοῦ ὔδατός, φηοι, συνιζάναι
πάντα, which Cicero renders, *ex aquâ, dixit, constare omnia*. So that
it is easie to know the true importance of this phrase, and how ill it
is render’d in the English, *standing out of the water*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[393:2](ste59.htm#fr_31.md) Whether you refer the
words ὄξ ὔδατ. καὶ δἰ ὔδατ. separately, to the Heavens and the Earth, or
both to the Earth, or both to both, it will make no great difference as
to our interpretation.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[398:1](ste59.htm#fr_32.md) I know some would make
this place of no effect by rendering the *Hebrew* particle על *juxta*,
by or near to; so they would read it thus, He hath founded the Earth by
the Sea-side, and establish’d it by the Floods. What is there wonderful
in this, that the shores should lie by the Sea-side; Where could they
lie else? What reason or argument is this, why the Earth should be the
Lord's? <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> The Earth is the Lord's *for*
he hath founded it near the Seas, Where is the consequence of this? But
if he founded it upon the Seas, which could not be done by any other
hand but his, it shows both the Workman and the Master. And accordingly
in that other place, *Psal*. 136. 6, if you render it, he *stretched*
out the Earth *near* the Waters, How is that one of God's great wonders?
as it is there represented to be. Because in some few places this
particle is render’d otherwise, where the sense will bear it, must we
therefore render it so when we please, and where the sence will not bear
it? This being the most usual signification of it, and there being no
other word that signifies *above* more frequently or determinately than
this does, Why must it signifie otherwise in this place? Men will
wriggle any way to get from under the force of a Text, that does not
suit to their own Notions.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[401:1](ste59.htm#fr_33.md) *This reading or
translating is generally followed*, (Theor. book 1, p. 86.) *though the
English translation read* on a heap, *unsuitably to the matter and to
the sence*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](ste60.md)
