[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste55)  [Next](ste57.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

*Objections against the Millennium, answer’d. With some Conjectures
concerning the state of things after the Millennium: and what will be
the final Consummation of this World*.

You see how Nature and Providence have conspir’d, to make the Millennium
as happy a state, as any Terrestrial state can be. For, besides health
and Plenty: Peace, Truth, and Righteousness will flourish there, and all
the evils of this life stand excluded. There will be no ambitious
Princes, studying mischief one against another; or contriving methods to
bring their own Subjects into slavery. No mercenary Statesmen, to assist
and intrigue with them. No oppression from the powerful, no snares or
traps laid for the innocent. No treacherous friends, no malicious
Enemies. No knaves, cheats, hypocrites; the Vermin of this Earth, that
swarm every where. There will be nothing but truth, candor, sincerity,
and ingenuity: as in a Society or Commonwealth of Saints and
Philosophers. In a word, ’twill be *Paradise Restor'd*: both as to
innocency of temper, and the beauties of Nature.

I believe you will be apt to say, If this be not true, ’tis pity but
that it should be true. For ’tis a very desirable state, where all good
People would find themselves mightily at ease. What is it that hinders
it then? It must be some ill *Genius*. For Nature tends to such a
Renovation, as we suppose: and Scripture speaks loudly of an happy state
to be, some time or other, on this side Heaven. And what is there, pray,
in this present World, natural or moral, if I may ask with reverence,
that could make it worth the while for God to create it, if it never was
better, nor ever will be better? Is there not more misery than
happiness: Is there not more vice than virtue, in this World? as if it
had been made by a

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Manichean* God. The Earth barren, the Heavens
inconstant: Men wicked, and God offended. This is the posture of our
affairs: such hath our World been hitherto with wars and bloudshed,
sickness and diseases, poverty, servitude and perpetual drudgery for the
necessaries of a mortal life. We may therefore reasonably hope, from a
God infinitely good and powerful, for better times and a better state,
before the last period and consummation of all things.

But it will be objected, it may be, that, according to Scripture, the
vices and wickedness of men will continue to the end of the World; and
so there will be no room for such an happy state, as we hope for. Our
Saviour says,<span class="margnote">*Luke* 18. 8.</span> *When the son
of man cometh, shall he find faith upon the Earth?* They shall *eat and
drink and play*, as before the destruction of the *old World*, or of
*Sodom*, (*Luk*. 17. 26, *&c*.) and the wickedness of those men, you
know, continued to the last. This objection may pinch those that suppose
the Millennium to be in the present Earth, and a thousand years before
the coming of our Saviour: for his words seem to imply that the World
will be in a state of wickedness even till his coming. Accordingly
Antichrist or the *Man of Sin*, is not said to be destroy’d till the
coming of our Saviour. 2 *Thess*. 2. 8. and till he be destroy’d, we
cannot hope for a Millennium. Lastly, the Coming of our Saviour is
always represented in Scripture as sudden, surprising and unexpected. As
*Lightning* breaking suddenly out of the clouds, (*Luk*. 17. 24. and
*ch*. 21. 34, 35.) or as a *thief in the night*, 1 *Thess*. 5. 2, 3, 4.
2 *Pet*. 3. 10. *Apoc*. 16. 15. But if there be such a forerunner of it
as the Millennial state, whose bounds we know, according as that expires
and draws to an end, men will be certainly advertis’d of the approaching
of our Saviour. But this objection, as I told you, does not affect our
hypothesis, for we suppose the Millennium will not be till after the
coming of our Saviour, and the Conflagration. And also that his coming
will be sudden and surprising: and that Antichrist will continue in
being, tho’ not in the same degree of power, till that time. So that
they that place the Millennium in the present Earth, are chiefly
concern’d to answer this first objection.

But you will object, it may be, in the second place, That this
Millennium, wheresoever it is, would degenerate, at length, into
sensuality, and a Mahometan Paradise. For where there are early
pleasures and earthly appetites, they will not be kept always in order,
without any excess or luxuriancy: especially as to the senses of touch
and taste. I am apt to think this is true, if the Soul have no more
power over the body than she hath at present: and our senses, passions,
and appetites be as strong as they are now. But according to our
explication of the Millennium, we have great reason to hope, that the
Soul will have a greater dominion over the Resurrection-body, than she
hath over this. And you know we suppose that none will truly inherit the
Millennium, but those that rise from the Dead. Nor do we admit any
propagation there, nor the trouble or weakness of Infants. But that all
rise in a perfect age, and never die: being translated, at the final
judgment, to meet our Saviour in the clouds, and to be with him for
ever. Thus we easily avoid the force of this objection. But those that
place the Millennium in this life, and to be enjoy’d in these Bodies,
must find out some new preservatives against vice: otherwise they will
be continually subject to degeneracy.

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

Another objection may be taken from the personal Reign of Christ upon
Earth: which is a thing incongruous, and yet asserted by many modern
Millenaries. That Christ should leave that right hand of his Father, to
come and pass a thousand years here below: living upon Earth in an
heavenly Body: This, I confess, is a thing I never could digest, and
therefore I am not concern’d in this objection; not thinking it
necessary that Christ should be personally present and resident upon
Earth in the Millennium. I am apt to believe that there will be then a
celestial presence of Christ, if I may so call it; as the Sun is present
to the Earth, yet never leaves its place in the Firmament; so Christ may
be visibly conspicuous in his heavenly Throne, as he was to St.
*Steven*:<span class="margnote">Act. 7. 55, 56.</span> and yet never
leave the right hand of his Father. And this would be a more glorious
and illustrious presence, than if he should descend, and converse
amongst men in a personal shape. But these things not being distinctly
reveal’d to us, we ought not to determine any thing concerning them, but
with modesty and submission.

We have thus far pretty well escap’d, and kept ourselves out of the
reach of the ordinary objections against the Millennium. But there
remains one, concerning a *double Resurrection*, which must fall upon
every Hypothesis: and ’tis this. The Scripture, they say, speaks but of
one Resurrection: whereas the doctrine of the Millennium supposes two;
one at the beginning of the Millennium, for the Martyrs, and those that
enjoy that happy state, and the other at the end of it; which is
universal and final, in the last day of judgment. ’Tis true, Scripture
generally speaks of the Resurrection in gross: without distinguishing
first and second; and so it speaks of the *Coming* of our Saviour,
without distinction of first or second; yet it does not follow from
that, that there is but one coming of our Saviour: so neither that there
is but one Resurrection. And seeing there is one place of Scripture that
speaks expresly and distinctly of two Resurrections, namely the 20*th*
*chap*. of the *Apocalypse*: that is to us a sufficient warrant for
asserting two. As there are some things in one Evangelist that are not
in another, yet we think them authentick if they be but in one. There
are also some things in *Daniel*, concerning the *Messiah*, and
concerning the *Resurrection*, that are not in the rest of the Prophets:
yet we look upon his single testimony, as good authority. St. *John*
writ the last of all the Apostles: and as the whole series of his
Prophecies is new, reaching through the later times to the Consummation
of all things; so we cannot wonder if he had something more particular
reveal’d to him concerning the Resurrection; that which was spoken of
before in general, being distinguish’d now into *First* and *Second*, or
particular and universal, in this last Prophet. Some think St. *Paul*
means no less, when he makes an *order* in the Resurrection:<span
class="margnote">*See Mr*. Mede.</span> some rising sooner, some later:
1 *Cor*. 15. 23, 24. 1 *Thess*. 4. 14, 15, *&c*. but whether that be so
or no, St. *John* might have a more distinct revelation concerning it,
than St. *Paul* had, or any one before him.

After these Objections, a great many Quæries and difficulties might be
propos’d relating to the Millennium. But that's no more than what is
found in all other matters, remote from our knowledge. Who can answer
all the Quæries that may be made concerning *Heaven*, or *Hell*, or
*Paradise*? When we know a thing as to the substance, we are not to let
go our hold, tho’ there remain some

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

difficulties unresolv’d; otherwise we should be eternally Sceptical in
most matters of knowledge. Therefore, tho’ we cannot, for example, give
a full account of the distinction of habitations and inhabitants in the
*Future Earth*: or, of the order of the *first Resurrection*; whether it
be performed by degrees and successively, or all the Inhabitants of the
New Jerusalem rise at once, and continue throughout the whole
Millennium. I say, tho’ we cannot give a distinct account of these, or
such like particulars, we ought not therefore to deny or doubt whether
there will be a *New Earth*, or a *First Resurrection*. For the
Revelation goes clearly so far: and the obscurity is only in the
consequences and dependances of it. Which Providence thought fit,
without further light, to leave to our search and disquisition.

Scripture mentions one thing, at the end of the Millennium, which is a
common difficulty to all; and every one must contribute their best
thoughts and conjectures towards the solution of it. ’Tis the strange
doctrine of *Gog* and *Magog*;<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 20. 8,
9.</span> which are to rise up in rebellion against the Saints, and
besiege the holy City, and the holy Camp. And this is to be upon the
expiration of the thousand years, when Satan is loosen’d. For no sooner
will his Chains be knock’d off, but he will put himself in the head of
this Army of Gyants, or Sons of the Earth, and attack Heaven, and the
Saints of the most High. But with ill success, for there will come down
fire and lightning from Heaven, and consume them. This, methinks, hath a
great affinity with the history of the Gyants, rebelling and assaulting
Heaven, and struck down by thunder-bolts. But that of setting mountains
upon mountains, or tossing them into the Skie, that's the Poetical part,
and we must not expect to find it in the Prophecy. The Poets told their
fable, as of a thing past, and so it was a fable; But the Prophets speak
of it, as of a thing to come, and so it will be a reality. But how and
in what sence it is to be understood and explain’d, every one has the
liberty to make the best judgment he can.

*Ezekiel* mentions *Gog* and *Magog*:<span class="margnote">*ch*. 38, &
39.</span> which I take to be onely types and shadows of these which we
are now speaking of: and not yet exemplified, no more than his Temple.
And seeing this People is to be at the end of the *Millennium*, and in
the same Earth with it, We must, according to our Hypothesis, plant them
in the Future Earth; and therefore all former conjectures about the
*Turks*, or *Scythians*, or other *Barbarians*, are out of doors with
us, seeing the Scene of this action does not lie in the present Earth.
They are also represented by the Prophet, as a People distinct and
separate from the Saints, not in their manners onely, but also in their
seats and habitations;<span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 20. 8, 9.</span>
For they are said to come up from the four corners of the Earth, upon
the breadth of the Earth: and there to besiege the *Camp of the Saints
and the beloved City:* This makes it seem probable to me, that there
will be a double race of Mankind in that *Future Earth:* very different
one from another, both as to their temper and disposition, and as to
their origine. The one born from Heaven, Sons of God, and of the
Resurrection: who are the true Saints and heirs of the *Millennium*. The
others born of the Earth, Sons of the Earth, generated from the slime of
the ground, and the heat of the Sun, as brute Creatures were at first.
This second Progeny or Generation of Men in the Future Earth, I
understand to be signified by the Prophet under these borrowed or
feigned names of *Gog* and *Magog*. And this Earth-born race, encreasing
and

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

multiplying after the manner of Men, by carnal propagation, after a
thousand years, grew numerous, as the Sand by the Sea; and thereupon
made an irruption or inundation upon the face of the Earth, and upon the
habitations of the Saints; As the barbarous Nations did formerly upon
Christendom: Or as the Gyants are said to have made War against the
Gods. But they were soon confounded in their impious and sacrilegious
design, being struck and consum’d by fire from Heaven.

Some will think, it may be, that there was such a double race of Mankind
in the first World also. *The Sons of Adam, and the Sons of God:*
because it is said, Gen. 6. *When men began to multiply upon the face of
the Earth, that the SONS OF GOD SAW THE DAUGHTERS OF MEN, that they were
fair, and they took them Wives of all that they lik’d*. And it is added
presently, *ver*. 4. *There were Gyants in the Earth in those days; and
also after that, when the Sons of God came in unto the daughters of men,
and they bare children to them: the same became mighty men, which were
of old men of renown*. Here seem to be two or three orders or races in
this Ante-diluvian World. *The Sons of God:* *The Sons and Daughters of
Adam:* and a third sort arising from the mixture and copulation of
these, which are call’d *Mighty men of old*, or Hero's. Besides, here
are Gyants mention’d, and to which they are to be reduc’d, it does not
certainly appear.

This mixture of these two Races, whatsoever they were, gave, it seems,
so great offence to God, that he destroy’d that World upon it, in a
Deluge of Water. It hath been matter of great difficulty to determine,
who these *Sons of God* were, that fell in love with and married the
daughters of men. There are two conjectures that prevail most: One, that
they were Angels: and another, that they were of the Posterity of
*Seth*, and distinguish’d from the rest, by their Piety, and the worship
of the true God: so that it was a great crime for them to mingle with
the rest of mankind, who are suppos’d to have been Idolaters. Neither of
these opinions is to me satisfactory. For as to Angels; Good Angels
neither *marry, nor are given in marriage*; *Matt*. 22. 30. and bad
Angels are not call’d the *Sons of God*. Besides, if Angels were capable
of those mean pleasures, we ought in reason to suppose, that there are
female Angels, as well as male; for surely those capacities are not in
vain through a whole *Species* of Beings. And if there be female Angels,
we cannot imagine, but that they must be of a far more charming beauty
than the dowdy daughters of men. Then as to the line of *Seth*, It does
not appear that there was any such distinction of Idolaters and true
Worshippers before the Flood, or that there was any such thing, as
Idolatry, at that time: nor for some Ages after. Besides, it is not said
that the Sons of God fell in love with the Daughters of *Cain*, or of
any degenerate race, but with the Daughters of *Adam:* which may be the
Daughters of *Seth*, as well as of any other. These conjectures
therefore seem to be shallow and ill grounded. But what the distinction
was of those two orders, remains yet very uncertain.

St. *Paul* to the *Galatians*, (chap. 4. 21, 22, *&c*.) makes a
distinction also of a double Progeny: that of *Sarah*, and that of
*Hagar*. One was born according to the flesh, after a natural manner:
and the other by the divine power, or in vertue of the divine promise.
This distinction of a natural and supernatural origine, and of a double
progeny: the one born to servitude, the other to liberty: represents

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

very well either the manner of our present birth, and of our future, at
the Resurrection: Or that double progeny and double manner of birth,
which we suppose in the *Future Earth*. ’Tis true, St. Paul applies this
to the Law and the Gospel; but Typical things, you know, have different
aspects and completions: which are not exclusive of one another: and so
it may be here. But however this double race of Mankind in the Future
Earth, to explain the doctrine of Gog and Magog, is but a conjecture:
and does not pretend to be otherwise consider’d.

The last thing that remains to be consider’d and accounted for, is the
upshot and conclusion of all: namely, what will become of the Earth
after the thousand years expir’d? Or after the Day of Judgment past, and
the Saints translated into Heaven, what will be the face of things here
below? There being nothing expresly reveal’d concerning this, we must
not expect a positive resolution of it. And the difficulty is not
peculiar to our hypothesis: for though the *Millennium*, and the final
Judgment were concluded in the present Earth, the Quære would still
remain, *What* would become of this Earth after the Last Day. So that
all parties are equally concern’d, and equally free, to give their
opinion, *What* will be the *last state and Consummation* of this Earth.
Scripture, I told you, hath not defin’d this point: and the Philosophers
say very little concerning it. The Stoicks indeed speak of the final
resolution of all things into *Fire*, or into *Æther*: which is the
purest and subtlest sort of fire. So that the whole Globe or Mass of the
Earth, and all particular bodies, will, according to them, be at last
dissolv’d into a liquid flame. Neither was this doctrine first invented
by the Stoicks: *Heraclitus* taught it long before them: and I take it
to be as ancient as *Orpheus* himself: who was the first Philosopher
amongst the *Greeks*. And he deriving his notions from the *Barbarick*
Philosophers, or the Sages of the East, that School of wisdom may be
look’d upon as the true seminary of this doctrine: as it was of most
other natural knowledge.

But this dissolution of the Earth into Fire, may be understood two ways;
either that it will be dissolv’d into a loose flame, and so dissipated
and lost as Lightning in the Air, and vanish into nothing; or that it
will be dissolv’d into a fixt flame, such as the Sun is, or a fixt Star.
And I am of opinion, that the Earth after the last Day of Judgment, will
be chang’d into the nature of a Sun, or of a fixt Star: and shine like
them in the Firmament. Being all melted down into a mass of 'Ethereal
matter, and enlightning a Sphere or Orb round about it. I have no direct
and demonstrative proof of this, I confess; But if Planets were once
fixt Stars, as I believe they were; their revolution to the same state
again, in a great circle of Time, seems to be according to the methods
of Providence; which loves to recover what was lost or decay’d, after
certain periods: and what <span class="margnote">*Rom*. 8. 21.</span>
was originally good and happy, to make it so again; All Nature, at last,
being transform’d into a like glory with the Sons of God.

I will not tell you what foundation there is in Nature, for this change
or trans-formation; from the interiour constitution of the Earth, and
the instances we have seen of new Stars appearing in the Heavens. I
should lead the English Reader too far out of his way, to discourse of
these things. But if there be any passages or expressions in Scripture,
that countenance such a state of things after

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

the day of judgment, it will not be improper to take notice of them.
That radiant and illustrious *Jerusalem*, describ’d by St. *John*
*Apoc*. 21. *ver*. 10, 12, *&c*. compos’d all of Gemms and bright
materials, clear and sparkling, as a Star in the Firmament: Who can give
an account what that is? Its foundations, walls, gates, streets, all the
Body of it, resplendent as light or fire. What is there in Nature, or in
this Universe, that bears any resemblance with such a Phænomenon as
this, unless it be a Sun or a fixt Star? Especially if we add and
consider what follows, *That the City had no need of the Sun, nor of the
Moon, to shine in it*. And that *there was no night there*. <span
class="margnote">ver. 23.  
ver. 25.</span> This can be no Terrestrial Body; it must be a substance
luminous in it self, and a fountain of light, as a fixt Star. And upon
such a change of the Earth, or transformation, as this, would *be
brought to pass the saying that is written, DEATH IS SWALLOWED UP IN
VICTORY*. Which indeed St. *Paul* seems to apply to our Bodies in
particular, 1 *Cor*. 15. 54. But in the Eighth Chap. to the *Romans* He
extends it to all Nature. <span class="margnote">*ver*. 21.</span>*The
Creation it self also shall be deliver’d from the bondage of Corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God*. And accordingly St.
*John* speaking of the same time with St. *Paul* in that place to the
*Corinthians*, namely of the general Resurrection and day of Judgment,
says, *Death* and *Hades*, which we render Hell, *were cast into the
lake of fire*. <span class="margnote">*Apoc*. 20. 14.</span>This is
their being *swallowed up in victory*, which St. *Paul* speaks of; when
Death and Hades, that is, all the Region of mortality: The Earth and all
its dependances: are absorpt into a mass of Fire; and converted, by a
glorious Victory over the power of darkness, into a Luminous Body and a
region of Light.

This great Issue and Period of the Earth, and of all humane affairs,
tho’ it seem to be founded in nature, and supported by several
expressions of Scripture; yet we cannot, for want of full instruction,
propose it otherwise than as a fair Conjecture. The Heavens and the
Earth shall flie away at the day of Judgment, says the Text: *Apoc*. 20.
11. *And their place shall not be found*. This must be understood of our
Heavens and our Earth. And their flying away must be their removing to
some other part of the Universe; so as their place or residence shall
not be found any more here below. This is the easie and natural sence of
the Words; and this translation of the Earth will not be without some
change preceding, that makes it leave its place, and, with a lofty
flight, take its seat amongst the Stars. . . . . . There we leave it;
Having conducted it for the space of Seven Thousand Years, through
various changes from a *dark Chao*s to a *bright Star*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](ste57.md)
