[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste59)  [Next](ste61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

SO much for the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth and Abyss; which as they
aptly correspond to one another, so you see, our Theory answers and is
adjusted to both; and, I think, so fitly, that we have no reason
hitherto to be

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

displeas’d with the success we have had in the examination of it,
according to Scripture. We have dispatch’d the two main points in
question, first, to prove a diversity in general betwixt the two natural
Worlds, or betwixt the Heavens and the Earth before and after the Flood.
Secondly, to prove wherein this diversity consisted; or that the
particular form of the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth was such
according to Scripture, as we have describ’d it in the Theory. You’l
say, then the work is done, what needs more, all the rest follows of
course; for if the Ante-diluvian Earth had such a form as we have
propos’d and prov’d it to have had, there could be no Deluge in it but
by a dissolution of its parts and exteriour frame: And a Deluge so made,
would not be in the nature of a standing Pool, but of a violent
agitation and commotion of the waters. This is true; These parts of the
Theory are so cemented, that you must grant all, if you grant any.
However we will try if even these two particulars also may be prov’d out
of Scripture; That is, if there be any marks or memorandums left there
by the Spirit of God, of such a fraction or dissolution of the Earth at
the Deluge. And also such characters of the Deluge it self, as show it
to have been by a fluctuation and impetuous commotion of the waters.

To proceed then; That there was a Fraction or Dissolution of the Earth
at the Deluge, the history of it by *Moses* gives us the first account,
seeing he tells us, as the principal cause of the Flood, that the
Fountains of the *Great Abyss* were *cloven* or *burst asunder*; and
upon this disruption the waters gush’d out from the bowels of the Earth,
as from the widen’d mouths of so many Fountains. I do not take
*Fountains* there to signifie any more than Sources or Stores of Water;
noting also this manner of their eruption from below, or out of the
ground, as Fountains do. Accordingly in the *Proverbs*, (*chap*. 3.
20.) <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) ’tis onely said, the *Abysses
were broken open*. I do not doubt but this refers to the Deluge, as
*Bede*, and others understand it; the very word being us’d here, both in
the *Hebrew* and Septuagint, the express’d the disruption of the Abyss
at the Deluge.

And this breaking up of the Earth at that time, is elegantly exprest in
*Job*, by the bursting of the Womb of Nature, when the Sea was first
brought to light; when after many pangs and throes and dilacerations of
her body, Nature was deliver’d of a burthen which she had born in her
Womb Sixteen Hundred Years.

These three places I take to be memorials and proofs of the disruption
of the Earth, or of the Abyss, at the universal Deluge. And to these we
may add more out of the Prophets, *Job*, and the *Psalms*, by way of
allusion (commonly) to the state of Nature at that time. The Prophet
*Isaiah* in describing the future destruction of the World, chap. 24.
18, 19. seems plainly to allude and have respect to the past destruction
of it at the Deluge; as appears by that leading expression, *the windows
from on high are open*, ;אֲ;רֻבות סִמָּרוֹס נִפְתָה, θυρίδες ὀκ τοῦ
οὐρανοῦ ἠνεώχθησαν taken manifestly from *Gen*. 7. 11. Then see how the
description goes on, *the windows from on high are open, and the
foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken down, the
Earth is quite dissolv’d, the Earth is exceedingly moved*. Here are
Concussions, and Fractions, and Dissolutions, as there were in the
Mundane Earthquake and Deluge; which we had exprest before only by
*breaking open the Abyss*. By the Foundations of the Earth here

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

and elsewhere, I perceive many understand the Centre; so by *moving* or
*shaking* the foundations, or putting them out of course, must be
understood a displacing of the Centre; which was really done at the
Deluge, as we have shewn in its proper place. <span
class="margnote">*Theor*. *book* 2. *p*. 194, 195.</span> If we
therefore remember that there was both a dislocation, as I may so say;
and a fraction in the body of the Earth, by that great fall; a
dislocation as to the centre, and a fraction as to the surface and
exterior region, it will truly answer to all those expressions in the
Prophet, that seem so strange and extraordinary. ’Tis true, this place
of the Prophet respects also and foretells the future destruction of the
World; but that being by Fire, when the *Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, and the Earth with the works therein shall be burnt up,
these expressions of fractions and concussions*, seem to be taken
originally from the manner of the World's first destruction, and to be
transferr’d, by way of application, to represent and signifie the second
destruction of it, though, it may be, not with the same exactness and
propriety.

There are several other places that refer to the dissolution and
subversion of the Earth at the Deluge: *Amos* 9. 5, 6. *The Lord of
Hosts is he that toucheth the Earth, and it shall melt, or be dissolv'd.
. . . . and it shall rise up wholly like a Flood, and shall be drowned
as by the Flood of Ægypt*. By this and by *the next Verse* the Prophet
seems to allude to the Deluge, and to the dissolution of the Earth that
was then. This in *Job* seems to be call’d *breaking down the Earth, and
overturning the Earth*, Chap. 12. 14, 15. *Behold he breaketh down and
it cannot be built again, He shutteth upon man, and there can be no
opening. Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up; also he
sendeth them out, and they overturn the Earth:* Which place you may see
paraphras’d, *Theor*. *Book* 1. *pp*. 91, 92. We have already cited, and
shall hereafter cite, other places out of *Job*; And as that Ancient
Author (who is thought to have liv’d before the Judaical Oeconomy, and
nearer to *Noah* than *Moses*) seems to have had the *Præcepta
Noachidarum*, so also he seems to have had the *Dogmata Noachidarum*;
which were deliver’d by *Noah* to his Children and Posterity, concerning
the mysteries of natural Providence, the origine and fate of the World,
the Deluge and Ante-diluvian state, *&c*. and accordingly we find many
strictures of these doctrines in the Book of *Job*. Lastly, in the
Psalms there are Texts that mention the *shaking of the Earth*, and the
*foundations* of the World, in reference to the Flood, if we judge
aright; whereof we will speak under the next Head, *concerning* the
raging of the Waters in the Deluge.

These places of Scripture may be noted, as left us to be remembrancers
of that general ruine and disruption of the Earth at the time of the
Deluge. But I know it will be said of them, that they are not strict
proofs, but allusions onely. Be it so; yet what is the ground of those
allusions? something must be alluded to, and something that hath past in
nature, and that is recorded in Sacred History; And what is that, unless
it be the universal Deluge, and that change and disturbance that was
then in all nature. If others say, that these and such like places are
to be understood morally and allegorically, I do not envy them their
interpretation; but when nature and reason will bear a literal sence,
the rule is, that we should not recede from the letter. But I leave
these things to every one's thoughts; which the more calm they are, and
the more impartial, the more easily they will

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

feel the impressions of truth. In the mean time, I proceed to the last
particular mention’d, *The form of the Deluge it self*.

This we suppose to have been not in the way of a standing Pool, the
Waters making an equal Surface, and an equal heighth every where; but
that the extreme heighth of the Waters was made by the extreme agitation
of them; caus’d by the weight and force of great Masses or Regions of
Earth falling at once into the Abyss; by which means, as the waters in
some places were prest out, and thrown at an excessive height into the
air, so they would also in certain places gape, and lay bare even the
bottom of the Abyss; which would look as an open Grave ready to swallow
up the Earth, and all it bore. Whilst the Ark, in the mean time, falling
and rising by these gulphs and precipices, sometimes above water, and
sometimes under, was a true Type of the state of the Church in this
World; And to this time and state David alludes in the name of the
Church, *Psal*. 42. 7. *Abyss calls unto Abyss at the noise of thy
Cataracts or Water-spouts; All thy waves and billows have gone over me*.
And again, *Psal*. 46. 2, 3. in the name of the Church. *Therefore will
not we fear, tho’ the Earth be removed, and tho’ the mountains be
carried into the midst of the Seas. The waters thereof roar and are
troubled, the mountains shake with the swelling thereof*.

But there is no description more remarkable or more eloquent, than of
that Scene of things represented, *Psal*. 18. 7, 8, 9, *&c*. which still
alludes, in my opinion, to the Deluge-scene, and in the name of the
Church. We will set down the words at large.

Ver. 6. *In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God;
He heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him into his
ears*.

7\. *Then the Earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the
hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth*.

8\. *There went up a smoke from his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured; Coals were kindled by it*.

9\. *He bowed the Heavens also and came down, and darkness was under his
feet*.

10\. *And he rode upon a Cherub and did flie, he did flie upon the wings
of the wind*.

11\. *He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him
was dark waters and thick clouds of the skie*.

12\. *At the brightness before him the thick clouds passed, hail and
coals of fire*.

13\. *The Lord also thunder’d in the Heavens, and the Highest gave his
voice, hail and coals of fire*.

14\. *Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scatter’d them: and he shot out
lightnings and discomfited them*.

15\. *Then the Chanels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the
World were discovered; at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath
of thy nostrils. He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of great
waters*. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)

This I think is a rough <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md) draught of
the face of the Heavens and the Earth at the Deluge, as the last Verses
do intimate; and ’tis apply’d to express the dangers and deliverances of
the Church: The Expressions are far too high to be apply'd

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

to *David* in his Person, and to his deliverance from *Saul*; no such
agonies or disorders of nature as are here instanc’d in, were made in
*David*'s time, or upon his account; but ’tis a scheme of the Church,
and of her fate, particularly, as represented by the Ark, in that dismal
distress, when all nature was in confusion. And though there may be some
things here intermixt to make up the Scene, that are not so close to the
subject as the rest, or that may be referr’d to the future destruction
of the world: yet that is not unusual, nor amiss, in such descriptions,
if the great strokes be fit and rightly plac’d. That there was smoke,
and fire, and water, and thunder, and darkness, and winds, and
Earthquakes at the Deluge, we cannot doubt, if we consider the
circumstances of it; Waters dash’d and broken make a smoke and darkness,
and no Hurricano could be so violent as the motions of the Air at that
time; Then the Earth was torn in pieces, and its Foundations shaken; And
as to thunder and lightning, the encounters and collisions of the mighty
Waves, and the cracks of a falling World, would make flashes and noises,
far greater and more terrible, than any that can come from vapors and
clouds. There was an universal Tempest, a conflict and clashing of all
the Elements; and *David* seems to have represented it so; with God
allmighty in the midst of it, ruling them all.

But I am apt to think some will say, all this is Poetical in the
Prophet, and these are hyperbolical and figurate expressions, from which
we cannot make any inference, as to the Deluge and the natural World.
’Tis true, those that have no Idea of the Deluge, that will answer to
such a Scene of things, as is here represented, must give such a slight
account of this Psalm. But on the other hand, if we have already an Idea
of the Deluge that is rational, and also consonant to Scripture upon
other proofs, and the description here made by the Prophet answer to
that Idea, whether then is it not more reasonable to think that it
stands upon that ground, than to think it a meer fancy and Poetical
Scene of things: This is the true state of the case, and that which we
must judge of. Methinks ’tis very harsh to suppose all this a bare
fiction, grounded upon no matter of fact, upon no Sacred story, upon no
appearance of God in nature. If you say it hath a moral signification,
so let it have, we do not destroy that; it hath reference, no doubt, to
the dangers and deliverances of the Church; but the question is, whether
the words and natural sence be a fancy onely, a bundle of randome
hyperboles: or whether they relate to the history of the Deluge, and the
state of the Ark there representing the Church. This makes the sence
doubly rich, historically and morally; and grounds it upon Scripture and
reason, as well as upon fancy.

That violent eruption of the Sea out of the Womb of the Earth, which
*Job* speaks of, is, in my judgment, another description of the Deluge;
’tis *Chap*. 38. 8, 9, 10, 11. *Who shut up the Sea with doors, when it
broke forth, as if it had issued out of a Womb; When I made the cloud
the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swadling band for it. And
broke up for it my decreed place . . . . hitherto shalt thou come*,
*&c*. Here you see the birth and nativity of the Sea, or of Oceanus,
describ'd; <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) how he broke out of the
Womb, and what his first garment and

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

swadling cloaths were; namely clouds and thick darkness. This cannot
refer to any thing, that I know of, but to the face of Nature at the
Deluge; when the Sea was born, and wrapt up in clouds and broken waves,
and a dark impenetrable mist round the body of the Earth. And this seems
to be the very same that David had exprest in his description of the
Deluge, *Psal*. 18. II. *He made darkness his secret place, his pavilion
round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies*. For
this was truly the face of the World in the time of the Flood, tho’ we
little reflect upon it. And this dark confusion every where, above and
below, arose from the violent and confus’d motion of the Abyss;<span
class="margnote">*See* *Theor*. *Book* 1, *p*. 99.</span> which was
dasht in pieces by the falling Earth, and flew into the air in misty
drops, as dust flies up in a great ruine.

But I am afraid, we have stayed too long upon this particular, *the form
of the Deluge*; seeing ’tis but a Corollary from the precedent article
about the dissolution of the Earth. However time is not ill spent about
any thing that relates to natural Providence, whereof the two most
signal instances in our Sacred Writings, are, the *Deluge* and the
*Conflagration*. And seeing *Job* and *David* do often reflect upon the
works of God in the external creation, and upon the administrations of
Providence, it cannot be imagin’d that they should never reflect upon
the Deluge; the most remarkable change of Nature that ever hath been,
and the most remarkable judgment upon mankind. And if they have
reflected upon it any where, ’tis, I think, in those places and those
instances which I have noted; and if those places do relate to the
Deluge, they are not capable, in my judgment, of any fairer or more
natural interpretation than that which we have given them; which, you
see, how much it favours and confirms our Theory.

I have now finisht the heads I undertook to prove, that I might shew our
Theory to agree with Scripture in these three principal points; first,
in that it supposeth a diversity and difference betwixt the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and the present Heavens and Earth.
Secondly, in assigning the particular form of the Ante-diluvian Earth
and Abyss. Thirdly, in explaining the Deluge by a dissolution of that
Earth, and an eruption of the Abyss. How far I have succeeded in this
attempt, as to others, I cannot tell; but I am sure I have convinc’d my
self, and am satisfied that my thoughts, in that Theory, have run in the
same tract with the holy writings: with the true intent and spirit of
them. There are some persons that are wilfully ignorant in certain
things, and others that are willing to be ignorant as the Apostle
phraseth it; speaking of those Eternalists that denyed the doctrine of
the change and revolutions of the Natural World: And ’tis not to be
expected but there are many still of the same humour; and therefore may
be called *willingly ignorant*, that is, they will not use that pains
and attention that is necessary for the examination of such a doctrine,
nor impartiality in judging after examination; they greedily lay hold on
all evidence on one side, and willingly forget, or slightly pass over,
all evidence for the other; this I think is the character of those that
are *willingly ignorant*; for I do not take it to be so deep as a
down-right wilful ignorance, where they are plainly conscious to
themselves of that wilfulness; but where an insensible mixture of humane
passions inclines them one way, and makes them averse to the other; and
in that method draws on all the consequences of a willing *ignorance*.

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

There remains still, as I remember, one Proposition that I am bound to
make good; I said at first, that our Hypothesis concerning the Deluge
was more agreeable not only to Scripture in general, but also to the
particular History of the Flood left us by *Moses*; I say, more
agreeable to it than any other Hypothesis that hath yet been propos’d.
This may be made good in a few words. For in *Moses*'s history of the
Deluge there are two principal points, The extent of the Deluge, and the
Causes of it; and in both these we do fully agree with that sacred
Author. *As to the extent of it*, He makes the Deluge universal; *All
the high hills under the whole heaven were cover’d, fifteen cubits
upwards*; We also make it universal, over the face of the whole Earth;
and in such a manner as must needs raise the waters above the top of the
highest hills every where. *As to the causes of it*, *Moses* makes them
to be the disruption of the *Abyss*, and the *Rains*; and no more; and
in this also we exactly agree with him; we know no other causes, nor
pretend to any other but those two. Distinguishing therefore *Moses* his
narration as to the substance and circumstances of it, it must be
allowed that these two points make the substance of it, and that an
Hypothesis that differs from it in either of these two, differs from it
more than Ours; which, at the worst, can but differ in matter of
circumstance. Now seeing the great difficulty about the Deluge is the
quantity of Water required for it, there have been two explications
proposed, besides ours, to remove or satisfie this difficulty; One
whereof makes the Deluge not to have been universal, or to have reacht
only *Judea* and some neighbouring Countreys; and therefore less water
would suffice; The other owning the Deluge to be universal, supplies it
self with Water from the Divine Omnipotency, and says new Waters were
created then for the nonce, and again annihilated when the Deluge was to
cease. Both these explications you see, (and I know no more of note that
are not obnoxious to the same exceptions) differ from *Moses* in the
substance, or in one of the two substantial points, and consequently
more than ours doth. The first changeth the Flood into a kind of
national inundation, and the second assigns other causes of it than
*Moses* had assigned. And as they both differ apparently from the
Mosaical history, so you may see them refuted upon other grounds also,
in the third Chapter of the First Book of the Theory.

This may be sufficient as to the History of the Flood by *Moses*. But
possibly it may be said the principal objection will arise from *Moses*
his Six-days Creation in the first Chapter of *Genesis*: where another
sort of Earth, than what we have form’d from the Chaos, is represented
to us; namely, a Terraqueous Globe, such as our Earth is at present.
’Tis indeed very apparent, that *Moses* hath accommodated his Six-days
Creation to the present form of the Earth, or to that which was before
the eyes of the people when he writ. But it is a great question whether
that was ever intended for a true Physical account of the origine of the
Earth: or whether *Moses* did either Philosophize or Astronomize in that
description. The ancient Fathers, when they answer the Heathens, and the
adversaries of Christianity, do generally deny it; as I am ready to make
good upon another occasion. And the thing it self bears in it evident
marks of an accommodation and condescention to the vulgar notions
concerning the form of the World. Those that think otherwise, and would
make it literally and physically true in all the parts

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

of it, I desire them, without entring upon the strict merits of the
cause, to determine these Preliminaries. First, whether the whole
universe rise from a Terrestrial Chaos. Secondly, what Systeme of the
World this Six-days Creation proceeds upon: whether it supposes the
Earth, or the Sun, for the Center. Thirdly, Whether the Sun and Fixt
Stars are of a later date, and a later birth, than this Globe of Earth.
And lastly, Where is the Region of the Super-celestial Waters. When they
have determin’d these Fundamentals, we will proceed to other
observations upon the Six-days work, which will further assure us, that
’tis a narration suited to the capacity of the people, and not to the
strict and physical nature of things. Besides, we are to remember, that
*Moses* must be so interpreted in the first Chapter of *Genesis*, as not
to interfere with himself in other parts of his History; nor to
interfere with St. *Peter*, or the Prophet *David*, or any other Sacred
Authors, when they treat of the same matter. Nor lastly, so, as to be
repugnant to clear and uncontested Science. For, in things that concern
the natural World, that must always be consulted.

With these precautions, let them try if they can reduce that narrative
of the Origine of the World, to physical truth; so as to be consistent,
both with Nature, and with Divine Revelation every where. It is easily
reconcileable to both, if we suppose it writ in a Vulgar style, and to
the conceptions of the People: And we cannot deny that a Vulgar style is
often made use of in the holy Writings. How freely and unconcernedly
does Scripture speak of God Allmighty, according to the opinions of the
vulgar? of his *passions*, *local motions*, *parts and members of his
body*. Which all are things that do not belong, or are not compatible
with the Divine nature, according to truth and Science. And if this
liberty be taken, as to God himself, much more may it be taken as to his
works. And accordingly we see, what motion the Scripture gives to the
Sun: what figure to the Earth: what figure to the Heavens: All according
to the appearance of sence and popular credulity; without any remorse
for having transgressed the rules of intellectual truth.

This vulgar style of Scripture in describing the natures of things, hath
been often mistaken for the real sence, and so become a stumbling block
in the way of truth. Thus the *Anthropomorphites* of old contended for
the humane shape of God, from the Letter of Scripture; and brought many
express Texts for their purpose: but sound reason, at length, got the
upper hand of Literal authority. Then, several of the Christian Fathers
contended, that there were no *Antipodes:* and made that doctrine
irreconcileable to Scripture. But this also, after a while, went off,
and yielded to reason and experience. Then, the Motion of the Earth must
by no means be allow’d, as being contrary to Scripture: for so it is
indeed, according to the Letter and Vulgar style. But all intelligent
Persons see thorough this argument, and depend upon it no more in this
case, than in the former. Lastly, The original of the Earth from a
Chaos, drawn according to the rules of Physiology, will not be admitted:
because it does not agree with the Scheme of the Six-days Creation. But
why may not this be writ in a Vulgar style, as well as the rest?
Certainly there can be nothing more like a Vulgar style, than to set God
to *work by the day*, and in Six-days to finish his task: as he is there
represented. We may therefore probably hope that all these disguises of
truth will at

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

length fall off, and that we shall see God and his Works in a pure and
naked Light.

Thus I have finish’d what I had to say in confirmation of this Theory
from Scripture. I mean of the former part of it, which depends chiefly
upon the Deluge, and the Ante-diluvian Earth. When you have collated the
places of Scripture, on either side, and laid them in the balance, to be
weigh’d one against another; If you do but find them equal, or near to
an equal poise, you know in whether Scale the Natural Reasons are to be
laid: and of what weight they ought to be in an argument of this kind.
There is a great difference betwixt Scripture with Philosophy on its
side, and Scripture with Philosophy against it: when the question is
concerning the Natural World. And this is our Case: which I leave now to
the consideration of the unprejudic’d Reader: and proceed to the Proof
of the Second Part of the Theory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[402:1](ste60.htm#fr_34.md) נבקעו ἐῤῤάγησάν *c*.
38.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[404:1](ste60.htm#fr_35.md) מַֹיִֹמ רַבּיִמ

<span id="fn_36"></span>[404:2](ste60.htm#fr_36.md) See *Philo Judæus* his
description of the Deluge, both as to the commotions of the Heavens, and
the fractions of the Earth. In his first Treatise de *Abrahamo*, mihi
*pa*. 279.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[405:1](ste60.htm#fr_37.md) *Uti comparatio
præcedens* \|\| *de ortu Telluris, sumitur ab ædificio, ita bæc altera
de ortu maris, sumitur à partu; & exhibetur Oceanus, primùm, ut fœtus
inclusus in utero, dein ut erumpens & prodeuns, denique ut fasciis &
primis suis pannis involutus. Atque ex aperto Terræ utero prorupit
aquarum moles, ut proluvies illa, quam simul cum fœtu profundere solet
puerpera*. \|\| Ver. 4, 5, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](ste61.md)
