[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff07)  [Next](fff09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EGYPT.

LET us now turn to Egypt and cast a glance on the vista which has to be
surveyed, before the outlines of this part of the background of the
Gnosis can be filled in.

In spite of her reserve and immeasurable contempt for the upstart Greek
genius, Egypt had, even in the <span class="margnote">The wisdom of
Egypt.</span> times of the earliest Ptolemies, given of her wisdom to
Greece. There had been an enormous activity of translation of records
and documents, the origin of which is associated with the name of
Manetho. It is very probable that Plutarch in his treatise on the
Mysteries of Isis drew the bulk of his information from Manetho, and it
is very evident that the doctrines therein set forward as the
traditional wisdom of Egypt have innumerable points of contact with the
Greek Trismegistic literature, those mystic and theosophic treatises
which formed the manuals of instruction in the inner Hermetic schools,
mystic communities which handed on the wisdom-tradition of Thoth, or
Tehuti, the God of Wisdom, whose name, as Jamblichus tells us, was
"common to all priests," that is to say, was the source of inspiration
of the wisdom-tradition in all its branches.

The Greeks, finding in their own Hermes some points of similarity with
the [characteristics](errata.htm#7) of Tehuti, called him by that name,
with the added title

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Trismegistus, or
Thrice-greatest, because of his great wisdom. That the contents, though
not the form, of the oldest treatises of this Trismegistic literature
were largely Egyptian is further evidenced by Jamblichus in his treatise
on the Mysteries of the Egyptians and Chaldæans.

Along these lines of contact between Egypt and Greece we can proceed to
inspect the Egyptian wisdom on its own soil, and find in it many
doctrines fully developed which without this investigation we should
have considered as entirely indigenous to purely Christian soil. Indeed,
in the Trismegistic literature we find a number of the distinctive
doctrines of Gnostic Christianity but without the historic Christ; and
all of these doctrines are seen to have existed for thousands of years
previously in direct Egyptian tradition--especially the doctrines of the
Logos, of the Saviour and Virgin Mother, of the second birth and final
union with God.

But as in the case of Greece, so in the case of <span
class="margnote">The Blendings of Tradition.</span> Egypt, within the
Egyptian tradition itself there are all manners of conflation of
doctrines, of syncretism and blendings, not only in the external popular
cults but also in the inner traditions.

To take a single instance, there was a strong Semitic blend dating from
the line of the Hyksōs (2000-1500 <span class="small">B.C.</span>). At
that time Seth, perchance identical with the title of the Supreme in the
tongue of the Semitic conquerors, was a name of great honour. It was
identified with Sothis, Sirius, the guardian star of Egypt, the Siriadic
Land; and the Mysteries of Seth were doubtless

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

blended in some fashion with those of Osiris. After the hated Hyksōs
were expelled it is true that Seth or Set was gradually identified with
Typhon, the opponent of Osiris, the Logos; but this no more affects the
real doctrines of the Mysteries of Seth, than the fact that the Iranian
Aryans used the name Daevos to designate evil entities, destroyed the
beneficent nature of the Devas of the Indo-Aryans; it simply registers a
rivalry of cult and race and points to a previous epoch when there was
intimate contact between the races and their religions. Equally so the
Christian use of the term Demon does not dispose of the fact that the
Daimones of the Greeks were beneficent beings; witness the Daimon of
Socrates "who prevented him if he were about to do anything not
rightly."

The ancient close political relations between Chaldæa and Egypt
disclosed by archæological research, and the later Persian conquest of
Egypt, must also have discovered points of contact in the domain of
religion, especially in the Mystery-traditions, and future researches in
the many hitherto unworked fields of Egyptology will doubtless throw
fresh light on the mixed heredity of religion in Egypt, which is perhaps
even more complicated than that of the cults of Greece.

In any case we cannot but feel the sublimity of many of the conceptions
of the inner religion of Egypt, in spite of our present inability to
classify them in a satisfactory manner. The vast and mysterious
background of the cults of Egypt, the sonorous phrases and grandiose
titles which we sift

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

out from the present unintelligibility of myth and symbol, persuade us
that there was something great working within, and we find the innermost
strivings of the mystics devoted to the "Birth of Horus," a shadowing
forth of that greatest of all mysteries, the spiritual birth of man,
whence man becomes a god and a son of the Father.

The Egyptians themselves, according to Greek writers, looked back to a
time when their initiated <span class="margnote">The Mystic
Communities.</span> priesthood was in possession of greater wisdom than
was theirs in later times; they confess that they had fallen away from
this high standard and had lost the key to much of their knowledge.
Nevertheless the desire for wisdom was still strong in many of the
nation, and Egypt was ever one of the most religious countries of the
world. Thus we find the Jew Philo, in writing of the wisdom-lovers about
<span class="small">AḌ.</span> 25, declaring that "this natural class of
men is to be found in many parts of the inhabited world, both the
Grecian and non-Grecian world, sharing in the perfect good. In Egypt
there are crowds of them in every province, or nome as they call it, and
especially round Alexandria."

These wisdom-lovers Philo calls by the common name of Therapeuts, either
because they professed <span class="margnote">The Therapeuts.</span> an
art of *healing* superior to that in ordinary use, for they healed souls
as well as bodies, or because they were *servants* of God. He describes
one of their communities, which evidently belonged to the circle of
mystic Judaism; but the many other communities he mentions were also

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

devoted to the same ends, their members were strenuous searchers after
wisdom and devoted practisers of the holy life. These secret
brotherhoods left no records; they kept themselves apart from the world,
and the world knew them not. But it is just these communities which were
the immediate links in the chain of heredity of the Gnosis.

We must, therefore, make the most we can of what Philo has to tell us of
these Healers; in order to do this thoroughly, it would of course be
necessary to search through the whole of his voluminous works and submit
the material thus collected to a critical examination--a task outside
the scope of these short sketches. But as the matter is of vital
importance, we cannot refrain from presenting the reader with

a translation of the main source in Philo's writings from which we
derive our information. But before giving this translation it is
necessary to prefix a few words by way of introduction.

The appearance in 1895 of Conybeare's admirable edition of the text of
Philo's famous treatise <span class="margnote">The Earliest Christians
of Eusebius.</span> *On the Contemplative Life* has at length set one of
the ingeniously inverted [pyramids](errata.htm#8) of the origins
squarely on its base again.

The full title of this important work is: *Philo about the Contemplative
Life, or the Fourth Book of the Treatise concerning the
Virtues*,--critically edited with a defence of its genuineness by Fred
C. Conybeare, M.A. (Oxford, 1895). This book contains a most excellent
bibliography of works relating to the subject.

The survival of the voluminous works of Philo through the neglect and
vandalism of the Dark and

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Middle Ages is
owing to the fact that Eusebius, in his efforts to construct history
without materials, eagerly seized upon Philo's description of the
externals of the Therapeut order, and boldly declared it to be the
earliest Christian Church of Alexandria.

This view remained unchallenged until the rise of Protestantism, and was
only then called in question because the Papal party rested their
defence of the antiquity of Christian monkdom on this famous treatise.

For three centuries the whole of the batteries of Protestant scholarship
have been turned on this main position of the Roman and Greek Churches.
For if the treatise were genuine, then the earliest Church was a
community of rigid ascetics, men and women; monkdom, the *bête noire* of
Protestantism, was coëval with the origins.

These three centuries of attack have finally evolved a theory, which, on
its perfection by Grätz, <span class="margnote">The Pseudo-Philo
theory.</span> Nicolas, and Lucius, has been accepted by nearly all our
leading Protestant scholars, and is claimed to have demolished the
objectionable document for ever. According to this theory, "the
Therapeutæ are still Christians, as they were for Eusebius; but no
longer of a primitive cast. For the ascription of the work to Philo is
declared to be false, and the ascetics described therein to be in
reality monks of about the year 300 <span class="small">A.D.</span>;
within a few years of which date the treatise is assumed to have been
forged" (*op. cit.*, p. vi.).

The consequence is that every recent Protestant Church history,
dictionary, and encyclopedia, when

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

treating of the Therapeuts, is plentifully besprinkled with references
to the ingenious invention, called the "Pseudo-Philo."

This pyramid of the origins was kept propped upon its apex until 1895,
when Conybeare's work <span class="margnote">Its Death-blow.</span> was
published, and all the props knocked from under it. Strange to say, it
was then and only then that a critical text of this so violently
attacked treatise was placed in our hands. At last all the MSS. and
versions have been collated. With relentless persistence Conybeare has
marshalled his Testimonia, and with admirable patience paralleled every
distinctive phrase and technical expression with voluminous citations
from the rest of Philo's works, of which there is so "prevalent and
regrettable an ignorance." To this he has added an extensive Excursus on
the Philonean authorship of the tract. If Philo did not write the *De
Vita Contemplativa* then every canon of literary criticism is a
delusion; the evidence adduced by the sometime Fellow of University
College for the authenticity of the treatise is irresistible. We have
thus a new departure in Philonean research.

The danger to certain orthodox presumptions which a thorough study of
the rest of Philo's works would threaten, is evidenced by the concluding
paragraph of Conybeare's preface, where he writes:

"It is barely credible, and somewhat of a reproach to Oxford as a place
of learning, that not a single line of Philo, nor any work bearing
specially on him, is recommended to be read by students in our Honour
School of Theology; and that, although this most

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

spiritual of authors is by the admission, tacit or express, of a long
line of Catholic teachers, from Eusebius and Ambrose in the fourth
century down to Bull and Döllinger in modern times, the father not only
of Christian exegesis, but also, to a great extent, of Christian
dogmatics" (*op. cit.*, p. x.).

It is thus established that the *De Vita Contemplativa* is a genuine
Philonean tract. As to its date, we <span class="margnote">An
Interesting Question of Date.</span> are confronted with some
difficulties; but the expert opinion of Conybeare assures us that "every
reperusal of the works of Philo confirms my feeling that the D.U.C. is
one of his earliest works" (*op. cit.*, p. 276). Now as Philo was born
about the year 30 <span class="small">B.C.</span>, the date of the
treatise may be roughly ascribed to the first quarter of the first
century. ("About the year 22 or 23"--*op. cit.*, p. 290). The question
naturally arises: At such a date, can the Therapeuts of Philo be
identified with the earliest Christian Church of Alexandria? If the
accepted dates of the origins are correct, the answer must be
emphatically, No. If, on the contrary, the accepted dates are incorrect,
then a vast problem is opened up, of the first importance for the
origins of the Christian faith. Be this as it may, the contents of the
*D.V.C.* are of immense importance and interest as affording us a
glimpse into those mysterious communities in which Christians for so
many centuries recognized their forerunners. The Therapeuts were not
Christians; Philo knows absolutely nothing of Christianity in any
possible sense in which the word is used to-day. Who, then, were they?
The answer to this question

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

demands an entire reformulation of the accepted history of the origins.

The treatise bears in some MSS. the superscription, <span
class="margnote">The Title and Context.</span> "The Suppliants, or
Concerning the Virtues, Book IV., or Concerning the Virtue of the
Suppliants, Book IV." By "Suppliant" Philo tells us, he means "one who
has fled to God and taken refuge with Him." (*De Sac. Ab. et C.*, i.
186, 33). It is highly probable that our tract formed part of the fourth
book of Philo's voluminous work *De Legatione*, fragments only of which
have survived.

"Time and Christian editors have truncated the *De Legatione* in a
threefold way. Firstly, a good part of the second book has been removed,
perhaps because it ran counter to Christian tradition concerning Pontius
Pilate. Secondly, the entire fourth book was removed, as forming a whole
by itself; and the first part of it has been lost, all except the scrap
on the Essenes which Eusebius has preserved to us in the *Præparatio
Evangelica;* while the account of the Therapeutæ was put by itself and
preserved as a separate book. . . Thirdly, the palinode which formed the
fifth book has been lost" (*op. cit.*, p. 284).

But to the tractate itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philo on the Contemplative Life](fff09)
