[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff09)  [Next](fff11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JEWRY.

THE third stream which poured into the matrix of the Christian origins,
was that of Jewry. Even <span class="margnote">The Influence of
Babylon.</span> before the Exile the undisciplined tribes composing this
peculiar nation had had their "Schools of the Prophets," small
communities holding themselves apart and recruited by seers and
visionaries. Up to this time the traditions of the Jews and their

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

conceptions of religion had been mostly of a very crude nature compared
to those of the more highly civilized nations which surrounded them,
although of course they were distinguished by the particularism of a
nascent exclusive monotheism and a growing detestation of idolatry.

In Babylon, however, they came into intimate contact with a great and
very ancient civilization, and the impression it made upon them can be
clearly traced in the history of their subsequent religious development.

Most of the nation remained contentedly in Babylon, while the leaders of
those who returned set to work to rewrite their old traditions and
reformulate their religious conceptions, by the light of the wider views
they had absorbed--all of which is to be clearly traced in the various
stages of evolution of their national scripture, the various deposits of
which are revealed to us by the patient researches of scientific
Biblical scholars and the ever new discoveries of archæology.

The Jewish writers appropriated to themselves the traditions of the
great Semitic race and of the nations of Chaldæa and of Babylon, and
used them for the glorification of their own origins and history, in the
strange conviction that they all applied to them as the "chosen people"
of God. The elaborate doctrine of purity on which the Persian
Zoroastrian tradition laid such stress was eagerly adopted by their
priesthood, and we perceive in their library of religious books the
gradual elimination of the cruder ideas of Deity and the gradual
development of far

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

higher conceptions in (at times) most wonderful poetic outbursts.

It must not be supposed, however, that the re-writers and editors of the
old traditions were <span class="margnote">The Writing of Scripture
History.</span> forgers and falsifiers in any ordinary sense of the
word. Antiquity in general had no conception of literary morality in its
modern meaning, and all writing of a religious character was the outcome
of an inner impulse. The wealth of technical terms bestowed on these
ancient writers and their methods by modern Biblical critics forces the
student almost unconsciously to read into those times ideas and
standards that had then no existence. Again, a common fault is to endow
these ancient worthies of the Jews with motives of action and
refinements of belief which only belong to the best in Christendom; and
so we not only do grave injustice to their memories, but we read into
their history an atmosphere of too great refinement for the actual Jew
of the period to have lived in. It should also be remembered that the
mythologizing of history and the historicizing of mythology were not
peculiar to the Jews, but common to the times; what was peculiar to them
was their fanatical belief in Divine favouritism and their egregious
claim to the monopoly of God's providence.

Now the Jews, as all children of the desert, had ingrained in them an
invincible longing for <span class="margnote">The Mythology of
History.</span> freedom, and at the same time they had the innate poetic
imagination of all those who live in close contact with nature.

The two "kingdoms" that were always fighting

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

among themselves and with their neighbours, "Israel" and "Judah," were
successively deported by the Assyrian authorities, to remove a centre of
perpetual disturbance.

The "ten tribes" who were the first to be deported, consisting as they
did of elements more adaptable to their surroundings than the Judæans,
settled down in Babylonia and gradually adapted themselves to their new
environment; it would be interesting to know what development occurred
in the schools of *their* prophets in contact with the ancient Chaldæan
wisdom, and the subsequent history of that "Israel" which not only thus
settled in Babylon, but remained there.

When the more turbulent Judæan tribes were subsequently in their turn
deported, some of them followed the example of their kinsfolk; but most
of the Judæans refused to adapt themselves to the new conditions, they
pined for their freedom, and in spite of their being surrounded by the
monuments of a great civilisation, looked back to their poor settlement
of Jerusalem as though it had been in the land of Paradise, and its
meagre homes the palaces of kings. The fathers wove for the children
stories of the beauty and richness of their native land, of the glories
of its palaces, and the great deeds of their ancient sheiks; above all
things they insisted on their peculiar destiny as men who had made a
compact with a God who had promised them victory over all foes. The
fathers, who had gradually grown to believe their own stories, died
before the conqueror Cyrus, in gratitude for their help against the
Assyrian power, granted the return of the Judæan

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

folk. Those who returned were of the next generation, and they
reoccupied the ruins of Jerusalem with ideas of a former greatness which
existed in the poetic imagination and love of freedom of their sires
rather than in actual history.

Filled with an enthusiasm for the past, they wrote what their fathers
had told them, expanding the old records into a splendid "history," and
bringing into it all that they had developed of religion by controversy
with the Babylonians and Persians--a controversy which consisted in
persistently maintaining that their religion was better than their
opponents’, claiming the best in their opponents’ position or tradition
as their own, and ever asserting that they had something still higher as
well.

Now the Jew had such a firm conviction that <span
class="margnote">Honest Self-delusion.</span> he was the Chosen of God
that he probably really believed all his assertions; in any case the
sense of history did not exist in those days, and there was no one to
check the enthusiasm of these early scribes.

They probably argued: We are the chosen people of God; our religion is
better than any other religion, in fact all other religions are false,
all other Gods false; the palmy days of our religion were before the
Captivity; those times must have been greater than the best times in
other nations, our temple must have been grander, our sacrifices greater
than any other in the world; our fathers have said it and we feel it is
true. In such a frame of mind and with the innate poetic fervour

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

of their nature they felt impelled to write, and by their writing
transformed the old records out of all historic recognition, and from
such beginnings gradually evolved a literature which future generations
received without question, not only as a precise record of fact but as a
divinely written scripture verbally inspired.

The development of this literature was a natural growth, though the
distinct factors which played a part in it are somewhat difficult to
disentangle; but there are distinct signs of repeated modifications of
cruder conceptions, and of the leavening of the nation by a steadily
developing spiritual force. Whence came this persistent spiritualizing
of the old conceptions?

In seeking for an answer to this question, the point of departure may be
found in the fact that the <span class="margnote">The Spiritualizing of
Judaism.</span> majority of the nation did not return; and not only
this, but that the majority of the Jews in course oftime preferred to
live among the Gentiles. In fact the members of the nation gradually
became the great traders of the ancient world, so that we find colonies
of them scattered abroad in all the great centres; for instance, shortly
after the founding of Alexandria we hear of a colony of no fewer than
40,000 Jews planted there. These Jews of the Diaspora or Dispersion were
in constant contact with their Palestinian co-religionists on the one
side, and on the other in intimate contact with the great civilizations
in which they found a home.

The expectation of the salvation of the race and of a Saviour of the
race, which the Jews <span class="margnote">Zealotism.</span> absorbed
from Zoroastrianism, they adapted to

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

their own needs and to the conviction that Israel was the Chosen of God.
This expectation was for long entirely of a material nature; they looked
for a king who should restore them to freedom and tread under foot the
nations of the world, when he would reign for one thousand years in
Jerusalem. All this was to be effected by the direct interposition of
Yahweh, their God. For some four hundred years, up to the final
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, we are presented with the spectacle
of a most determined struggle for freedom; for the Jews were ever
disappointed of their hopes, and had to submit to the successive
overlordship of Greece and Rome. But hope ever sprang up again and again
after every new disappointment, and we find in their literature the
record of a determined opposition to the conqueror, fanned into fever
heat by the fiery exhortations and denunciations of a pseudoprophetical
character which has no parallel in the history of the world. If in the
Greek genius was centred the struggle for the freedom of the intellect,
in the Jewish nation was centred the struggle for personal freedom; and
in the Roman Empire, after the destruction of Jerusalem, Jewry finally
became the centre of all disaffection and revolutionary ideas.

At the back of all of this was the peculiarly <span
class="margnote">Pharisaism</span> exclusive faith which the Jew had
evolved, and which from a Roman point of view constituted him "the hater
of mankind." But this fanatical Zealotism, although it was directly
nourished by the more unbalanced pronouncements of the religious writers
and prophets, became more and more distasteful

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

to the better elements in the nation. These better elements we find
represented by the more spiritual views that by degrees worked into the
sacred literature, and the nation was gradually leavened by Pharisaism,
which, though running to the extreme of minute ceremonial and the most
elaborate rules of external purity, was nevertheless a most potent
factor in the widening of the religious horizon. The external side of
Pharisaism is fairly well known to us; but the inner side of this great
movement, to which all the most learned of the Jews belonged, is but
little understood.

Pharisaism was in course of time divided into numerous schools, the
strictest of which led the life of rigid internal purity. Leading such a
life, it could not but be that their ideas became of a more spiritual
nature; indeed Pharisaism had its origin in Babylon, and it represented
the main stream of Chaldæan and Persian influence on Jewry.

Along this line of tradition we find gradually evolved a far more
spiritual view of the Messiah- doctrine; <span class="margnote">The
Chassidim and Essenes.</span> Israel was not the physical nation of the
Jews, but the Elect of God chosen out of all nations; the servants of
God were those who served Him with their hearts and not with their lips;
the God of this Israel abhorred their blood sacrifices.

But such views as these, although they indirectly influenced the public
scripture of the nation, could not be boldly declared among a people
that had ever stoned its prophets and delighted in blood-sacrifice. Such
views could only be safely discussed in private, and we find numerous
records of the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

existence of schools of Chassidim and those whom Josephus calls Essenes,
among whom were the most pure and learned of the Jews, the "Rabbis of
the South," living apart and in retirement.

These schools and communities seem to have looked back to the stern
physical discipline of the Schools of the Prophets on the one hand, and
to have been in contact with the spiritual ideas of the Babylonian
wisdom-discipline on the other.

In Babylon we see how one of the nation's seers <span
class="margnote">The Inner Schools.</span> contacted part of the
Chaldæan wisdom-tradition, and the famous "Vision of Ezekiel" was
subsequently invoked as canonical authority for all that range of ideas
which we find revived so many hundreds of years later in Mediæval
Kabalism. But in order to understand the nature of the studies and inner
experiences of the members of these mystic schools of Chassidim and
their imitators, it is necessary to have a critical acquaintance with
non-canonical Jewish writings, especially the wisdom-literature and
those numerous apocrypha, and apocalypses, and apologies for unfulfilled
prophecy--a mass of pseudepigraphs which were so busily produced in the
last centuries preceding our era and in its earliest centuries. It is
true we possess only the fragmentary remains of this once enormous
literature, most probably only the works that were written for general
circulation, and principally by those members of these communities who
were still obsessed by the Zealot conception of Israel; but enough
remains to fill in some very necessary outlines of the background of the
Gnosis, and to enable us to realise how

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

earnestly men were striving for a purer life and greater knowledge of
God in those early days.

These mystic schools of Jewish theosophy had an enormous influence on
nascent Christianity; the innermost schools influenced the inner schools
of Christendom, and the general literature of the intermediate circles
left a deep mark on general Christianity.

Most of these mystic schools and communities, whether of Greek or
Egyptian or Jewish descent, when they came in contact with each other,
gave and received. True that some of them refused to mix in person or
doctrine, and there were rigidly conservative mystic schools of all
three lines of descent; others, however, if not in their corporate
capacity, at any rate in the persons of their individual members, gave
and received, and so modified their preconceptions and enlarged their
horizon. Indeed, in the last two centuries prior to and first two
centuries of our era there was an enormous enthusiasm for syncretism and
syntheticism among the members of such schools, the effects of which are
plainly traceable in the fragments of the Gnosis preserved to us by the
polemical citations of the heresiologists of later orthodoxy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alexandria](fff11)
