[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff24)  [Next](fff26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AN ANONYMOUS SYSTEM FROM IRENÆUS.

<span class="margnote">The Spiritual Creation.</span>IN the Unutterable
Depth were two Great Lights, the First Man, or Father, and his Son, the
Second Man; and also the Holy Spirit, the First Woman, or Mother of all
living. Below this triad was a sluggish mass composed of the four great
"elements," called Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos. The *Universal*
Mother brooded over the Waters; enamoured of her beauty, the First and
Second Man produced from her the third Great Light, the Christ; and He,
ascending above, formed with the First and Second Man the Holy Church.
This was the right-hand birth of the Great Mother. But a Drop of Light
fell downwards to the left hand into chaotic matter; this was called
Sophia, or Wisdom, the *World*-Mother. The Waters of the Æther were thus
set in motion, and formed a body for Sophia (the Light-Æon), *viz*., the
Heaven-sphere. And she, freeing herself, left her body behind, and
ascended to the Middle Region below her Mother (the *Universal* Mother),
who formed the boundary of the Ideal Universe.

By her mere contact with the Space-Waters she had
[already](errata.htm#26) generated a son, the chief Creative Power of
the Sensible World, who retained some of the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Light-fluid; this
son was Ialdabaōth (said by some to mean the Child of Chaos), who in his
turn produced a son, and he another, until there were seven in all, the
great Formative Powers of the Sensible Universe. And they were
"fighters," and quarrelled much with their fathers. And by means of this
interplay of forces on matter came forth the "mind," which was
"serpent-formed," and "spirit," and "soul," and all things in the world.

And Ialdabaōth was boastful and arrogant, and exclaimed: "I am Father
and God, and beyond me is <span class="margnote">Yahweh
Ialdabaōth.</span> none other." But Sophia hearing this cried out to her
son: "Lie not, Ialdabaōth, for above thee is the Father of All, the
First Man, and Man the Son of Man." And all the Powers were astonished
at the word; but Ialdabaōth, to call off their attention, cried out:
"Let us make 'man' after our image." So they made "man," and he lay like
a worn on the ground, until they brought him to Ialdabaōth, who breathed
into him the "breath of life," that is to say the Light-fluid he had
received from Sophia, and so emptied himself of his Light. And "man"
receiving it, immediately gave thanks to the First Man and disregarded
his fabricators (the Elohīm).

Whereupon Ialdabaōth (Yahweh) was jealous and planned to deprive Adam of
the Light-spark by <span class="margnote">O. T. Exegesis.</span> forming
"woman." And the six creative powers were enamoured of Eve, and by her
generated sons, namely, the angels. And so Adam again fell under the
power of Ialdabaōth and the Elohīm; then Sophia or Wisdom sent the
"serpent" ("mind") into the Paradise of Ialdabaōth, and Adam and Eve

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

listened to its wise councils, and so once more "man" was freed from the
dominion of the Creative Power, and transgressed the ordinance of
ignorance of any power higher than himself imposed by Ialdabaōth.
Whereupon Ialdabaōth drove them out of his Paradise, and together with
them the "serpent" or "mind"; but Sophia would not permit the
Light-spark to descend, and so withdrew it to avoid profanation. And
"mind" (the lower mind) the serpent-formed, the first product of
Ialdabaōth, brought forth six sons, and these are the "dæmonial" powers,
which plague men because their father was cast down for their sake.

Now Adam and Eve before the fall had spiritual bodies, like the "angels"
born of this Eve; but after their fall, down from the Paradise of
Ialdabaōth, their bodies grew more and more dense, and more and more
languid, and became "coats of skin," till finally Sophia in compassion
restored to them the sweet odour of the Light, and they knew that they
carried death about with them. And so a recollection of their former
state came back to them, and they were patient, knowing that the body
was put on only for a time.

The system then goes on to grapple with the legends of *Genesis*
touching Cain and Noah, etc., and the Old Testament record generally,
with moderate success; the main idea being that the prophets were
inspired by one or other of the seven Elohīm, but occasionally Sophia
had succeeded in impressing them with fragmentary revelations about the
First Man and the Christ above.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

The rest of the system is devoted to the question of the scheme of
regeneration and the interpretation <span
class="margnote">Christology.</span> of the Mystery-myths. Sophia, or
Wisdom, finding no rest in heaven or earth, implored the help of the
Great Mother, and she in compassion begged of the First Man that the
Christ should be sent to help her. And then Wisdom, knowing that her
brother and spouse was coming to her aid, announced his coming by John,
and by means of the "baptism of repentance" Jesus was made ready to
receive him, as in a clean vessel. And so the Christ descended through
the seven spheres, likening himself unto the Rulers, and draining them
of their power, the Light they had retained all flowing back to him. And
first of all the Christ clothed his sister Sophia with the
Light-vesture, and they rejoiced together, and this is the mystical
"marriage" of the "bridegroom and the bride." Now Jesus, having been
born of a "virgin" by the working of God (in other words, after the
spiritual "second birth" had been attained by the ascetic Jesus), Christ
and Sophia, the one enfolding the other, descended upon him and he
became Jesus Christ.

Then it was that he began to do mighty works, to heal, and to proclaim
the Unknown Father, and <span class="margnote">Jesus.</span> profess
himself openly the Son of the First Man. Whereupon the Powers and
especially Ialdabaōth took measures to slay him, and so Jesus, the man,
was "crucified" by them, but Christ and Sophia mounted aloft to the
Incorruptible Æon. But Christ did not forget the one in whom He had
tabernacled, and so sent a power which raised up his body, not

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

indeed his gross physical envelope, but a psychic and spiritual body.
And those of his disciples who saw this body, thought he was risen in
his physical frame, but to certain of them who were capable of receiving
it, he explained the mystery, and taught them many other mysteries of
the spiritual life. And Jesus now sits at the right hand of his father,
Ialdabaōth, and receives the souls who have received these mysteries.
And in proportion as he enriches himself with souls, in such measure is
Ialdabaōth deprived of power; so that he is no longer able to send back
holy souls into the world of reincarnation, but only those of his own
substance; and the consummation of all things will be when all the Light
shall once more be gathered up and stored in the treasures of the
Incorruptible Æon.

Such is the account of this by no means absurd scheme of the Gnosis
preserved to us in the barbarous Latin translation of Irenæus’ summary.
That the original system was far more elaborate we may assume from the
now known method of Irenæus to make a very brief summary of the tenets
he criticized. The main features of the christological and
soteriological part of the system is identical with the main outlines of
the system of the *Pistis Sophia*, and of one of the treatises of the
Codex Brucianus. This is a very important point, and indicates that the
dates of these treatises need not necessarily be later than the time of
the bishop of Lyons, but the consideration of this important subject
must be reserved for the sequel. Interesting again is it to remark the
influence of the Orphic,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pythagoræan,
Platonic, and Hermetic tradition in the cosmological part, and to
observe how both the Hellenic and Jewish myths find a common element in
the Chaldæan tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Early ''Ophite'' System](fff26)
