[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff21)  [Next](fff23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

### MENANDER.

ONE of the teachers of the "Simonian" Gnosis who was singled out by
Justin for special mention, because <span class="margnote">His
Date.</span> of his having led "many" away, even as Marcion was gaining
an enormous following in Justin's own time, is Menander, a native, we
are told, of the Samaritan town Capparatea. The notice in Justin shows
us that Menander was a man of a past generation, and that he was
specially famous because of his numerous following. We know that the
dates of this period are exceedingly obscure even for Justin, our
earliest authority. For instance, writing about 150 <span
class="small">A.D.</span>, he says that Jesus lived 150 years before his
time. His "Simon" and Menander dates are equally vague; Menander may
have lived a generation or four generations before Justin's time, or
still earlier.

The centre of activity of Menander is said to have been at Antioch, one
of the most important commercial <span class="margnote">His
Doctrines.</span> and literary cities of the Græco-Roman world, on the
highway of communication between East and West. He seems to have handed
on the general outlines of the Gnosis; especially insisting on the
distinction between the God over all and the creative power or powers,
the "forces of nature." Wisdom, he taught, was to be attained by the
practical discipline of transcendental "magic"; that is to say, the
Gnosis was not to be attained by faith alone, but by definite endeavour
and conscious striving along the path of cosmological and psychological
science. Menander professed to teach a knowledge of the powers of

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

nature, and the way whereby they could be subjected to the purified
human will; he is also said to have claimed to be the Saviour sent down
by the higher Powers of the spiritual world, to teach men the sacred
knowledge whereby they could free themselves from the dominion of the
lower Angels.

It is, however, almost certain that Menander made no more claim to be
the Saviour (in the Catholic meaning of the term) than did "Simon." The
Saviour was the Logos, as we have seen above. The claim of the Gnostics
was that a man might so perfect himself that he became a conscious
worker with the Logos; all those who did so, became "Christs," and as
such were Saviours, but not in the sense of being the Logos Himself.

The neophyte on receiving "baptism," that is to say, on reaching a
certain state of interior purification or enlightenment, was said to
"rise from the dead"; thereafter, he "never grew old and became
immortal," that is to say, he obtained possession of the unbroken
consciousness of his spiritual ego. Menander was especially opposed to
the materialistic doctrine of the resurrection of the body, and this was
made a special ground of complaint against him by the Patristic writers
of the subsequent centuries.

The followers of Menander were called Menandrists, and we can only
regret that no record has been left of them and their writings. As they
seem to have been centralized at Antioch--seeing that tradition assigns
the founding of the Church of Antioch to Paul, and assigns to it Peter
as its first bishop; seeing again that the "withstanding to the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

face" incident is placed by the *Acts* tradition in the same city--it
may be that their writings would have thrown some light on these obscure
traditions.

I would, however, suggest that Mainandros should be placed far earlier
than "Simon," and that we <span class="margnote">A Link with
Zoroastrianism.</span> should see in him one of the earliest links
between Gnosticism and the Magian tradition. It may be even that the
Gnostics traced the tradition of their æon-lore to this disciple of the
Magi, for the root of their æonology is to be found in the Zoroastrian
Amshaspends, the personal emanations of Ahuramazda, as Mills and others
have shown; though I myself would seek the origin of the æon-doctrine in
Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Saturninus](fff23)
