[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff22)  [Next](fff24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SATURNINUS.

SATURNINUS, or more correctly Satornilus, is generally regarded as the
founder of the Syrian Gnosis, but <span class="margnote">The Chain of
Teachers.</span> there is every reason to suppose that Gnosticism was
widespread in Syria prior to his time. Justin Martyr (*Trypho*, xxxv.),
writing between 150 and 160, speaks of the Satornilians as a very
important body, for he brackets them with the Marcians (? Marcionites),
Basilidians and Valentinians, the most important schools of the Gnosis
in his time. Saturninus, Basilides and Valentinus were separated from
each other respectively by at least a generation, and Saturninus may
thus be placed somewhere about the end of the first and the beginning of
the second century; but this assignment of date rests entirely upon the
Patristic statements that Menander was the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

teacher of Saturninus, Saturninus of Basilides, and Basilides of
Valentinus. It is, however, not improbable that, with regard to the
first two, a general similarity of doctrine alone was sufficient reason
for the hæresiologists to father the origin of Saturninus’ system upon
Menander himself, whereas in reality a generation or two may have
elapsed between them, and they may have never as a matter of fact met
face to face.

Saturninus is said to have taught at Antioch, but <span
class="margnote">Asceticism.</span>(as is almost the invariable case
with the Gnostic doctors) we have no information as to his nationality
or the incidents of his life. He was especially distinguished for his
rigid asceticism, or encratism. His followers abstained from marriage
and from animal food of all kinds, and the rigidity of their mode of
life attracted many zealous adherents. Salmon says that Saturninus seems
to have been the first to have introduced encratism "among those who
called themselves Christians." Protestant theologians especially regard
encratism as a heretical practice; but there seems no sufficient reason
for assuming that so common a feature of the religious life can be
traced to any particular teacher.

Our information as to the Saturninian system<span
class="margnote">Summary of Doctrines.</span> is unfortunately
exceedingly defective; the short summary of Irenæus is presumably based
on, or a copy of, the lost Compendium of Justin. This is all the more
regrettable as fuller information would have probably enabled us to
trace its connection with the "Ophite" and "Barbēlō" developments, and
to define the relations of all three

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

to the Gnosticism of Basilides and Valentinus. The main features are of
the same nature as those of the "Simonian" and Menandrian Gnosis; we
should, however, always bear in mind that these early systems, instead
of being germinal, or simple expressions, may have been elaborate
enough. The mere fact that Irenæus gives a summary which presents
comparatively simple features, is no guarantee that the systems
themselves may not have been full and carefully worked out expositions.
We may with safety regard the summary of the bishop of Lyons as a rough
indication of heads of [doctrine](errata.htm#25), as a catalogue of
subjects deprived of their content. Thus we learn that Saturninus taught
the Unknown Father; the great intermediate hierarchies, archangels,
angels, and powers; the seven creative spheres and their rulers; the
builders of the universe and the fashioners of man. There were numerous
inimical hierarchies and their rulers, and a scheme of regeneration
whereby a World-saviour in the apparent form of man, though not really a
man, brings about not only the defeat of the evil powers, but also
rescues all who have the light-spark within them, from the powers of the
creative hierarchies, among whom was placed the Yahweh of the Jews. The
Jewish scriptures were imperfect and erroneous; some prophecies being
inspired by the creative angels, but others by the evil powers.

The most interesting feature of the system which Irenæus has preserved
for us, is the myth of the creation of man by the angels, or rather the
fabrication

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

of man's external envelope by the hierarchies of the builders.

<span class="margnote">The Making of Man.</span>The making of man was on
this wise. A shining image or type was shown by the Logos to the
demiurgic angels; but when they were unable to seize hold upon it, for
it was withdrawn immediately, they said to one another: "Let us make man
according to \[this\] image and likeness." They accordingly endeavoured
to do so, but the nature-powers could only evolve an envelope or plasm,
which could not stand upright, but lay on the ground helpless and
crawling like a worm. Then the Power Above, in compassion, sent forth
the life-spark, and the plasm rose upright, and limbs developed and were
knit together, that is to say, it hardened or became denser as race
succeeded race; and so the body of man was evolved, and the light-spark,
or real man, tabernacled in it. This light-spark hastens back after
death to those of its own nature, and the rest of the elements of the
body are dissolved.

Here we have in rough suggestion the same theory of the evolution of the
bodies of the early races as we find advanced, from totally different
sources and an entirely different standpoint, by a number of modern
writers on theosophic doctrines--and, therefore, we all the more regret
that the orthodox prejudices of Irenæus or his informant have treated
Saturninus and his "heresy" with so scant notice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The ''Ophites''](fff24)
