[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff35)  [Next](fff37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

### NICOLAUS.

<span class="margnote">"Which things I hate."</span>WE have now got back
to such early times that even the faintest glimmer of historical light
fails us; we which are deep down in the sombre region of legend and
things I hate. speculation. We will, therefore, plunge no farther into
the dark depths of the cave of the origins, but once more retrace our
steps to the mouth of the cavern, where at least some fitful gleams of
daylight struggle through. But before doing so, we must call the
reader's attention to a just discernible shadow of early Gnosticism, the
circle of the Nicolaïtans. These Gnostics are of special interest to the
orthodox, because the over-writer of the Apocalypse has twice gone out
of his way to tell us that he hates their doings. Encouraged by this
phrase, Irenæus includes the Nicolaïtans in the writer's condemnation of
some of the members of the church of Pergamus, who apparently "ate
things sacrificed to idols and committed fornication." Subsequent
hæresiologists, in their turn encouraged by Irenæus, added further
embellishments, until finally Epiphanius makes Nicolaus the father of
every enormity he had collected or invented against the Gnostics. And
then, with all this "evidence" of his iniquity before him, Epiphanius
proceeds rhetorically to address the shade of the unfortunate Gnostic:
"What, then, am I to say to thee, O Nicolaus?" For ourselves we are
surprised that so inventive a genius as the Bishop of Salamis should
have drawn breath even to put so rhetorical a question.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

Tradition claims Nicolaus as an ascetic, and relates an exaggerated
instance of his freedom from passion. Even granted that he taught that
the eating of sacrificial viands was not a deadly sin, there seems no
reason why we to-day should follow these Church Fathers in their
condemnation of everything but their own particular view of the Christ's
doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cerdo](fff37)
