[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff41)  [Next](fff43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

### VALENTINUS.

<span class="margnote">Biography.</span>As to his biography, we know
next to nothing. Valentinus was an Egyptian, educated at Alexandria in
all that Egypt and Greece had to teach him. The mysterious lore of
ancient Khem, the "mathēsis" of Pythagoras, the wisdom of Plato, all
helped to fashion his character. But the greatest inspiration of all he
found in the last outpouring from the same source from which the wisdom
of every true philosopher comes--the stream of Christianity that was
swirling along at full tide. But what kind of Christianity did
Valentinus encounter at Alexandria? There was no Catechetical School
when he was a boy. Pantænus and Clement were not as yet. There were the
Logoi, the Sayings of the Lord, and many contradictory traditions; a
Pauline community also, doubtless founded by some missionary from Asia
Minor; and numerous legends of the mysterious Gnosis which Jesus had
secretly taught to those who could comprehend. But, above all things, at
the back were the inner schools and communities of the wisdom-traditions
and the Gnosis. Valentinus must have been in closest intimacy with
Basilides, though he is said to have stated that a certain Theodas, an
"apostolic man," was his witness to the direct tradition of the Gnosis.
Nothing is known of this Theodas or Theudas, and Ussher has even assumed
that it was a contraction for Theodotus, a conjecture in which he has
been followed by Zahn. This theory

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

would thus make the Theodotus of the Excerpts in Clement an older
authority than Valentinus himself, which would still further complicate
the Eastern and Western school question, and, in fact, change the whole
problem of Valentinian origins. All we can say here is that the view is
not entirely improbable, and would clear the ground on certain important
points.

In addition there were at Alexandria, in the great library and in the
private libraries of the mystics, all those various sources of
information, and in the intellectual and religious atmosphere of the
place all those synthetical and theosophical tendencies which make for
the formulation of a universal system of religion. And this we know was
the task that Valentinus set before him as his goal. He determined to
syntheticize the Gnosis, every phase of which was already in some sort a
synthesis. But in so doing, Valentinus did not propose to attack or
abandon the general faith, or to estrange the popular evolution of
Christianity which has since been called the Catholic Church. He most
probably remained a Catholic Christian to the end of his life. It is
true that we read of his excommunication in Tertullian, coupled with the
favourite accusation brought against prominent heretics, that he
apostatized from the Church because his candidature for the episcopal
office was rejected. Tertullian imagined that this took place at Rome;
but, even if so, did Rome speak in the name of the Catholic Church in
those early days? Would Alexandria, the philosophic, recognize the
ruling of disciplinarian Rome? Or

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

did Rome excommunicate Valentinus after his death, a favourite way with
her in after times of finishing a controversy? Or is not Tertullian
romancing here as is not infrequently the case? Epiphanius distinctly
states that Valentinus was regarded as orthodox so long as he was at
Rome, and Tertullian himself also, in another place, adds fifteen years
of orthodoxy on to the date of his leaving Rome.

<span class="margnote">Date.</span>Valentinus seems to have passed the
greater part of his life in Egypt; he was, however, if we can trust our
authorities, for some considerable time at Rome, somewhere between 138
and 160. One authority also says that he was at Cyprus.

The date of his death is absolutely unknown; critics mostly reckon it
about 161, but in order to arrive at this conclusion, they reject the
distinct statement of Tertullian that Valentinus was still an orthodox
member of the Church up to the time of Eleutherus (*c*. 175); and the
equally distinct statement of Origen, that he was personally acquainted
with Valentinus. This would set back Origen's own date of birth and
advance the date of Valentinus' death; but as both are problematical, we
have nothing to fear from the putting back of the one and the putting
forward of the other ten years or so.

On the whole I am inclined to assign the date of Valentinus to the first
eighty years of the second century. In further support of this length of
days, I would invite the reader to reflect on the extraordinary fact
that, though the name of Valentinus is in the mouth of everyone of the
time, and though his fame entirely eclipses that of every other name

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

of this most important Gnostic cycle, the words and deeds of the great
coryphæus of Gnosticism are almost entirely without record, and,
stranger than all, he is regarded, at any rate for the major part of his
life, as orthodox. This strange fact requires explanation, and I would
venture to suggest that the explanation is to be found to a great extent
in the extraordinary reserve and secrecy of the man. He was an enigma
not only to the generality, but even to those who regarded him as a
teacher.

The Gnosis in his hands is trying to forestall "orthodoxy," to embrace
everything, even the most dogmatic formulation of the traditions of the
Master. The great popular movement and its incomprehensibilities were
recognized by Valentinus as an integral part of the mighty out-pouring;
he laboured to weave all together, external and internal, into one
piece, devoted his life to the task, and doubtless only at his death
perceived that for that age he was attempting the impossible. None but
the very few could ever appreciate the ideal of the man, much less
understand it.

None of his technical treatises were ever published; his letters and
homilies alone were circulated.

After leaving Rome he is practically lost to the sight of the Western
hæresiologists. Where <span class="margnote">Writings.</span> he went,
what he did, and how long he lived after that, is almost entirely
conjectural. But if it be ever shown to be true that such documents as
the *Pistis Sophia* are specimens of the workshop to which he belonged,
we can at least conjecturally answer that he went back to Alexandria,
where he

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

finished his life in the retirement that such abstruse literary labours
required.

Of his writings, besides the fact that they were numerous and his
technical treatises exceedingly difficult and abstruse, we know very
little. He composed numerous Letters and Homilies and Psalms. We are
also told that he composed a Gospel, but this is supposed to be a false
assumption--false, that is to say, if by Gospel is meant a Gospel
containing the Sayings of the Lord. But may not Gospel here be used in
the Basilidian sense of an exposition of the Gnosis, or knowledge of the
things beyond the phenomenal world?

Tertullian also tells us that Valentinus composed a treatise entitled
*Sophia*, or Wisdom, Some critics have asserted that the words of
Tertullian do not refer to a book but to the Wisdom which Valentinus
claimed to teach; but if this were so, the antithesis which Tertullian
makes between the *Wisdom* of Valentinus and the *Wisdom* of Solomon
would lose all its point. The *Wisdom* of Solomon is a book, the
*Wisdom* of Valentinus should also be a book; if it were intended to
mean simply the Gnosis which Valentinus taught, then its proper
antithesis would have been the Wisdom of God and not of Solomon.

<span class="margnote">The Fragments that remain.</span>We have now to
treat of the few fragments of the works of this prolific writer which
have come down to us in the writings of the Church Fathers. The latest
collection of 'them is by Hilgenfeld (1884), whose "emendations,"
however, we shall not always follow. The fragments consist of a few
scraps of letters and homilies preserved by

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Clement of
Alexandria, and two pieces in The Philosophumena--the narrative of a
vision and the scrap of a psalm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: i. From a Letter](fff43)
