[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff46)  [Next](fff48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### v. A few Sentences preserved in the Controversial Matter of Clement following the above Quotation, and probably taken from a Writing of Valentinus.

The "elect race," the third Sonship of Basilides, has incarnated here
for the abolition of "death,"<span class="margnote">The Face of
God.</span> the domain of the Ruler of the phenomenal world, the
*saṁsāra* of the Buddhist and Indian philosophers, the realm of the
"ever-becoming" of Plato. This Ruler is the God of the Old Testament.
"No

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

man shall see the face of God and live." This is the face of death, but
there is also a face of life, concerning which Valentinus writes:

"As far removed as is the \[dead image\] from the living face, so far is
the \[phenomenal\] world removed from the living æon \[the noumenal\].
What then is the cause of the image? The majesty of the \[living\] face,
\[or person,\] which exhibits the type \[of the universe\] to the
painter, and in order that it \[the universe\] may be honoured by its
name \[--the name or real being of the majesty of the godhead\]. For it
is not the authentic \[or absolute\] nature which is found in the form;
it is the name which completes the deficiency in the confection. The
invisible nature of deity co-operates so as to induce faith in that
which has been fashioned."

Here we have the same idea as in Fragment i., and presumably it was
taken from the same Letter. The "painter" is of course the user of the
creative forces of the phenomenal world, who copies from the types or
ideas in the noumenal world of reality. He whom the Jews called God and
Father, was said by Valentinus to be the "image and prophet of the true
God," the word prophet meaning one who speaks for and interprets. The
"image" is the work of Sophia or Wisdom, who is the "painter" who
transfers the types from the noumenal spaces on to the canvas of the
phenomenal world, and the "true God" or the "God of truth" is the
creator of the noumenal world, which contains the types of all things.
He is the god of life; the "image" is the god of death.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

"All things that come forth from a pair \[or syzygy\] are fullnesses
(plērōmata), but all which proceed from a single \[æon\] are images."

This will be explained later on; it refers to the "fall" of Sophia from
the æon-world, whereby the phenomenal universe came into existence.

The remarks of Clement which immediately follow are almost
unintelligible; they deal with the coming of the "excellent" spirit, the
infusion of the light-spark into man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vi. From the Letter on the Community of Friends](fff48)
