[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff54)  [Next](fff56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

### PTOLEMY.

OF the life of Ptolemy, one of the oldest pupils of Valentinus, we know
absolutely nothing.. It was through some of the pupils of Ptolemy mainly
that Irenæus (I. i.-viii.) become acquainted with a rough outline of
some of the ideas of the developed Gnosticism of this line of tradition;
but whether or not Ptolemy himself was alive when the Presbyter of Lyons
wrote the opening chapters of his Refutation, somewhere about <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 185-195, it is impossible to say. Of the
writings of Ptolemy two fragments alone have been preserved: an
interpretation of the magnificent Proem of the Beginnings still extant
in the Prologue to the fourth canonical Gospel (Iren., I. viii. 5), and
a letter to a lady called Flora, quoted by Epiphanius (*Hær*., xxxiii.).

Whether or not the teaching of Ptolemy had any essential differences
from that of his master Valentinus, it is at present impossible to
decide; and the copied statement of Tertullian (*Adv. Valent.*, 4)--that
with Ptolemy the names and numbers of the æons were separated into
personal substances external to Deity, whereas with Valentinus these
substances had been included in the sum of the Godhead, as sensations,
affections, and emotions--is perfectly unintelligible to the student of
Gnosticism.

We will first consider the Letter to Flora, and then the interpretation
of the Logos-doctrine Proem. The <span class="margnote">The Letter to
Flora.</span> Letter to Flora gives the view which the Valentinian to
Flora.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

tradition held concerning the world-process, the old Covenant theology,
and the documents of the Jewish law.

Opinions, says Ptolemy, are divided; some holding the one extreme and
contending that the Jews’ Law came direct from God and the Father (the
Logos); others maintaining the absolute contrary, and declaring that it
emanated from the opposite power, the destroyer, the god of this world
(the Accuser or Diabolos). Both of these extreme views are unwise. On
the one hand, the Law is evidently imperfect, as may be seen from the
crude ideas ascribed to God in some of the documents, ideas foreign to
the nature and judgments of the God of the Christ; and on the other, the
world-process cannot be the work of an unjust power, for the Saviour
Himself declared that a house divided against itself cannot stand; and
the "Apostle" long ago robbed of its sting the "baseless wisdom"
(ἀνυπόστατον σοφίαν) of such liars, in the words, "all things were made
by Him," the Logos, and not by a god of destruction.

Ptolemy, like the rest of the Valentinians, condemns as strongly such
false gnosis as later the now-called "orthodox" Fathers, headed by
Irenæus, condemned all gnosis. But at this time the phrase "knowledge
falsely so called" was not a condemnation of all gnosis, for there still
was an "orthodox" Christian gnosis, as Clement of Alexandria and others
have so well shown.

Such views, then, are held only by those who are ignorant of the
causative law; the one body of extremists being ignorant of the God of
Justice (the

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

framer of the kārmic law), the other of the All-Father, whom the Saviour
was the first to know and proclaim to the Jews.

The Gnostics held a middle position between these extremes, the only
possible one. Ptolemy thus proceeds <span class="margnote">The "Higher
Criticism."</span> to answer the doubts of Flora entirely in  the spirit
of what is now called the "Higher Criticism"; he lays down a position
immediately self-evident to the cultured Gnostic genius, and said to be
based on the words of Jesus, but only recovered by modern scholarship
after many long centuries of obscurantism.

The law, as set forth in the Five Books ascribed to Moses, is not from
one source, that is to say, not from God alone. In fact, three sources
may be distinguished: (1) laws given by Moses under inspiration; (2)
laws enacted by Moses himself; (3) laws added by the elders.

This division is borne out by the "Words of the Saviour"; for with
regard to divorce He taught that it was permitted by Moses only because
of the Jews’ hardness of heart, whereas the Law of God from the
beginning laid down that husband and wife should not be sundered. The
law of Moses was simply an enactment of expediency, it was not the Law.
Moreover, the traditions of the elders were equally not the Law. For the
inspired Law taught that honour was *due* to father and mother; and
Jesus had opposed this old truth of karmic duty to the ignorant
tradition of the elders, which taught that anything given to father or
mother by the child was a *gift*--a phrase which Ptolemy quotes
differently from the

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

readings of either of the synoptic documents that still preserve it;
namely, "whatsoever benefit thou receivest from me, is a gift to God."

Thus three distinct sources are to be distinguished, only one of which
can be referred to what can in any sense be called revelation.

Again, as to the first division, this in its turn is resolvable into
three elements: (1) a good element (the Decalogue), endorsed and
completed by the teaching of Christ; (2) a bad element, which He set
aside, the "eye for an eye" law of retaliation; and (3) the typical and
symbolical rites, such as circumcision, the sabbath and fasting, which
the Christ translated from their sensible and phenomenal forms into
their spiritual and invisible meaning. This is borne out in a remarkable
fashion by one of the newly discovered Sayings: "Jesus saith, Except ye
fast to the world, ye shall in no wise find the Kingdom of God; and
except ye sabbatize the sabbath, ye shall not see the Father." (See
*Sayings of Our Lord*, Grenfell and Hunt; London, 1897).

Thus with regard to the third element, the Christ taught that the
"offerings" to God were not to consist of incense and the slaughter of
irrational animals, but of spiritual thanksgiving, and goodwill and good
works to our neighbours; that circumcision was not of anything physical,
but of the spiritual heart; that keeping the sabbath was resting from
evil works; and in like manner fasting was from baser things, and not
from physical food.

From what source, then, came the "inspiration" of Moses in establishing
such observances? From a

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

source midway between the world of men and the God over all; that is to
say, from the intermediate <span class="margnote">The Source of Moses’
Inspiration.</span> realms, or world-soul, the fabricative power of this
physical world. The source of Moses’ inspiration was not the Perfect
Deity of the Christ, but an inferior source, not good (for God alone is
really good), nor evil (the power which opposes good alone being evil),
but imperfect; the power of the adjuster or arbitrator. This source is
inferior to the Perfect Deity; it is only conditionally righteous or
just, and so inferior to the perfect righteousness and justice of God.
The maker or soul of our world is generable, the creator of the divine
creation ingenerable. But the world-maker is superior to the opposer,
the world, whose substance is destruction and darkness, and whose matter
is material and manifoldly divided. But the substance of the cosmic
spaces of the ingenerable Father (the cosmic spaces, or "universals," as
opposed to the "world," or our earth; the cosmic planes as distinguished
from the terrestrial) is incorruptibility and self-existent Light,
simple and one.

The substance of these cosmic spaces is differentiated in an
incomprehensible manner into two powers or aspects, soul enforming body;
that is to say, the "planetary soul" enforming the "earth." This soul is
an image of the ideal cosmos, and it is from one of its powers that
Moses received his inspiration.

So far the sensible letter of Ptolemy to Flora; in which the Gnostic
doctor, by his knowledge of the unseen world and understanding of the
teaching of

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

the Christ, intuitively applies a canon of criticism to the contents of
the Pentateuch, which the best scholarship of our own century has taken
a hundred years to establish intellectually.

<span class="margnote">The Proem to the Fourth Gospel.</span>We will now
proceed to consider the interpretation which Ptolemy gave to the
glorious Proem that now stands at the head of the fourth Gospel.

The Beginning is the first principle brought into being by God, and in
it the Father emanated all things in germ, or potentially. This
Beginning is called Mind, Son, and Alone-begotten (that is to say,
brought forth by the Father alone).

The next phase of being was the emanation of the Logos (Reason or Word)
in the first principle, the Beginning or Mind. This Logos in His turn
contained in Himself the whole substance of the Æons, which substance
the Logos enformed.

According to the Lexicon of the Alexandrian Hesychius, the philosophical
meaning of the term Logos is "the cause of action" (ἡ τοῦ δράματος
ὑπόθεσις).

The opening words, therefore, treat of the divine hypostases.

"In the Beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was (one) with God, and
the Logos was God. He was in the Beginning (one) with God." I translate
the phrase πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν by the words "one with God," and not by the
simple and familiar "with God," on the authority of Ptolemy (ἡ πρὸς
ἀλλήλους ἅμα καὶ ἡ πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ἕνωσις), seeing that the simple
English preposition "with" does not convey the sense of the Greek.

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

First of all there is a distinction made between the three, God,
Beginning and Logos, and then they are at-oned, or identified; in order
that first the emanation of the two from the one may be shown--of the
Son (or Beginning or Mind) and of the Logos from the Father)--and then
the identification or at-one-ment of the two with each other and with
the Father may be indicated.

For in the Father and from the Father is the Beginning; and in the
Beginning and from the Beginning is the Logos. Well said is it then, "In
the Beginning was the Logos," for He was in the Son (or Mind).

"And the Logos was (one) with God." For the Beginning is one with God,
and, consequently, the Logos is one. For what is of God, is God.

"All came into being through Him, and without Him nothing had being."
That is, the Logos was the cause of the divine or æonic creation.

But "that which has its being in Him is Life"--the syzygy or consort of
the Logos.

The Æons came into being *through* Him, but Life was *in* him. And she
who is in Him, is more akin to Him than they who came into being through
Him. For she is united to Him and bears fruit through Him.

"And the Life was the Light of men"--"men" signifying first of all the
supernal Man and his spouse, the Church, for they were enlightened, or
brought to light through Life. Thus far concerning the Plērōma or divine
world.

The next verse, "The Light shineth in the

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Darkness and the
Darkness comprehended it not," refers to the sensible universe. For
though the chaos of the sensible universe was made into cosmos by the
passion of the Divine Æon, the sensible world knew Him not. And this Æon
is thus Truth and Life, and "Word made flesh," in the cosmic process. It
is the enlightened only who have "beheld His glory," the glory of the
Alone-begotten Son, the Divine Æon or Plērōma, given unto Him by the
Father, full of Grace (another name for Silence and Peace) and Truth.

And thus, said Ptolemy, distinct reference to the two
tetraktydes--Father and Silence, Mind and Truth, Word and Life, Man and
Church--is contained in the Proem.

Such was the nature of the exegesis of Ptolemy with regard to the Proem
of the Logos-doctrine, and here we must reluctantly leave him, for we
have no further information.

Irenæus’ summary, in his opening chapters, of what he had picked up
concerning the tenets of "them of Ptolemy," differs but slightly from
the outlines of the æon-process and Sophia-mythus drama already familiar
to our readers from the account of Hippolytus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Heracleōn](fff56)
