[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff51)  [Next](fff53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SOME OUTLINES OF ÆONOLOGY.

IN order to elevate our thought to a contemplation of the transcendent
problems towards which the <span class="margnote">Towards the Great
Silence.</span> mind of these Gnostics was carried, we should refresh
our memory with the sketch of the Basilidian system which has been given
above. From the world of men, our earth, we must pass in thought through
the sublunary spaces, visible and invisible; thence we must pass beyond
the moon-firmament, the heaven, into the æthereal spaces--the
star-worlds, and their infinite inhabitants, spaces and regions, orders
and hierarchies--bounded at the utmost limits of space and time, by the
Great Firmament, the Ring "Pass Not," which marks off the phenomenal
universe from the universe of reality out of space and time. It is a
Boundary everywhere and--no "where."

Here we bid farewell to time and space, and reach the region of paradox,
for mortal man has still to speak of it in terms of phenomenal
things--calling it a region, although it is not a region; speaking of it
as the Living Æon, though it transcends all life; hymning it as the
Light-world, though its light is darkness to mortal eyes, because of the
superabundance of its brilliancy.

This is the Plērōma, the world of perfection, of

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

perfect types and perfect harmony. The mind falls back from it, unable
to comprehend, and yet the spirit within cries unto man with a voice
that can brook no denial: "Onward still; beyond still, and beyond!" Then
is there Silence; no words, no symbols, no thoughts can further avail.
The mind is mute, the spirit is at peace, at rest in the Supreme Silence
of contemplation, of union with the Divine, the Great Deep--Profundity,
the within of things, that which permeates all, goes *through* all.

<span class="margnote">The Depth Beyond Being.</span>Our Gnostics are
said to have "begun" with this conception of Bythus, or the Abyss of
Profundity; but this is a mistake. Basilides had already shown how
impossible it was to name the God beyond all; are we to think that the
Valentinians fell short of so obvious a truth? By no means; some of them
taught of the Beyond the Deep, a hierarchy of Deeps; and curiously
enough in the Codex Brucianus we meet with such hierarchies, and also
find them assumed in the *Pistis Sophia* treatise. What absurdity, then,
to seek a "beginning" in infinitude! Such a conception as a beginning
was low down in the scale of being; we can speak of the "beginning" of
some special phenomenal universe, but there is an infinitude of such
universes, and infinitude has no beginning.

Beyond the Plērōma, or ideal type of all universes, there was--what?
Silences more unspeakable than Silence, and Depths deeper than the Deep!
How the Valentinians would have laughed at the notion of ascribing a
monistic or dualistic theory to their intuition of what lay beyond
Being, and of making

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

this the basis of dividing them into an Eastern and Western school! Yet
that is what Hippolytus (II.) and many modern critics have done.

Let us then leave the mystery in the Silence of that Depth beyond
Being--a Silence which, as it were, shut off the Plērōma from the Depth
beyond Being by a still higher Boundary than the Great Firmament. This
highest Boundary was within the innermost depths of the Plērōma itself,
the inward world, just as the Great Boundary was beyond the depths of
the phenomenal external world. The idea connoted by the term "depth"
takes thought away from all ideas of three dimensional matter, as we
know it, and introduces it to the notion of "through" in every direction
at the same time, inside and out as well.

We next have to treat of the "being" of the Plērōma of the æons. Every
"being" in this <span class="margnote">The Æon-world.</span> "Fullness
of Being" (Plērōma) was also, in its turn, a "fullness" or perfection,
and the nature of the life of these "beings" was shown forth in their
names. They were called æons, or "eternities," for they were out of time
and space. Everything outside the Plērōma, that is to say, everything in
the phenomenal universe, on the contrary, was an "image" or deficiency.
The phenomenal world was therefore called by such names as the Kenōma or
"Emptiness," the Image, etc.

It is, however, evident that until we reach the phenomenal world, no
possible human language can serve us to express modes of being which
transcend cosmogonic operations. And yet the hardihood of the

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gnostic genius had
to find some method whereby it could adumbrate the manner of being of
the æons, which were *ex hypothesi* out of time and space. Let us then
turn our attention to one of the methods whereby this was attempted. Not
that the Gnostics worked from below upwards, they received from above
and brought it down into matter; in brief, their expositions were
attempts to describe a *living symbol*, which is said to have been shown
them in vision.

<span class="margnote">The Platonic Solids.</span>Now Pythagoras and
Plato, and the instructors in the Mysteries, declared that physical
matter was ultimately of a geometrical nature; that in all things "God
geometrizes." Thus the five regular solids formed the summit of the
geometrical knowledge of the Platonic school. It was because of the
attention bestowed on these solids by this school, that' posterity has
called the five the Platonic Solids. The whole of the Elements of
Euclid, says Proclus, were but an introduction to this science of the
perfect solids. These polyhedra were believed to lie at the back not
only of earth-formation, but of every genus, species, and individual in
the material universe. It is strange that no subject in mathematics has
been so neglected as that of the regular solids; but so it is, and the
moderns laugh at such "puerilities" of the ancients.

For the re-discovery and elaboration of a part of this science within
the last six years I must refer the "*doulx lecteur*" to the works of a
young Spanish scientist, Señor Soria y Mata.

No one of course who is entirely ignorant of the

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

subject, will be able to comprehend fully the following general
indications; but the nature of finger-posts is to point in certain
directions, not to accompany the traveller along the road; and the
"gentle reader" who requires such personal conducting must seek it in
Señor Soria's admirable essays. For the present our work is simply to
set up sign-posts; and so we return to our task.

But even supposing, some one may say, that the five solids (which are
all variations of one in various combinations with itself) have some
connection with the typical elements which build up the invisible
molecular structure of physical matter, what has that to do with the
Valentinian Gnostics? A great deal, we may answer. Marcus, one of the
earliest followers of Valentinus, has some system of a kabalistic
numbering assigned to him, and in connection with this Hippolytus (II.)
declares that the whole of Valentinianism was based on the numbers and
geometry of Pythagoras and Plato.

No further proof, however, is brought forward of this sweeping
generality, and no scholar has so far supplied the missing link. It is,
nevertheless, entirely credible that the æonology of the Valentinian
School was based partly on such considerations. Let us then attempt to
make a few suggestions on the subject, not from the numbering ascribed
to Marcus, but from the living side of Pythagorean and Platonic
mathematics, the "*mathēsis*" which was the same as the "*gnōsis*," and
which is said to have been called even by Pythagoras himself, "the
gnōsis of things that are."

It was then perhaps along this line of thought

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

that some of the Gnostic thinkers sought for <span class="margnote">A
Living Symbolism.</span>a living symbolism, which should adumbrate in
some fashion the manner of being of the æons. From the region of
definite polyhedrical matter, the ordering of which, though invisible to
the eye, could yet be imagined in the mind, the symbolism could be
pushed back a further stage--from the molecular to the atomic as we
should say now-a-days. The regular solids were thus the eventuation in
physical matter of certain systems of perfect equilibrium of "points" in
space. These points were not pure mathematical abstractions, but actual
centres of force, bearing certain relations to one another, equilibrated
by a law of polarity or syzygy. This was the region of the atom. The
atom was thought of as a living thing of force, a sphere, said by some
to be a spherical ("conical") swirl, the most perfect figure, ever
contracting and expanding, generative of all motions, while it is itself
self-motive, and yet from another point of view "immovable," as
pertaining to the "foundations of earth." It is smaller than the small
as matter, yet greater than the great as energy.

It was the atom and its combinations, then, as we should now-a-days say,
which the Valentinian Gnosis envisaged in its æonology. I do not,
however, for a moment suggest that any Gnostic philosopher thought of
the atom in the same way as a modern physicist does; I believe, on the
contrary, that the most advanced of the Gnostics were shown this living
symbol of world-formation in vision, and the various systems were
efforts to explain such visions. Of course, any symbol is immensities

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

removed from the reality, but the endeavour to imagine, or the privilege
of being shown, the living type lying beyond the simplest types of
physical matter-formation, is at any rate nearer the reality than any
dead physical shape. Thus the atom and its simplest modes of
differentiated being, may be taken as symbols of the æon-world, the
Plērōma, the world of life and light, beyond time and space, the
undecaying heart of the eternities.

The following view may then be of interest to students of symbolism, who
as a rule confine their attention solely to plane figures, and thus deal
as it were with the "shadows of the dead." For a plane figure is, so to
speak, only a shadow of a dead solid; it is the living system of force
behind or within the latter which is the first spark of life in the
series. In order to see this more clearly, let us take a familiar
symbol, the interlaced triangles or "Solomon's Seal." In solids this
symbol is represented by two mutually interpenetrated tetrahedra; from
this union come the cube and octahedron. The dodecahedron and
icosahedron come from the mutual congress of five tetrahedra, a
quintuplication. Thus we have our five regular solids. The fundamental
type is the tetrahedron, and the force-system behind it consists of two
pairs of atoms, or a double syzygy or couple in perfect equilibrium. The
nature of the relationship of these atoms or spheres to each other, and
of the interplay of their motions, is the mode of life or being of the
symbol; and when this is learned, then the symbol becomes alive and thus
the forces

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

which the "shadow" of the "dead" solid symbolizes, are in the hand of
the solver of the "mystery." One form of ancient magic, especially
practised in Egypt, consisted of a most complicated extension of this
idea, which wandered far beyond the limits of the geometrical symbols.
Needless to say that the vast majority who practised the art, had not
the slightest idea of the "reasons" for their performances. Magic for
the general was never a rational thing. It consisted of an infinite
number of "rules of thumb," and this side of it is consequently, and
quite rightly, regarded by the present age of intelligent enquiry as a
superstition.

<span class="margnote">The "Fourth Dimension."</span>The intelligent
student of symbolism will thus endeavour to free his mind from the
limitations of three-dimensional space, and think within into the state
of the so-called "fourth dimension." For it is only along this line of
thought that there is any hope of the faintest conception of æonic
being. As the matter is of the first importance for a student of
Gnosticism, and at the same time one of great difficulty, the following
line of thought may be suggested as a preliminary exercise. Think of an
atom, or monad, as a sphere which generates itself, or swells out, from
a point and refunds itself again into that point. This gives the simple
idea of position. Take two of such spheres at the same moment of
expansion, that is to say two equal spheres, and place them in mutual
contact. This can be done in an infinite number of ways, so that they
may be in any direction the one with the other.

Reduce these spheres in thought to mathematical

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

points, and we have the simplest idea of extension--one dimension. The
two points are the extremities or boundaries of a line.

Next, take three similar spheres and bring them into mutual contact.
They can be placed in any direction the one to the other. Reduce them in
thought to points, and we have three points not in a straight line,
lying in a plane surface, or superfices of two dimensions. Then take
four such spheres and bring them into mutual contact. Reduce them in
their turn to points, and their positions require space of three
dimensions. Finally, take five such spheres and try to imagine how they
can be brought into mutual contact, that is to say, how each one can
touch all the rest. This cannot be imagined in three dimensions, and
requires the conception of another "dimension"--something to do with the
content of the spheres--the idea of "through." This does not seem to be
so much a "fourth dimension" as an involution of perception, retracing
the path we have so far followed.

For instance, three-dimensional space is for normal sight bounded by
surfaces; those who have inner vision ("four-dimensional" sight) say
that the contents of an object--*e.g.*, a watch--appear, in some
incomprehensible way, spread out before them as on a surface. If this is
so, then three-dimensional space, the fourth link in our chain, is the
turning point, and hence consciousness turns itself inwards once more
towards the point, which when reached will become the illimitable
circumference, or plērōma of consciousness--the nirvānic "atom," so to
say.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

Let us now try to imagine how the Gnosis symbolized the ideal universe,
the type of all universes--the primal atom or monad, its motions, and
modes of self-differencing and self-emanation within itself. The object
of their contemplation was identical with the world of ideas, or noëtic
world, of Plato; the light-world of ancient Irān; the "eternal egg," or
type, from which all universes come forth, of ancient Khem; the
"resplendent germ," or *hiranya-garbha*, of the Upanishads--all of which
has been intuitively set forth in philosophical terms by Leibnitz in his
*Monadology*.

<span class="margnote">The Eternal Atom.</span>First, then, we have the
conception of an infinite sphere of Light, Light which transcends the
glory of the most brilliant sun, as that sun's glory transcends the
flame of a rush-light; Light beyond thought. As yet there is naught but
infinite Light; yet through it there is ever a something going, as it
were from and to its centre, which is everywhere and nowhere, a breath
ever outbreathing and inbreathing, an endless energy which nothing human
can perceive or know. It is the Life-breath of the universe at the
zero-point of being, to use terms familiar to some theosophical
students.

We next proceed to what we must call a change of state; but we should
remember that all the states we are attempting thus to symbolize, in
reality exist *simultaneously;* and though in thought we are to follow
out a kind of emanation or evolution, it is in reality an ever-existing
infinite state of consciousness out of time and space.

In this ever-pulsating field of universal energy

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (which is
everywhere and nowhere), a something arises slightly less brilliant than
the transcendent <span class="margnote">The Law of Syzygy.</span> Light,
another mode of motion as it were, which we may symbolize as an oval or
egg-like swirling, ever swelling-out and in-drawing. Within this two
"foci" are gradually developed, as it pulsates and swells. The inner
periphery of the egg-envelope contracts in the midst through the action
of the two foci, the symbols of equilibrium, of positive and negative,
the law of syzygy or pairing. The two part asunder. Bythus and Ennœa,
Profoundity and Thought, are the first syzygy of æons, now symbolized as
two spheres. Being separate, in some mysterious fashion they are
differently affected by the great out-breath and in-breath, yet each
manifests the qualities of the other. One is positive, the other is
negative, as it were, and these qualities are at once communicated to
the whole of the great Light-sphere, for they are everywhere and nowhere
at once. Polarity is thus stated to be a mode of being of the Plērōma;
the law of syzygy is affirmed.

But duality arising, multiplicity must follow; and not only multiplicity
but universality. For the Plērōma must be simultaneously the type of the
One, Many and All, and monotheism, polytheism and pantheism must each
find its source therein.

In following out our symbolic imagery, however, we cannot think the
whole at once. We try to conceive that whatever process we gain an
intuition of by means of our symbols, takes place everywhere, always,
and simultaneously with every other process and manner of being; but of
this we can get no

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

mental image. We can only pass from one process to another by following
out the behaviour of a single pair of our living symbols. To proceed
then.

Thus we have spheres evolving, each positive-negative in itself, but
positive or negative in its relationship to the other. In thought we
will treat one as positive, the other as negative, and thus try to
imagine the changes of mode. As the twin spheres in their turn expand
and contract, when they touch, from the negative a "veil" or "mist" is
shed forth and as it were "lines" the great Light-sphere.

<span class="margnote">The Law of Differentiation.</span>The law of
densification and perpetual differentiation is declared. At each
contract the negative sphere becomes less light and more passive as it
were, though in reality the "lowest" æon far transcends the most
brilliant radiance in the universe. The negative light-sphere developer
into progeny, differentiates its substance, impregnated by the positive
light-sphere. That is to say, the Light-world is differentiated into
"planes" of being; there are "veils" and "firmaments." But how many and
of what kind?

I must refer the reader again to Señor Soria's essays on the polyhedric
origin of species for the only possible series of physical systems of
perfect equilibrium of spheres of equal diameter, from two upwards, if
he would follow out this most interesting problem in greater detail and
work out the matter for himself. For the moment it is sufficient to
state that the first æonic hierarchy of the Valentinian Plērōma is said
to have been an ogdoad, or group of eight, which was sometimes
considered as a dual

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

tetrad--in living symbols, the system of equilibrium behind two equally
interpenetrated tetrahedra.

A point of interest which should not be overlooked, however, is to be
noticed as following from <span class="margnote">The Three and the
Seven.</span> the consideration of the ogdoadic mode of the Plērōma. The
Bythus and Ennœa are no longer regarded as a single pair; Ennœa, the
negative sphere, has produced offspring. She is now the type of
"seven-robed" Nature, Isis; while Bythus is the Great Deep or
"Water-whirl," Osiris, the tether. The negative sphere is now seven
spheres (herself, and six like unto herself and the positive
sphere)--that is, three pairs of æons. Here we have the type of the one
sphere of sameness, and the seven spheres of difference, of the
Pythagorean and Platonic World-soul. The Ogdoad and Hebdomad of
Basilides have also here their types.

Thus having declared the law of duality, or syzygy, we next find the law
of triplicity asserted in the triad of syzygies into which the negative
sphere is differentiated. These are the three great stages or spaces of
the Plērōma, and the syzygies, or modes of polarity, of these phases
were called Mind-Truth, Word-Life, and Man-Church, for reasons which are
somewhat obscure, and to which we shall return later on.

We are next told of a dodecad and decad of æons <span
class="margnote">The Twelve and Ten</span> which owe their existence to
one or other of the syzygies of the ogdoad. The accounts of their
genesis are entirely contradictory; sometimes also the decad is placed
before the dodecad, and, seeing of course that ten naturally comes
before twelve, the critics

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

have without exception preferred this order. The matter is at best
purely conjectural in such a chaos, but experience leads us to choose
the less likely as being the more correct account. What on earth should
have induced some of the Valentinians to put the twelve before the ten
if their symbolism had not necessitated such an order?

We shall therefore take the main phases of the Plērōma to be those
symbolized by the ogdoad, the dodecad and the decad in turn; not that
one came from the other in reality (they all existed together
eternally), but because the living symbols are described in a dramatic
myth, one of the variants of which we shall shortly present to the
reader.

The ogdoad is a term connoting the operations of the living processes
behind the symbol of two interpenetrated tetrahedra, and therefore
includes all the permutations of their complementary progeny (the cube
and octahedron). Thus the ogdoad was divided into a higher and lower
tetrad, and in various other ways, including the one and the seven as
described above; the one and the seven can be represented by the curious
geometrical fact that if seven equal circles be taken, and six be
grouped round the central one, each circumference respectively will be
found to exactly touch two adjacent circles and the one in the middle,
while the greater circle can be described round all seven. This is of
course but the shadow of a symbol, and is only intended to serve as a
mnemonic; but the fact is curious, and such natural facts were not so
lightly regarded by the Platonists as they are by the moderns,
especially when they had to do with the

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

most perfect figures--circles and spheres, the natural symbols of
perfections or plērōmata.

We have now come to a stage where the differentiation of the primal
simplicity is to be represented <span class="margnote">The
Dodecahedron.</span> by groups of twelve; the mode of being of the
Plērōma is now the dodecad. It is a curious fact that if we were to
imagine space filled with spheres all of equal diameter and in mutual
contact, we should find that each sphere was surrounded with exactly
twelve other spheres; moreover, if we should imagine the spheres to be
elastic, and that pressure be brought to bear on one of such systems of
twelve, on every side at once, the central or thirteenth sphere would
assume a dodecagonal form--in fact, a rhombic dodecahedron.

If we further remember that there is frequent mention of a "thirteenth
æon," which has hitherto puzzled all the commentators; that the
Pythagoreans and Platonists and Indian philosophers asserted that the
dodecahedron was the symbol of the material universe; that we are
assured by some who have psychic or clairvoyant vision to-day that the
field of activity of the atom is contained by a rhombic dodecahedron;
and that the "twelve" signs of the zodiac have hitherto remained a mere
irrational hypothesis--then we may be inclined to think that there was
good reason for insisting on the dodecad as an important phase of æonian
being.

Moreover, each phase of the Plērōma is supposed to be positive to the
succeeding phase. Thus the Plērōma as a whole is positive to the dyadic
stage; in the dyadic stage, Bythus is positive to Ennœa, who

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

becomes various and sevenfold. The sevenfold is positive to the dodecad
stage, which consists of thirteen spheres.

If we think of the dodecad as the dodecahedron we shall be dealing with
the phenomenal universe, and thus be without the Plērōma; here we are
dealing with the living type behind, in the æon-world, that is to say
the system of thirteen spheres which eventuate the dodecahedron in the
physical world.

Each of these thirteen contains in itself the seven modes of being of
the preceding phase, and thus, in every system of thirteen, there is in
reality a multitudinous progeny. These are the children of that phase of
being which we may call the multiplicity of sameness, *i.e.*, the atomic
ocean of like contiguous spheres; and they in their turn undergo a
change which will eventuate in a harmonious arrangement or perfection,
to be finally denoted by the perfect number ten, the decad.

<span class="margnote">The Decad.</span>How, then, do we get from the
dodecad to the decad, from atomic matter to the perfect form? Perhaps
somewhat in this way. Every sphere is living, moving in all ways at
once, so to speak, and yet in another sense motionless. The types of
external motion are up, down, right, left, back, front, and round--seven
in all; to these we have to add in and out, and a motion that is no
motion we can imagine. And thus we reach a new phase of being through
the decad or ten, which begins, as it were, another series of motions on
a higher plane (1, 2, 3, etc., and then 11, 12, 13, etc.).

The seven motions, or modes of life, in every

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

system of thirteen spheres, are simple in the great sphere which
surrounds the thirteen--the fourteenth or boundary of the system; but in
the subordinate thirteen spheres the modes of motion act and react on
each other (for each subordinate sphere contacts so many others) and
produce a number of other modes of a subordinate nature, namely (7 × 13
or) 91. If to these we add as rulers the seven simple rates of motion,
in all we have 98 (91 + 7) different modes. To these we add the two
higher modes, the in- and out-breathing, and in all we have 100. The one
hundred is the perfection (10 × 10) of the perfect number (10). We shall
see later on how the Gnostics, in one of their systems, in their
perfecting of the Plērōma, found themselves compelled to add two æons,
and so introduced Christ and the Holy Spirit into the myth of the
Plērōma-drama.

Thus the hundred obtained along the line of development of the ogdoad
and dodecad, by the addition of two new factors, or the operation of a
new syzygy, led by another path of simplification to the ten, the number
of consummation.

Now the number of root-æons in the Plērōma was said to be thirty (8 +12
+ 10), to which we may add Christ and the Holy Spirit--the
representatives of the Bythus and Sigē (Silence) beyond the Plērōma--and
finally the That beyond all, so getting thirty-three, the number of the
Vaidic pantheon of thirty-three deities, the 8 Vasus, 12 Adityās and 10
Rudras, with a supreme Rudra at their head, and Heaven and Earth.

The number 100 also gives a hint whereby to

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

explain the ordering of the subordinate phases of the Plērōma, as found
in the system attributed by Hippolytus (II.) to the Docetæ, where
mention is made of the "thirty-fold, sixty-fold and one hundred-fold."

I do not for one moment suggest that these speculations were the basis
of Gnostic æonology; I believe the Gnostics were "shown" their æon-lore
in vision, and that they found analogies to what they were shown, in
nature and in the science of the time. Pythagoras was also, I believe,
shown the same truths and worked them out in mathematical symbols. The
Gnostics were acquainted with the system of his followers--a system of
which unfortunately only the merest fragments have reached us--and they
doubtless pressed into their service his theological arithmetic and
geometry to aid in their expositions; but this was only *one* means out
of a number which they employed for the same purpose. But to continue
with our æonology.

<span class="margnote">Chaos.</span>But how, out of the perfection of
the Plērōma (for every one of the æons was a perfection or plerōma in
its turn), was the imperfection, or deficiency, of cosmic matter to
come, which should serve as the substance out of which the "images" or
"creatures" of the universe were to be formed? So far the living symbol
of the Plērōma has produced perfect spheres, all in pairs, a light and
less light or "darker" globe; for the twelve and ten, just like the
eight, consist of pairs. The various phases have been brought about by
the light globes acting on the "darker" ones. But now a new change

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

takes place. There is an interaction of "dark" globes; and the result is
no longer a perfect sphere innate with motion, but an amorphous mass, in
one sense *out of* the Plērōma, as being *lower* than it, or not of its
nature. When this takes place, the whole system endeavours, as it were,
to right itself, just as the organs and corpuscles of the human body do
when anything goes wrong in it, for the Plērōma is the spiritual body of
the Heavenly Man. But the various æons of themselves cannot effect their
purpose, they can only act on the "formlessness" when they combine
together. From every one of the thirty æons, as it were, there shoots
forth a ray, and all the rays somehow or other, form a new æon or globe
of light, which rounds off the amorphous mass, or "abortion," burns it
into shape, enters into it, and finally carries it back to the rest.

This is the living symbol of the world-drama, and was worked out by the
Gnostics in much mythological detail. To everything below the Plērōma,
the Plērōma is one, a single thing, containing the powers of all the
æons; it is the "living æon" and acts upon cosmic matter, which is
shapeless, and so endows it with form and creates the universe. But this
is only the "enforming according to essence"; there is also an
"enforming according to knowledge," or consciousness, which pertains to
the soteriological part of the drama.

The idea seems to have been that the "abortion," or chaos, was destitute
of the life-swirl or vortex. <span class="margnote">Theos.</span> The
vortex is the finger of fire, as it were, or light-spark, shot forth by
the light-æons, in their

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

positive phases; the negative spheres cannot shape or fashion the
abortion, but can only densify or materialize it; the mother-breath
cools, the father-breath warms the plasm of the universe. This plasm is
now, so to say, thrown out of the ideal world into the cosmic plane, or
rather, let us say, from the cosmic plane into the plane of a
star-system; for the human mind cannot grasp such immensities as those
of the ideal world, and all we can do is to single out a finite example
from the infinitudes of space. Anything thrown out of the great cosmic
sweep and the life of the æons is, as it were, "crucified in space"; or
rather that which is incarnated into it, leaves the plane of infinitude
where it is one with the Father, and is "crucified." The Logos takes a
body, and His body is the cosmos. The Heavenly Man is crucified in
space. But this crucifixion is no shame, no disgrace; the cross is the
body of the Heavenly Man, the universe; and the symbol which the wise
have chosen for that mystery, is the figure of the Heavenly Man with
arms outstretched pouring His life and love and light into His
creatures. He is the source of all good to the universe, the perpetual
self-sacrifice.

Far lower down in the scale of being there is another crucifixion, when
the spirit is incarnated into the plane where there is male and female,
and is thus cut off from the great life and motion of the Plērōma. The
spirit in man is no longer consciously in the grand sweep of the Great
Breath, the Nirvānic Ocean of Life.

But we must return to cosmic substance and its fashioning. This
substance is so fine and rare and

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

subtle, that it transcends all substance we know of; indeed the
mother-substance of cosmos is of so marvellous a nature that the
Gnostics called it Wisdom herself, the highest vesture with which the
spirit could be clothed. That which gives Wisdom her first enformation,
is the potency of all the æons, called the Common Fruit of the Plērōma.

We have now arrived at the beginning of the evolution of the cosmos,
according to this scheme of <span class="margnote">Cosmos.</span>
universal philosophy. We must, however, if our imagination is to stand
the strain, be more modest, and confine our attention to the beginning
of a solar system instead of the origin of the cosmos.

The ætheric spaces destined to be the home of the future system are void
and formless. From the fullness of potential energy, the Plērōma, there
comes forth the stream of power, the spiral vortex--the Magna Vorago, or
Vast Whirlpool, of Orpheus. It is the fiery creative power; there is as
it were the purification of the spaces by fire. He enters into the
formlessness, and becomes the thing which it lacked, the spiral
life-force or primordial atom; He also fashions it without. The
mother-substance becomes a sphere, irradiate with life, a whirling mass
of stardust. The "atom" becomes the "flying serpent," the comet, which
as it were first hovers over the mother-substance, the new-born system.
It is the "serpent" and the "egg" again, the spermatozoon and ovum of
the solar embryon.

We have now reached a stage where we have to deal with the
differentiation of this nebula according to the types in the Divine
Mind, in other words, the

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Plērōma. It is at
this point that the intuitions of antiquity and the most recent
discoveries of modern science should meet face to face. This most
desirable union of the past and the present is, I believe, not so
distant an event as one might be led to suppose, but the present essay
does not give us scope even to suggest a few indications of the subject.
The matter is exceedingly technical, and we are not at present engaged
on such a task, but are merely enabling the general reader to while away
an hour or two among the Gnostics.

<span class="margnote">Mythology.</span>We will, therefore, break off
here on the borderland between the æonology and cosmogony of the
Valentinian circle of Gnosticism, and before going any farther give a
specimen of their mythological treatment of the æon-process. As we have
already remarked more than once, the accounts in the Church Fathers are
inconsistent and in many details contradictory. We hope, however, that
the sketch we have given above of the trend of ideas will throw some
light on all accounts, but as we have not the space to give all, we must
select one as a specimen; and the fact that Hippolytus (II.) seems to
have had a Gnostic MS. in front of him (seeing that. he invariably
adheres more closely to his written authorities than any of his
predecessors) shall guide us in our selection. Hippolytus, in his
*Philosophumena*, may be quoting from a late writing compared for
instance with the *Excerpts from Theodotus;* but his account is more or
less a reflection of the way in which a Gnostic looked at the matter,
while the *Excerpts* are most pitifully mutilated and misplaced. As for

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Irenæus’ summary,
it is at best a sorry patchwork. Not, however, that the account of
Hippolytus is not also a patchwork. It is manifestly patched together,
nevertheless the main pattern is taken from some treatise in the private
circulating library of the Valentinian school.

It may, however, before dealing with the account of Hippolytus, be of
interest to give the reader some <span class="margnote">The
Sophia-Mythus.</span> general idea of the important rôle played by the
personified Wisdom in Gnostic mythology. As Wisdom was the end of the
Gnosis, so the pivot of the whole Gnostic mythological drama was the
so-called Sophia-Mythus. For whether we interpret their allegories from
the macrocosmic or microcosmic standpoint, it is ever the evolution of
the mind that the initiates of old have sought to teach us. The
emanation and evolution of the world-mind in cosmogenesis, and of the
human mind in anthropogenesis, is ever the main interest of the secret
science.

The dwelling of Sophia, as the World-Soul, according to our Gnostics,
was in the Midst, in the Ogdoad, between the upper or purely spiritual
worlds, and the lower psychic and material worlds. Below the Ogdoad was
the Hebdomad or Seven Spheres of psychic substance. Truly hath "Wisdom
built for herself a House, and rested it on Seven Pillars" (*Prov*. ix.
1); and again: "She is in the lofty Heights; she stands in the Midst of
the Paths, for she taketh her seat by the Gates of the Powerful Ones,
she tarrieth at the Entrances \[of the Light-World\]" (*ibid*., viii.
2), says the Wisdom in its Jewish tradition.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

Moreover, Sophia was the Mediatrix between the upper and lower spaces,
and at the same time projected the Types or Ideas of the plērōma into
the cosmos. But why should Wisdom, who was originally of a pneumatic or
spiritual essence, be in the Middle Space, an exile from her true
Dwelling? Such was the great mystery which the Gnosis endeavoured to
solve. Seeing again that this "Fall of the Soul" (whether cosmic or
individual) from her original purity involved her in suffering and
misery, the object which the Gnostic philosophers had ever before them,
was identical with the problem of "sorrow" that Gautama Sākyamuni set
himself to solve. Moreover, the solution of the two systems was
identical in that they traced the "cause of sorrow" to Ignorance, and
for its removal pointed out the Path of Self-knowledge. The Mind was to
instruct the mind; "self-analysing reflection" was to be the Way. The
material mind was to be purified, and so become one with the spiritual
mind. In the nomenclature of the Gnosis this was dramatized in the
redemption of the Sophia by the Christ, who delivered her from her
ignorance and sufferings.

<span class="margnote">The Mother of Many Names.</span>It is not
surprising, then, that we should find the Sophia in her various aspects
possessed of many names. Among these may be mentioned the Mother, or
All-Mother; Mother of the Living, or Shirting Mother; the Power Above;
the Holy Spirit; again, She of the Left-hand as opposed to the Christos,
Him of the Right-hand; the Man-woman; Prouneikos or Lustful one; the
Matrix; Paradise; Eden; Achamōth; the Virgin; Barbēlō;

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Daughter of Light;
Merciful Mother; Consort of the Masculine One; Revelant of the Perfect
Mysteries; Perfect Mercy; Revelant of the Mysteries of the whole
Magnitude; Hidden Mother; She who knows the Mysteries of the Elect; the
Holy Dove who has given birth to Twins; Ennœa; Ruler; and the Lost or
Wandering Sheep, Helena, and many other names.

These terms refer to Sophia or the "Soul"--using the term in its most
general sense--in her cosmic or individual aspects, according as she is
above in her perfect purity; or in the midst, as intermediary; or below,
as fallen into matter. But to return to:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hippolytus’ account of One of the Variants of the
Sophia-Mythus](fff53)
