[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff60)  [Next](fff62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FROM THE ACTS OF JOHN.

<span class="margnote">A Recently Published Fragment.</span>IN a recent
volume of that most valuable series Texts and Studies (*Apocrypha
Anecdota II.*, by M. R. James, 1897), there is a long fragment of *The
Acts of John*, much of which has never been previously published. It has
been rescued from a fourteenth century MS. preserved in Vienna. The
original of these Acts is early, belonging as they do to the Leucian
collection. Seeing that Clement of Alexandria quotes from them, we must
assign the third quarter of the second century to them as the *terminus
ad quem*. We have therefore before us an early document, our interest in
which is further increased by the fact of its distinctly Gnostic nature.

<span class="margnote">The Rationale of Docetism.</span>Nearly the whole
of the fragment consists of a monologue put into the mouth of John, in
which is preserved for us a most remarkable tradition of the occult life
of Jesus. The whole setting of the christology is docetic and the
fragment is thus a most valuable addition to our knowledge on this
interesting point of Gnostic tradition. Docetism was the rank growth of
the

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

legends of certain occult powers ascribed to the "perfect man," which
were woven into the many christological and soteriological theories of
the Gnostic philosophers; and also, as I believe, of a veritable
historical fact, which has been obscured out of all recognition by the
many historicizing narrations of the origins. After His death the Christ
did return and teach His followers among the inner communities, and this
was the part origin of the protean Gnostic tradition of an inner
instruction. He returned in the only way He could return, namely, in a
"psychic" or "spiritual" body; this body could be made visible at will,
could even be made sensible to touch, but was, compared to the ordinary
physical body, an "illusory" body--hence the term "docetic."

But just as the external tradition of the "Poor Men" was gradually
transmuted, and finally exalted Jesus <span class="margnote">The
Evolution of Tradition.</span> from the position of a prophet into the
full power and glory of the Godhead itself, so the internal tradition
extended the original docetic notion to every department of the huge
soteriological structure raised by Gnostic genius. *The Acts of John*
pertain to the latter cycle of tendencies, and "John" is the
personification of one of the lines of tradition of the protean
docetism, which had its origin in an occult fact, and of those
marvellous teachings of initiation which became subsequently
historicized, and which John sums up in the words: "I held firmly this
one thing in myself, that the Lord contrived all things symbolically and
by a dispensation toward men, for their conversion and salvation."

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

That the Christ was possessed of spiritual powers of a very high order
is easy of belief to any student of occult nature. That he could appear
to others in a *māyāvi-rūpa*, as it is called in India, and change its
appearance at will, is quite possible of credit. But that the tradition
of these and other such happenings should have been handed down without
exaggeration and fantastic embellishment, would be entirely contrary to
human experience in such matters.

<span class="margnote">Mystic Stories of Jesus.</span>Thus, then, we are
told that at the calling of James and John, first of all James saw Jesus
as a child, while John saw Him first as a man "fair and comely and of a
cheerful countenance"; afterwards he saw Him as one "having a head
rather bald, but a thick and flowing beard," while James asserted that
He appeared "as a youth whose beard wag newly come."

Moreover, another peculiarity which John remarked, was that His eyes
never closed. Strangely enough, this is one of the signs of a "god"
given in the Hindu scriptures. Many changes of appearance did John
remark, sometimes as of "a man small and uncomely, and then again as one
reaching to heaven"--a fact quite credible when related of a pupil in
sympathetic contact with the powerful "presence" or "glory" of a Master.
But stranger still, when John lay upon his breast, "sometimes it was
felt of me to be smooth and tender, and sometimes hard, like stones."
Moreover, when Jesus was in prayer and contemplation, there was seen in
Him "such a light as it is not possible for a man that useth corruptible
speech to tell what it was like."

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

The following naïve story will at the end bring a smile to the face of
the reader, but at the same time it will give the student of hidden
nature proof that the legend is not based entirely on the imagination,
but pertains to the domain of occult fact, if at any rate the many
similar legends, current in India, concerning the touch of yogins when
in certain states of ecstasy are at all to be credited. (The quotations
are for the most part from Dr. James’ translation).

"Again in like manner he leadeth us three up into the mountain, saying
'Come ye to Me.' And we again went: and we beheld Him at a distance
praying. Now therefore I, because He loved me, drew nigh unto Him softly
as though He should not see, and stood looking at His back. And I beheld
Him that He was not in any wise clad with garments, but was seen of us
naked thereof, and not in any wise as a man; and His feet whiter than
any snow, so that the ground there was lighted up by His feet; and His
head reaching unto heaven, so that I was afraid [and](errata.htm#40)
cried out; and He turned and appeared as a [man](errata.htm#41) of small
stature, and took hold of my beard and pulled it and said unto me,
'John, be not unbelieving, and not a busybody.' And I said unto Him,
'But what have I done, Lord V And I tell you, brethren, I suffered great
pain in that place where he took hold upon my beard for thirty days.

"But Peter and James were wroth because I spake with the Lord, and
beckoned unto me that <span class="margnote">The Christ speaks with
Jesus.</span> I should come unto them, and leave the Lord alone. And I
went, and they both said unto me, 'He that

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

was speaking with the Lord when he was upon the top of the mount, who
was He? for we heard both of them speaking.' And I, when I considered
His great grace and His unity which hath many faces, and His wisdom
which without ceasing looked upon us, said, 'That shall ye learn if ye
inquire of Him.'

"Again, once when all of us His disciples were sleeping in one house at
Gennesaret, I alone, having wrapped myself up, watched from under my
garment what He did; and first I heard Him say, 'John, go thou to
sleep,' and thereupon I feigned to be asleep; and I saw another like
unto Him come down, whom also I heard saying unto my Lord, 'Jesus, do
they whom thou hast chosen still not believe in thee?' And my Lord said
unto Him, 'Thou sayest well, for they are men.'"

Here, in my opinion, is the direct tradition of an inner fact which led
to the subsequent great doctrinal distinction between Jesus and the
Christ in Gnostic Christianity. The Christ was the Great Master; Jesus
was the man through whom He taught during the time of the ministry.

<span class="margnote">An Early Form of one of the Great
Miracles.</span>Interesting again is the simple story that when Jesus
and His disciples were each given a loaf by some well-to-do householder,
Jesus would bless the loaf and divide it among them, and each was well
satisfied with his portion, and thus "our loaves were saved whole"--an
incident credible enough to any student of occultism, and supplying a
basis on which the gorgeous oriental imagination could easily in time
construct the legend of the feeding of the

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

five thousand. Such incidents were all that the writer deemed advisable
to tell to the uninitiated; there were many more of a nature too sacred
or too far from credibility to be revealed to the outer circles.

"Now these things, brethren, I speak unto you for the encouragement of
your faith toward Him; for we must at present keep silence concerning
His mighty and wonderful works, inasmuch as they are mysteries and
peradventure cannot at all be either uttered or heard."

Next follows the "Hymn" which was sung before He was taken by "the
lawless Jews." The <span class="margnote">A Ritual from the
Mysteries.</span> disciples are described as holding one another's hands
so as to make a ring round Jesus, who stands in the midst, and to each
line He sings, they intone in chorus the sacred word "Amen." It is
evidently some echo of the Mysteries, and the ceremony is that of a
sacred dance of initiation. The Hymn stands at present in a very
confused and mutilated form, and the rubrics have almost entirely
disappeared. I have therefore permitted myself a few conjectures; in
some passages, however, the confusion is so great. that it is impossible
to venture on a suggestion. In the following C. stands for the
candidate, I. for the initiator (the Christ), and A. for the assistants.

C. "I would be saved."

I. "And I would save."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be loosed."

I. "And I would loose."

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be pierced."

I. "And I would pierce."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be born."

I. "And I would bring to birth."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would eat."

I. "And I would be eaten."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would hear."

I. "And I would be heard."

A. "Amen."

"I would be understood, being all understanding (mind)."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be washed."

I. "And I would wash."

A. "Amen."

"(Grace \[*i.e.*, the Sophia\] dances.)"

"I would pipe; dance all of you."

A. "Amen."

"The Ogdoad plays to our dancing. Amen."

"The Dodecad danceth above \[us\]. Amen."

\[The reading of this line is hopeless.\]

"He who danceth not, knoweth not what is being done."

C. "I would flee."

I. "I would \[have thee\] stay."

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be robed \[in fit garments\]."

I. "And I would robe \[thee\]."

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

A. "Amen."

C. "I would be at-oned."

I. "And I would at-one."

A. "Amen."

"I have no house, and I have houses. Amen."

"I have no place, and I have places. Amen."

"I have no temple, and I have temples. Amen."

I. "I am a lamp to thee who beholdest Me."

A. "Amen."

I. "I am a mirror to thee who perceivest Me."

A. "Amen."

I. "I am a door to thee who knockest at Me."

A. "Amen."

I. "I am a way to thee, a wayfarer."

A. "Amen."

I. "Now respond thou to my dancing."

"See thyself in Me who speak; and when thou hast seen what I do, keep
silence on My mysteries."

"(Dancing.) Observe what I do, for thine is this passion (suffering) of
the Man which I am to suffer (perform)."

\[Here probably followed a mystery-drama of the crucifixion and
piercing.\]

"Thou couldst never \[alone\] have understood what I suffer. I am thy
Word (Logos--Highest Self). I was sent by the Father."

"When thou didst look on My passion, thou didst see Me as suffering;
thou stood’st not firm, but wast shaken completely. . ."

"Thou hast Me for a couch, rest thou upon Me."

"Who am I? That shalt thou know when I depart."

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

"What I am now seen to be, that I am not; but what I am thou shalt see
when thou comest."

"If thou hadst known how to suffer, thou wouldst have had the power not
to suffer."

"Know then suffering and thou shalt have the power not to suffer."

"That which thou knowest not, I myself will teach thee."

"I am thy God, not that of thy betrayer."

C. "I would be brought into harmony with holy souls."

I. "In Me know thou the Word of wisdom."

<span class="margnote">The Doxology.</span>So run the mutilated
fragments of this most interesting relic of inner Gnostic ritual; in the
version of *The Acts of John* from which we are quoting, this so-called
Hymn begins and ends with the following doxology, to each line of which
the disciples, "going round in a ring," are said to answer back "Amen."

"Glory to Thee, Father. Amen!

"Glory to Thee, Word; glory to Thee, Grace. Amen!

"Glory to Thee, Spirit; glory to Thee, Holy One; glory to Thy glory.
Amen!

"We praise Thee, O Father; we give thanks to Thee, O Light, wherein
dwelleth no darkness. Amen!"

If we had only a description of the "drama," the "things done," as well
as of the "things said," at this most instructive ceremony, much light
might be thrown on the meaning of the "passion" of the Christ as it was
originally understood. When, moreover, we reflect that most precious
fragments of

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

this hidden part of earliest Christendom are being discovered almost
yearly, it is not too wild a hope that some tattered leaf may give us
further light. That, however, the "mystery of the cross," the mystic
crucifixion, was understood by the Gnostics in a fashion far different
from the literal historic narrative, is abundantly proved by these same
Johannine Acts.

When the Lord was hung upon the "bush of the cross," He appeared unto
John, who had fled unto the "Mount of Olives."

"Our Lord stood in the midst of the cave and filled it with light and
said, 'To the multitude <span class="margnote">The Mystery of the
Cross.</span> below, in Jerusalem \[? the Jerusalem Below--the physical
world\], I am being crucified, and pierced with lances and reeds, and
gall and vinegar is given Me to drink; to thee now I speak, and hearken
to My words. ’Twas I who put it in thy heart to ascend this mount, that
thou mightest hear what disciple must learn from Master, and man from
God.'

"And having thus spoken, He showed me a cross of light set up, and about
the cross a great multitude, and therein one form and one likeness; and
on the cross another multitude, not having one form, and I saw the Lord
Himself above the cross, not having any shape, but only a voice; and a
voice not such as was familiar to us, but a sweet and kind voice and one
truly of God, saying unto me: 'John, it is needful that one should hear
these things from Me; for I have need of one who will hear. This cross
of light is sometimes called the Word by Me for your sakes, sometimes
Mind, sometimes Jesus, sometimes Christ,

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

sometimes Door, sometimes Way, sometimes Bread, sometimes Seed,
sometimes Resurrection, sometimes Son, sometimes Father, sometimes
Spirit, sometimes Life, sometimes Truth, sometimes Faith, sometimes
Grace.

"'Now these things it is called as toward men; but as to what it is in
truth, as conceived of in itself and as spoken of to thee--it is the
marking off (delimitation) of all things, the firm necessity of those
things that are fixed and were unsettled, the harmony of Wisdom. And
whereas it is Wisdom in harmony (or fitly ordered), there are on the
Right and Left Powers, Principalities, Sources, and Dæmons, Energies,
Threats, Wrath, Accusers, Satan, and \[Below\] the Lower Root from which
hath proceeded the nature of the things in genesis.

"'This, then, is the cross which fixed all things apart by Reason, and
marked off the things that come from genesis, the things below it, and
then compacted all into one whole.

"'This is not the cross of wood which thou wilt see when thou hast
descended; nor am I He that is upon the cross, whom now thou seest not
but only hearest a voice.

"'By the others, the many, I have been thought to be what I am not,
though I am not what I was. And they will \[still\] say of Me what is
base and not worthy of Me.

"'As, therefore, the Place of Rest is neither seen nor spoken of, much
more shall I, the Lord of that Place, be neither seen nor spoken of.

"'Now the multitude of one aspect that is about

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

the cross is the lower nature, and those whom thou seest on the cross,
if they have not one <span class="margnote">The Interpretation
thereof.</span> form, it is because not yet hath every Limb of Him who
came down been gathered together. But when the upper nature shall be
taken up, and the race which is repairing to Me, in obedience to My
voice; then that which \[as yet\] hears Me not, shall become as thou
art, and shall no longer be what it now is, but above them \[of the
world\], even as I am now. For so long as thou callest not thyself Mine,
I am not what I am. But if hearing thou hearkenest unto Me, then shalt
thou be as I am, and I shall be what I was, when I have thee as I am
with Myself. For from this thou art. Pay no attention, then, to the
many, and them outside the mystery think little of; for know that I am
wholly with the Father and the Father with Me.

"'Nothing therefore of the things which they will say of Me have I
suffered; nay, that suffering also which I showed unto thee and unto the
rest in the dance, I will that it be called a mystery. For what thou
seest that did I show thee; but what I am that I alone know, and none
else. Suffer me then to keep that which is Mine own, and that which is
thine behold thou through Me, and behold Me in truth that I am, not what
I said, but what thou art able to know, for thou art kin to Me.

"'Thou hearest that I suffered, yet I suffered not; that I suffered not,
yet did I suffer; that I was pierced, yet was I not smitten; that I was
hanged, yet was I not hanged; that blood flowed from Me, yet it flowed
not. In a word those things that they

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

say of Me, I had not, and the things that they say not, those I
suffered. Now what they are I will shadow forth (riddle) for thee, for I
know that thou wilt understand.

"'See thou therefore in Me the slaying of a Word (Logos), the piercing
of a Word, the blood of a Word, the wounding of a Word, the hanging of a
Word, the passion of a Word, the nailing \[? fixing or joining\] of a
Word, the death of a Word. And by a Word I mean. Man. First, then,
understand the Word, then shalt thou understand the Lord, and thirdly
the Man, and what is His passion."'

<span class="margnote">The Initiation of the Cross.</span>It is evident
that we have here the tradition of the inner schools as to the great
mystery of initiation called the Cross. The Cross is apparently three
limbed, having a right, a left, and a lower arm, like the Egyptian tau.
On it the body of the candidate presumably was bound, and in trance his
soul ascended the mountain of initiation, the "height" within. Here he
meets the Master, but only hears His voice; not yet can he see Him as He
is, for all his limbs are not yet gathered together, the perfect Osiris
is not formed in him, but will be at a higher stage, when he is at-oned
with the Christ.

How beautiful are these echoes from the old teaching, and what light
they throw on things otherwise entirely incomprehensible! It was these
inner experiences of the soul which were the life and strength of the
Gnosis, experiences in which the complex systems that "the tongue of
flesh" endeavoured to enunciate with such labour, received illumination
and light--"sweet, joyous light," as the Shepherd of

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hermes the
Thrice-greatest has it. Well now can we imagine the significance of the
greeting among such scholars of the hidden way as: "The mystery of that
which hangs ’twixt heaven and earth be with you."

Of the idea of the Little and Great Man, the lower and higher selves, in
such circles of initiation we hear <span class="margnote">Higher Lower
Selves.</span> and elsewhere from *The Gospel of Eve* (Epiph., xxvi. 3),
describing one of these visions on the Mount.

"I stood on a lofty mountain and saw a mighty Man, and another, a dwarf,
and heard as it were a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and
it spake unto me and said: 'I am thou and thou art I; and wheresoever
thou art I am there, and I am sown (or scattered) in all; from
whencesoever thou wiliest thou gatherest Me, and gathering Me thou
gatherest Thyself."

The "dwarf" presumably corresponds to the "man of the size of a thumb in
the æther of the heart" of the Upanishads; as yet he is smaller than the
small, but as the spiritual nature develops he will become greater than
the great, and grow into the stature of the Heavenly Man--the Supreme
Self.

As to the scattering and collecting of the Limbs, there is a passage
cited by Epiphanius (*ibid*., 13) from *The Gospel of Philip*, which
throws some further light on the subject. It is an apology or defence to
be used by the soul in its ascent to the Heaven-world, as it passes
through the middle spaces, and runs as follows:

"I have recognised myself and gathered myself together from all sides. I
have sown no children to the Ruler \[the lord of this world\], but have
torn up his roots; I have gathered together my limbs that

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

were scattered abroad, and I know thee who thou art."

<span class="margnote">A Prayer of Praise to Christ.</span>So much for
what we can glean from the text of the latest published fragment of
these most instructive Acts; from the already known texts there are
several other fragments of interest. The following is a prayer of praise
put into the mouth of John at the sacred feast prior to his departure
from life. It is addressed to the Christ.

"What praise, what offering, what thanksgiving, shall we, in breaking
bread, speak of but Thee alone? We glorify Thy Name \[*i.e.*, Power\]
which hath been spoken by the Father; we glorify Thy Name which hath
been spoken through the Son; we glorify the Resurrection shown unto us
through Thee; we glorify Thy Seed, Word, Grace, Faith, Salt, True Pearl
ineffable, Treasure, Plough, Greatness, Net, and Diadem, Him who hath
been called for our sakes the Son of Man, Truth, Rest, and Gnosis,
Power, Statute, Frankness, Hope, Love, Freedom, and Going-for-refuge to
Thee. For Thou alone art the one Lord, the Root of Deathlessness, and
Source of Incorruptibility, Seat of the Æons. All these hast Thou been
called for us, that we invoking Thee by them, may know that as 'Te are
we never can embrace Thy Greatness, greatness that can alone be
contemplated by the Pure, for it is imaged in Thy man alone."

The same phrase, "Thy man," is found in the beautiful treatise of Hermes
Trismegistus known as The Secret Sermon on the Mountain; "Thou art the
God; Thy man thus cries to Thee through fire, air,

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

earth; through water, spirit, through these Thy creatures." But indeed
the whole of the so-called Poimandrēs collection of the Trismegistic
literature comes from the same source as the Gnosis.

The high ideal of the Gnostic life, and the lofty level to which these
strivers after the sinless state aspired, are amply shown in the
farewell address to his disciples, put in the mouth of John by the
Gnostic composer or compiler of the Acts.

"Brothers and fellow-servants, co-heirs and co-partners in the kingdom
of the Lord, ye know how <span class="margnote">John's Farewell Address
to his Community.</span> many powers the Lord hath granted you through
me--how many wonders, healings how many, how many signs, what gifts \[of
the Spirit\], teachings, guidings, reliefs, services, glories, graces,
gifts, bestowings of faith, communions--how many ye see with your own
eyes given unto you, how many that neither these eyes of yours can see,
nor these ears hear! Stand ye, therefore, fast in Him, in every deed
remembering Him, knowing wherefore the mystery of the dispensation
towards men is being worked out.

"The Lord Himself exhorteth you through me: 'Brethren, I would be free
from grief \[on your behalf\], from violence, plottings, punishments.'

"For He knoweth the violence that comes from you, He knoweth the
dishonour, He knoweth the plotting, He knoweth the punishment that comes
through them who obey not His commandments.

"Let not then our Good God be grieved, Him the compassionate, merciful
and holy, the pure and spotless one, the one and only one, unchangeable,
of

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

speckless purity, who knows not guile or wrath, higher and loftier than
any attribute that we can name or think, Jesus our God.

"May He be glad of us as citizens of a well-ruled state; may He rejoice
at our living in purity; may He have rest by our reverent behaviour; may
He be free from care by our continence; may He be delighted by our
dwelling in brotherhood; may He laugh with joy at our prudence; may He
rejoice at our love for Him.

"These things do I say unto you, hastening to the end of my appointed
task, which has been brought to an end for me by the Lord. For what else
can I say to you? Ye have the pledges of our God; ye have the sureties
of His goodness; ye have His presence which can never leave you. If then
ye sin no more, He doth forgive you all that ye have done in ignorance;
but if, having once known Him and having received of His mercy, ye turn
back into such paths then shall your former sins be put to your charge,
and ye shall have neither portion nor mercy before Him."

Immediately on this there follows the last prayer of John to the Christ
on behalf of his brethren.

<span class="margnote">John's Last Prayer.</span>"Thou who hast woven
this wreath by Thy weaving, Jesus, Thou who hast united these many
blossoms into that sweet flower of Thine whose scent can never fade,
Thou who hast sown these Words, protector of Thine own, healer who
heal’st for naught, Thou only one who ever doest good, stranger to
arrogance, Thou only merciful, the friend of man, Thou only saviour,

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

righteous one, who ever seest all things and art in all and always
ever-present, God, Jesus, Christos, Lord, who with Thy gifts and Thy
compassion dost screen \[all\] them who hope on Thee, Thou who dost
right well know all those that do us wrong and who blaspheme Thy holy
Name, Thou only Lord, watch o’er Thy servants and protect them; yea,
Lord, do this!"

The rest of the prayer has also a strong Gnostic colouring, but
sufficient has already been quoted to give the reader some idea of the
lofty thoughts which animated such communities of the early days.

But before leaving *The Acts of John* we cannot refrain from presenting
the reader with the best known story that has crept into their
compilation. It is strange that, where there is so much beauty, this
particular story should have been singled out for most frequent
quotation, and that many theological students know nothing else of the
contents of these instructive documents but "The Story of John and the
Bugs." But so it is, and we give it as a specimen of the many legends
that were current among the people, and also because it is not deficient
in humour, an uncommon commodity in the circles of the pious. We take
the account from Salmon's summary. (*Op. supra cit.*, p. 350).

Once on a time John and his companions were a-journeying for apostolic
purposes. "On their journey <span class="margnote">The Story of John and
the Bugs.</span> the party stopped at an uninhabited caravanserai. They
found there but one bare couch, and having laid clothes on it they made
the Apostle lie on it, while the rest of the party laid themselves down
to sleep on the

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

floor. But John was troubled by a great multitude of bugs; until after
having tossed sleepless for half the night, he said to them in the
hearing of all: 'I say unto you, O ye bugs, be ye kindly considerate;
leave your home for this night, and go to rest in a place which is far
from the servant of God.' At this the disciples laughed, while the
Apostle turned to sleep, and they conversed gently, so as not to disturb
him. In the morning, the first to awake went to the door, and they saw a
great multitude of bugs standing. The rest collected to view, and at
last St. John awoke and saw likewise. Then (mindful rather of his
grateful obligation to the bugs than of the comfort of the next
succeeding traveller) he said: 'O ye bugs, since ye have been kind and
have observed my charge, return to your place.' No sooner had he said
this, and risen from the couch, than the bugs all in a run rushed from
the door to the couch, climbed up the legs, and disappeared into the
joinings. And John said: 'See how these creatures, having heard the
voice of a man, have obeyed; but we, hearing the voice of God, neglect
and disobey; and how long?'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From The Acts of Andrew](fff62)
