[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff67)  [Next](fff69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

### SUMMARY OF THE FRAGMENTS OF THE BOOK OF THE GREAT LOGOS ACCORDING TO THE MYSTERY.

<span class="margnote">The Book of the Gnoses of the Invisible
God.</span>THE first page is headed with the beautiful words: "I have
loved you and longed to give you Life," and is followed by the
statement: "This is the Book of the Gnoses (pl.) of the Invisible God";
it is the Book of the Gnosis of Jesus the Living One, by means of which
all the hidden mysteries are revealed to the elect. Jesus is the Saviour
of Souls, the Logos of Life, sent by the Father from the Light-world to
mankind, who taught His disciples the one and only doctrine, saying:
"This is the doctrine in which all Gnosis dwelleth."

This is evidently an introduction written by an editor or compiler;
immediately after there begins a dialogue between Jesus and the
disciples.

Jesus saith: "Blessed is the man who crucifieth the world and doth not
let the world crucify him."

<span class="margnote">The Hidden Wisdom.</span>He then explains that
such a man is he who hath found His Word, and fulfilled it according to
the will of the Father. The apostles beg the Master to tell them this
Word, for they have left all and followed Him; they desire to be
instructed in the Life of the Father.

Jesus answers that the Life of His Father consists in their purifying
their souls from all earthly stain, and making them to become the Race
of the Mind, so that they may be filled with understanding, and by

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His teaching
perfect themselves, and be saved from the Rulers of this world and its
endless snares. Let them then hasten to receive the Gnosis He is to
impart--His Word--for He is free from all stain of the world.

The disciples break into praises of the Master--as the Light shining in
the daylight--who hath enlightened their hearts until they receive the
Light of Life, by means of the Gnosis which teacheth the hidden wisdom
of the Lord.

Jesus saith: "Blessed is the man who knoweth this \[Word\] and hath
brought down the Heaven, <span class="margnote">A Dark Saying is
Explained.</span> and borne the earth and raised it heavenwards; and it
\[the Earth\] becometh the midst, for it is a nothing.'"

The Heaven is explained as being the invisible Word of the Father. They
who know this--(who become children of the true Mind)--bring down Heaven
to Earth. The raising of Earth to Heaven is the ceasing from being an
earthly intelligence, by receiving the Word of these Gnoses (pl.) and
becoming a Dweller in Heaven. Thus will they be saved from the Ruler of
this World, and he will become the midst (that is to say, perhaps, that
they will be above the Ruler and no longer subject to him as heretofore;
he will be a "nothing" to them, that is to say, have no effect on them).
Nay, the evil powers will envy them because they know Him, that He is
not of this world and that no evil cometh from Him. But as for those who
are born in the flesh of unrighteousness (and are not children of the
Righteous Race, those of the second birth), they have no part in the
Kingdom of the Father.

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

<span class="margnote">The Flesh of Ignorance.</span>Thereupon the
disciples are in despair, for they have been born "according to the
flesh" and have known Him only "according to the flesh." But the Master
explains that not the flesh of their bodies is meant, but the flesh of
unrighteousness and ignorance."

The disciples ask to be instructed in the nature of ignorance (ἀγνοία,
the opposite of gnosis, γνῶσις), and the Master tells them that, to
understand this great mystery, they must first put on His virginity and
righteousness, and His robe (of glory), and seek to understand the
teaching of the Word, whereby they will learn to know Him in the
Fullness (Plērōma) of the Father.

The apostles answered and said, "Lord, Jesus, Thou Living One, teach us
the Fullness and it sufficeth us."

Here unfortunately the text breaks off and pages are lost; nowhere in
the MS. is a direct continuation to be found.

Taking Schmidt's *Second Book of Ieou* first, we are introduced to the
following narrative.

<span class="margnote">The Mysteries of the Treasure of
Light.</span>Jesus bids the twelve disciples and also the women
disciples to surround Him, and promises to reveal to them the great
mysteries of the Treasure of Light, which no one in the Invisible God
knows (that is to say, no one even of the powers of the Thirteenth
Æon--the Æon which surrounds or is beyond or within the Twelve
Æons--over which the Invisible God is ruler). If these mysteries are
consummated, neither the Rulers of the Twelve Æons nor those of the
Invisible God can endure them nor comprehend them,

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

for they are the great mysteries of the interior of the interiors of the
Treasure of Light. When these are consummated, the Receivers of the
Light-treasure come and take the soul from the body, and bear it through
all inferior spaces into the Light-treasure. Yea, the sins of that soul,
whether conscious or unconscious, are blotted out, and the soul becomes
pure Light. And not only does the purified soul pass through all
inferior spaces, but also within into the Light-realm, ever inward,
within all its spaces, orders, and powers, to the space of the
Uncontainables in the innermost space of the Light-treasure.

These mysteries are to be guarded with utmost secrecy, and revealed to
none who are unworthy; <span class="margnote">To be Revealed to the
Worthy Alone.</span> neither to father nor mother, to sister nor
brother, nor to any relative; neither for meat nor drink, neither for
woman nor gold nor silver, nor anything in this world. Beyond all to no
sorcerer, those who practise certain most foul rites, whose God is the
son of the Great Ruler, Sabaōth Adamas--the enemy of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the chief of the six non-repentant Rulers. The mystery-name of
this power is given and its monstrous form described.

Those alone are worthy of the mysteries of the Light-treasure (the
emanation of the Unapproachable God) who have abandoned the whole world
and all that pertains thereto, its gods and powers, and have centred
their whole faith in the Light, giving ear to one another, and
submitting themselves the one to the other, as do the children of the
Light.

Now inasmuch as the disciples have left father

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

<span class="margnote">The Lesser Mysteries.</span>and mother and
brethren and all their possessions, and have followed Him and fulfilled
His commandments, Jesus promises that He will reveal to them the
mysteries as follows: The mystery of the Twelve Æons and their
Receivers, and the mode of their invocation, so that the disciples may
pass through their spaces; the mystery of the Invisible God (the
Thirteenth Æon) and his Receivers (them of the Left), etc.; of them of
the Middle, etc.; of them of the Right. But before all He will give them
the mysteries of the three Baptisms--the Baptism of Water, the Baptism
of Fire, and the Baptism of the Holy Spirit. Moreover He will give them
the Mystery of Withdrawing the Malice or Naughtiness (κακία) of the
Rulers, and thereafter the Mystery of the Spiritual Chrism.

<span class="margnote">The Good Commandments.</span>But they must
remember that, when they in turn give these mysteries to others, they
must command them not to swear falsely, nor even to swear at all;
neither to fornicate nor commit adultery; neither to steal nor covet
other men's goods; neither to love silver nor gold, nor invoke the names
of the seventy-two evil Rulers or of their angels for any purpose; not
to rob, nor to curse, nor calumniate falsely, nor to rail, but to let
their yea be yea and their nay nay; in a word, they must fulfil the good
commandments.

The disciples remind Jesus that His first promise had been that they
should be given the mysteries of the Treasure of Light, the greater,
which are above these lower mysteries of which He has spoken.

Seeing then that the disciples have not only

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

abandoned all things in the world and kept all the commandments, but
have further now followed Him <span class="margnote">The Greater
Mysteries.</span>for twelve years, Jesus assures them that He will
further give them the mysteries of the Light-treasure, to wit: The
mystery of the Nine Guardians of the three Gates of the Light-treasure
and the way of their invocation, so that they may pass through their
spaces; the mystery of the Child of the Child, etc.; of the Three Amens;
of the Five Trees; of the Seven Voices; the will (? mystery) of the
Forty-nine Powers; the mystery of the Great Name of all names, that is
of the Great Light which contains, or is beyond, the Treasure of Light.
The master-mysteries of the Light-treasure are those of the Five Trees
and of the Seven Voices and of the Great Name. There is, however, yet
another supreme Mystery, which bestows upon a man all the rest--the
Mystery of the Forgiveness of Sins; this Mystery transmutes the soul
into pure light, so that it may be received into the Light of lights.

Such souls have already inherited the Kingdom of God while still on
earth; they have their share <span class="margnote">The Powers they
Confer.</span> in the Light-treasure and are immortal Gods; and at
death, when they leave the body, all the Æons disperse and flee to the
west, to the left, until their souls arrive at the Gates of the
Light-treasure. And the Gates are opened to them, and the Wardens give
them their seals and their Great Name. So they pass within successively
through the various Orders, where they receive the successive seals and
master-words--within into the Five Trees and Seven Voices; yea, still
farther

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

within, to the Orders of the Parentless, to the spaces of their
inheritance--the Order of the Thrice-spiritual; until they reach the
space of the Ieou, the Lord over the whole Treasure--the middle
Treasure; thence ever within to the inner Treasures--the spaces of the
interior of the interiors, the within of the within, to the Silences, to
Peace Eternal, in those Everlasting Spaces.

All of these mysteries Jesus promises to give to His disciples, that
they may be called "Children of the Fullness (Plērōma) perfected in all
mysteries."

The Master then gathers His disciples, men and women, round Him with the
words: "Come all of you and receive the three Baptisms, ere I tell you
the mystery of the Rulers!"

<span class="margnote">The Mystic Rite of the Baptism of the Water of
Life.</span>He bids them go to Galilee and find a man or woman in whom
the greater part of evil (or the superfluity of naughtiness) is dead,
that is to say, who has ceased from intercourse or sexuality (συνουσία),
and receive from such a one two jars of wine and bring them to the place
where He is, and also two vine branches.

They do so, and the Master sets forth a place of offering (θυσία),
placing one wine jar on the right and one on the left, and strews
certain berries and spices round the vessels; He then makes the
disciples clothe themselves in white linen robes, puts a certain plant
into their mouths, and the number of the Seven Voices and also another
plant in their hands, and ranges them in order round the sacrifice.

Jesus then spreads a linen cloth, and on it places a cup, and bread or
loaves according to the number

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

of the disciples; He surrounds this with olive-branches, and also puts
wreaths of olive-branches on the heads of His disciples. He next seals
their foreheads with a certain seal (the diagram of which., authentic
name, and interpretation of it--also in the secret cypher--are given).

The Master then turns with his disciples to the four corners of the
world, and the disciples are commanded to set their feet together (an
attitude of prayer). He then offers a prayer which is prefixed with an
invocation in the mystery-language, interspersed with triple Amens, and
continues as follows:

"Hear Me, My Father, Father of all fatherhood, Boundless Light, who art
in the Treasure of Light May the Supporters \[or Ministers
(παραστάται)\] come, who serve the Seven Virgins of Light who preside
over the Baptism of Life! \[The mystery-names of the Supporters are here
given.\] May they come and baptize My disciples with the Water of Life
of the Seven Virgins of Light, and wash away their sins and purify their
iniquities, and number them among the heirs of the Kingdom of Light! If
now Thou hast heard Me and hast had pity on My disciples, and if they
have been numbered among the heirs of the Kingdom of Light, and if Thou
hast forgiven their sins and blotted out their iniquities, then may a
wonder be done, and Zorokothora come and bring the Water of the Baptism
of Life into one of these wine-jars!"

The wonder takes place, and the wine in the right-hand jar becomes
water; and Jesus baptizes them, and gives them of the sacrifice, and
seals them

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

with the seal (? of the Supporters), to their great joy.

<span class="margnote">the Baptism of Fire.</span>This is the Baptism of
Water; we are next given a description of the Baptism of Fire. In this
rite the vine-branches are used; they are strewn with various materials
of incense. The eucharist is prepared as before, and the rest of the
details are almost identical; the number of the Seven Voices is again
used, but the seal is different.

The prayer is longer than the preceding one, but all to the same
purpose; the supernal baptizers are no longer the Ministers of the Seven
Virgins, but the Virgin of Life, herself, the Judge; she it is who gives
the Water of the Baptism of Fire. A wonder is asked for in "the fire of
this fragrant incense," and it is brought about by the agency of
Zorokothora, a name now interpreted as Melchizedec. What the nature of
the wonder was, is not stated. Jesus baptizes the disciples, gives them
of the eucharistic sacrifice, and seals their foreheads with the seal of
the Virgin of Light.

<span class="margnote">The Baptism of the Holy Spirit.</span>Next
follows the Baptism of the Holy Spirit. In this rite both the wine jars
and vine-branches are used; the details are otherwise very similar, the
number of the Seven Voices being again employed. The supernal givers of
the Baptism are not mentioned, but as the final sealing after the rite
is with the seal of the Seven Virgins of Light, we may suppose that they
are the givers of the Baptism. A wonder again takes place, but is not
further specified.

After this we have the Mystery of Withdrawing

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

the Evil of the Rulers. There is here no mention of the eucharist, but
in other respects the ceremonial <span class="margnote">The Mystery of
Withdrawing the Evil of the Rulers. </span> is very similar, and
consists of an elaborate incense-offering. The number is that of the
First Amen and the seal is very elaborate. The prayer asks that Sabaōth
Adamas and all his chiefs may come, and take away their (the Rulers’)
evil or naughtiness from the disciples. At the end of it the disciples
are sealed with the seal of the Second Amen, and the Rulers have no
longer any power over them; they have now become immortal, and can
follow Jesus into all spaces whither they would go.

Jesus having now given the disciples the mysteries of the Baptisms, the
mode of invoking the powers, their numbers, seals, and authentic names,
promises to give them the apologies (defences or formula), whereby they
will now be able to enter into the interior of the spaces or realms of
these powers, and pass through them.

So far as they have been taught, they will be enabled, when out of the
body, to pass through the <span class="margnote">The Powers the Lesser
Mysteries Confer.</span> realms apparently of the six Æons which have
not repented, those of Sabaōth Adamas; these with all their rulers and
indwellers will disperse before them. But on reaching the six great Æons
(those apparently of Iabraōth, who repented and believed in the Light),
they will be detained until they receive the Mystery of the Forgiveness
of Sins.

The Mystery of the Forgiveness of Sins is said to have its being in the
interior of the interior of the Treasures of Light; it is the perfect
salvation of the soul. He who receives it is more excellent

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

<span class="margnote">The Mystery of the Forgiveness of
Sins.</span>than all the gods and powers of the twelve Æons of the
Invisible God (the Ruler of the Thirteenth Æon). This Mystery is the
Great Mystery of the Unapproachable God; it is the perfection of all
mysteries, making the soul all-perfect.

It is this Mystery which will enable the disciples to pass into the Æons
of the Invisible God--that is, the spaces that no physical eye can see,
beyond the elements of water, fire, and air (or æther)--the baptismal
mysteries of which have been already given.

<span class="margnote">The Power it Confers.</span>But with the aid of
the rite of the Mystery of the Forgiveness of Sins all the Æons will
withdraw to the west, to the left, as veils before the eyes, up to the
twelfth, which will then be so purified by the Light of the
Light-treasure, that all the ways by which the disciples will have
ascended will be purified; and moreover the exterior of the
Light-treasure (the exterior being the Space of the Thirteenth Æon) will
be revealed, and they will see Heaven from below. It will be at this
point that Jesus will give them the apologies, seals, and numbers of the
Mystery with their interpretations. And when they have received these
and go out of the body, they will become pure light and soar upwards
into the Light-treasure.

And then the Guardians of the Gates of the Treasure will open to them,
and they will pass upwards and ever inwards through the following
spaces, the powers therein rejoicing and giving them their mysteries,
seals, and names of power: the Orders of the Three Amens, of the Child
of

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

the Child, of the Twin Saviours, of the Great Sabaōth, of the Great Iaō
the Good, of the Seven <span class="margnote">The Ordering of the Light
Treasure.</span> Amens, of the Five Trees, of the Seven Voices; the
Orders of the Uncontainables, of the Impassables; the Orders of those
who are before and beyond (in time and space) the Uncontainables and
Impassables: the Orders of the Unstainables, and of those who are before
and beyond them; the Orders of the Immovables, and of those who are
before and beyond them; the Orders of the Parentless, and of those that
are before them; the Orders of the Five Impressions, of the Three
Spaces, of the Five Supporters, of the Thrice-spiritual, of the Triple
Power, of the First Precept (or Statute), of the Inheritance, of the
Silences and of Peace, of the Veils which are drawn before the Great
King of the Light-treasure, unto the Great Man himself, the King of the
whole Light-realm, whose name is Ieou.

These spaces and orderings are also mentioned in the *Pistis Sophia*
treatise, but I have omitted them in the summary in order not to confuse
the reader. The subject is exceedingly difficult, and no one has so far
succeeded in reconstructing in detail the elaborate scheme of the Gnosis
presupposed by the compiler or compilers of our treatises, owing in a
great measure to the fragmentary state of the Codex Brucianus on the one
hand and to the insufficient data of the Askew Codex on the other.

Still upwards and inwards are they to soar to the Space of the Great
Light which surrounds or <span class="margnote">The Great Light.</span>
transcends the outer Treasure of Light itself. Ieou

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

is there too, he is the Great Light; this is the Second or inner Light
Treasure. The guardians will open the Gates and they will pass into the
Orders of the Triple Powers of the Second Light Treasure; thence inwards
to the twelfth Order of the twelfth Great Power of the emanation of the
True God. There are twelve Great Powers with twelve Chiefs in each of
their Orders (of which the authentic names are given). These Twelve will
stand apart in this Space and invoke the True God with this "Name" (?
prayer), saying:

<span class="margnote">Invocation to the True God.</span>"Hear us, O
Father, Father of all fatherhood \[Here follows a sentence in the
mystery-language containing four of the vowels each seven times
repeated--with the interpretation: That is to say, Father of all
fatherhood, for the All hath come out of the Alpha, and will return to
the Ōmega when the consummation of all consummations will take place.\]
We will now invoke Thy imperishable Names that Thou mayest send forth
Thy great Light-power, and that it follow these Twelve Uncontainables
\[that is to say, the twelve disciples\], for they have verily received
the Mystery of the Forgiveness of Sins, and therefore are they not to be
held back from approaching Thy Light-Treasure."

Thereon the True God will send forth his Light-power; it will shine
forth from behind the disciples, and cause all the Treasures of the
Second Light-realm to withdraw, and they will reach the Space of the
True God.

Then will the True God in turn invoke the

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Unapproachable
God, that is to say the One and Only One, and He will send forth a
Light-power <span class="margnote">Invocation to the
Unapproachable.</span> out of Himself, into the Space of the True God,
and the disciples shall be perfected in all fullness and be made into an
Order in that Treasure. They shall sing hymns of praise to the
Unapproachable God, for, while still in the body, they have received the
Mystery of the Forgiveness of Sins, and attained to the Space of the
True God.

The disciples hereupon ask to be given this Great Mystery; the Master
promises that He will give it; <span class="margnote">The Mystery of the
Twelve Æons.</span> but before receiving it, they must be told the
mystery of the Twelve (supernal) Æons, their seals, names, and
apologies. These are given, seal-diagrams, names, numbers, and
apologies; the last being in the form "Make way \[mystery names\], ye
Rulers of the first (second, etc.) Æon, for I invoke \[other mystery
names--these being superior names of the Light-treasure\]."

The sixth (? seventh) Æon is called the Little Midst, for it belongs to
the six Æons which have believed on the Light; the Rulers of these Æons
have a little good in them.

In the twelfth Æon is the Invisible God and Barbēlō and the Ingenerable
God. The Invisible God is in a space alone in the twelfth Æon with veils
drawn before him, and in that Æon are many other gods called the great
rulers of the Æons, though servants of the Invisible God, Barbēlō and
the Ingenerable God.

In the thirteenth Æon is the Great Invisible God, the Great Virginal
Spirit (? Barbēlō) and the four

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

<span class="margnote">The Thirteenth Æon.</span>and twenty emanations
of the Invisible God. The mystery-names of these four and twenty are
given, and also the invocation of the higher names of the Light-treasure
in which are contained a series of triple ōmegas four times repeated,
and a series of triple ētas four times repeated. The names of these
emanations are said to be their names "from the beginning."

<span class="margnote">The Fourteenth Æon.</span>Yet higher in the
fourteenth Æon is a second Great Invisible God, and another Great God
called the "Great Just One" (χρηστός); he is a power of the three
Light-rulers which are within all the Æons, but without the Treasure of
Light. Here also are numbers of emanations. The powers of this Æon will
try to detain the disciples in order that they may perform the mysteries
of Jesus in those spaces, and so these powers themselves receive further
powers from the powers of the Light-treasure. The disciples, however,
are given the proper seals, numbers, and apologies, so that the powers
shall. withdraw.

<span class="margnote">The Three Great Rulers.</span>Now the three Great
Rulers that are within all these Invisibles (*i.e.*, the emanations of
the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Æons), but without the Treasure of Light,
are called the Triple-powered Gods, and are above all others.

They themselves have received the mysteries of the Treasure of Light,
for when the First Power came forth (from the Light-kingdom) they first
of all remained in it (the Power), and when they emerged from it the
Kingdom of Light was preached to them. "I gave them," says the Master,
"the mysteries

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

which I have given unto you, but I have not given them the Mystery of
the Forgiveness of Sins. . . Therefore now I say unto you that I, when I
shall separate all the Æons, will give to these three Rulers of the
Light, who are in the last \[highest\] of all the Æons, the Mystery of
the Forgiveness of Sins, because they have believed in the Mystery of
the Light-realm."

No one can pass beyond them till he have received the Mystery of the
Forgiveness of Sins; but, continues the Master, they are not to fear on
this account, for there is no place of punishment in those spaces, for
their indwellers received the Mysteries (? of Baptism).

The seals, names, and apologies of these powers are then given, and here
unfortunately the text breaks suddenly off, and we come to the end of
Schmidt's *Second Book of Ieou*.

Taking now Schmidt's *First Book* we next come to a description of the
middle Light-world, and <span class="margnote">Concerning Ieou the
Emanator of the Middle Light-world.</span> its Ruler, the True God, the
Demiurgos, above whom are the Treasures of the Plērōma of the Father.
Jesus is still the narrator. The subject is one of immense complexity,
with infinite emanations, treasures (*i.e.*, storehouses of riches and
fullness), spaces, orders, and hierarchies, with diagrams and symbols,
and hosts of (to me) absolutely unintelligible "authentic" names, which
are said to be "in the language of my Father." The authentic name of the
supernal Demiurgos is translated as the True God or God of Truth, and is
given in Greek transliteration as

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ieou, which
Schmidt transliterates into German as Jeû.

<span class="margnote">The Tetragrammaton.</span>I would suggest that
Ieou is a transliteration of the four-lettered mystery name of the
creator according to Semitic and Chaldæan tradition, the tetragrammaton
of the Kabalah. Theodoret tells us that the Samaritans pronounced this
name Iabe (Iave) and the Jews Iaō. Since the sixteenth century, by
adding the vowels of Adonai to the unpronounceable Y H V H, it has been
pronounced Jehovah. It is now generally written Yahweh: but there is no
certainty in the matter, beyond the fact that Jehovah is absolutely
wrong. Ieou or Iao are probably attempts in Greek transliteration at the
same Semitic name, which contained letters totally unrepresentable in
Greek; Yahoo or Yahuwh perchance, the name hidden in Iacchus (Yach),
still further corrupted into Bacchus by the Greeks. Iacchus was the
mystery-name of the creative power in that great mystery tradition;
Bacchus was the name in the popular cult. But to continue with our
summary.

Jesus, the Living One, has apparently taken his disciples with Him
through the inner spaces of the unseen world, and brought them to the
plane of this True God, from which He gives the mystic instruction on
the creative dispensation of the universe, in the Realm of Light.

He first shows them Ieou in his own nature, as a simple emanation from
the Ineffable Treasures of the Father, before he has in his turn sent
forth emanations by the command of the Father. A strange combination of
letters and signs is said to be the

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "name" of this God
"according to the treasures which are outside this region"--that is to
say, either the planes below or sub-planes of that plane.

Next follows a diagram--a square surrounding a circle, within which is
another square containing <span class="margnote">The Type of the
Treasures.</span> three lines; this diagram is said to be the type of
the treasures over which Ieou will rule, and it is also the type of Ieou
himself before he emanated.

But out of Ieou are to come a host of emanations, through the command of
the Father, who are in their turn to become fathers of treasures; each
of these fathers is also to be called Ieou. This ordering is effected by
Jesus as the Logos; but the True God is the father of all of these
fathers or fatherhoods, for he is a direct emanation from the Father,
and through him and from him all subsequent emanation will proceed.
Further, from each of the subordinate Ieou's, through the command of the
Father, will proceed other hosts to fill the treasures, and they shall
be called Orders (or hierarchies) of the Treasures of Light. Myriads of
myriads will arise out of them. We are therefore in the Light-kingdom.

We are next given a diagram which is said to be the type of the True God
before he <span class="margnote">The Type of the True God Ieou.</span>
emanated, that is to say when the subsequent emanations lay potential
within him. The diagram is like an egg, with a smaller egg or nucleus
within it containing three lines or strokes. The upper circumferences,
or shells, of both the egg and the nucleus are lacking, as though to
represent the creative Light-beam from the Father streaming into them.

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

<span class="margnote">The Mystic Diagrams.</span>It is very probable,
therefore, that in these diagrams squares may represent treasures or the
substance-side, while circles may represent gods or the energy-side--but
these can interchange, for the substance of one plane or phase becomes
the energy of the plane below. The three strokes seem to represent the
potential triad or trinity latent in all manifestation, and this triad
acting within the tetrad of the squares produces the infinite ordering
into twelves or dodecads. We should also recollect that in all
probability we have only a very faulty reproduction of these diagrams,
for we have to take into account the translating and copying and
re-copying by ignorant scribes.

The three lines are said to be the three Voices, which Ieou will send
forth when he is ordered "to praise the Father," that is to say, to
emanate, for this is how the creative song of praise is sung.

<span class="margnote">Cosmic Embryology.</span>Next we have a diagram
of the first moment of this emanation; it is curious to notice that the
symbols used closely resemble a spermatozoon and ovum. Within a square
is a small circle with its diameter produced, so that it very well
represents the head and tail of a spermatozoon; the ovum consists of
three concentric circles, the innermost of which has a diameter and is
of the same size as the head of the spermatozoon, which has also a
similar diameter; there are thus two of the lines or strokes or Voices
still latent, and only one is so far manifest.

Following this comes a diagram the upper half of which apparently
repeats the preceding diagram, and

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

the lower half consists of six concentric circles with a point in the
centre. The latter is called <span class="margnote">The Seal on the
Forehead of Ieou.</span> the seal (χαρακτήρ) upon the face or forehead
of Ieou, and is said to be the type of the treasures. This emanation
from the True God is caused by the streaming into the True God of a
Light-power from the ineffable treasures above, in response to an
invocation of Jesus as the Logos, calling upon the Name of His Father.
The Light-power is called the "Little Idea," presumably to signify that
though it has power to energize all creation, it is but little compared
to the real "Greatnesses" or Ideas in the Divine Mind.

What follows is beyond my power of summarizing. We have diagrams of a
series of twenty-eight Ieou's, <span class="margnote">General
Characteristics of the Diagram.</span> before the text again breaks
suddenly off. What was the full number in the original is now impossible
to say; Schmidt supposes thirty. The diagrams appear to have been very
carelessly copied, but present certain general characteristics. The
upper part generally consists of six squares, one within the other;
within the smallest square is the word Ieou, and the special
mystery-name of the Ieou or treasure for which the diagram stands. These
names are generally placed over a small oblong figure (or two lines),
which are said to stand for the "root" of the spaces or regions in which
the particular Ieou is placed. Above and below, cutting through the top
and bottom sides of the six squares, are two parallel lines, which are
said to denote the paths whereby one must travel if he would enter into
the space of the father of the treasure. These paths

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

where they cross the sides of the square are marked by Greek letters,
alphas, which are said to stand for the curtains or veils which are
drawn before the father. Above each diagram of squares we find again the
three lines or strokes, which are now said to be the three Gates or
Doors of each treasure. Each treasure has twelve orders, the authentic
names of the Heads of each of which are appended, together with the
authentic names of the three Guardians or Watchers of the Gates.

The lower half of each diagram consists of the seal upon the forehead of
the Ieou; these seals are mostly circles with varying contents, but it
is exceedingly difficult to trace any connection between them.

<span class="margnote">The Twelve the Order of Jesus.</span>Between the
second and third Ieou diagram is another figure differing entirely from
the rest of the series: as to its meaning I have no notion. It is
followed by these words of Jesus: "From these orders I will take Twelve
and range them for Myself, that they may serve Me." This probably refers
to the prototypes of the souls of the disciples which Jesus chooses for
Himself before their incarnation, as we learn from the *Pistis Sophia*.

With the twenty-eighth diagram the text breaks off suddenly; and the
next subject we meet with, according to Schmidt's ordering of the
leaves, is a hymn which Jesus sings to the First Mystery.

After printing this fragment in this place, Schmidt came to the
conclusion that these pages must be separated, and treated as fragments
of

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

another work, on the ground that they could not be brought into organic
unity with the rest.

We are now in the lower space or plane of the Thirteen Æons, each of
which has its father or creator, its Ieou, with rulers, and subordinate
powers, <span class="margnote">Hymn to the First Mystery sung in the
Thirteen Æons.</span> called decans and liturgi, signifying servants,
ministers, or workmen. There are thirteen praise-givings, one for each
Æon, but the text of the first four is missing. The general tenour of
each petition is as follows:

"Give ear unto me, while I sing Thy praises, O Thou First Mystery, who
didst shine forth in his mystery \[*i.e.*, the mystery of that
particular Æon\]; it was Thy Light which caused Ieou to order this Æon
and establish therein its rulers, ministers, and workers. \[Then follows
the "imperishable name" of the Æon.\] Save all my Members (Limbs), which
since the foundation of the world have been scattered abroad in all the
rulers, ministers, and workmen of this Æon, and gather them all together
and receive them into the Light!"

The final petition is concluded by a threefold Amen.

The peculiarity of the praise-giving with regard to the Thirteenth Æon
consists in the fact that <span class="margnote">The Thirteenth
Æon.</span> it is treated apparently as a separate plane or space. By
command of the First Mystery the Ieou of this space brought into
existence the space of the four and twenty invisible emanations, with
all their rulers, gods, lords, archangels and angels, their ministers
and workmen; further to this space of the Thirteenth Æon are assigned
the "three gods." Moreover, by command of

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

the First Mystery the six Rulers under Iabraōth, who have believed in
the Light-kingdom, are set just below this Thirteenth Æon in a space of
pure air, the six unrepentant Rulers being apparently assigned to the
lower impure atmosphere.

With regard to the scattering of the Limbs, we may remind the reader of
Epiphanius' quotation from The *Gospel of Philip:* "I have recognised
myself and gathered myself together from all sides. I have sown no
children to the Ruler \[the lord of this world\], but have torn up his
roots; I have gathered together my limbs that were scattered abroad, and
I know thee who thou art."

<span class="margnote">The Sixty Treasures.</span>We are now introduced
to a new subject. Jesus is taking His Order, the twelve disciples,
through the Treasures of the Middle Light-world, and giving them the
seals, numbers, and authentic names whereby these Treasures can be
entered and passed through. There are sixty of these Treasures, but our
narrative begins only in [the](errata.htm#43) fifty-sixth, for all the
intervening pages are lost. From what we are here told I am inclined to
think that there were also sixty diagrams of the Ieou's, and not thirty
only as Schmidt supposes. Fundamentally there were presumably twelve
main treasures, but each apparently was regarded from five different
standpoints, each view-point being called an order or ordering. There
was thus a twelve-fold ordering, and a five-fold ordering as well, all
immanent in the God "who dwells in the Middle of the universe," that is
to say, in Ieou, the God of the Middle Light-world. Of the five, two are

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

called the exterior, two the interior, and one the middle order.

Each treasure is said to be surrounded by six regions or spaces,
represented by the squares of the diagrams. By a use of the seals (a
series of very curious diagrams), numbers, and names, the Guardians,
Orders, and Veils are said to disperse and the innermost space of the
father of the treasure is reached, and so the secret of his authentic
name is revealed. Moreover within each treasure is a Door or Gate, and
without three Gates; each of the outer Gates has three Guardians, but
the inner gate has but one, presumably the father of the treasure
himself.

On the conclusion of this exposition, the disciples

ask how all these spaces and their fatherhoods <span
class="margnote">The Little Idea.</span> have come into being. Jesus
replies that it is because of the "Little Idea," which the Father has
left behind and not withdrawn into Himself; all else of the Father He
has withdrawn into Himself. "It was in this Little Idea that I streamed
forth, having My being in the Father; I burst forth and freed Myself
therefrom. I shone forth and it emanated Me, the first emanation
therefrom, its perfect likeness and image. When it had emanated Me I
stood before it." This was the First Voice.

Again it shone forth and emanated, sending forth the Second Voice--all
these spaces, which came forth one after another.

The Third Voice streamed forth and emanated the rulers of all these
spaces.

It is He, Jesus, the First Voice, the first emanation,

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

who has gathered together His own Order--the Twelve, and taken them
through all the spaces, that they may serve Him, He has given them the
powers whereby they may pass through all these spaces within, to the
innermost space of the ruler of them all, the True God.

<span class="margnote">The Name of the Great Power.</span>The disciples
then remind Jesus that He had promised to give them the one master-name,
whereby every space could be traversed without the wearisome repetition
of each of the separate names--the Name that was the key to unlock every
gate in every treasure. Is this, they ask, the Great Name of the Father?

The Christ (the first mention of this title) replied: "Nay, but the Name
of the Great Power that is in all the spaces."

He then gives them this authentic name--apparently a sentence in cypher,
interspersed with the triple repetition of the seven vowels. It is to be
said in the Space of the True God, in the "space of the interiors which
belongs to the space of the exteriors." The name must be invoked,
turning to the four corners of the treasure, and then followed by the
request that all the paths to the fatherhood be left free to the
disciple, "for I have invoked the Great Name of the God of all the
spaces." Then will all the veils be withdrawn, and all the rulers
disperse; they will withdraw "into their own form.

"Lo, now," continued the Master, "I have told you the \[master-name\];
guard it, and do not repeat it continually, so that all the spaces may
not be disquieted because of the glory therein."

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

Hereupon Jesus commands His disciples to follow Him, and goes yet
farther within, into the seventh <span class="margnote">Hymn to the
Unapproachable God Sung in the seventh Treasure.</span> treasure; this
cannot apparently be the seventh treasure of the sixty, but must be some
other ordering. Here He commands them to surround Him, and answer Him
with a threefold Amen for every praise-giving, as He sings a hymn of
praise to the Father because of the emanation of the treasures.

The Father is addressed first by the Ineffable Name, symbols of which
are given; then as "God, My Father," and then as the "Unapproachable
One." The form of each praise-giving begins with the words: "I praise
Thee, Thou Unapproachable God, for that Thou didst shine forth in
Thyself," and ends with the question: "For what now is Thy will, but
that all this should be, O Unapproachable God?"

The subject of the hymn is that God has withdrawn Himself into Himself,
into His Truth, save only one Little Idea, the space of which He has
left as the shining Light-world, shining within the Father. It is a
radiance of the Father within Himself, according to His will. This Light
is Jesus, the one emanation of the Father through His will. Jesus is the
perfect likeness and whole image of God. The second emanation brings
into being the spaces which surround the Father. The third emanation is
the bringing into being the powers and rulers of the Light-spaces, which
are called Treasures. Moreover all these powers are energized by a Great
Power emanated by the Father, so that they are called True Gods, that
is, Gods in Truth (presumably as distinguished

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

from the Gods of the vulgar pantheons). It is this Power that energizes
not only in the various fathers of the treasures, but also in the
subordinate powers.

Thus also are emanated the Guardians or Watchers and the sixty
fatherhoods, one for each treasure. These sixty are called the "Orders
of the Five Trees." It is also this Power which has brought into
existence the seals and the great name. This same Power is further
called the \[First?\] Mystery and the Light-image surrounding the
Father.

<span class="margnote">The Great Logoi according to the
Mystery.</span>These Light-spaces are called the Spaces of the "Great
Logoi according to the Mystery," in whom is the glory of the Father.
This leads us to suppose that the "Great Logos" of the title of the
treatise is the same as the First Mystery, the Great Power, and
therefore identical with Jesus. The Great Logoi are also called Ieou's.
The hymn then continues:

"I praise Thee, O Unapproachable God, for that Thou didst shine forth in
Thyself; Thou hast emanated Thy One and Only Mystery, Thou who art an
unapproachable God even for these Logoi. Thou art an unapproachable
among them, in this Great Logos according to the Mystery of Ieou, the
father of all Ieou's, which is Thyself;--yet what is else Thy one and
only will but that we should draw nigh Thee in them, O God that none can
approach, to whom nevertheless we have drawn near in this Great Logos
according to the Mystery of Ieou?"

I am inclined to think that "Logos" is here used in two meanings. It
generally means Reason or

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Word; here it
seems to mean also Sermon, Discourse, or Teaching.

The hymn ends with praises in which the Father is again said to have
withdrawn, or inbreathed, Himself <span class="margnote">The Universal
Idea.</span> entirely into His Universal Likeness and Idea, with the
single exception of the Little Idea, leaving it as a means whereby His
boundless Riches, universal Glory, and mighty Mysteries might be
manifested. The Great or Universal Idea and the Little Idea are thus
seen to correspond in the ideal spiritual world to the ideas of the
macrocosm and microcosm. And so ends this remarkable hymn, with a final
triple Amen.

The two remaining fragments are put by Schmidt in an appendix. The first
fragment is part of a hymn of praise, each praise-giving of which begins
with the words:

"Give ear unto me, while I sing Thy praises, Thou Mystery before all
Uncontainables and Impassables, <span class="margnote">Hymn to the \[?
First\] Mystery.</span> who didst shine forth in Thy Mystery, in order
that he Mystery that is from the beginning should be completed."

The contents of the hymn are as follows, the imperishable names being
added after each technical term:

The Mystery shining forth became Water of the Ocean. The Earth in the
midst of the Ocean became purified. The whole vast matter of the Ocean
became purified--that is to say, the Sea and all species existing
therein. Through its shining forth it sealed the Sea and all that are
therein, for the power that is in them was in disorder (? chaos) against
the existing order (? cosmos).

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

<span class="margnote">The Way of the Midst.</span>The hymn here breaks
off suddenly, and we have a description of the passing of the soul
through the regions of the dæmonian powers, and of the imperishable
names of the "mystery of their fear," whereby the soul can escape from
their clutches. These are the spaces of the orders of the various great
ministers of the Great Powerful Ruler in the Way of the Midst; and the
names of these ministers, recoverable from this scrap, are the same as
the Rulers of the Way of the Midst as given in the *Extracts from the
Books of the Saviour*. This Great Powerful Ruler is further described as
"he who is filled with wrath." He is the successor of the Ruler of the
Outer Darkness, of that space which changes all forms. He is spread out
on the Way of the Midst, so that he may carry off the souls like a
robber.

The leaves on which these fragments are found differ from the rest of
the MS. in that they are surrounded by single-lined borders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Selections from the Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex
Brucianus](fff69)
