[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff65)  [Next](fff67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

### SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS OF THE SO-CALLED PISTIS SOPHIA TREATISE.

THE treatise begins by informing us that Jesus, after rising from the
dead, had spent eleven years <span class="margnote">The Teaching of the
Eleven years.</span> with His disciples, instructing them. So far,
however, He had taught them the mysteries of the inner world up to a
certain point only, apparently up to the outermost realms of the
Light-world only, and yet even so far with omissions of many points
which they were as yet incapable of understanding. But so wonderful had
been the instruction imparted that the disciples imagined that all had
been revealed to them, and that the First Mystery--the Father in the
likeness of a dove--was the end of all ends and the gnosis of all
gnoses. They did not know that this First Mystery was the lowest of a
vast series of still higher mysteries.

It came to pass, therefore, in the twelfth year, that the disciples were
assembled with the Master on <span class="margnote">The Mystic
Transfiguration and Ascent in the Twelfth year.</span> the Mount of
Olives, rejoicing that they had, as they thought, received all the
fullness. It was the fifteenth day of the month Tybi, the day of the
full moon. Jesus was sitting apart, when, at sunrise, they beheld a
great light-stream pouring over Him, so that he became lost to view in
the ineffable radiance which stretched from earth to heaven. The light
was not one radiance, but its rays were of every kind and type; and in
it the Master soared aloft into heaven, leaving the disciples in great
fear

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

and confusion as they silently gazed after Him. From the third hour of
the fifteenth day until the ninth hour of the morrow (thirty hours) the
Master was absent; and during this time there was a shaking of all the
regions and great confusion and fear, while songs of praise came forth
from the interior of the interiors.

<span class="margnote">The Master returns to His Disciples.</span>On the
ninth hour of the morrow they saw Jesus descending in infinite light,
more brilliant far than when He had ascended; the light was now of three
degrees, glory transcending glory. The disciples were dismayed and in
great fear, but Jesus, the compassionate and merciful-minded, spake unto
them, saying: "Take courage, it is I; be not afraid." At their prayer
Jesus withdraws His great light into Himself, and appears in His
familiar form once more, and the disciples come to worship, and ask Him,
saying: "Master, whither didst thou go? or on what ministry wentest
thou? or wherefore are all these confusions and shakings?"

The Master, now speaking as the glorified Christ, bids them rejoice, for
that now He will tell them all things "from the beginning of the truth
to the end thereof," face to face, without parable, for that authority
has now been given Him by the First Mystery to reveal these things unto
them.

<span class="margnote">Of the Mystic Incarnation of the
Twelve.</span>For this cause is it that He hath again been clothed in
the vesture of light, the robe of glory; which he had left with the
First Mystery, in the lowest spaces of the supernal Light-realm. He hath
received it in order that He may speak to human kind and reveal all the
mysteries, but

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

first of all to the Twelve. For the Twelve are His order, whom He hath
chosen from the beginning, before He came into the world. He chose
twelve powers, receiving them from the hands of the twelve Saviours of
the Light-treasure, and when He descended into the world cast them, as
light-sparks, into the wombs of their mothers, that through them the
whole world might be saved. It is by reason of these powers that they
are not of the world, for the power in them is from Him, a part of
Himself.

So too another of His powers was in John the Baptizer with water for the
remission of sins; not <span class="margnote">That the Soul of Elias is
born in the Baptist.</span> only so, but the soul of John was the soul
of Elias reborn in him. These things had He explained before, when He
said: "If ye will receive it, John the Baptist is Elias, who, I said,
was for to come"; but they had not understood.

Into Mary, His mother, also He had implanted a power higher than them
all, "the body which I bore <span class="margnote">Of His own
Incarnation.</span> in the height," and also another power instead of
the soul, and so Jesus was born. It was He Himself who had watched over
the birth of His disciples, so that no soul of the world-rulers should
be found in them, but one of a higher nature.

And the Master continued in His conversation and said unto them: "Lo, I
have put on My vesture, and <span class="margnote">Concerning the Robe
of Glory.</span> all power hath been given Me by the First Mystery. Yet
a little while and I will tell you the mystery of the plērōma and the
plērōma of the plērōma; I will conceal nothing from you from this hour,
but in perfectness will I perfect you in the whole plērōma, and all
perfection, and every mystery; which things,

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

indeed, are the perfection of all perfections, the plērōma of all
plērōmas, and the gnosis of all gnoses, which are in My vesture. I will
tell you all mysteries from the exterior of the exteriors, to the
interior of the interiors. Hearken, I will tell you all things which
have befallen Me.

"It came to pass, when the sun had risen in the regions of the east,
that a great stream of light descended in which was My vesture, the same
which I had laid up in the four-and-twentieth mystery, as I have said
unto you. And I found a mystery in My vesture, written in these five
words which pertain to the height: Zama, Zama, Ōzza, Rachama, Ōzai. And
this is the interpretation thereof:

"The Mystery which is beyond the world, that whereby all things exist:
It is all evolution and all involution; It projected all emanations and
all things therein. Because of It all mysteries exist and all their
regions."

Hereupon the Master recites the hymn of praise and welcome sung by the
powers at His investiture on the Great Day<span class="margnote">The
Hymn of Welcome "Come unto us."</span> "Come unto us"--the day of this
supreme initiation, when all His Limbs are gathered together. "Come unto
us, for we are Thy fellow-members (or limbs). We are all one with Thee.
We are one and the same, and Thou art one and the same. This is the
First Mystery, who hath existed from the beginning in the Ineffable,
before He came forth; and the Name thereof is all of us. Now, therefore,
we all live together for Thee at the last limit, which also is the last
mystery from the interior. That also is part of us. Now, therefore, we
have sent Thee Thy

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

vesture, which, indeed, is Thine from the beginning, which Thou didst
leave in the last limit, which also is the last mystery from the
interiors, until its time should be fulfilled, according to the
commandment of the First Mystery. Lo, its time being fulfilled, I give
it Thee.

"Come unto us, for we all stand near to clothe Thee with the First
Mystery and all His glory, by commandment of the same, in that the First
Mystery gave us two vestures to clothe Thee, besides the one we have
sent Thee, since Thou art worthy of them, and art prior to us, and came
into being before us. For this cause, therefore, the First Mystery hath
sent for Thee through us the mystery of His glory, two vestures."

The hymn proceeds to explain how that the first vesture hath in it the
whole glory of all the names <span class="margnote">The Three Vestures
of Light.</span> of all the mysteries of all the orders of the spaces of
the Ineffable; that the second contains the whole glory of all the
names, or powers, of all the mysteries, or emanations, of the orders of
the twin spaces of the First Mystery; that the third vesture contains
all the glory of the powers of the emanations of all the spaces and
sub-spaces below these supernal realms as far as the earth. The hymn
then continues:

"Lo, therefore, we have sent Thee this \[third\] vesture, without any
\[of the powers\] knowing it from the First Statute downward; because
the glory of its light was hidden in it \[the First Statute\], and the
spheres with all their regions from the First Statute downwards \[knew
it not\]. Make haste, therefore;

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

clothe Thyself with this vesture. Come unto us; for ever, until the time
appointed by the Ineffable was fulfilled, have we been in need of Thee,
to clothe Thee with the two \[remaining\] ventures, by order of the
First Mystery. Lo, then, the time is fulfilled. Come, therefore, to us
quickly, in order that we may clothe Thee, until Thou hast accomplished
the full ministry of the perfections of the First Mystery, the ministry
appointed for Thee by the Ineffable. Come, therefore, to us quickly, in
order that we may clothe Thee, according to the commandment of the First
Mystery; for yet a little while, a very little while, and Thou shalt
come to us, and shalt leave the world. Come, therefore, quickly, that
Thou mayest receive the whole glory, the glory of the First Mystery."

<span class="margnote">The Journey into the Height.</span>Thereupon, on
hearing the hymn of the powers, the Master said, He donned the lowest
robe of glory, and, changed into pure light, soared upwards and came to
the lower firmament. And all the powers of that firmament were in great
confusion because of the transcendent light; and on seeing the mystery
of their names or powers inscribed in it, leaving their ranks, they
bowed down and worshipped, saying: "How hath the Lord of the plērōma
changed us without our knowing!" And they all sang together to the
interior of the interiors a hymn of praise in harmony.

And so He passed upwards and inwards to the First Sphere above the
firmament, shining with a radiance forty-and-nine times as great as
before, and the gates were opened and He entered the mansions

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

of the Sphere, and the powers were changed and worshipped, and sang
hymns of rejoicing as before.

Thence upward and inward he passed to the Second Sphere, shining with a
light nine-and-forty times still more intensified, and the powers of
that sphere did as them beneath them, and bowed and worshipped and sang
hymns to the interior of the interiors.

Still continuing His triumphal flight, He soared still higher within, to
the Space of the Twelve Æons, shining with radiance forty-and-nine times
still further increased. And all the orders and rulers of the Æonic
Space were amazed. Those of them called the Tyrants, under their great
leader Adamas, in ignorance fought against the light; but in vain, for
they only expended their strength one against the other, and fell down
and became "as the inhabitants of the earth who are dead and who have no
breath in them"--that is to say, deprived of the light-spark, like the
unknowing among men.

And He took from them a third of their power, that they should no more
prevail in their evil doings; <span class="margnote">The Master Robs the
Æons of a Third of their Light.</span> so that if men should invoke them
for evil in the magic practices which the transgressing Angels brought
down from above, they should not be able to work their will as
heretofore.

And so He changed the Fate-Sphere, over which they are lords. For by
order of the First Statute and First Mystery, they had been set, by
Ieou, the Overseer of the Light, all facing the Left, accomplishing
their influences. But now they were changed so that for six months they
faced the Left and for six months the Right.

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

<span class="margnote">The Questions of Mary.</span>Hereupon, the Master
having invited questions and interpretations of the mysteries He has
revealed, Mary Magdalene, who is throughout represented as the most
spiritual by far of all the disciples, comes forward, and being granted
permission to speak, interprets a passage from Isaiah by the light of
the new teaching. The passage begins with the words: "Where, then, O
Egypt, where are thy diviners and ordainers of the hour?"--and among
other things Egypt is said to mean the "inefficacious matter (*hylē*)."

Mary is commended for her intuition, and in reply to her further
questioning, the Master explains that all their power has not been taken
from these Rulers of the Fate, by the third robe of glory, but only a
third of it; so that if the ordainers of the hour chance on the Fate or
the Sphere turning to the Left, they will say what is to take place; but
if they chance on it turning to the Right they will not be able to
prophesy, for He has changed all the influences. But those who know the
mysteries of the magic of the Thirteenth Æon will accomplish them
perfectly, for He has not taken away the power in that Space, according
to the command of the First Mystery.

<span class="margnote">Why the Rulers have been robbed.</span>In reply
to a question by Philip, it is explained that this conversion of the
spheres has been effected to aid the salvation of souls; otherwise the
number of perfected souls would have been kept back from its
accomplishment, that is to say, of those who shall be counted in the
heritage of the height, by means of the mysteries, and shall dwell in
the Light-treasure. The power of the Rulers is in the matter

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

of the world which they make into souls By the victory of the Master a
third of this power has been taken from them, and converted to a higher
substance.

In answer to Mary's further questioning, it is further explained how
this third part of their power was taken away. It always had been that
their power, as it became purified, was gathered back to the higher
world by Melchisedec, the Great Receiver or Collector of Light, it being
continually liberated by the spheres being made to turn more rapidly,
that is to say by the quickening of evolution owing to the influx of
Light. The substance of the Rulers is graphically described as "the
breath of their mouths, the tears of their eyes, and the sweat of their
bodies"--the matter out of which souls are made.

But as their power was gradually taken from them, their kingdom began to
be dissolved; the Rulers therefore began to devour their own matter, so
that it should not be made into souls of men and so be purified, and in
every way strove to delay the completion of the number of perfect
souls--the crown of evolution. So it came to pass that they fought
against the great soul of the Master as He passed through them, and so
He changed them and their configurations and influences, "and from that
hour they have not had the power to turn towards the purgation of their
matter to devour it."

"I took away a third part of their power; I changed their revolution; I
shortened their circles, and caused their path to be lightened, and they
were

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

greatly hurried, and were thrown into confusion in their path; and from
that hour they have no more had the power of devouring the matter of the
purgation of the brilliancy of their light."

<span class="margnote">The Shortening of the Times.</span>Thus had He
shortened their times and hastened evolution. "For this cause I said
unto you before, 'I have shortened the times because of my Elect.'" The
"Elect" (Pneumatics) are the perfect number of souls who shall receive
the mysteries; indeed had not the times been shortened, "there would not
have been a single material (hylic) soul saved, but they would have
perished in the fire which is in the flesh of the Rulers."

<span class="margnote">The Heavenly journey continued.</span>After these
explanations the Master continues the narrative of his heaven journey.
All the great powers of the Æonic Spaces, when they saw what had
happened to their Tyrants, adored and sang hymns to the interior of the
interiors. And so He passed inward to the veils of the Thirteenth Æon.
Here, outside this Space, He found Pistis Sophia, sitting alone,
mourning and grieving because she had not been brought into the
Thirteenth Æon, her proper region in the height. She was grieving
because of the sufferings brought upon her by Arrogant, one of the three
Triple Powers. But when she saw the radiant light-vesture of the Master,
containing the whole glory of her mystery, the mystery of the Thirteenth
Æon, she began to sing a song to the light which is in the height, which
she had seen in the veil of the Treasure of Light. And as she sang, the
veils of the Thirteenth Æon were drawn apart, and her syzygy, and her
two-and-twenty

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

fellow-emanations within the Æon, making together four-and-twenty
emanations who came forth from the Great Invisible Forefather and the
two other great Triple Powers of that Space, gazed upon the light of His
vesture.

Hereupon follows the mystic story of the sufferings of Pistis Sophia. In
the beginning she was <span class="margnote">The Myth of Pistis
Sophia.</span> in the Thirteenth Æon with her companion Æons. By order
of the First Mystery, she gazed into the height and saw the light of the
veil of the Treasure of Light, and desired to ascend into that glorious
realm, but could not. She ceased to do the mystery of the Thirteenth Æon
and ever sang hymns to the Light she had seen.

Hereupon the Rulers in the Twelve Æons below hated her, because she had
ceased to do their mystery--the mystery of intercourse or sexual
union--and desired to go into the height and be above them all.

And Arrogant, the disobedient one, that one of the three Triple Powers
of the Thirteenth Æon who <span class="margnote">The Enmity of
Arrogant.</span> refused to give the purity of his light for the benefit
of others, but desired to keep it for himself and so be ruler of the
Thirteenth Æon, led the onslaught against her. Arrogant is apparently
the conservative power of the "matter" of this Space. He joined himself
to the number of the Twelve Æons and fought against the Sophia. He sent
forth a great power from his light and other powers from his matter, the
reflections of the powers and emanations above, into Chaos; and caused
the Sophia to look down into the lower regions, that she might see this
power and imagine

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

it was the real Light to which she aspired. And so in ignorance she
descended into matter, saying: "I will go into that region, without my
consort, to take the light, which the Æons of Light have produced for
me, so that I may go to the Light of lights, which is in the Height of
heights."

<span class="margnote">The Fall into Matter.</span>Thus pondering she
went forth from the Thirteenth Æon and descended into the Twelve; but
they pursued her, and so she gradually descended to the regions of
Chaos, and drew nigh to the light-power which Arrogant had sent below,
to devour it. But all the material emanations of Arrogant surrounded
her, and the light-power of Arrogant set to work to devour all the
light-powers in the Sophia; "it expelled her light and swallowed it, and
as for her matter they cast it into Chaos." This light-power of Arrogant
is that Ialdabaōth "of which," says the Master, "I have spoken to you
many times."

And so Sophia was greatly weakened and beset and "cried out exceedingly,
she cried on high to that Light of lights which she had seen in the
beginning, in which she had trusted \[hence is she called Pistis (Faith)
Sophia\], and began to sing songs of repentance," whereby she might be
converted or taken back to the Light.

The lengthy incident of the Pistis Sophia occupies pp. 42-181 of the
Coptic translation, and her thirteen repentances and songs of praise are
a mystical interpretation of a number of the Psalms of the Second Temple
collection and of five of the Odes of Solomon.

To attain to the knowledge of the Light, the

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

human soul (as the world-soul before it) has to descend into matter
(*hylē*). Hence the Sophia, desiring <span class="margnote">The Descent
of the Soul.</span> the Light, descends towards its reflection, from the
Thirteenth Æon, through the Twelve, into the depths of Chaos or Unorder,
where she seems in danger of entirely losing all her own innate light or
spirit, being continually deprived of it by the powers of matter. Having
descended to the lowest depths of Chaos, she at length reaches the
limit, and the path of her pilgrimage begins to lead upward to spirit
again. Thus she reaches the middle point of balance, and still yearning
for the Light, rounds the turning point of her cyclic course, and
changing the tendency of her thought or mind or nature, recites her
penitential hymns or repentances. Her chief enemy is the false
light--presumably the counterfeit spirit of which we shall hear later
on--the desire-nature, which is assisted by four-and-twenty material
powers, the reflections of the supernal projections, powers or
co-partners of the Sophia, the whole looked at from without making an
ordering into forty-nine.

The Sophia first utters seven repentances. At the fourth of these, the
turning point of some sub-cycle of <span class="margnote">Its Repentance
and Redemption.</span> her pilgrimage, she prays that the *image* of the
Light may not be turned from her, for the time is come when "those who
turn in the lowest regions" should be regarded--"the mystery which is
made the type of the race."

At the sixth the Light remits her transgression; *viz*., that she
quitted her own region and fell into Chaos. This perhaps refers to the
dawning of the consciousness of the higher ego in the lower

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

personality. But as yet the command has not come from the First Mystery
to free her entirely from Chaos. This may refer to the higher
illumination when the consciousness of the true spiritual soul is
obtained.

Therefore at the conclusion of her seventh repentance, where she pleads
that she has done it all in *ignorance*, through her *love* for the
Light, Jesus, her syzygy (without the First Mystery) raises her up to a
slightly less confined region in Chaos, but Sophia still *knows not* by
whom it is done.

It is only at the ninth stage that the First Mystery partly accepts her
repentance and sends Jesus in the form of the Light to her help, so that
she recognises it.

Her next four hymns are sung *knowingly* to the Light, and are of the
nature of thanksgiving, and of declaration that justice will shortly
overtake her oppressors, while at the same time she prays to be
delivered wholly from her "transgression"--the lower desire-nature.

<span class="margnote">The Degrees of Purification.</span>After the
thirteenth repentance, Jesus again, of himself, without the First
Mystery, emanated a brilliant power of light from Himself, and sent it
to aid Sophia, to raise her still higher in Chaos, until the command
should come to free her entirely. There are, therefore, as it seems,
three degrees of purification from the chaotic elements of the lower
nature.

Next follows a description of the light-powers, which are to be closely
compared with the description of the three vestures of glory in the
opening pages of the Codex.

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

Then, while Sophia pours forth hymns of joy, the power becomes a "crown
to her head," and her *hylē* <span class="margnote">The
Light-Crown.</span> (or material propensities) begins to be entirely
purified, while the spiritual light-powers which she has succeeded in
retaining during her long combat, join themselves with the new vesture
of light which has descended upon her.

Then is the law fulfilled, and the First Mystery in His turn sent forth
another great light-power, which joined with that already emanated by
the Light, and it became a great light-stream. This stream was nothing
else than the First Mystery Himself looking without, coming forth from
the First Mystery looking within.

When all this is accomplished the Sophia is completely purified, and her
light-powers are reestablished and filled with new light, by their own
co-partner of light, that syzygy without whom Sophia in the beginning
had thought to reach the Light of lights, unaided, and so fell into
error.

But all is not yet over; the final victory is not yet won. For the
higher she rises the stronger are the powers or projections sent against
her; they proceed to *change their shapes*, so that she now has to
struggle against still greater foes, which are emanated and directed by
the subtlest powers of cosmos.

Thereupon Sophia is not only crowned but entirely surrounded with the
light-stream, and further supported <span class="margnote">The Final
Victory.</span> on either hand by Michael and Gabriel, the "sun" and
"moon." The "wings of the great bird" flutter, and the "winged globe"
unfolds its

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

pinions, preparatory to its flight. Thus the last great battle begins.

The First Mystery looking without directs her attack against the "cruel
crafty powers, passions incarnate," and makes the Sophia tread underfoot
the basilisk with seven heads, destroying its *hylē*, "so that no seed
can arise from it henceforth," and casting down the rest of the opposing
host.

Thereupon Sophia sings triumphant hymns of praise on being set free from
the bonds of Chaos. Thus is she set free and *remembers*.

Still the great Self-willed one and Adamas, the Tyrant, are not yet
entirely subdued, for the command has not yet come from the First
Mystery looking within. Therefore does the First Mystery looking without
seal their regions and those of their rulers "until three times are
accomplished," presumably until the end of the seven cycles or ages, of
which the present is said to be the fourth, when the perfect number of
those of humanity who reach perfection will pass into the interplanetary
*Nirvāṇa*--to use a Buddhist term. This *Nirvāṇa*, however, is a state
out of time and space, as we know them, and therefore can be reached
*now* and *within* by very holy men who can attain the highest degree of
spiritual contemplation. Then shall the Gates of the Treasure of the
Great Light be opened and the heights be crossed by the pilgrim.

<span class="margnote">An otherwise unknown Story of the
Infancy.</span>In the course of the many interpretations of scripture
given by the disciples and women disciples, Mary, the Mother of Jesus
("my mother according to matter, thou in whom I dwelt"), who is also

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

one of the women disciples, receives permission to speak and tells a
quaint story of the Infancy, otherwise entirely unknown.

And Mary answered and said: "My Master, concerning the word which Thy
power prophesied through David, to wit, 'Mercy and truth are met
together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other; truth hath
flourished on the earth, and righteousness hath looked down from
heaven'--Thy power prophesied this word of old concerning Thee.

"When Thou wert a child, before the Spirit had descended upon Thee, when
Thou wert in the vineyard with Joseph, the Spirit came down from the
height, and came unto me in the house, like unto Thee, and I knew Him
not, but thought that He was Thou. And He said unto me, 'Where is Jesus,
my Brother, that I may go to meet Him?' And when He had said this unto
me I was in doubt, and thought it was a phantom tempting me. I seized
Him and bound Him to the foot of the bed which was in my house, until I
had gone to find you in the field--Thee and Joseph, and I found you in
the vineyard; Joseph was putting up the vine poles.

"It came to pass, therefore, when Thou didst hear me saying this thing
unto Joseph, that Thou didst understand, and Thou wert joyful and
saidest, 'Where is He, that I may see Him? Nay \[rather\] I am expecting
Him in this place.' And it came to pass, when Joseph heard Thee say
these words, that he was disturbed.

"We went together, we entered into the house,

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

we found the Spirit bound to the bed, and we gazed upon Thee and Him,
and found that Thou wert like unto Him. And He that was bound to the bed
was unloosed; He embraced Thee and kissed Thee, and Thou also didst kiss
Him; ye became one and the same being."

At the end of the story of the Sophia, Mary asks: "My Master and
Saviour, how are the four-and-twenty Invisibles \[the co-powers of
Sophia\]; of what type, of what quality; or of what quality is their
light?"

<span class="margnote">Of the Glory of Them of the Thirteenth
Æon.</span>And Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "What is there in this
world which is comparable to them; or what region in this world is like
unto them? Now, therefore, to what shall I liken them; or what shall I
say concerning them? For there is nothing in this world with which I can
compare them; nor is there a single form to which I can liken them.
Indeed, there is nothing in this world which is of the quality of
heaven. But, Amen, I say unto you, every one of the Invisibles is nine
times greater than the Heaven \[the lower firmament\], and the Sphere
above it, and the Twelve Æons all together, as I have already told you
on another occasion.

"\[Again\] there is no light in this world which is superior to that of
the sun. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, the four-and-twenty Invisibles are
more radiant than the light of the sun which is in this world, ten
thousand times, as I have told you before on another occasion; but the
Light of the Sun *in its true form*, which is in the space of the Virgin
of Light, is more

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

radiant than the four-and-twenty, . . . ten thousand times more
radiant."

The Master promises further, when he takes them through the various
spaces of the unseen world, to bring them all finally into the Twin
Spaces of the First Mystery, as far as the supreme Space of the
Ineffable, "and ye shall see all their configurations as they really
are, without similitude."

"When I bring you into the region of the rulers of the Fate-Sphere, ye
shall see the glory in which <span class="margnote">The Scale of
Light.</span> they are, and compared with their greatly superior glory,
ye will regard this world as the darkness of darkness; and when ye gaze
down on the whole world of men, it will be as a speck of dust for you,
because of the enormous distance by which \[the Fate-Sphere\] will be
distant from it, and because of the enormous superiority of its quality
over it."

And so shall it be in ever increasing glory of light with each higher
space, the lower appearing as a speck of dust from its sublimity, as
they are taken through the Twelve Æons, the Thirteenth Æon (or the
Left), the Midst, the Right (*sci*., of the cosmic cross), the
Light-world, and the Inheritance of Light within it.

Then Mary asks: "Master, will the men of this world who have received
the mysteries of light be higher in Thy Kingdom than the emanations of
the Treasure of Light?"

And in answer the Master explains the ordering and nature and functions
of these great emanations, and how that, at the final time of the
completion

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

of the æon and the ascension of the plērōma, these all shall have a
higher place in His Kingdom; but this time has not yet come. But high
above all of them the souls of men who have received the mysteries of
light, shall take precedence.

<span class="margnote">The "Last" shall be "First."</span>And Mary said:
"Master, my indweller of light hath ears, and I comprehend every word
which Thou speakest. Now, therefore, O Master, concerning the word which
Thou hast spoken, to wit, 'All the souls of human kind which shall
receive the mysteries of light, shall in the Inheritance of Light take
precedence of all the Rulers who shall repent, and all them of the
region of those who are on the Right, and the whole space of the
Treasure of Light'; concerning this word, my Master, Thou hast said unto
us aforetime, 'The first shall be last and the last shall be first,'
that is, the 'last' are the whole race of men who shall be first in the
Light-kingdom; so also they that are \[now\] in the space of the height
are the 'first.'"

<span class="margnote">The Three Supernal Spaces of the Light.</span>The
Master then continues in His conversation and tells them of the glorious
beings and spaces, of which He will treat in detail in His further
teaching, up to the inner Space of the First Mystery, but of those
within these supernal spaces He will not treat in the physical
consciousness, for "there is no possibility of speaking of them in this
world"; nay, "there is neither quality nor light which resembleth them,
not only in this world, but also no comparison in those of the Height of
Righteousness." He, however, in lofty language describes the greatness
of the five

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great Supporters
of the outer Space of the First Mystery, above or within which is the
inner Space of the First Mystery, and above all the Space of the
Ineffable.

To these supernal realms of the Inheritance shall come those who have
received the light-mysteries, <span class="margnote">The Inheritance of
Light.</span> and each shall occupy the space according to the mystery
he has received, a higher space or a lower according to the degree of
the mysteries he has received; each shall have the power of going into
all regions of the Inheritance below him, but not of ascending higher.

"But he who shall have received the complete mystery of the First
Mystery of the Ineffable, that is <span class="margnote">The Mystery of
the First Mystery.</span> to say, the twelve mysteries of the First
Mystery, one after another, . . . . . . . shall have the power of
exploring all the orders of the Inheritance of Light, of exploring from
without within, from within without, from above below, and from below
above, from the height to the depth, and from the depth to the height,
from the length to the breadth, and from the breadth to the length; in a
word, he shall have the power of exploring all the regions of the
Inheritances of Light, and he shall have the power of remaining in the
region which he shall choose in the Inheritance of the Light-kingdom.

"Amen, I say unto you, this man, in the dissolution of the world, shall
be King over all the orders of the <span class="margnote">The Gnosis of
Jesus, the Mystery of the Ineffable. </span> Inheritance of Light; and
he who shall have received the Mystery of Ineffable, that man the is
Myself.

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

Hereupon follows a magnificent recital of the perfect Gnosis of such a
one, for:

"That Mystery knoweth why there is darkness, and why light."

And so on, in great phrases describing the wisdom of the supreme
Mystery, who knows the reason of the existence of all things: darkness
of darkness and light of light; chaos and the treasure of light;
judgment and inheritance of light; punishment of sinners and rest of the
righteous; sin and baptisms; fire of punishment and seals of light;
blasphemies and songs to the light; and so on through many pairs of
opposites, ending with death and life.

But the recital of the greatness of the supreme Gnosis is not yet ended,
for the Master continues: "Hearken, therefore, now further, O My
disciples, while I tell you the whole Gnosis of the Mystery of the
Ineffable."

It is the Gnosis of pitilessness and compassion; of destruction and
everlasting increase; of beasts and creeping things, and metals, seas,
and earth, clouds and rain, and so on working downwards from man into
nature and upwards through all the supernal realms.

<span class="margnote">The Disciples lose Courage in Amazement at the
Glories of the Gnosis.</span>But the disciples are amazed at the glories
of the Gnosis of this greatest Mystery and lose courage. And Mary said:
"O Master, if the Gnosis of all these things is in that Mystery, who is
the man in this world who shall be able to understand that Mystery and
all its gnoses, and the manner of all the words which thou hast spoken
concerning it?"

And the Master said: "Grieve not, My disciples,

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

concerning the Mystery of that Ineffable, thinking that ye will not
understand it. Amen, I say unto you, that Mystery is yours, and every
one's who shall give ear unto you, and shall renounce the whole world,
and all the matter therein, who shall renounce all the evil thoughts
that are therein, and shall renounce all the cares of this æon.

"Now, therefore, will I tell you: Whosoever shall renounce the whole
world and all therein, and shall <span class="margnote">The Highest
Mystery is the Simplest of All.</span> submit himself to the Divinity,
to him that Mystery of them shall be far more easy than all the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Light; it is far simpler to understand than
all the rest, and it is far clearer than them all. He who shall come to
a knowledge of that Mystery, hath renounced the whole of this world and
all its cares. For this cause have I said unto you aforetime: 'Come unto
Me all ye that are oppressed with cares and labour under their weight,
and I will give you rest, for My burden is light and My yoke easy."

Let them not be dismayed at the vast complexity of the emanation of the
plērōma and the world-process, "for the emanation of the plērōma is its
Gnosis." Let but the Christ be born in their hearts by their forsaking
the delights of the world, and they shall grow into the being of the
plērōma and so possess all its Gnosis.

The Master then continues His description of the Gnosis of the Mystery
of the Ineffable, resuming it at <span class="margnote">Concerning the
One Word of the Ineffable.</span> the point where He had broken off, and
leading them higher and higher into the supernal heights through space
after space, and hierarchy after hierarchy, of stupendous being and its
emanation,

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

up to the Mystery itself, the First Mystery who knoweth why He came
forth from the Last Limb of the Ineffable. All this, which He now
recites simply, naming the great spaces and their indwellers, He
promises to explain at length in His further teaching.

"Now, therefore, it is the Mystery of the Ineffable which knoweth why
all of which I have spoken unto you hath come into existence; of a truth
all this hath existed because of Him. He is the Mystery which is in them
all; He is the emanation of them all, the re-absorption of them all, and
the support of them all.

"This Mystery of the Ineffable is in all those of which I have spoken,
and of which I shall speak in treating of the emanation of the plērōma.
He is the Mystery which is in them all, and He is the One Mystery of the
Ineffable. And the Gnosis of that which I have said unto you, and of
what I have not yet spoken unto you, but of all of which I shall speak
when treating of the \[full\] emanation of the plērōma, and the whole
Gnosis of each of them, one after another, that is to say, why they
exist--all this is the One Word (Logos) of the Ineffable."

"The Mystery of the Ineffable is the One and Only Word, but there is
another \[Word\] on the Tongue of the Ineffable; it is the rule of the
interpretation of all the words which I have spoken unto you."

It is then explained how that he who receives this One and Only Word.
when he comes forth from

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

the body of the matter of the Rulers, becomes a great light-stream, and
soars into the height; he <span class="margnote">The Glory of Him who
Receive the Mystery.</span> stands in no need of apology or symbol, for
all powers bow down before the vesture of light in which he is clothed,
and sing hymns of praise, and so he passes upwards and onwards, through
all the Inheritances of Light, and higher still until he becometh one
with the Limbs of the Ineffable. "Amen, I say unto you, he shall be in
all the regions during the time a man can shoot an arrow."

Hereupon follows a recital of the greatness of such a soul. Beginning
with the words, "Though he be a man in the world, yet is he higher than
all angels, and shall far surpass them all," it recites in the same form
all the grades of the supernal hierarchies of beings from angels
upwards, and ends as follows:

"Though he be a man in the world, yet is he higher than the whole region
of the Treasure, and shall be exalted above the whole of it.

"Though he be a man in the world, yet shall he be King with Me in My
Kingdom. He is a man in the world but a King in the Light.

"Though he be a man in the world, yet is he a man who is not of the
world.

"Amen, I say unto you, that man is Myself, and I am that man."

And at the great consummation all such men "shall be fellow-kings with
Me, they shall sit on My right hand and on My left in My Kingdom.

"Amen, I say unto you, these men are Myself, and I am these men,"

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the Thrones in the Light-Kingdom.</span>There
then follows apparently an interpolation consisting of a quotation from
some now unknown Gospel: "Wherefore have I said unto you aforetime, 'In
the place where I shall be, there also will be my twelve ministers, but
Mary Magdalene and John the virgin shall be higher than all the
disciples.'

"And all men who shall receive the Mystery in that Ineffable shall be on
My left hand and on My right, and I am they and they are Myself.

"They shall be your equals in all things, and yet your thrones shall be
more excellent than theirs, and My throne shall be more excellent than
yours and \[than those of\] all men who shall have found the Word of
that Ineffable."

<span class="margnote">There are other Logoi.</span>And Mary thinks that
this must be the end of all things and the Gnosis of all gnoses, and so
protests: "Master, surely there is no other Word of the Mystery of that
Ineffable, nor any other Word of the whole Gnosis?"

The Saviour answered and said: "Yea, verily; there is another Mystery of
the Ineffable and another Word of the whole Gnosis." Nay, a multitude of
Words, He might have added.

<span class="margnote">The Degrees of the Mysteries.</span>Then Mary
asks whether those who do not receive the Mystery of the Ineffable
before they die, will enter the Light-kingdom. The Master answers that
every one who receives a mystery of light, any one of them, shall after
death find rest in the Light-world appropriate to his mystery, but no
one who has not become a Christ will know the Gnosis of the whole
plērōma, for "in all openness I am the Gnosis of the whole plērōma."

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

So he who receives the first mystery of the First Mystery shall be King
over the spaces of the First Saviour in the Light-realm, and so on up to
the twelfth.

And Mary asks: "Master, how is it that the First Mystery hath twelve
mysteries, whereas the Ineffable hath but one Mystery?"

The answer is that they are really one Mystery; this Mystery is ordered
into twelve, and also into five, and again into three, while still
remaining one; they are all different aspects or types of the same
Mystery.

The two higher mysteries of the three not only ensure the possessor of
them, when he leaves the <span class="margnote">The Boons they
Grant.</span> body, his appropriate lot in the Inheritance, but they
further bestow boons with regard to others. If a man "perform them in
all their configurations, that is to say when he shall have created
those mysteries for himself," they give the power of further enabling
him to protect one who is not a participator in the Words of Truth,
after his death, so that he shall not be punished. Of course such a man
cannot "be brought into the Light until he have performed the whole
polity of the light of those mysteries, that is to say, the strict
renunciation of the world"; but he will be sent back again into "a
righteous body, which shall find the God of Truth and the higher
mysteries."

But as for the highest mystery of all, "whosoever shall receive the
Mystery which is in the whole <span class="margnote">The Limbs of the
Ineffable.</span> Space of the Ineffable, and also all the other sweet
mysteries which are in the Limbs of that Ineffable,

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

of which I have not yet spoken unto you, both concerning their
emanation, and the manner in which they are constituted, and the type of
each of them as it is--I have not told you why It is called the
Ineffable, or why It lies stretched out with all Its Limbs, or how many
Limbs there are therein, or what are all Its regulations; nor will I say
this unto you immediately, but only when I come to speak of the
emanation of the \[whole\] plērōma; \[then\] will I tell you every
detail, one by one, for It hath emanated together with Its own Word,
just as it is in Itself, together with the sum total of all its Limbs,
which belong to the regulation of the One and Only One, the changeless
God of Truth--in the region, therefore, of which each shall receive the
mystery in the Space of that Ineffable, there shall he inherit up to the
region which he shall have received, \[as far as\] the whole region of
the Space of that Ineffable; nor shall he give explanation throughout
the regions, nor apology nor symbol, for \[such souls\] are without
symbol and have no receivers.

So also for the second Space below this, the Space of the First Mystery
looking within; such souls require no apology.

But for the third Space, the Space of the First Mystery looking without,
each region has its receiver, explanation, apologies, and symbols, of
all of which the Master will speak in due course.

"But when the plērōma is completed, that is to say, when the number of
perfect souls shall be reached, and the Mystery shall be accomplished

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

according to which the plērōma is the plērōma, I shall pass a thousand
years, according to the years of Light, reigning over all the emanations
of the Light and the whole number of perfect souls who shall have
received all the mysteries."

Now "a day of the Light is a thousand years in the world, so that
thirty-six myriads of years and a half a myriad of years of the world
make a single year of the Light."

The glories of the Light-kingdom with its three Realms and Kings is then
described.

"Now the mysteries of these three Inheritances of Light are exceedingly
numerous. Ye shall find them <span class="margnote">The Books of
Ieou.</span> in the two great Books of Ieou." The higher ones He will
reveal unto them; "but as for the rest of the lower mysteries, ye have
no need thereof, but ye shall find them in the two Books of Ieou, which
Enoch wrote when I spoke with him from the Tree of Knowledge, and from
the Tree of Life, which were in the Paradise of Adam."

Hereupon Andrew is in great amazement, and cannot believe that men of
the world like themselves can have so high a destiny reserved for them,
and can reach such lofty heights. "This matter, then, is hard for me,"
he says.

When Andrew had said these words, the spirit of the Saviour was moved in
Him, and He cried <span class="margnote">Ye are Gods.</span> out and
said: "How long shall I bear with you, how long shall I suffer you? Do
ye still not know and are ye ignorant? Know ye not and do ye not
understand that ye are all Angels, all Archangels, Gods and Lords, all
Rulers, all the great

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Invisibles, all
those of the Midst, those of every region of them that are on the Right,
all the Great Ones of the emanations of the Light with all their glory;
that ye are all, of yourselves and in yourselves in turn, from one mass
and one matter, and one substance; ye are all from the same mixture. . .
.

"The great Light-emanations have not at all \[in reality\] undergone
sufferings, nor changes of region, nor have they at all torn themselves
asunder, nor poured themselves into different bodies, nor have they been
in any affliction.

<span class="margnote">Of Souls in Incarnation.</span>"Whereas, ye
others, ye are the purgations of the Treasure, ye are the purgations of
the region of them that are on the Right, ye are the purgations of all
the invisibles and all the rulers; in a word, ye are the purgation of
all of them. And ye have been in great afflictions and great
tribulations, in your pourings into different bodies in this world. And
after all these afflictions which came from yourselves, ye have
struggled and fought, renouncing the whole world and all the matter that
is in it; and ye have not held your hands in the fight, until ye found
all the mysteries of the Kingdom of Light, which have purified you, and
transformed you into refined light, most pure, and ye have become pure
light itself. . . .

"Amen, I say unto you, the race of human kind is of matter. I have torn
myself asunder, I have brought unto them the mysteries of light, to
purify them, for they are the purgations of all the matter of their
matter. . . .

"Now the Light-emanations have no need of any

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

mystery, for they are pure; but the human race hath need of
purification, for all men are purgations of matter. . . .

"For this cause, therefore, preach ye to the <span class="margnote">The
Preaching of the Mysteries.</span> whole human race, saying, 'Cease not
to seek day and night, until ye have found the purifying mysteries'; and
say unto them, 'Renounce the whole world, and all the matter therein',
for he who buyeth and selleth in this world, he who eateth and drinketh
of his own matter, who liveth in his own cares and all his own
associations, amasses ever fresh matter from his matter, in that the
whole world, and all that is therein, and all its associations, are
exceedingly material purgations, and they shall make enquiry of every
one according to his purity."

This is followed by a long instruction on the nature of the preaching of
the disciples to the world when the Master shall have gone unto the
Light.

"Say unto them, 'Renounce the whole world and <span class="margnote">The
Burden of the Preaching.</span> the matter that is in it, all its cares,
all its sins, in a word, all the associations that are in it, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of light, and be saved from all the
torments which are in the judgments.'"

They are to renounce mourning, superstition, spells, calumny, false
witness, boasting and pride, gluttony, garrulity, evil caresses, desire
of avarice, the love of the world, robbery, evil words, wickedness,
pitilessness, wrath, reviling, pillage, slandering, quarrelling,
ignorance, villainy, sloth, adultery, murder, hardness of heart and
impiety, atheism, magic potions, blasphemy, doctrines of error,--that
they may escape

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

the torments of fire and ice and other graphic horrors of an elaborate
hell, capped by the torments of the Great Dragon of the inexorable Outer
Darkness, reserved for the greatest of sins, where such absolutely
unrepentant souls "shall be without existence until the end" of the æon;
they shall be "frozen up" in that state.

<span class="margnote">The Boundary Marks of the Paths of the
Mysteries.</span>Thus far for the negative side, the things to be
abandoned; but for the positive, the things to be done, they are to:
"Say unto the men of the world, 'Be ye diligent, that ye may receive the
mysteries of light, and enter into the height of the Kingdom of Light.'"

They are to be gentle, peacemakers, merciful, compassionate, to minister
unto the poor and sick and afflicted, be loving unto God, and righteous,
and live the life of absolute self-renunciation.

"These are all the boundary marks of the paths of them that are worthy
of the mysteries of light."

Unto such and such only are the mysteries to be given; the absolute
condition is that they make this renunciation and repent.

"It is because of sinners that I have brought these mysteries into the
world, for the remission of all the sins which they have committed from
the beginning. Wherefore have I said unto you aforetime, 'I came not to
call the righteous.'"

<span class="margnote">The After-death State of the Uninitiated
Righteous.</span>The question now arises as to good men who have not
received the mysteries, how will it be with them after death?

"A righteous man who is perfect in all righteousness," answers the
Master, yet who has not received

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

the mysteries of light, on going forth from the body, is taken charge of
by the Receivers of Light--as distinguished from the Receivers of Wrath.
"Three days shall they journey round with that soul in all the creatures
of the world," and pass it through all the elements of the judgments,
instructing it therein, and then it shall be taken to the Virgin of
Light and sealed with an excellent seal that it may be carried into a
righteous body of the æons, so that it may in its next birth find the
signs of the mysteries of light and inherit the Kingdom of Light for
ever.

So with a man who has only sinned twice or thrice, he shall be sent back
into the world according to the type of the sins he hath committed; "I
will tell you these types when I shall come to explain the emanation of
the plērōma" in detail.

"But Amen, Amen, I say unto you, even though a righteous man have not
committed any sin at all, it is impossible to take him into the Kingdom
of Light, because the sign of the Kingdom of the Mysteries is not with
him." He must have gnosis as well as righteousness.

The question next arises as to the sinner who has repented, and received
the mysteries, and then has <span class="margnote">Of Those who Repent
and again Fall Back.</span> fallen away, and again repented, provided he
be not a hypocrite; "Wilt Thou or not that we remit his transgressions
unto seven times, and give him the mysteries again?"

The Saviour answered and said: "Remit ye his sin not only unto seven
times, but Amen, I say unto you, remit ye it unto him many times seven
times,

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

and each time give ye him the mysteries from the beginning, the
mysteries which are in the first Space from the exterior; perchance ye
will win the soul of that brother, so that he may inherit the Kingdom of
Light. . . .

<span class="margnote">The Added Glories of the Saviour of
Souls.</span>"Amen, I say unto you, he who shall give life unto a single
soul, and shall save it, in addition to his own proper light in the
Kingdom of Light, he shall further receive an additional glory for the
soul which he shall have saved, so that he who shall save a host of
souls, in addition to his own proper glory in the Glory, he shall
receive a host of additional glories for the souls which he shall have
saved."

Nay, they shall not only give the lower mysteries, but the higher
mysteries as well, provided always the man sincerely repent and is not a
hypocrite; all mysteries up to the three highest mysteries of the First
Mystery, "for the First Mystery is compassionate and merciful-minded."

<span class="margnote">Concerning the Irreconcilables.</span>"But if
that man again transgresseth, and is in any kind of sin, ye shall not
remit his sin again from that hour, nor any more accept his repentance;
let him be for you a stumbling-block and transgressor.

"For Amen, I say unto you, these three mysteries shall witness against
his last repentance for him from that hour. Amen, I say unto you, the
soul of that man shall have no more probation for the world of the
height henceforth from that hour, but it shall dwell in the habitation
of the Dragon of the Outer Darkness."

In all of this the disciples have no choice; if they know a man is
sincere, and not a hypocrite or merely

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

curious to know what kind of things the rites of the mysteries are, they
must give him these mysteries and not withhold them, even if he be one
who has never received any of the lower mysteries; for should they hide
them from him, they will be subject to a great judgment.

Beyond the giving of these three higher mysteries they have no power,
for they have not sufficient knowledge.

But the case of a man who has fallen away after receiving the highest
mysteries they can give, is not <span class="margnote">Of the Infinite
Compassion of the Divine.</span> entirely hopeless; it is, however, in
the hands of the First Mystery and the Mystery of the Ineffable alone.

These alone can accept repentance from such a man, and grant him the
remission of his sins, for these Mysteries are "compassionate and
merciful-minded, and grant remission of sins at any time."

The question is now raised, Supposing they give the mysteries in error
to those who are hypocrites <span class="margnote">Of those who Mimic
the Mysteries.</span> and who have deceived them and have afterwards
made a mock of the mysteries "mimicking us and making forgeries of our
mysteries," what then are they to do?

In this case they are to appeal to the First Mystery, saying: "The
mystery which we have given unto these impious and iniquitous souls,
they have not performed in a manner worthy of Thy mystery, but they have
\[merely\] copied \[what we did\]; give back \[therefore\] that mystery
unto us, and make them for ever strangers to Thy Kingdom."

In that hour the mysteries such impious souls

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

have received, shall return to them, and such people can receive pardon
from no one save only the Mystery of the Ineffable.

In the case of the unbelieving friends and relatives of those who have
received the mysteries, the latter may by their prayers and invocations
procure a better lot in the after-death state for their relatives and
friends, so that they may be sent back into conditions favourable for
their receiving the mysteries in another life.

<span class="margnote">Can the Pains of Martyrdom be Avoided.</span>It
is then asked whether the mysteries will save the disciples from the
pains of martyrdom. "For they are in exceeding great number who
persecute us because of Thee, and multitudes pursue us because of Thy
name, so that if we be submitted to the torture, we shall utter the
mystery, that we may immediately depart from the body without suffering
pain."

The answer is not clear; every one who has accomplished the first
(*i.e.*, highest) of the three higher mysteries, in life, when the time
comes to leave the body, shall soar into the Kingdom of Life without
need of apology or sign. But it is not said that the pains of martyrdom
can be avoided.

<span class="margnote">The Mystery of the Resurrection of the
Dead.</span>But they will be able to help others, for "not only ye, but
all men who shall achieve the mystery of the resurrection of the dead,
which healeth from demonian possessions, and sufferings, and every
disease, \[which also healeth\] the blind, the lame, the halt, the dumb,
and the deaf, \[the mystery\] which I gave unto you aforetime--whosoever
shall receive of these mysteries and achieve them,

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

if he ask for any thing whatever hereafter, poverty or riches, weakness
or strength, disease or health, or the whole healing of the body, and
the resurrection of the dead, the power of healing the lame, the blind,
the deaf, and the dumb, of every disease and of every suffering--in a
word, whosoever shall achieve this mystery, if he ask any of the things
which I have just said unto you, they shall at once be granted unto
him."

Hereupon the disciples cried out together in transport: "O Saviour, Thou
excitest us with very <span class="margnote">The Transport of the
Disciples.</span> great frenzy because of the transcendent height which 
Thou hast revealed unto us; and Thou exaltest our souls, and they have
become paths on which we travel to come unto Thee, for they came forth
from Thee. Now, therefore, because of the transcendent heights which
Thou hast revealed unto us, our souls have become frenzied, and they
travail mightily, yearning to go forth from us into the height to the
region of Thy Kingdom."

The Master continues His teaching, saying that the rest of the mysteries
which have been committed <span class="margnote">That this Mystery is to
be kept Secret.</span> unto them they may give to others, but not the
mystery of the resurrection of the dead and the healing of disease, "for
that mystery pertaineth to the rulers, it and all its namings." This
they are to retain as the sign of their mission, so that when they do
such wonder-deeds, "they will believe on you, that ye preach the God of
perfection, and will have faith in all your words."

The next point of instruction taken up is the question; "Who
constraineth a man to sin?" This

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

<span class="margnote">The Constitution of Man.</span>opens up the whole
subject of the constitution of man, and gives rise to a very interesting
exposition of Gnostic psychology.

When the child is first born, the "light-power," "soul," "counterfeit
spirit," and "body," are all very feeble in it. "None of them hath sense
enough as yet for any work, whether good or evil, because of the
exceeding great weight of oblivion."

The babe eateth of the delights of the world of the Rulers; the power
absorbeth from the portion of the power which is in the delights, the
soul from the portion of the soul in the delights, the counterfeit
spirit from the portion of evil in the delights, and the body from the
unperceptive matter in the delights.

There is also another factor called the "destiny," which remains as it
came into the world and takes nothing from the delights.

So, little by little, all these constituent elements in man develop,
each sensing according to its nature. "The power senseth after the light
of the height; the soul senseth after the region of mixed righteousness,
which is the region of the Mixture (*sci*., of Light and Matter); and
the counterfeit spirit seeketh after all vices, and desires, and sins;
but the body hath no power of sensing unless it be an impulse to gain
strength from matter."

The power is evidently the higher mind, the soul the lower mind, and the
counterfeit spirit the animal nature.

"The power within impelleth the soul to seek after the region of light
and the whole Godhead;

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

whereas the counterfeit spirit draggeth down the soul, and persistently
constraineth it to commit <span class="margnote">The Evil Desire which
constraineth a Man to sin.</span> every kind of iniquity and mischief
and sin, and persisteth as something foreign to the soul, and is its
enemy, and maketh it commit all these sins and evils"--bringing them
into operation against the soul because of what it has done in the past;
moreover, for the future, "it spurreth on the Workmen of Wrath to bear
witness to all the sin which it will constrain the soul to commit. And
even when the man sleepeth by night or by day, it plagueth him in dreams
with the desires of the world, and causeth him to long after all the
things of this world. In a word, it bindeth the soul to all the actions
which the Rulers have decreed for it, and is the enemy of the soul,
causing it to do what it would not." This it is which constraineth a man
to sin.

The "destiny" is that which leadeth the man to his death. Then come the
Receivers of Wrath to lead that soul out of the body.

"And for three days the Receivers of Wrath travel round with that soul
through all the regions, <span class="margnote">The Cycle of the
After-death State of the Sinner.</span> taking it through all the æons
of the world; and the counterfeit spirit and destiny accompany that
soul, but the power withdraws itself unto the Virgin of Light."

The soul is then brought down into Chaos, and the counterfeit spirit
becometh the receiver of that soul, and haunteth it, rebuking it in
every punishment because of the sins which it hath caused it to commit;
it is in exceeding great enmity to the soul.

The soul then rises higher, still always haunted

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

by the counterfeit spirit, until it comes to the Ruler of the Way of the
Midst between the lower firmament and the earth-surface. Here it is
still subjected to the punishments of its counterfeit spirit, according
to its "destiny."

It is then brought by the counterfeit spirit to the "light of the
sun,"--the Way of the Midst being apparently the sublunary regions--and
taken to the Judge, the Virgin of Light, according to the commandment of
Ieou, the First Man; and "the Virgin of Light sealeth that soul and
handeth it over to one of her receivers, and will have it carried into a
body, which is the record of the sins which it hath committed."

"Amen, I say unto you she will not suffer that soul to escape from
transmigrations into bodies, until it hath given signs of being in its
last cycle according to its record of demerit."

<span class="margnote">And of the Initiated Righteous.</span>In the case
of a righteous soul, however, and one that hath received the higher
mysteries of light, "when the time of that soul is come for its passing
from the body, then the counterfeit spirit followeth after that soul,
and also the destiny. They follow after it in the way whereby it shall
pass into the height.

"And before it goeth far into the height, it uttereth the mystery of the
breaking of the seals and all the bonds of the counterfeit spirit,
whereby the Rulers bind it to the soul"; and so they cease to impede the
soul, and the destiny departeth to its own region, to the Rulers of the
Way of the Midst, and the counterfeit of the spirit to the Rulers of the
Fate-Sphere.

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And so it becometh
a glorious light-stream and passeth up to its inheritance, for "the
receivers of that soul, who pertain to the light, become wings of light
for that soul," and will be a vesture of light for it. Such a soul
requires no seals or apologies.

But one that hath received the lower mysteries only, requires such
apologies and seals, all of which the Master promises to give them in
His detailed exposition of the emanation of the plērōma. For the present
He simply states what spaces have to be traversed and what are the
rulers.

Mary compares some of the statements with former sayings, including one
which the Master <span class="margnote">"Agree with thine Enemy."</span>
spake "unto us aforetime by the mouth of Paul our brother." She further
interprets the saying, "Agree with thine enemy whilst thou art in the
way with him, lest at any time thine enemy deliver thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee
into prison; thou shalt not come out thence till thou hast paid the
uttermost farthing," as referring to the Judge, the Virgin of Light, and
the recasting of the soul into another body, for that no soul is free
from transmigration until it gives signs of being in its last cycle.

Mary next enquires as to the nature of the mysteries of the baptisms
which remit sins, and the Master replies:

"The counterfeit spirit beareth witness to every sin which the soul hath
committed; not only doth <span class="margnote">The Stamping of the Sins
on the Souls.</span> it bear witness concerning the sins of the souls,
but it sealeth every sin that it may be stamped on the

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

soul, so that all the rulers of the punishments of sinners may know that
it is the soul of a sinner, and may be informed of the number of sins
which it hath committed, by the number of the seals which the
counterfeit spirit hath stamped upon it, so that they may chastise it
according to the number of sins which it Bath committed. This is the
fashion in which they treat the soul of the sinner.

<span class="margnote">The Burning Up of the Sins by the Fires of the
Baptism Mystery.</span>"Now, therefore, when a man receiveth the
mysteries of the baptisms, those mysteries become a mighty fire,
exceedingly fierce, wise, which burneth up sins; they enter into the
soul secretly and devour all the sins which the counterfeit spirit hath
implanted in it.

"And when the fire hath purified all the sins which the counterfeit
spirit hath implanted in the soul, the mysteries enter into the body
occultly, that the fire may secretly pursue after the pursuers and cut
them off with the body. They chase after the counterfeit spirit and the
destiny, to separate them from the power and the soul, and place them
with the body, so that the counterfeit spirit, the destiny, and the body
may be separated into one group, and the soul and power into another.
And the mystery of baptism remaineth between the two, and separateth the
one from the other, in order that it may cleanse them and make them
pure, that the soul and power may not be fouled in matter."

It is then further explained that all the twelve and other mysteries of
the First Mystery and of the Ineffable are still higher than the
mysteries of the

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

baptisms; but all of this will be explained in a further teaching.

Mary gives interpretations of passages of scripture by the light of the
new teaching, the opportunity being offered by a recapitulation of some
of the points by the Master, with enquiry as to. whether they have well
understood. Especially is the unending compassion of the highest
Mysteries insisted upon.

"If even a king of to-day, a man of the world, granteth boons unto them
who are like unto him, <span class="margnote">The Infinite Forgiveness
of Sins.</span> if he moreover granteth pardon unto murderers, and them
that are guilty of intercourse with males, and other horrible and
capital crimes; if, I say, it is in the power even of one who is a man
of the world to act thus, much more then have that Ineffable and that
First Mystery, who are lords of the whole plērōma, power over everything
to do as they will, and grant remission of sin unto every one who shall
have received the Mystery.

"Again, if even a king of to-day investeth a soldier with a royal
mantle, and sendeth him to foreign regions, and the soldier there
committeth murders and other grave offences worthy of death, and yet
they are not brought home to him, because he weareth the royal mantle,
how much more, then, \[is it the case with\] them who are mantled in the
mysteries of the vestures of that Ineffable, and those of the First
Mystery who are lords over all them of the height and all them of the
depth!"

Thereupon the Master makes trial of Peter, to see whether he is
compassionate, in the case of a woman

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

who had fallen away after receiving the mystery of baptism, and Peter
comes out of the trial successfully.

<span class="margnote">But Delay not to Repent.</span>It is then
explained that the lot of a man who has received the mysteries and
fallen away and not repented, is far worse than that of the impious man
who has never known them. As to those who are indifferent, thinking they
have many births before them and need not hasten, the Master bids the
disciples:

"Preach ye unto the whole world, saying unto men: 'Strive together that
ye may receive the mysteries of light in this time of stress, and enter
into the Kingdom of Light. Put not off from day to day, and from cycle
to cycle, in the belief that ye will succeed in obtaining the mysteries
when ye return to the world in another cycle.'

<span class="margnote">For at a Certain Time the Gates of the Light will
be shut.</span>"Such men know not when the number of perfect souls
\[shall be filled up\]; for when the number of perfect souls shall be
completed, I will then shut the Gates of the Light, and from that time
none will be able to come in thereby, nor will any go forth thereafter,
for the number of perfect souls shall be \[completed\], and the mystery
of the First Mystery be perfected--\[the mystery\] whereby all hath come
into existence, and I am that mystery.

"From that hour no one shall any more enter into the Light, and none
shall come forth, in that the time of the number of perfect souls shall
be fulfilled, before I set fire to the world, that it may purify the
coons, and veils, the firmaments and the whole world, and also all the
matters that are still in it, the race of human kind being still upon
it.

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

"At that time, then, the faith shall show itself forth more and more,
and also the mysteries in those days. And many souls shall pass through
the cycles of transmigrations of body and come back into the world in
those days; and among them shall be some who are now alive and hear Me
teach concerning the consummation of the number of perfect souls, \[and
in those days\] they shall find the mysteries of light, and shall
receive them. They shall mount up to the Gates of Light, and shall find
that the number of perfect souls is complete, which is the Consummation
of the First Mystery and the Gnosis of the Plērōma; they will find that
I have shut the Gates of Light, and that from that hour no one can come
in or go forth thereby.

"Those souls then will cry within through the Gates of Light, saying:
'Master, open unto us.' And <span class="margnote">"I know not whence ye
are."</span> I will answer unto them, saying, 'I know not whence ye
are.' And they will say unto Me, 'We have received the mysteries, and we
have fulfilled all Thy doctrine; Thou didst teach us on the high ways.'
And I will answer unto them, saying, 'I know not who ye are, ye who have
practised iniquity and evil even unto this day. Wherefore go \[hence\]
into the Outer Darkness.' Forthwith they will depart to the Outer
Darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth."

Mary then asks as to the type of the Outer Darkness and the number of
the spaces and regions <span class="margnote">The Dragon of Outer
Darkness.</span> of punishment; and then follows an elaborate
description of the space-dragon of this Outer Darkness, whose tail is in
its mouth, and its twelve

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

dungeons, with their authentic faces and names of the rulers, of the
doors and angels that watch at them, and what souls pass into the Dragon
and how; it is explained how the names are all contained in one another,
and what are the torments and degrees of the fires. Thereupon follows
the teaching how the souls of the uninitiated may be saved, and how
finally the Mystery will save even those who have no more chance of
rebirth.

It is further explained how the initiated become light-flames and
streams of light. Mary pleads for them who have neglected the mysteries;
and the efficacy of the names of the twelve rulers of the dungeons is
explained, and how that the souls who know the names escape from the
Dragon and are taken to Ieou, and their subsequent fate.

<span class="margnote">The Draught of Oblivion.</span>Then comes fresh
instruction as to the Rulers of the Fate and the Draught of
Oblivion--"the seed of iniquity, filled with all manner of desire and
all forgetfulness . . .; and that deadly draught of oblivion becometh a
body external to the soul, like unto the soul in every way, and its
perfect resemblance, and hence they call it the counterfeit spirit."

The manner of the fashioning of a new soul is then described, and how
the power is inbreathed into it; this is set forth generally, and more
detailed information is promised on a future occasion.

<span class="margnote">The Parents we are to Leave.</span>It is further
explained that the saying, "He who shall not leave father and mother and
follow after Me," refers to the "parents" or fashioners of the

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

soul and counterfeit spirit, and not our earthly parents, far less the
parents of the light-power within--the Saviour and His mysteries.

Further information is also given as to the counterfeit spirit and its
elemental builders, three-hundred and sixty-five in number; the
embryonic stages of incarnation; the kārmic compulsion of the
parents--the father and mother of the physical body; the occult process
of gestation; the mode of incarnation of the various constituent
elements in man; occult physiognomy; the nature of the destiny and how a
man comes by his death; and various other questions of a like nature.
And then the Saviour continues:

"Now, therefore, for the sake of sinners have I torn myself asunder and
come into the world, to save <span class="margnote">Of the Books of Ieou
again.</span> them, and also because it is necessary that the righteous,
who have never done evil, and have never committed sin, should find the
mysteries which are in the Books of Ieou, which I made Enoch write down
in Paradise, when I spake to him from the Tree of Knowledge, and from
the Tree of Life, and which I made him deposit in the rock of Ararad;
and I set Kalapataurōth, the Ruler that is over Skemmut, on whose head
is the foot of Ieou--the latter surroundeth all the Æons and the
Fate-Sphere--I set \[then\] this Ruler to preserve the Books of Ieou
from the flood, and \[also\] lest any of the Rulers out of enmity should
destroy them. These \[books\] will I give unto you, when I have finished
telling you the emanation of the plērōma."

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

But few only will comprehend the higher mysteries. "I tell you that
there will be found one in a thousand and two in ten thousand for the
consummation of the mysteries of the First Mystery."

<span class="margnote">The Christ of the First of this Humanity to Enter
the Light.</span>Before the coming of the First Mystery no soul of this
humanity had fully entered into the Light; none of the prophets or
patriarchs had as yet entered into the Light, but they will be sent back
into righteous bodies and so find the mysteries and inherit the Kingdom.

The treatise brings itself to an end with the following paragraphs:

"Mary answered and said: 'Blessed are we before all men because of these
great \[truths\] which Thou hast revealed unto us.'

"The Saviour answered and said unto Mary and all His disciples: 'I will
also reveal unto you all the grandeurs of the height, from the interior
of the interiors to the exterior of the exteriors, that ye may be
perfect in every gnosis, and in every plērōma, and in every height of
the heights, and every deep of the depths.'

<span class="margnote">’Tis He who holds the Keys of the
Mysteries.</span>"And Mary answered and said to the Saviour: 'Now we
know, O Master, freely, surely, plainly, that Thou hast brought the keys
of the mysteries of the Kingdom of Light, which remit the sins of souls,
that they may be cleansed, and be transformed into pure light, and be
brought into the Light.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary of the Extracts From the Books of the Saviour](fff67)
