[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff62)  [Next](fff64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FROM THE TRAVELS OF PETER.

To the above may be added the final speech put into the mouth of Peter,
in the romance of his Travels, or Circuits (Tours). It is found in the
fragment [of](errata.htm#42) the Linus-collection, called *The Martyrdom
of Peter*. The legend says that Peter insisted on being crucified head
downwards, and the reasons for this strange proceeding are given as
follows in the faulty Latin translation.

<span class="margnote">The Descent of Man.</span>"Fitly wert Thou alone
stretched on the cross with head on high, O Lord, who hast redeemed all
of the world from sin. I have desired to imitate Thee in Thy passion
too; yet would I not take on myself to be hanged upright. For we, pure
men and sinners, are born from Adam, but Thou art God of God, Light of
true Light, before all æons and after them; thought worthy to become for
men Man without stain of man, Thou hast stood forth man's glorious
Saviour. Thou ever upright, ever raised

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

on high, eternally above! We, men according to the flesh, are sons of
the first man (Adam), who sunk his being in the earth, whose fall in
human generation is shown forth. For we are brought to birth in such a
way, that we do seem to be poured into earth, so that the right is left,
the left doth right become; in that our state is changed in those who
are the authors of this life. For this world down below doth think the
right what is the left; this world in which Thou, Lord, hast found us
like the Ninevites, and by Thy holy preaching hast Thou rescued those
about to die."

"The authors of this life" presumably refer to the powers that bring the
man to birth. The Jonah-myth was a type of the initiate, who, after
being three days and three nights in the "belly of Sheol" or Hades,
preached to those in Nineveh, the Jerusalem Below, that is to say, this
world.

But for the brethren there was a still further instruction as to the
meaning of the Mystic Cross.

"But ye, my brothers, who have the right to hear, lend me the ears of
your heart, and understand what <span class="margnote">The Mystic
Redemption of the Cross.</span> now must be revealed to you--the hidden
mystery of every nature and the secret spring. of every thing composed.
For the first man, whose race I represent by my position, with head
reversed, doth symbolize his birth into destruction; for that his birth
was death and lacked the life-stream. But of His own compassion the
Power Above came down into the world, by means of corporal substance, to
him who by a just decree had been cast down into the earth, and hanged
upon the Cross, and by the means of this

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

most holy calling \[the Cross\], He did restore us and did make for us
these present things (which had till then remained unchanged by men's
unrighteous error) into the Left, and those that men had taken for the
Left into eternal things. In exaltation of the Right He hath changed all
the signs into their proper nature, considering as good those thought
not good, and those men thought malefic most benign. Whence in a mystery
the Lord hath said: 'If ye make not the Right like as the Left, the Left
like as the Right, Above as the Below, Before as the Behind, ye shall
not know God's kingdom.' This saying have I made manifest in me, my
brothers; this is the way in which your eyes of flesh behold me hanging.
It figures forth the way of the first man.

"But ye, beloved, hearing these words and by conversion of your nature
and changing of your life perfecting them, even as ye have turned you
from that way of error where ye trod, unto the most sure state of faith,
so keep ye running and strive towards the peace of that which calls you
from above, living the holy life. For that the way on which ye travel
there is Christ. Therefore with Jesus, Christ, true God, ascend the
Cross; He hath been made for us the one and only Word. Whence also doth
the Spirit say: 'Christ is the Word and Voice of God.' The Word in truth
is symbolized by that straight stem on which I hang. \[As for the
Voice--\] since that voice is a thing of flesh, with features not to be
ascribed unto God's nature, the cross-piece of the cross is thought to
figure forth that human nature which suffered the fault of change in the
first man, but by

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

the help of God-and-man, received again its real mind. Right in the
centre, joining twain in one, is set the nail of discipline, conversion
and repentance."

The Latin translation is very faulty and often obscures the Greek
original, but enough of the meaning has been preserved to show the
general drift of the thought. The first quotation is one of the sayings
from *The Gospel according to the Egyptians;* the source of the second
is not known. Compare also the changing of the Right and Left with the
conversion of the spheres in the opening pages of the *Pistis Sophia*
treatise.

Other speeches and innumerable isolated phrases, which still preserve
traces of the Gnosis, could be <span class="margnote">Afterword.</span>
cited from the existing remains of the uncanonical Acts, but sufficient
has been written to give the reader an idea of the extensive popular
literature of this kind which emanated from Gnostic circles in the early
years, and to show him that very different ideas prevailed among those
who were in touch with the inner tradition, from those of that
exclusively historical view which eventually gained the upper hand.

Whether or not these ideas throw light on the Christ's teaching, each
must decide for himself. That, however, they were ideas put forward by
men vastly nearer the time of the origins than ourselves--by men whose
whole lives were devoted to the Christ, striving by every means to
purify themselves, and to experience in themselves the truths of the
unseen world and realize the teachings of the Master--is amply manifest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gnosis According to Its Friends](fff64)
