[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fff59)  [Next](fff61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVUVRM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

### FROM THE ACTS OF THOMAS.

WE have already given the reader the most important fragment preserved
in the *Acts of Thomas*, or Judas <span class="margnote">A Hymn to
Wisdom.</span> Thomas; it is the beautiful Hymn of the Soul, composed in
every likelihood by Bardesanes. If the *Acts of Thomas* had given us
nothing else than this grand Gnostic Hymn of the Robe of Glory, their
life would not have been preserved in vain. Fortunately, however, there
is more to be gleaned from them. The following is a translation of the
beautiful Ode to Sophia, as it is called.

"The Maiden is Light's daughter; in her the King's radiance is
treasured. Majestic her look, and delightsome; in radiant beauty she
shineth.

"Like to spring flowers are her garments; from them streameth scent of
sweet odours. Throned o’er her head the King sitteth, with food free
from death feeding them at His table.

"Truth crowneth her head; Joy sports at her feet. She openeth her mouth
as becomes her; all songs of praise she lets stream forth.

"Two and thirty are they who sing praises; . . . Her tongue is like the
entrance veil, moved by them who enter in only.

"Her neck towereth step-like; the first world-builder did build it. Her
hands suggest the band of blessed Æons, proclaiming them (?); her
fingers point toward the City's Gates.

"Her bridal chamber (παστός) doth stream with light, and pour forth
scent of balsam and sweet herbs,

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

delicious scents of myrrh and savoury plants; with myrtle wreaths and
masses of sweet flowers ’tis strewn within. Her bridal couch is decked
with reeds (?).

"Her bridesmen are grouped round her; seven are they in number; she hath
picked them herself. Seven, too, are her bridesmaids dancing before her.

"Twelve are they who serve and attend her; their eyes ever look for the
Bridegroom, that He may fill them with light.

"For ever with Him will they be in joy everlasting; and will take their
seats at that feast where the Great Ones assemble, and remain at that
banquet of which the Eternal (αἰώνιοι) alone are deemed worthy.

"In kingly dress shall they be clad, and put on robes of light, and both
shall joy in bliss and exultation, singing praise to the Father.

"For of His glorious radiance they've received; and at the sight of Him,
their Lord, they have been filled with light. They have received from
Him immortal food that knows no waste.

"They've drunk of wine that makes men thirst no more, nor suffer fleshly
lust. So with the Living Spirit they glorify Truth's Father, and sing
their praise to Wisdom's Mother."

Would that we had the original of this beautiful hymn, for even the
faulty and distorted version that remains is beautiful. Can it be that
we have here another of the Hymns of Bardaisan? In any case the hymn
looks back to the sacred marriage of the Sophia with her Bridegroom the
Christ, to which

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

reference has already been made in our sketch of the Basilidian Gnosis.

In this marriage the cosmic Sophia was received back into the
Light-world, and united with her <span class="margnote">Its
meaning.</span> heavenly spouse. This was to take place at the Great
Consummation; but, mystically, it was ever taking place for those who
united themselves with their Higher Selves.

As in the consummation of the universe the World-soul was reunited with
the World-mind, so in the perfectioning of the individual the soul was
made one with the Self within.

The Maiden is the daughter of the Plērōma of Light; she reflects the
splendour of the Kings, the Lords of the Light-realm. Above her in the
Light-realm sits throned the King of Glory, the Christos, who giveth the
food of deathlessness to the Spiritual Souls (Pneumatics) who are worthy
to be bidden to the Feast.

At this high initiation the whole Plērōma (the two and thirty Æons) sing
songs of rejoicing that the victory is won. ’Tis only such perfected
souls who can move Wisdom's tongue in praise to God; they alone can make
the subtle substance of such lofty heights vibrate in songs of praise.

The following verse is difficult to understand, and doubtless does not
preserve the original. The "City" is the Plērōma; the bride-chamber is
the Pastos, the shrine, the holy place, where the initiation is
given--the Jerusalem Above, identical perhaps with the City of which we
read in the superior MS. of the Codex Brucianus.

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

Thither the purified soul is conducted by seven pairs or syzygies of
powers. Rising aloft she takes with her the twelve, her servants, no
longer her rulers as in the lower world, where she has so long been
chained in the bonds of desire. The twelve are now her own purified
powers, whereby the Light of the Christos is reflected. In the phrase,
"both shall joy in bliss and exultation," of the third verse from the
end, "both" refers to the reunited soul with its "Angel"--those Angels
who always behold the Face of the Father.

This and much else does the hymn reveal to those who love the Gnosis,
for many pages would not exhaust its full meaning.

<span class="margnote">The Sacramental Invocations.</span>But we must
hasten on to the remaining fragments in the *Acts of Thomas*, and so
present our readers with a translation of two interesting sacramental
prayers or invocations in hymn-form. The first runs as follows:

"Come Thou Holy Name of Christ, Name above all names; come Power from
above; come Perfect Mercy; come highest gift!

"Thou Mother of compassion, come; come Spouse of Him, the Man; come Thou
Revealer of the mysteries concealed; Thou Mother of the seven mansions
come, who in the eighth hath found Thy rest!

"Come Thou who art more ancient far than the five holy Limbs--Mind,
Thought, Reflection, Thinking, Reasoning; commune with those of later
birth!

"Come Holy Spirit, purge Thou their reins and heart!"

The second runs thus:

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

"Come highest Gift; Thou Perfect Mercy, come; Thou knower of the
Chosen's mysteries, descend; Thou who dost share in all the noble
striver's struggles, come!

"Come Silence, Thou Revealer of the mighty things of all the Greatness;
come Thou who dost make manifest the hidden, and make the secret plain!

"Come Holy Dove, mother of two young twins; come Hidden Mother, revealed
in deeds alone!

"Come Thou who givest joy to all who are at one with Thee; come and
commune with us in this thanksgiving (eucharist) which we are making in
Thy name, in this love-feast (agapē) to which we have assembled at Thy
call!"

These sacramental invocations are to be referred to the same circle of
ideas as the formula of the <span class="margnote">A Note
thereon.</span> Marcosian Gnosis which we have already given.

The Name is not the name "Christos," but the Name or Power of the
Christ, His *shakti* (to use a term of Indian theosophy) or syzygy.

The "one more ancient than the five limbs," is the Man, the spouse of
the Sophia or Holy Spirit, the Christos. The five limbs are presumably
the Pentad of the æons referred to in the new-found Gnostic *Gospel of
Mary*, and the names of them are very similar to those mentioned in the
"Simonian" system. They are one of the highest orderings of the limbs,
or members, of the Heavenly Man, of which we read so much in the Bruce
and Askew Codices.

"Those of later birth" are the neophytes awaiting the initiation of the
"seal of perfection." The

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "mighty things of
the whole Greatness" are the mysteries of the Plērōma.

The Holy Dove is again the Sophia or World-soul; according to the Gnosis
of Bardaisan, she had two daughters. Ephraim, the bitter opponent of the
Bardesanists, says that they were called Shame of the Dry and Image of
the Water; whether these were really their names or not, they were
presumably the productive World-earth and procreative World-water, the
builders of the material world; in other words, the sublunary and
terrestrial regions.

Before leaving the *Acts of Thomas* it may be interesting to give the
reader a specimen of the stories with which such religious romances were
filled. The Apostle Judas Thomas, or the Twin of Jesus, is fabled to
have received India by lot for his apostolic sphere of work. Thomas at
first does not wish to go, but is sold by Jesus, his master, to a trader
from the East as a slave "skilled in carpentry." We take the following
summary of the story from Salmon's *Introduction to the New Testament*
(8th ed., 1897, pp. 337, 338).

<span class="margnote">The Palace that Thomas Built.</span>"When Thomas
arrives in India, he is brought before the King, and being questioned as
to his knowledge of masons’ or carpenters’ work professes great skill in
either department. The King asks him if he can build him a palace. He
replies that he can, and makes a plan which is approved of. He is then
commissioned to build the palace, and is supplied abundantly with money
for the work, which, however, he says he cannot begin till the winter
months. The

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King thinks this
strange, but being convinced of his skill acquiesces. But when the King
goes away, Thomas, instead of building, employs himself in preaching the
Gospel, and spends all the money on the poor. After a time the King
sends to know how the work is going on. Thomas sends back, word that the
palace is finished all but the roof, for which he must have more money;
and this is supplied accordingly, and is spent by Thomas on the widows
and orphans as before. At length the King returns to the city, and when
he makes inquiry about the palace, he learns that Thomas has never done
anything but go about preaching, giving alms to the poor, and healing
diseases. He seemed to be a magician, yet he never took money for his
cures; lived on bread and water, with salt, and had but one garment. The
King, in great anger, sent for Thomas. 'Have you built me a palace?'
'Yes.' 'Let me see it.' 'Oh, you can't see it now, but you will see it
when you go out of this world.' Enraged at being thus mocked, the King
committed Thomas to prison, until he could devise some terrible form of
death for him. But that same night the King's brother died, and his soul
was taken up by the angels to see all the heavenly habitations. They
asked him in which he would like to dwell. But when he saw the palace
which Thomas had built, he desired to dwell in none but that. When he
learned that it belonged to his brother, he begged and obtained that he
might return to life in order that he might buy it from him. So as they
were putting grave-clothes on the body, it returned to life. He sent for
the King, whose love for him he

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

knew, and implored him to sell him the palace. But when the King learned
the truth about it, he refused to sell the mansion he hoped to inhabit
himself, but consoled his brother with the promise that Thomas, who was
still alive, should build him a better one, The two brothers then
received instruction and were baptized."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From The Acts of John](fff61)
