[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1213) 
[Next](sbe1215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:">1:3:3:</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:1">1:3:3:1</span></span>1. The
Adhvaryu takes the sprinkling-water, and sprinkles in the first place
the fire-wood <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_243), with the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 1), 'A black deer, living in the den, art thou <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_244); I sprinkle thee, agreeable to Agni!' He
thereby makes it sacrificially pure for Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:2">1:3:3:2</span></span>2. He
then sprinkles he altar, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 1), 'Thou art the
altar; I sprinkle thee, agreeable to the barhis (sacrificial-grass
covering)!' He thereby makes it sacrificially pure for the grass
covering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:3">1:3:3:3</span></span>3. He
(the Âgnîdhra) then hands the sacrificial grass <span
id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_245) to him (the Adhvaryu). The latter puts
it down (on the altar) with the knot turned to the east, and sprinkles
it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, I), 'Barhis art thou! I sprinkle thee,
agreeable to the spoons!' He thereby makes it sacrificially pure for the
spoons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:4">1:3:3:4</span></span>4.
Thereupon he pours the sprinkling-water

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

which is left on the roots of the (grass) plants, with the text (Vâ*g*.
S. II, 2), 'A moistening art thou for Aditi!' Aditi, indeed, is this
earth; hence it is for the latter that he thus moistens the roots of the
plants: thereby these plants become root-moistened; and even if their
tops are dry, their roots at least remain moist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:5">1:3:3:5</span></span>5. Having
thereupon untied the knot, he takes the prastara bunch from the front
(of the barhis), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 2), 'Vish*n*u's crest art
thou!' Vish*n*u, namely, is the sacrifice, and this (the prastara) is
his top-knot or crest: this he thereby makes it at this sacrifice <span
id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_246). From the front he takes it, because
this top-knot also is (worn) on the front (of the head): for this reason
he takes it from the front.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:6">1:3:3:6</span></span>6. He
then undoes the band (of the barhis). 'His (the sacrificer's) wife is
sure to bring forth without difficulty <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_247),' thinking thus he undoes the band. He
puts it down on the right hip (of the altar); for this represents his
(the sacrificer's) waist-band, and it is on the right side that the
waist-band is (tied): this is the reason why he puts it down on the
right hip. He again covers it over (with sacrificial grass); for the
waist-band also is covered (by the upper garment): for this reason he
again covers it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:7">1:3:3:7</span></span>7. He now
spreads the barhis (on the altar). For the prastara is the top-knot; and
this other

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

sacrificial grass is for this (sacrifice) what other hair there is below
that (top-knot, viz. the beard, &c.):--that (hair) he thereby puts on
it, and for this reason he spreads the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:8">1:3:3:8</span></span>8. Now
the altar (vedi, fem.) is a woman, and around her sit the gods and those
priests who have studied and teach revealed lore <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_248); and as they thus sit around her, he
makes her not naked: hence it is in order to avoid nudity (on her or the
altar's part) that he spreads the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:9">1:3:3:9</span></span>9. As
large as the altar is, so large is the earth; and the plants (are
represented by) the barhis; so that he thereby furnishes the earth with
plants; and those plants are firmly established in this earth: for this
reason he spreads the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:10">1:3:3:10</span></span>10.
Here now they say, 'Let him strew abundantly; for where the plants are
most abundant on her, there the means of subsistence are most amply
afforded by her: let him therefore strew abundantly!' It is in favour of
him (the sacrificer) who procures (the sacrificial grass), then, (that
this is done.) He strews it threefold <span
id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_249), for threefold is the sacrifice. Or he
may also spread it whilst lifting up (the tops) <span
id="fr_251"></span>[3](#fn_250); for

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

it has been said by the seer (Vâ*g*. S. VII, 32), 'They spread the
barhis continuously.' He spreads it with the roots below (the tops); for
it is with their roots below that those plants are firmly established in
this earth: for this reason he spreads it with the roots below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:11">1:3:3:11</span></span>11. He
spreads it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 2), 'I spread thee, soft as
wool, pleasant to sit upon for the gods!'--when he says 'thee, soft as
wool,' he thereby means to say 'agreeable to the gods;' and by 'pleasant
to sit upon for the gods,' he means to say 'forming a good seat for the
gods.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:12">1:3:3:12</span></span>12. He
now trims the fire <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_251). The Âhavanîya,
doubtless, is the head of the sacrifice, for the head is the
fore-part <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_252): that fore-part of the
sacrifice he thereby trims. He trims it while holding the prastara
(which he has received back from the Brahman) close over it; for the
prastara is the top-knot, and it is this which he thereby puts on it:
for this reason he trims (the fire) while holding the prastara close
over it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:13">1:3:3:13</span></span>13. He
then lays the (three) enclosing-sticks (paridhi) around (the fire). The
reason why he lays the enclosing-sticks around (is this). When at first
the gods chose Agni for the office of Hot*ri*, he said: 'Verily, I am
not equal to this, that I should be your Hot*ri*, and that I should
carry your oblation. Already you have chosen three before,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

and they have passed away <span id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_253). Restore
them to me: then I shall be equal to this, that I should be your Hot*ri*
and that I should carry your oblation!' They said, 'So be it!' and they
restored to him those (three former Agnis): they are these
enclosing-sticks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:14">1:3:3:14</span></span>14. He
then said, 'The thunderbolt, (in the shape of) the vasha*t*-call <span
id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_254), has struck these down: I am afraid of
that thunderbolt, the vasha*t*-call. Lest that thunderbolt, the
vasha*t*-call, should strike me down, enclose me by those (three Agnis,
or paridhis); and thus that thunderbolt, the vasha*t*-call, will not
strike me down.' They said, 'So be it!' and they enclosed him with those
(three sticks), and that thunderbolt, the vasha*t* call, did not strike
him down. When he encloses Agni with those (sticks) he buckles armour on
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:15">1:3:3:15</span></span>15.
They (the other three Agnis) then said, 'If you join us with the
sacrifice in this wise, then let us also have a share in the sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:16">1:3:3:16</span></span>16. The
gods said: 'So be it! What shall fall outside the enclosure, that is
offered unto you; and what they shall offer just upon you, that will
sate

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

you; and what they shall offer up in the fire that will sate you!' Thus
what they offer up in the fire, that satisfies them (the Agnis); and
what they offer up just upon them (the enclosing-sticks, or Agnis), that
satisfies them; and what is spilled outside the enclosure, that is
offered to them <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_255): hence no sin
attaches to what (butter) is spilt; for into this earth they entered
(when they, the Agnis, passed away), and whatever is spilt here,--all
that remains indeed in her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:17">1:3:3:17</span></span>17.
That which is spilt he touches, with the formulas (Vâ*g*. S. II, 2), 'To
the Lord of the Earth--svâhâ!' 'To the Lord of the World--svâhâ!' 'To
the Lord of Beings--svâhâ!' These, indeed, are the names of those
Agnis,--to wit, Lord of the Earth, Lord of the World, and Lord of
Beings. Thus in like manner as that (oblation) which is accompanied by
'Vasha*t*' is offered up (to the particular deity to which it is
announced), so is this (offered up) on his (the sacrificer's) part to
those Agnis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:18">1:3:3:18</span></span>18.
Here now some people take the sticks they lay around from the fire-wood;
but let him not do so, for unsuitable for laying around are those which
they take from the fire-wood, since the fire-wood is prepared for the
purpose of being put upon (the fire); but what other (kind of sticks)
they bring to him, called 'enclosing-sticks (paridhis),' they are indeed
suitable for his purpose: let them therefore bring others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:19">1:3:3:19</span></span>19.
Indeed, they should be of Palâ*s*a wood

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Butea Frondosa);
for the Palâ*s*a tree, doubtless, is the Brahman <span
id="fr_257"></span>[1](sbe1215.htm#fn_256), and Agni also is the
Brahman: for this reason the Agnis should be of Palâ*s*a wood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3:3:20">1:3:3:20</span></span>20.
Should he be unable to procure them of Palâ*s*a wood, they may be of
Vikankata wood (Flacourtia Sapida); and if he be unable to procure any
of Vikankata, they may be of Kârshmarya wood (Gmelina Arborea); and if
he be unable to procure any of Kârshmarya wood, they may be of Vilva
(Aegle Marmelos), or of Khadira (Acacia Catechu), or of Udumbara wood
(Ficus Glomerata). These, doubtless, are the trees that are suitable for
sacrificial purposes, and from these trees they (the enclosing-sticks)
are therefore (taken).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_243"></span>[83:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_244) The fire-wood had
been brought by the Âgnîdhra and laid down on the altar. The Adhvaryu
now unties and sprinkles it. \[Before doing so he has, as usual, to ask
and obtain the permission of the Brahman. The same is the case in regard
to the barhis, but not in regard to the altar.\] Kâty. II, 7, 19.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[84:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_245) ? Âkhare-sh*th*a; it
probably has a double meaning in this place, viz. 'that which dwells in
a den (âkhara)' and 'that which has its place on the hearth (khara).'

<span id="fn_245"></span>[84:2](sbe1214.htm#fr_246) 'At the beginning of
the sacrifice the Adhvaryu makes of the load of Darbha or sacred grass,
which has been brought to the sacrificial compound, seven mush*t*is or
bunches, each of which is tied together with a stalk of grass, just as
the Baresma (Barsom) of the Parsis. The several names of these seven
bunches are, 1. Va*g*amânamush*t*i, the bunch kept by the sacrificer
himself in his hand as long as the sacrifice lasts. 2. Three bunches
from the Barhis, or the covering of the Vedi on which the sacrificial
vessels are put. These are unloosened and spread all over the Vedi. 3.
Prastara. This bunch, which must remain tied, is put over the Darbha of
the Vedi. 4. Paribho*g*anî. From this bunch the Adhvaryu takes a handful
out for each priest, and the sacrificer and his wife, which they then
use for their seat. 5. The Veda. This bunch is made double in its first
part; the latter part is cut off and has to remain on the Vedi; it is
called parivâsana. The Veda itself is always wandering from one priest
to the other, and is given to the sacrificer and his wife. It is handed
over to the latter only when one of the priests makes her recite a
mantra.' Haug's translation of the Ait. Br. p. 79.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[85:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_247) Because, according
to Sâya*n*a, it lies on the front, or eastern side of the altar, near
the Âhavanîya fire, and men also wear their topknot (in the form of a
ball or lump) on the fore-part of their head. The prastara he hands to
the Brahman-priest. Katy. II, 7, 22.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[85:2](sbe1214.htm#fr_248) Prak*li*ptam;
Sâya*n*a takes it in the sense of 'a completely formed (child).'

<span id="fn_248"></span>[86:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_249) 'Around her on the
south sit the gods and those man-gods (manushyadevâ*h*), the priests who
have studied and teach revealed lore.' Kâ*n*va recension.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[86:2](sbe1214.htm#fr_250) Viz. in three
layers, one beside the other, each consisting of one handful of grass.
He first spreads a layer on the east side from the southern to the
northern shoulder of the altar, with the tops of the blades turned
towards the east; then a second one west of it, so as to cover the roots
of the first with the tops of the second layer; and in the same way a
third one on the west side of the altar. If he thinks fit, he may make
more than three layers, but their number should be uneven. Kâty. II, 7,
22-26 (schol.).

<span id="fn_250"></span>[86:3](sbe1214.htm#fr_251) That is to say, he
is to begin on the west side, and in laying down the successive layers,
he is to lift up (with a stick or some <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
other object) the heads of the preceding layer and push the roots of the
succeeding one under them. Ib. 27 (schol.).

<span id="fn_251"></span>[87:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_252) He takes one stick
from the fuel and gets the fire ready (for the oblations, either by
throwing the stick into it, or by stirring it with the stick). Ib. 29.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[87:2](sbe1214.htm#fr_253) The Âhavanîya is at
the foremost or eastern end of the sacrificial ground.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[88:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_254) See I, 2, 3, 1.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[88:2](sbe1214.htm#fr_255) The call 'vasha*t*'
(or vausha*t*), apparently signifying 'may he (Agni) carry it (the
oblation) up!' (from vah, to bear, carry), is pronounced by the Hot*ri*
at the end of the yâgyâs or offering prayers (see note on I, 5, 1, 16).
Professor Weber has somewhere proposed to derive it from vaksh, to grow,
increase, hence 'may it prosper, or agree, with you!' Different, but
quite fanciful, interpretations of vasha*t* are given *S*at. Br. I, 5,
2, 18; Ait. Br. 3, 6. As to the awful solemnity of this formula, and the
danger arising from a careless use of it, see Ait. Br. 3, 8, on which
Haug remarks, 'Up to the present day the Shrotriyas or sacrificial
priests never dare to pronounce this formula save at the time of
sacrificing. They say that if they would do so at any other time, they
would be cursed by the gods.'

<span id="fn_255"></span>[89:1](sbe1214.htm#fr_256) The Kâ*n*va text has
as follows:--They said, 'So be it! what shall fall outside the enclosure
that shall be yours! and what they shall offer just upon you that shall
sate you!' for what they offer just upon them that does indeed sate them
(enân); and what they offer up in the fire that is theirs (eshâm, ? the
gods’); and what falls outside the enclosure by that he shall incur no
guilt, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1215)
