[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1254) 
[Next](sbe1256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4">2:4:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### THE DÂKSHÂYA*N*A SACRIFICE.

This peculiar modification of the new and full-moon sacrifice seems to
have been originated and generally to have been practised among the
Dâkshâya*n*as, a royal family which was evidently still flourishing at
the time of our author <span id="fr_836"></span>[2](#fn_832).

Here also two days were, as a rule, required for the performance, both
at full and new moon; but while, at the ordinary sacrifice,

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

the first day was completely taken up with the preliminary ceremonies,
the Dâkshâya*n*as spread the special offerings over both days, making
each time two separate ish*t*is of them. The special havis, or
sacrificial dishes, were, at the ordinary full-moon sacrifice, a
rice-cake (to Agni, and another) to Agni and Soma; and at the new-moors
sacrifice, a cake (to Agni, and another) to Indra and Agni, or, as an
alternative, a dish of curds (sânnâyya) prepared of sweet and sour milk,
offered to Indra (or Mahendra). The Dâkshâya*n*as, on the other hand,
offered the Agni-Soma and Indra-Agni cakes in the fore-noon of the first
day, that of full and new moon respectively. The afternoons of the same
days were then taken up with preliminary rites, such as the eating of
fast-day food, the cutting of a palâ*s*a branch, driving away of the
calves from the cows, &c. The second day's performance commences (after
the Agnihotra) with the election of the Brahman. The chief oblations of
the day are (a cake to Agni, and) sour and sweet milk, offered
separately to Indra at full moon; and mixed (as sânnâyya or payasyâ) to
Mitra and Varu*n*a at new moon.

At full moon some authorities add a special ish*t*i to Indra Vim*ri*dh
('the Averter of evil'). The new-moon performance concludes with
libations of whey to the divine coursers (the horses of the gods); and,
optionally, with an ish*t*i to Âditya.

The performance of the Dâkshâya*n*a sacrifice was held to be obligatory
only for a period of fifteen years (see XI, 1, 2, 13), whereas the
ordinary new and full-moon offerings had to be performed for double that
period from the setting up of the sacred fires. Nay, even the daily
performance of it with certain modifications, for a whole year, was
supposed to acquit the householder of any further obligation in this
respect; his sacrificial duties being henceforth limited to the
performance of the Agnihotra, or morning and evening libations. The
daily performance of the Dâkshâya*n*a is so regulated that an afternoon
and following forenoon are alternately assigned to the two days'
ceremonies of the ordinary fortnightly Dâkshâya*n*a sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:1">2:4:4:1</span></span>1. In the
beginning Pra*g*âpati, being desirous of offspring, sacrificed with this
sacrifice: 'May I abound in offspring and cattle; may I obtain
prosperity; may I become glorious; may I become an eater of food!' so he
thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:2">2:4:4:2</span></span>2. Now he
was indeed Daksha: and because

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

he sacrificed in the beginning with this sacrifice, it is called
Dâkshâya*n*a-sacrifice. Some, however, call it the
Vasish*th*a-sacrifice; for he (Pra*g*âpati) is indeed vasish*th*a (the
best) <span id="fr_837"></span>[1](#fn_833), and after him they call it.
He sacrificed with that sacrifice; and what race, what prosperity of
Pra*g*âpati was then produced through his performing that sacrifice,
that same race he procreates, that same prosperity he obtains,
whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him therefore
perform that sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:3">2:4:4:3</span></span>3. Now
that same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Pratîdar*s*a *S*vaikna;
and he indeed was an authority <span id="fr_838"></span>[2](#fn_834) to
those who emulated him. An authority, therefore, he will become,
whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore,
perform that sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:4">2:4:4:4</span></span>4. Him
Suplan Sâr*ñg*aya approached for the sake of sanctity; and accordingly
he was taught that sacrifice and another <span
id="fr_839"></span>[3](#fn_835); and having learnt it he went back to
the S*riñg*ayas. Now they knew that he was coming to them after studying
the sacrifice for their sake. They said, 'Verily, with the gods (saha
devai*h*) he has come to us who has come after studying the sacrifice:'
thus he (was called) Sahadeva Sâr*ñg*aya; and even now the saying is,
'Lo, Suplan has taken another name!' He performed that sacrifice; and
what race and prosperity of the S*riñg*ayas was then produced through
his performing that sacrifice, that same race he procreates, that same
prosperity he obtains, whosoever,

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:5">2:4:4:5</span></span>5. That
same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Devabhâga *S*rautarsha. He
was Purohita both to the Kurus and the S*riñg*ayas. Now a very high
position (is held by him) who is the Purohita of one kingdom: how much
higher, then, is the position (of one) who (is the Purohita) of two
(kingdoms). A very high position accordingly he obtains, whosoever,
knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:6">2:4:4:6</span></span>6. That
same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Daksha Pârvati; and even to
this day these (descendants of his) the Dâkshâya*n*as are possessed of
the royal dignity: royal dignity he, therefore, here obtains, whosoever,
knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that
sacrifice.--Day by day there is one cake <span
id="fr_840"></span>[1](#fn_836): thereby Fortune (*s*rî) is (wedded) to
him without a rival wife and undisturbed. He offers on two days of the
full moon and on two of the new moon: for two means a pair, so that a
productive pair is thereby obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:7">2:4:4:7</span></span>7. Now
when <span id="fr_841"></span>[2](#fn_837), at full moon, he offers a
(cake) to Agni and Soma on the first day,--these are two deities, and
two means a pair: hence a productive pair is thereby obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:8">2:4:4:8</span></span>8. And on
the morrow there are Agni's cake and Indra's Sânnâyya  <span
id="fr_842"></span>[3](#fn_838),--these are two deities, and two means a
pair, so that a productive pair is thereby obtained.

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:9">2:4:4:9</span></span>9. Again
when, at new moon, he offers a (cake) to Indra and Agni on the first
day,--these are two deities, and two means a pair, so that a productive
pair is thereby obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:10">2:4:4:10</span></span>10.
Then on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Mitra and Varu*n*a's curds.
Now Agni's cake (is offered), for the sole purpose that it may not
forsake the sacrifice <span id="fr_843"></span>[1](#fn_839). Then those
two, Mitra and Varu*n*a, are two deities, and two means a pair: hence a
productive pair is thereby obtained; and thus is (produced) that form
(of the sacrifice) whereby he becomes many, whereby he is reproduced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:11">2:4:4:11</span></span>11. And
when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first day,
then this is for him that victim which they slaughter for Agni and Soma
on the fast-day (of the Soma-sacrifice) <span
id="fr_844"></span>[2](#fn_840).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:12">2:4:4:12</span></span>12. And
on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Indra's Sânnâyya. Now Agni's
cake is for him what the morning libation is (at the Soma-sacrifice),
for the morning libation is indeed sacred to Agni; and the Sânnâyya is
for him the mid-day libation, for the mid-day libation is indeed sacred
to Indra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:13">2:4:4:13</span></span>13. And
again when, at new moon, he offers the Indra-Agni (cake) on the first
day, that is for him the same as the third (or evening) libation; for
the third libation is sacred to the All-gods, and Indra and Agni truly
are all the gods <span id="fr_845"></span>[3](#fn_841).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:14">2:4:4:14</span></span>14. And
on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Mitra and Varu*n*a's curds. Now
Agni's cake is (offered) for the sole purpose that it should not

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

forsake the sacrifice and that dish of curds (payasyâ) is to him the
same as that barren cow, the anûbandhyâ, which has to be slaughtered for
Mitra and Varu*n*a (at the Soma-sacrifice) <span
id="fr_846"></span>[1](#fn_842): thus. by performing the full and
new-moon offering one gains as much as is gained by performing a
Soma-sacrifice; and that (offering) is indeed a great sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:15">2:4:4:15</span></span>15. And
again when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first
day,--it was by that (offering) that Indra slew V*ri*tra <span
id="fr_847"></span>[2](#fn_843); it was thereby he gained that supreme
authority which he now wields <span id="fr_848"></span>[3](#fn_844): and
so does he (the sacrificer) thereby slay his wicked spiteful enemy and
gain the superiority. And as to his mixing (sweet and sour milk),--the
Sânnâyya is (the oblation) of the new moon (amâ-vâsyâ) <span
id="fr_849"></span>[4](#fn_845), and the new moon <span
id="fr_850"></span>[5](#fn_846) means being far away: to him who had
slain V*ri*tra this was forthwith (offered), and him they regaled with
that draught. He therefore who, knowing this, prepares the Sânnâyya at
full moon, forthwith

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

drives away evil. Now that moon doubtless is king Soma, the food of the
gods: they extract it on the first day, intending to consume it on the
next day; consequently when that (moon) wanes, it is being consumed by
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:16">2:4:4:16</span></span>16. And
when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first day, he
thereby (as it were) extracts that (Soma); and, when extracted, he adds
that juice to it, and makes it strong by means of that juice <span
id="fr_851"></span>[1](#fn_847). Whosoever, then, knowing this, prepares
the Sânnâyya at full moon, renders his offering palatable to the gods,
and his offering is palatable to the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:17">2:4:4:17</span></span>17. And
again as to why, at new moon, he offers the Indra-Agni (cake) on the
first day. Indra and Agni doubtless are the deities of the new and full
moon: it is to these, therefore, that he offers directly and expressly;
and directly to the new and full moon is offering made by him who thus
knows this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:18">2:4:4:18</span></span>18. And
on the morrow there is Agni's cake and Mitra and Varu*n*a's curds. Now
Agni's cake is (offered) for the sole purpose that it may not forsake
the sacrifice. Mitra and Varu*n*a, on the other hand, are the two
half-moons: the waxing one is Varu*n*a, and the waning one is Mitra.
During that night (of new moon) these two meet, and when they are thus
together he pleases them with that (cake-offering): and, verily, all is
pleased with him, all is obtained by him who thus knows this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:19">2:4:4:19</span></span>19. In
that same night Mitra implants seed in Varu*n*a, and when it (the moon)
wanes, then it is

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

produced from that seed. Now as to why that oblation of curds (payasyâ)
to Mitra and Varu*n*a is here exactly analogous (to the Sânnâyya offered
at new moon) <span id="fr_852"></span>[1](#fn_848).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:20">2:4:4:20</span></span>20. The
new moon doubtless is entitled to the Sânnâyya: it is prepared both then
and at full moon. Now were he also here (at the full-moon offering) to
mix together (the sweet and sour milk), he would commit a repetition and
cause a quarrel (between the respective gods) <span
id="fr_853"></span>[2](#fn_849). Having collected that (Soma or moon)
from the waters and plants, he causes him to be born from out of the
oblations; and on being born from the oblations, he is visible in the
western (sky).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:21">2:4:4:21</span></span>21. It
is through union that he produces him: the curds (payasyâ, fem.) are
female, and the whey is seed. Now what is produced by union is
(produced) properly: hence he thereby produces him by a productive
union; and therefore there is an offering of curds.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:22">2:4:4:22</span></span>22. He
then offers the whey <span id="fr_854"></span>[1](#fn_850) to the
(divine) Coursers. Now the Coursers are the seasons, and the whey is
seed: and thus the seed is cast properly, and the seasons bring forth
the seed so cast in the form of these creatures. This is why he offers
the whey to the Coursers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:23">2:4:4:23</span></span>23. He
offers, as it were, behind the sacrifice: for it is from behind that the
male approaches and impregnates the female. He first offers in the east.
With 'O Agni, accept . . . !' he repeats the Vashat,--this is in lieu of
the Svish*t*ak*ri*t; and (the latter) <span
id="fr_855"></span>[2](#fn_851) he offers in the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:24">2:4:4:24</span></span>24. He
then sprinkles (the whey) in the several quarters, with the texts (Vâg'.
S. VI, 19 b-g), 'The quarters!--The fore-quarters (pra-di*s*)!--The
by-quarters (â-di*s*)!--The intermediate quarters (vi-di*s*)! The upper
quarters (ud-di*s*)!--To the quarters,--Svâhâ <span
id="fr_856"></span>[3](#fn_852)!' Five are the quarters, and five the

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

seasons: he thus effects a union between the quarters and the
seasons <span id="fr_857"></span>[1](#fn_853).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:4:25">2:4:4:25</span></span>25.
Five partake of that (whey remaining in the spoon),--viz. the Hot*ri*,
the Adhvaryu, the Brahman, the Âgnîdhra, and the Sacrificer; for five
are the seasons, so that the characteristic nature of the seasons is
thereby obtained; and the seed that is cast is firmly implanted in the
seasons. The sacrificer partakes of it first, thinking, 'May I first
obtain seed!' But also last (he partakes of it) <span
id="fr_858"></span>[2](#fn_854), thinking, 'May seed remain in me last
of all!' By saying, 'Invited,--invite thou <span
id="fr_859"></span>[3](#fn_855)!' they make it (the whey to resemble)
the Soma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_832"></span>[374:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_836) See Weber, Ind.
Stud. I, p. 223; IV, p. 358; Ludwig, Rig-veda III, p, 595.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[376:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_837) The Kâ*n*va text
has:--Sa u vâ ekena nâmnâ vasish*th*as, 'and with one of his names he
(Pra*g*âpati) is indeed (called) Vasish*th*a.'

<span id="fn_834"></span>[376:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_838) Viva*k*anam;
vivâ*k*anam, Kâ*n*va recension.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[376:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_839) Viz. the
Sautrâma*n*î-sacrifice, according to XII, 8, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[377:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_840) Viz. on the first
day of the full moon a cake to Agni-Soma; on that of new moon a cake to
Indra-Agni; and on the second day of either ceremony the (ordinary) cake
to Agni.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[377:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_841) Or, 'Now, as to the
reason why' (yad) here and in the sequel.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[377:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_842) See I, 6, 4, 9 seq.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[378:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_843) See I, 6, 2, 6,
with note.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[378:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_844) On the upavasatha
(fast-day, or day of preparation) preceding the Soma-sacrifice a he-goat
is sacrificed to Agni and Soma.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[378:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_845) Compare II, 4, 3, 5
seq.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[379:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_846) In connection with
the so-called udayanîyâ ish*t*i, or concluding offering, of the
Soma-sacrifice, a barren cow, called anûbandhyâ (literally, 'to be bound
afterwards'), is offered to Mitra and Varu*n*a. In default of such a
cow, an ox, or even a dish of curds (payasyâ) serves the same purpose.
See Katy. *S*r. X, 9, I2-15; *S*at. Br. IV, 5, 2, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[379:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_847) See I, 6, 4, 1 2.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[379:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_848) Thus the
frequently-occurring phrase 'vya*g*ayata yâsyeyam vi*g*itis tâm'
(literally, 'he conquered that conquest which is now theirs') has been
translated throughout.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[379:4](sbe1255.htm#fr_849) On the derivation
of amâ-vâsyâ ('dwelling at home, or together'), see I, 6, 4, 3 seq.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[379:5](sbe1255.htm#fr_850) Or, 'the dwelling
at home,' or '(Indra's) dwelling together (with Agni) means (Indra, the
V*ri*tra-slayer) being far away.'

<span id="fn_847"></span>[380:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_851) See I, 6, 4, 6 seq.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[381:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_852) Or, to the offering
of sour and sweet milk at full moon; see next note. The Kâ*n*va text
has: 'Now as to why the oblation of curds is here made exactly analogous
(at the full and new-moon ceremonies).' Perhaps it may also refer to the
exact correspondence of the offering of curds to Mitra and Varu*n*a at
new moon and at the Soma-sacrifice.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[381:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_853) At the new-moon
offering of the Dâkshâya*n*a, the sânnâyya or payasyâ offered to Mitra
and Varu*n*a is prepared in the ordinary way (as at the new-moon
ceremony), by fresh (boiled or un-boiled) milk being added to the sour
milk of the preceding night's milking. At the full-moon offering, on the
other hand, the sour and sweet milk remain separate, and constitute two
different havis, or sacrificial dishes, dedicated to Indra. The terms
san-nî ('to bring together') and sânnâyya are here likewise applied to
the offering of the separate substances.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[382:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_854) Before the
oblations of curds are made, the whey is poured off into a vessel (then
optionally sprinkled with butter), and placed on the utkara, or heap of
rubbish. After the stalk of grass has been thrown into the fire (see I,
8, 3, 19), or after the dismissal of the spoons (I, 8, 3, 27), the
Adhvaryu takes the whey and sprinkles the barhis (the grass covering on
the altar) with it. He then pours the remaining whey into the *g*uhû
spoon and calls on the Hot*ri* to recite the invitatory prayer to the
Coursers. Thereupon he betakes himself with the spoon to the north of
the fire, calls on the Hot*ri* for the offering-formula, and at the two
concluding Vasha*t*s pours some of the whey into the east part of the
fire. He then sits down and sprinkles the whey on the fire according to
the several quarters, beginning in the east, and moving around from left
to right (pradakshi*n*am), with the respective texts, Vâ*g*. S. VI, 19
b-e; after which he makes two more libations in the centre and east part
of the fire, with VI, 19 f and g.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[382:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_855) The Kâ*n*va text
has tadu instead of sa vai. On the oblation to Agni as 'the maker of
good offering,' see I, 7, 3, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[382:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_856) Svâhâ is uttered
after each formula,--'The quarters, Svâhâ!' &c.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[383:1](sbe1255.htm#fr_857) *Ri*tûn evaitad
digbhir mithunân karoti, Kâ*n*va recension.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[383:2](sbe1255.htm#fr_858) The author does not
express himself quite clearly. The sacrificer is to partake of the whey
before the priests and also (or, as an alternative) after them.
According to Kâty. IV, 4, 26-27, the sacrificer is to eat either last of
all, or first and last. The Kâ*n*va text has: Prathamo ya*g*amâno
bhakshayati prathamo reta*h* parig*ri*h*n*âmîty athottamo mayy uttama*m*
reta*h* pratitish*th*âd iti,--accordingly he is to eat first and last.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[383:3](sbe1255.htm#fr_859) Each of them, in
his respective order, takes the spoon, calls on the others in the same
order with 'O sacrificer (Hot*ri*, Adhvaryu, &c.) invite!' Their
permission having been given by 'Invited (thou art)!' he then takes some
of the whey, with one of the texts: 'I eat thee, the courser (or whey,
vâginam) of the seasons, the coursers!' 'I, the courser (or, mighty one)
eat, invited, of the invited, to the whey.' 'May I be a racer in the
race!' Kâty. IV, 4, 13-15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 5, 1. Fifth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe1256)
