[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1255) 
[Next](sbe1257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1">2:5:1</span></span>

### FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### V. THE *K*ÂTURMÂSYÂNI OR SEASONAL SACRIFICES.

##### A. THE VAI*S*VADEVA.

The three seasonal or four-monthly sacrifices are performed at the
parvans, or commencement of the three seasons (spring, rainy

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

season, and autumn), viz. the Vai*s*vadeva generally on the full moon of
Phâlguna; the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h* on that of Âshâ*dh*a; and the
Sâkamedhâ*h* on that of Kârttika. As a fourth *K*âturmâsya, ritual
authorities add the *S*unâsîrîya, though they are at variance as to the
exact time of its performance; and neither is its true significance
clearly indicated. It apparently marks merely the conclusion of the
seasonal offerings (which, as a rule, are only performed once, cf. II,
6, 3, 12 seq.); but while the author of the *S*atapatha allows it to be
performed at any time (within four months) after the Sâkamedhâ*h*, other
ritualists hold that its performance should take place on the fifth full
moon after the Sâkamedhâ*h*, or, in other words, exactly a year after
the Vai*s*vadeva. See Weber, Nakshatra, II, p. 334 seq.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:1">2:5:1:1</span></span>1.
Verily, in the beginning, Pra*g*âpati alone existed here <span
id="fr_860"></span>[1](#fn_856). He thought within himself, 'How can I
be propagated?' He toiled and practised austerities. He created living
beings <span id="fr_861"></span>[2](#fn_857). The living beings created
by him passed away: they are those birds. Now man is the nearest to
Pra*g*âpati; and man is two-footed: hence birds are two-footed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:2">2:5:1:2</span></span>2.
Pra*g*âpati thought within himself, 'Even as formerly I was alone, so
also am I now alone.' He created a second (race of beings); they also
passed away: they are those small crawling reptiles other than snakes.
He created a third (race), they say; they also passed away: they are
those snakes. Yâ*gñ*avalkya, on his part, declared them to be of two
kinds only; but of three kinds they are according to the *Ri*k.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:3">2:5:1:3</span></span>3. While
praising and practising austerities, Pra*g*âpati

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

thought within himself, 'How comes it that the living beings created by
me pass away?' He then became aware that his creatures passed away from
want of food. He made the breasts in the fore-part of (their) body <span
id="fr_862"></span>[1](#fn_858) teem with milk. He then created living
beings; and by resorting to the breasts, the beings created by him
thenceforward continued to exist: they are these (creatures) which have
not passed away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:4">2:5:1:4</span></span>4. Hence
it has been said by the *Ri*shi <span
id="fr_863"></span>[2](#fn_859),.--'Three generations have passed
beyond,'--this is said [regarding](errata.htm#9) those that passed
away;--'Others settled down around the light (arka, the sun)'--the light
doubtless is the fire: those creatures which did not pass away, settled
down around the fire; it is with regard to them that this is said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:5">2:5:1:5</span></span>5. 'The
great one (neut.) <span id="fr_864"></span>[3](#fn_860) remained within
the worlds'--it is with regard to Pra*g*âpati that this is said.--'The
blower (or, purifier) entered the regions'--the regions doubtless are
the quarters, and these were indeed entered by that blowing wind: it is
with regard to them that this verse was uttered. And in like manner as
Pra*g*âpati created these living beings, so they are propagated: for
whenever the breasts of woman and the udder of cattle swell, then
whatever is born is born; and by resorting to the breasts these (beings)
continue to exist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:6">2:5:1:6</span></span>6. Now
that milk is indeed food; for in the beginning Pra*g*âpati produced it
for food. But that

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

food also means living beings (progeny), since it is by food that they
exist: by resorting to the breasts of those who have milk, they continue
to exist. And those who have no milk are nursed by the former as soon as
they are born; and thus they exist by means of food, and hence food
means progeny.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:7">2:5:1:7</span></span>7. He who
is desirous of offspring, sacrifices with that oblation, and thereby
makes himself the sacrifice, which is Pra*g*âpati <span
id="fr_865"></span>[1](#fn_861).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:8">2:5:1:8</span></span>8. In the
first place <span id="fr_866"></span>[2](#fn_862) there is a cake for
Agni on eight potsherds. Agni indeed is the root, the progenitor of the
deities; he is Pra*g*âpati ('lord of creatures'): hence there is a cake
for Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:9">2:5:1:9</span></span>9. Then
follows a potful of boiled rice (*k*aru) for Soma. Soma doubtless is
seed, and that in Agni, the progenitor; he (Agni) casts the seed Soma:
thus there is at the outset a productive union.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:10">2:5:1:10</span></span>10.
Then follows a cake on twelve or eight potsherds <span
id="fr_867"></span>[3](#fn_863) for Savit*ri*. Savit*ri* indeed is the
impeller (pra-savit*ri*) of the gods; he is Pra*g*âpati, the
intermediate <span id="fr_868"></span>[4](#fn_864) progenitor: hence the
cake to Savit*ri*.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:11">2:5:1:11</span></span>11.
Then follows a potful of boiled rice for Sarasvatî; and another for
Pûshan. Sarasvatî doubtless is a woman, and Pûshan is a man: thus there
is again a productive union. Through that twofold productive union
Pra*g*âpati created the living beings,--

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

through the one (he created) the upright, and through the other those
looking to the ground. This is why there are these five oblations <span
id="fr_869"></span>[1](#fn_865).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:12">2:5:1:12</span></span>12.
After that (follows), as a foundation for the curds, a cake on seven
potsherds for the Maruts. The Maruts indeed are the people (vi*s*a*h*),
the people of the gods. They roamed about here entirely unimpeded.
Having approached Pra*g*âpati, when he was sacrificing, they said, 'We
shall destroy those creatures of thine which thou art about to create by
means of this offering <span id="fr_870"></span>[2](#fn_866).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:13">2:5:1:13</span></span>13.
Pra*g*âpati reflected, 'My former creatures have passed away; and if
those (Maruts) destroy these (creatures), then nothing will be left.' He
accordingly set aside for them that share, the Maruts' cake on seven
potsherds; and that is this same cake on seven potsherds for the Maruts.
The reason why it is one of seven potsherds, is that the host of the
Maruts is (distributed in troops) of seven each <span
id="fr_871"></span>[3](#fn_867). This is why there is a cake on seven
potsherds for the Maruts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:14">2:5:1:14</span></span>14. Let
him offer it to the 'self-strong' (Maruts); since they gained that share
for themselves. \[If\], however, they (the priests) do not find an
invitatory and an offering prayer (addressed) to the 'self-strong'
(Maruts) <span id="fr_872"></span>[4](#fn_868), let it be (offered)
simply to the

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Maruts. It is
offered for the safety of creatures: hence it is offered to the Maruts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:15">2:5:1:15</span></span>15.
Thereupon follows the oblation of curds (payasyâ). Now it is on milk
that the creatures subsist, it was by means of milk that they were
preserved: hence he now offers to them that by which they were
preserved, and whereon they subsist; and the beings whom he creates by
means of the foregoing offerings, subsist on that milk, on that oblation
of curds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:16">2:5:1:16</span></span>16.
Therein a union takes place: the curdled milk (payasyâ, fem.) is female,
and the whey is seed. From that union the infinite All was gradually
generated; and since the infinite All was gradually generated from that
union, therefore it (the offering of curds) belongs to the All-gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:17">2:5:1:17</span></span>17.
Then follows a cake on one potsherd for Heaven and Earth. Now when
Pra*g*âpati had created the living beings by those offerings, he
enclosed them within heaven and earth; and so they are now enclosed
within heaven and earth. And in like manner he, who by means of those
oblations creates living beings, thereby encloses them within heaven and
earth: this is why there is a cake on one potsherd for Heaven and Earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:18">2:5:1:18</span></span>18. Now
as to the course of proceeding. They do not raise an uttara-vedi <span
id="fr_873"></span>[1](#fn_869) in order that it (the sacred work) may
be unobstructed, that it may be entire, that it may be (worthy) of the
All-gods.--The barhis is tied up in three (bunches), and then

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

again in one <span id="fr_874"></span>[1](#fn_870); for such is the
characteristic form of generation, since father and mother are a
productive (pair), and what is born forms a third element: hence that
which is threefold is again (made) one. Thereto flowering shoots (of
sacrificial grass) are tied: these he uses for the prastara <span
id="fr_875"></span>[2](#fn_871); for this is a productive union, and
productive indeed are flowering shoots: this is why he takes flowering
shoots for the prastara.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:19">2:5:1:19</span></span>19. On
putting the, sacrificial dishes in their place, they churn the
fire <span id="fr_876"></span>[3](#fn_872). For it was after Agni was
born that Pra*g*âpati's offspring was born;. and so for this
(sacrificer) also offspring is born after Agni (the fire) has been
produced: this is why they churn the fire, after they have deposited the
sacrificial dishes in their place.

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:20">2:5:1:20</span></span>20.
\[At the Vai*s*vadeva-offering\] there are nine fore-offerings and nine
after-offerings <span id="fr_877"></span>[1](#fn_873). Now the virâ*g*
metre consists of ten syllables: hence, he obtains both times an
inferior (incomplete) virâ*g* for the sake of production, because it was
from that inferior (lower) source of production <span
id="fr_878"></span>[2](#fn_874) that Pra*g*âpati twice produced
creatures--both the upright and those looking to the ground. This is why
(the Vai*s*vadeva) has nine fore-offerings and nine after-offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:21">2:5:1:21</span></span>21.
There are three Samish*t*aya*g*us <span id="fr_879"></span>[3](#fn_875);
for this (offering) is decidedly greater than an (ordinary)
havir-ya*gñ*a <span id="fr_880"></span>[4](#fn_876), since it has nine
fore-offerings and nine after-offerings. However, there may also be only
a single Samish*t*aya*g*us, since this is a havir-ya*gñ*a. The priest's
fee for it (consists of) the firstborn calf (of the season).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:1:22">2:5:1:22</span></span>22. And
what race, what prosperity accrued to Pra*g*âpati from his offering this
sacrifice, that same race he produces, that same prosperity he attains

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

whosoever, knowing this, offers this sacrifice: let him therefore
perform this sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_856"></span>[384:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_860) Or, Pra*g*âpati
alone was this (universe). Cf. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, p. 70.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[384:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_861) By pra*g*â*h*, or
(living) beings, mammalia--especially man and domestic animals--seem to
be understood.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[385:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_862) Âtmana evâgre; the
Kâ*n*va text has âtmany evâgre.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[385:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_863) Rig-veda VIII, 90,
14.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[385:3](sbe1256.htm#fr_864) Or perhaps better,
as Ludwig takes it, 'On high he took his place within the worlds.'

<span id="fn_861"></span>[386:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_865) ? Or, Pra*g*âpati,
the real, the existent, 'Pra*g*âpatim bhûtam.'

<span id="fn_862"></span>[386:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_866) Instead of the
preliminary Anvârambha*n*îyâ-ish*t*i (see [p. 7](sbe1203.htm#page_7)), a
special ish*t*i may be performed on this occasion, with a cake on twelve
potsherds to Agni Vai*s*vânara, and a potful of boiled rice (hare) to
Par*g*anya, for oblations. Kâty. V, 1, 2-4.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[386:3](sbe1256.htm#fr_867) According to Taitt.
S. I, 8, 2, it is one on twelve potsherds.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[386:4](sbe1256.htm#fr_868) Madhyata*h*, lit.
'from the middle.'

<span id="fn_865"></span>[387:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_869) While the five
preceding oblations are common to all the seasonal offerings (Kâty. V,
I, 15), the succeeding ones are peculiar to the Vai*s*vadeva.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[387:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_870) The Kâ*n*va text
adds, 'if thou wilt not assign a share to us.'

<span id="fn_867"></span>[387:3](sbe1256.htm#fr_871) In Rig-veda VIII,
96, 8, the Maruts are said to be sixty-three in number, divided into
nine troops of seven each.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[387:4](sbe1256.htm#fr_872) The Kâ*n*va text
has: Tad uta yâ*g*yânuvâkye svatavatyau na vindanti; yadi yâ*g*yânuvâkye
svatavatyau na vinded api mârutyâv eva syâtâm.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[388:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_873) The uttara-vedi, or
northern (or upper) altar, is not required at the performance of the
Vai*s*vadeva, but at that of the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h*; see II, 5, 2, 5
seq.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[389:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_874) Three bunches of
sacrificial grass are tied together with one band. Kâty. V, 1, 25.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[389:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_875) For the prastara,
or bunch of grass representing the sacrificer, see I, 3, 3, 5 seq.; I,
8, 3, II seq.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[389:3](sbe1256.htm#fr_876) Kâty. V, I, 27 seq.
supplies the following details:--With the text (Vâ*g*. V, 2 a, &c.),
'Agni's birth-place art thou,' the Adhvaryu takes up a piece of wood and
puts it on the altar. With 'the two testicles are ye' he lays on it two
stalks of sacrificial grass. With 'Urva*s*î thou art' he places the
lower ara*n*i (see [p. 294](sbe1243.htm#page_294), note
[3](sbe1243.htm#fn_678)) thereon. With 'Âyus (old age, or the son of
Purûravas and Urva*s*î) thou art' he touches the butter in the pot with
the upper ara*n*i; and with 'Purûravas thou art' he puts it down on the
lower ara*n*i. He then calls on the Hot*ri* to recite 'to the fire being
churned out.' With the three formulas 'with the gâyatrî (trish*t*ubh,
*g*agatî) metre I churn thee!' he churns thrice from left to right, and
then alternately both ways until fire is produced. He then calls on the
Hot*ri* to recite 'to the born fire' (Sâṅkh. III. 13, 21); and in
carrying the fire towards the Âhavanîya he makes him recite 'to (the
fire) being carried forward.' With the text V, 3, he throws it down on
the Âhavanîya hearth; and (having put a kindling-stick on it) he makes
two libations of butter thereon with V, 4.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[390:1](sbe1256.htm#fr_877) The same number of
prayâ*g*as and anuyâ*g*as are prescribed for the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h*
(see II, 5, 2, 30 and 41, with notes) and for the Mahâhavis of the
Sâkamedhâ*h*. Kâty. V, 2, 8.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[390:2](sbe1256.htm#fr_878) Or rather, from
that productive nyûna (womb, lit. defective, lower); see II, 1, 1, 13.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[390:3](sbe1256.htm#fr_879) See I, 9, 2, 25
seq. The formula used, if there be only one Samish*t*aya*g*us, is the
same as at the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa, viz. II, 21 b (VIII, 21). If there
are three, they are offered to the wind (vâta), the sacrifice, and the
lord of sacrifice respectively; the formulas Vâ*g*. S. VIII, 22 a b
being used with the second and third. Kâty. V, 2, 9. For the
Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h* and Sâkamedhâ*h* three Samish*t*aya*g*us are
prescribed, and for the *S*unâsîrîya only one.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[390:4](sbe1256.htm#fr_880) Viz. such as the
new and full-moon sacrifice, which serves as the model sacrifice, and at
which there are only five fore-offerings and three after-offerings. See
I, 5, 3, 1 seq.; I, 8, 2, 7 seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 5, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe1257)
