[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1208) 
[Next](sbe1210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3">1:2:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### THE PREPARATION OF THE ALTAR.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:1">1:2:3:1</span></span>1.
Fourfold, namely, was Agni (fire) at first. Now that Agni whom they at
first chose for the office of Hot*ri* priest passed away. He also whom
they chose the second time passed away. He also whom they chose the
third time passed away <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171). Thereupon
the one who still constitutes the fire in our own time, concealed
himself from fear. He entered into the waters. Him the gods discovered
and brought forcibly away from the waters. He spat upon the waters,
saying, 'Bespitten are ye who are an unsafe place of refuge, from whom
they take me away against my will!' Thence sprung the Âptya deities,
Trita, Dvita, and Ekata.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:2">1:2:3:2</span></span>2. They
roamed about with Indra, even as nowadays a Brâhman follows in the train
of a king. When he slew Vi*s*varûpa, the three-headed son of Tvash*tri*,
they also knew of his going to be killed.; and straightway Trita slew
him. Indra, assuredly, was free from that (sin), for he is a god <span
id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_172).

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:3">1:2:3:3</span></span>3. And
the people thereupon said: 'Let those be guilty of the sin who knew
about his going to be killed! 'How?' they asked. 'The sacrifice shall
wipe it off upon (shall transfer it to) them!' they said. Hence the
sacrifice thereby wipes off upon them (the guilt or impurity incurred in
the preparation of the offering), when they pour out for them the water
with which the dish has been rinsed, and that in which he (the Adhvaryu)
has washed his fingers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:4">1:2:3:4</span></span>4. And
the Âptyas then said: 'Let us make this pass on beyond us!' 'On whom?'
they asked. 'On him who shall make an offering without a dakshi*n*â
(gift to the officiating priests)!' they said. Hence one must not make
an offering without a dakshi*n*â; for the sacrifice wipes (the guilt)
off upon the Âptyas, and the Âptyas wipe it off upon him who makes an
offering without a dakshi*n*â.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:5">1:2:3:5</span></span>5.
Thereupon the gods ordained this to be the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

dakshi*n*â at the new- and full-moon sacrifices, to wit, the Anvâhârya
mess of rice <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173), 'lest the oblation
should be without a dakshi*n*â.' That (rinsing water) he pours out (for
each Âptya) separately: thus he avoids a quarrel among them. He makes it
hot (previously) <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174): thus it becomes
boiled (drinkable) for them. He pours it out with the formulas, 'For
Trita thee!' 'For Dvita thee!' 'For Ekata thee!'--Now it is as an animal
sacrifice that this sacrificial cake is offered <span
id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_175).

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:6">1:2:3:6</span></span>6. At
first, namely, the gods offered up a man as the victim <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176). When he was offered up, the sacrificial
essence went out of him. It entered into the horse. They offered up the
horse. When it was offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of it.
It entered into the ox. They offered up the ox. When it was offered up,
the sacrificial essence went out of it. It entered into the sheep. They
offered up the sheep. When it was offered up, the sacrificial essence
went out of it. It entered into the goat. They offered up the goat. When
it was offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:7">1:2:3:7</span></span>7. It
entered into this earth. They searched for it, by digging. They found it
(in the shape of) those two (substances), the rice and barley: therefore
even now they obtain those two by digging; and as much

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

efficacy as all those sacrificed animal victims would have for him, so
much efficacy has this oblation (of rice &c.) for him who knows this.
And thus there is in this oblation also that completeness which they
call 'the fivefold animal sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:8">1:2:3:8</span></span>8. When
it (the rice-cake) still consists of rice-meal, it is the hair <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177). When he pours water on it, it becomes
skin <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_178). When he mixes it, it becomes
flesh: for then it becomes consistent; and consistent also is the flesh.
When it is baked, it becomes bone: for then it becomes somewhat hard;
and hard is the bone. And when he is about to take it off (the fire) and
sprinkles it with butter, he changes it into marrow. This is the
completeness which they call 'the fivefold animal sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:3:9">1:2:3:9</span></span>9. The
man (purusha) whom they had offered up became a mock-man
(kim-purusha <span id="fr_179"></span>[3](#fn_179)). Those two, the
horse and the ox, which they had sacrificed,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

became a bos gaurus and a gayal (bos gavaeus) respectively. The sheep
which they had sacrificed, became a camel. The goat which they had
sacrificed, became a *s*arabha <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](sbe1210.htm#fn_180). For this reason one should
not eat (the flesh) of these animals, for these animals are deprived of
the sacrificial essence (are impure).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[47:2](sbe1209.htm#fr_171) In I, 3, 3, 13-16,
the three former Agnis (or the three brothers of Agni, acc. to Mahîdh.,
Vâ*g*. S. II, 2) are said to have fled from fear of the thunderbolt, in
the shape of the vasha*t* formula.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[47:3](sbe1209.htm#fr_172) Cf. I, 6, 3, 1 seq.
In the Taitt. Sarah. II, 5, 1, 1, Vi*s*varûpa, the Tvâsh*t*ra, is said
to have been a sister's son of the Asuras, and <span id="page_48">p.
48</span> house-priest (purohita) to the gods, and to have been killed
by Indra, because he had secretly contrived to let the oblations go to
the Asuras, instead of to the gods. Thus by killing him, Indra (or
Trita, according to our version of the legend) became guilty of that
most hideous crime, the brahmahatyâ, or killing of a Brâhma*n*a. Trita,
the Âptya (i.e. probably 'sprung from, or belonging to the ap, or waters
of the atmosphere'), seems to have been a prominent figure of the early
Indo-Iranian mythology, the prototype, in many respects, of Indra, the
favourite god of the Vedic hymns. The notion of wishing evil and
misfortune away to Trita, or far, far away, is a familiar one to the
Vedic bards. The name Traitana also occurs once in Rig-veda (I, 158, 5),
though in a rather dark passage. On the connection between Trita (?
Traitana) and the Iranian Thraetona (Ferîdûn), son of Athvya, see E.
Burnouf, Journ. Asiat. V, 120; R. Roth, Zeitschr. d. Deutsch. Morg. Ges.
II, p. 216 seq. Dvita (the second) and Ekata are no doubt later
abstractions suggested by the etymology of the name Trita (the third),
although the former, Dvita, occurs already in the Vedic hymns.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[49:1](sbe1209.htm#fr_173) The Anvâhârya
consists of boiled rice prepared from the rice-grains that remain after
the sacrificial cakes have been prepared. It is put on the Dakshi*n*a
fire by the Adhvaryu for cooking after covering over the cakes and
pouring out the water. Katy. II, 5, 27. Sâya*n*a explains the term as
'that which takes away (anvâ-h*ri*) from the sacrificer the guilt
incurred by mistakes during the sacrifice;' but the St. Petersburg
Dictionary offers the more probable explanation of it as 'that which
serves to supplement (anvâ-h*ri*) the sacrifice.'

<span id="fn_174"></span>[49:2](sbe1209.htm#fr_174) According to
Sâya*n*a 'he makes the poured-out water hot with a coal.' Kâtyâyana (II,
5, 26) and his commentators, on the other hand, supply the following
particulars: 'Having heated (with straw lighted in the Gârhapatya) the
water which has been used for washing the dish and hands, he pours it
out for the Âptyas (from east to west into three lines drawn with the
wooden sword from west to east, north of the sacrificial ground) in such
a manner that it does not flow together, with the formulas, "For Trita
thee!" &c., respectively.'

<span id="fn_175"></span>[49:3](sbe1209.htm#fr_175) That is to say, the
sacrificial cake is a substitute or symbol (pratimâ) for the animal
sacrifice (as this it would seem was originally a substitute for the
human sacrifice) by which the sacrificer redeems himself from the gods.
Cf. *S*at. Br. XI, 1, 8, 3; Taitt. Br. III, 2, 8, 8. The initiation
(dîkshâ) of the sacrificer constitutes his consecration as the victim at
the animal sacrifice (*S*at. Br. XI, 7, 1, 3; Ait. Br. II, 3; 9; 11;
Taitt. Br. II, 2, 82; T. S. VI, 1, 11, 6; Kaush. Br. X, 3; XI, 8), or as
the sacrificial food at the havirya*gñ*a (*S*at. Br. III, 3, 4, 21;
Taitt, Br. III, 2, 8, 9), or as the horse at the horse-sacrifice (Taitt.
Br. III, 9, 17, 4-5), &c. See, also, Taitt. S. VII, 2, 30, 4; Kâ*th*.
34, 11, where it is said that one must <span id="page_50">p. 50</span>
not perform the dvâda*s*âha for any one, since in having to eat of the
victim, the cake, &c., one would eat the sacrificer's own flesh, &c. Cf.
Weber, Ind. Streifen, I, p. 73. In accordance with these notions it
would seem that man originally sacrificed his equal, as the best
substitute for his own self; and that, as advancing civilisation
rendered human sacrifices distasteful, the human victim was supplied by
domestic animals, ennobled by constant contact with man; and finally by
various materials of human diet.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[50:1](sbe1209.htm#fr_176) On this legend and
the one in the Ait. Br. II, 8, but slightly differing from ours, see Max
Müller's History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 420; A. Weber's Ind.
Streifen, I, p. 55; Haug's Transl. of the Ait. Br. p. 90; J. Muir's
Original Sanskrit Texts, IV, p. 289 note. Professor Max Müller remarks:
'The drift of this story is most likely that in former times all these
victims had been offered. We know it for certain in the case of horses
and oxen, though afterwards these sacrifices were discontinued. As to
sheep and goats, they were considered proper victims to a still later
time. When vegetable offerings took the place of bloody victims, it was
clearly the wish of the author of our passage to show that, for certain
sacrifices, these rice-cakes were as efficient as the flesh of animals.'
Cf. also II, 1, 4, 3.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[51:1](sbe1209.htm#fr_177) According to
Sâya*n*a, because, like the hair of the victim, the particles of the
ground rice are minute and numerous. According to Ait. Br. II, 9, on the
other hand, the awn or beard of the rice represents the hair; the husks
the skin; the minute particles of chaff removed by the final winnowings,
the blood; the ground rice the flesh; and 'whatever other substantial
part is in the rice' are the bones of the victim.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[51:2](sbe1209.htm#fr_178) 'Because it becomes
as flexible as skin,' Sâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[51:3](sbe1209.htm#fr_179) It is doubtful what
particular kind of being the term kimpurusha (depraved man) is here
intended to denote. The authors of the St. Petersburg Dictionary, whom
Professor Weber follows (Ind. Stud. IX, 246), take it (probably
correctly) to denote 'a monkey.' Professor Haug, on the other hand, in
his translation of the corresponding passage in the Ait. Br. II, 8,
thinks 'the author very likely meant a dwarf,' whilst Professor Max
Müller (History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 420) translates it by
'a savage.' Perhaps one of the species of apes which particularly
resemble man, is intended by it. Cf. Weber, Omina et Portenta, P. 356.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1210)
