[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1201.md) 
[Next](sbe1203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE translator of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a can be under no illusion as
to the reception his production is likely to meet with at the hand of
the general reader. In the whole range of literature few works are
probably less calculated to excite the interest of any outside the very
limited number of specialists, than the ancient theological writings of
the Hindus, known by the name of Brâhma*n*as. For wearisome prolixity of
exposition, characterised by dogmatic assertion and a flimsy symbolism
rather than by serious reasoning, these works are perhaps not equalled
anywhere; unless, indeed, it be by the speculative vapourings of the
Gnostics, than which, in the opinion of the learned translators of
Irenæus, 'nothing more absurd has probably ever been imagined by
rational beings <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md).' If I have,
nevertheless, undertaken, at the request of the Editor of the present
Series, what would seem to be a rather thankless task, the reason will
be readily understood by those who have taken even the most cursory view
of the history of the Hindu mind and institutions.

The Brâhma*n*as, it is well known, form our chief, if not our only,
source of information regarding one of the most important periods in the
social and mental development of India. They represent the intellectual
activity of a sacerdotal caste which, by turning to account the
religious instincts of a gifted and naturally devout race, had succeeded
in transforming a primitive worship of the powers of nature into a
highly artificial system of sacrificial ceremonies, and was ever intent
on deepening and extending its hold on the minds of the people, by
surrounding its own vocation with the halo of sanctity and divine
inspiration. A complicated ceremonial, requiring for its proper
observance and

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

consequent efficacy the ministrations of a highly trained priestly
class, has ever been one of the most effective means of promoting
hierarchical aspirations. Even practical Rome did not entirely succeed
in steering clear of the rock of priestly ascendancy attained by
such-like means. There, as elsewhere, 'the neglect or faulty performance
of the worship of each god revenged itself in the corresponding
occurrence; and as it was a laborious and difficult task to gain even a
knowledge of one's religious obligations, the priests who were skilled
in the law of divine things and pointed out its requirements--the
*pontifices*--could not fail to attain an extraordinary influence <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md).' The catalogue of the duties and privileges
of the priest of Jupiter might well find a place in the Talmud. 'The
rule--that no religious service can be acceptable to the gods, unless it
be performed without a flaw--was pushed to such an extent, that a single
sacrifice had to be repeated thirty times in succession on account of
mistakes again and again committed; and the games, which formed part of
the divine service, were regarded as undone, if the presiding magistrate
had committed any slip in word or deed, or if the music even had paused
at a wrong time, and so had to be begun afresh, frequently for several,
even as many as seven, times in succession <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md).' Great, however, as was the influence
acquired by the priestly colleges of Rome, 'it was never
forgotten--least of all in the case of those who held the highest
position--that their duty was not to command, but to tender skilled
advice <span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md).' The Roman statesmen submitted
to these transparent tricks rather from considerations of political
expediency than from religious scruples; and the Greek Polybius might
well say that the strange and ponderous ceremonial of Roman religion was
invented solely on account of the multitude which, as reason had no
power over it, required to be ruled by signs and wonders <span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md).'

The devout belief in the efficacy of invocation and sacrificial

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

offering which pervades most of the hymns of the Rig-veda, and which may
be assumed to reflect pretty faithfully the religious sentiments of
those amongst whom they were composed, could not but ensure to the
priest, endowed with the gift of sacred utterance, a considerable amount
of respect and reverence on the part of the people. His superior culture
and habitual communion with the divine rulers of the destinies of man
would naturally entitle him to a place of honour by the side of the
chiefs of clans, or the rulers of kingdoms, who would not fail to avail
themselves of his spiritual services, in order to secure the favour of
the gods for their warlike expeditions or political undertakings. Nor
did the Vedic bard fail to urge his claims on the consideration and
generosity of those in the enjoyment of power and wealth. He often
dwells on the supernatural virtues of his compositions and their
mysterious efficacy in drawing down divine blessings on the pious
worshipper. In urging the necessity of frequent and liberal offerings to
the gods, and invoking worldly blessings on the offerer, the priestly
bard may often be detected pleading his own cause along with that of his
employer, as Ka*n*va does when he sings (Rig-veda VIII, 2, 13), 'Let him
be rich, let him be foremost, the bard of the rich, of so illustrious a
Maghavan <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) as thou, O lord of the bay
steeds!' Though the Dânastutis, or verses extolling, often in highly
exaggerated terms, the munificence of princely patrons, and generally
occurring at the end of hymns, are doubtless, as a rule, later
additions, they at least show that the sacerdotal office must have been,
or must gradually have become during this period, a very lucrative one.

Although there is no reason to suppose that the sacrificial ceremonial
was in early times so fully developed as some scholars would have us
believe, the religious service would seem to have been already of a
sufficiently advanced nature to require some kind of training for the
priestly office. In course of time, while the collection of hymns were
faithfully

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

handed down as precious heirlooms in the several families, and were
gradually enriched by the poetical genius of succeeding generations, the
ceremonial became more and more complicated, so as at last to
necessitate the distribution of the sacerdotal functions among several
distinct classes of priests. Such a distribution of sacrificial duties
must have taken place before the close of the period of the hymns, and
there can be little doubt that at that time the position of the
priesthood in the community was that of a regular profession, and even,
to some extent, a hereditary one <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md). A
post of peculiar importance, which seems to go back to a very early
time, was that of the Purohita (literally 'praepositus'), or family
priest to chiefs and kings. From the comparatively modest position of a
private chaplain, who had to attend to the sacrificial obligations of
his master, he appears to have gradually raised himself to the dignity
of, so to say, a minister of public worship and confidential adviser of
the king. It is obvious that such a post was singularly favourable to
the designs of a crafty and ambitious priest, and must have offered him
exceptional opportunities for promoting the hierarchical aspirations of
the priesthood <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md).

In the Rig-veda there is, with the single exception of the
Purusha-sûkta, no clear indication of the existence of caste in the
proper, Brâhmanical sense of the word. That institution, we may assume,
was only introduced after the Brahmans had finally established their
claims to the highest

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

rank in the body politic; when they sought to perpetuate their social
ascendancy by strictly defining the privileges and duties of the several
classes, and assigning to them their respective places in the gradated
scale of the Brâhmanical community. The period during which the main
body of the Vedic hymns was composed, in the land of the seven rivers,
seems to have been followed by a time of wars and conquests. From the
literary products of the succeeding period we can see that the centre of
the Âryan civilisation had in the meantime shifted from the region of
the Sindhu (Indus) to that of the Yamunâ (Jumna) and Gaṅgâ. As the
conquered districts were no doubt mainly occupied by aboriginal tribes,
which had either to retire before their Âryan conquerors, or else to
submit to them as *S*ûdras, or serfs, it seems not unnatural to suppose
that it was from a sense of the danger with which the purity of the
Brâhmanical faith was threatened from the idolatrous practices of the
aboriginal subjects, that the necessity of raising an insurmountable
barrier between the Âryan freeman and the man of the servile class first
suggested itself to the Brahmans. As religious interests would be
largely involved in this kind of class legislation, it would naturally
call into play the ingenuity of the priestly order; and would create
among them that tendency towards regulating the mutual relations of all
classes of the community which ultimately found its legal expression,
towards the close of this period, in the Dharma-sûtras, the prototypes
of the Hindu codes of law.

The struggle for social ascendancy between the priesthood and the ruling
military class must, in the nature of things, have been of long
duration. In the chief literary documents of this period which have come
down to us, viz. the Ya*g*ur-veda, the Brâhma*n*as, and the hymns of the
Atharva-veda some of which perhaps go back to the time of the later
hymns of the *Ri*k, we meet with numerous passages in which the
ambitious claims of the Brahmans are put forward with singular
frankness. The powerful personal influence exercised by the Purohitas,
as has already been indicated, seems to have largely contributed to the
final success of the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

sacerdotal order. Thus we read in the Aitareya-brâhma*n*a VIII, 24-25,
'Verily, the gods do not eat the food offered by the king who is without
a Purohita: wherefore let the king, who wishes to sacrifice, place a
Brâhman at the head (puro adhîta). . . .' 'Now Agni Vai*s*vânara, who is
possessed of five destructive weapons, is the same as the Purohita. With
them he constantly surrounds (protects) the king, even as the ocean
surrounds the earth: the kingdom of such a ruler is undisturbed. His
vital breath deserts him not before the (full term of) life, but he
lives to old age, and attains to the full measure of life: he dies not
(and is not born) again, whosoever possesses such a wise Brahman for his
Purohita, for the guardian of his realm.' And again, in the Atharva-veda
III, 19, 'May this prayer of mine be accomplished; may perfect vigour
and strength, may perfect, unceasing, and victorious power accrue to
those whose Purohita I am. I perfect their kingdom, their might, their
vigour, their strength. With this oblation I cut off the arms of their
enemies . . . . Go forth, ye men, and conquer; may your arms be
terrible! ye sharp-shafted, smite the weak-bowed; ye of terrible weapons
and terrible arms, (smite) the feeble! when discharged, fly forth, O
arrow, sped by prayer; vanquish the enemies; rush forward and slay all
the best of them; let not one of them escape <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md).'

The question as to how the Brâhmans ultimately succeeded in overcoming
the resistance of the ruling class receives but little light from the
contemporaneous records. Later legendary accounts of sanguinary
struggles between the two classes, and the final overthrow, and even
annihilation, of the Kshatriyas can hardly deserve much credence. At
best they seem to contain some small kernel of historical fact.
Perseverance and tenacity of purpose were probably the chief means by
which the Brahmans gained their ends. Not unfrequently, too, kings may
have lent their countenance to the aspirations of the priesthood, as
calculated to counteract the unruly spirit and ambitious designs of the
military order. We certainly meet with not a few instances of kings

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

figuring as the patrons of learned Brâhmans. As the old hymns were
gradually assuming the character of divinely inspired utterances,
additional matter might occasionally find its way into them, almost
unconsciously, which more adequately expressed the actual scope of the
aspirations of their priestly depositaries. That many such additions
must have been made to the old hymns, prior to the age of diaskeuasts
and exegetes, cannot be doubted.

Another, even more important, source of strength to the sacerdotal order
was the sacrifice. The more complicated the ceremonial, the greater the
dependence of the lay worshipper on the professional skill of the
priests; and the greater the number of priests required for the proper
performance of these ceremonies, the larger the gains derived by the
priesthood generally from this kind of occupation. What more natural,
therefore, than that the highest importance should have been ascribed to
these performances, and an ever-increasing attention bestowed on the
elaboration of the ceremonial. From clear indications in not a few hymns
of the Rig-veda it appears, as has already been remarked, that a
distribution of the sacrificial functions among different classes of
priests had taken place before the final redaction of that collection.
As to the time when such a step may have become necessary for the due
performance of sacrifices, this is a question which will probably never
be decided. The sacrifice is an old Indo-Iranian, if not Indo-Germanic,
institution. Some of the chief Indian sacrifices undoubtedly go back, in
some form or other, to the common Indo-Iranian period, notably the
Soma-sacrifice, and, if we may judge from the coincidence of name
between the âprî-hymns <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) and the
âfrî-gân of the Pârsî ritual, the animal sacrifice.

As regards the third great division of Indian sacrifices, the
havirya*gñ*as (or offerings of milk, butter, grain-food, and similar
materials), of which the present volume treats, we have hardly any
evidence to fall back upon. It is,

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

however, highly probable that these sacrifices also reach at all events
far back into the Vedic antiquity. Perhaps the careful preservation of
the pravara-lists <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md), or lists of
ancestors required at the ish*t*i, the normal form of offering which
underlies the havirya*gñ*as, might be adduced in favour of the antiquity
of the latter. This, however, is a point which requires further
investigation. Neither has the last word been spoken regarding the
traditional arrangements of the hymns. It is well known that the
majority of the single collections of which the first seven Ma*nd*alas
(and to some extent those of the tenth) are made up, begin with hymns
addressed to Agni, which, as a rule, are followed by hymns addressed to
Indra. These, again, are in many cases followed by hymns to the Vi*s*ve
Devâ*h* (and Maruts) <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md). Now, in the
later dogmatic literature we find the three Âryan castes, the Brahman,
the Kshatra, and the Vi*s*, identified with Agni, Indra, and the Vi*s*ve
Devâ*h* (all the gods, or, as a special class, the All-Gods) <span
id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12.md) respectively. This identification is a
very natural one. Agni, the sacrificial fire, the bearer of oblations
and caller of the gods, is, like the priest, the legitimate mediator
between God and man. Penetrating brilliance (te*g*as) and holy lustre
(var*k*as) are the common attributes of the Brahman. Again, Indra, the
valiant hero, for ever battling with the dark powers of the sky, is a
not less appropriate representative of the knightly order. According to
Professor Roth, this truly national deity of the Vedic Âryans would seem
to have superseded

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

the older Indo-Iranian god Trita <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md),
and to have gradually encroached on the province of Varu*n*a, who
perhaps was originally one of the highest deities of the Âryan
(Indo-Germanic) pantheon. The warlike chiefs and clansmen evidently saw
in Indra a more congenial object of their adoration. It can scarcely be
without significance that of all the Vedic *Ri*shis, Vasish*th*a, the
priest *par excellence*, has ascribed to him by far the greatest number
of hymns addressed to Varu*n*a (and Mitra-Varu*n*a), while there is not
a single hymn to Varu*n*a in the family collection of the royal *Ri*shi
Vi*s*vâmitra, whose religious enthusiasm is divided almost exclusively
between Agni, Indra, and the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*. Lastly, the identification
of the common people with a whole class of comparatively inferior
deities would naturally suggest itself. Hence we also find the
Maruts <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md), the constant companions and
helpmates of Indra, the divine ruler, employed in a similar

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

sense. The identification of the Vi*s* with the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*, which
ultimately obtained, was probably determined chiefly by etymological
considerations.

The same triad of divinities, as representative of the mutual relations
of the social grades of the Âryan community, is repeatedly met with in
the sacrificial ritual, and especially in its dogmatic exposition. This
identification finds its most complete expression in the well-known
passages of the Taittirîya-sa*m*hitâ (VII, 1, 1, 4-5) and the
Tâ*nd*ya-brâhma*n*a (VI, 1, 6-11) <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md).
According to these authorities, Pra*g*âpati, the lord of creatures,
created from his mouth the Brâhma*n*a, together with Agni, the triv*ri*t
stoma, the gâyatrî metre (and the rathantara sâman and he-goat,
according to the first source; or the spring, according to the other).
From his breast and arms he created the Râ*g*anya, together with Indra,
the pa*ñk*ada*s*a stoma, the trish*t*ubh metre (and the b*ri*hat sâman,
and the ram; or the summer respectively). From the middle part of his
body he created the Vai*s*ya, together with the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*, the
saptada*s*a stoma, the *g*agatî metre (and the vairûpa sâman, and the
kine; or the rainy season respectively). Finally, from his feet he
created the Sûdra, together with the ekavi*ms*a stoma and the
anush*t*ubh metre (and the vairâ*g*a sâman and the horse, according to
the Taitt. S.), but no deity, and no season. In accordance with these
speculations, single objects of those here enumerated are frequently
found elsewhere identified with their respective deities and castes. On
the same principle, the three savanas, or morning, mid-day, and evening
libations <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16.md) at the Soma-sacrifice, as
well as the first three days of the

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dvâda*s*âha <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md), are generally assigned to Agni, Indra,
and the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h* respectively. If in the ekâda*s*inî, or
traditional order of eleven victims that have to be immolated at the
Soma-sacrifice, the victim sacred to Agni is placed first, while those
to the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h* and to Indra only come sixth and seventh
respectively, we have probably to assume that this order was too firmly
established (just as the so-called âprî-hymns are) by long usage to have
been easily altered; the more so as the privileged position of the
sacerdotal class was not thereby affected.

At the havirya*gñ*as not less prominent a place is assigned to the
divine representatives of the two leading classes. The first oblation at
every ish*t*i belongs to Agni. The second oblation at the new-moon
sacrifice is offered either to Indra, or to Indra <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) and Agni; at the full-moon sacrifice, to
Agni and Soma, the latter of whom constitutes Indra's chief source of
strength. Indra also plays an important part at the Seasonal offerings
which indeed, according to the dogmatic, and by no means improbable,
explanation of the Brâhma*n*as, are performed with special reference to
Indra's struggle with V*ri*tra, the demon of drought. At the
Agny-upasthâna, or worship of the fires, which succeeds the Agnihotra,
the first prayer is addressed to Agni, the second to Indra and
Agni <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19.md). Indeed, while Agni appears
everywhere as the Purohita, the 'ya*gñ*asya deva *ri*tvik,' or divine
priest of the sacrifice, Indra is the god of sacrifice <span
id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20.md), the Maghavan, or munificent patron of the
priest.

From these indications it would appear far from improbable that the
arrangement of the hymns in which the collections of the Rig-veda were
finally handed down, was intended, as far as the leading deities are
concerned, to

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

exhibit a social gradation of the Hindu community which was either
already firmly established or was steadily kept in view by the
sacerdotal class as 'a consummation devoutly to be wished.' In either
case the claims of the priests could not fail to be materially
strengthened by the pre-eminent position assigned to their divine
prototype in the inspired utterances of the [*Ri*shis](errata.htm#1.md).
The question, whether the present arrangement is entirely the result of
the final redaction, or whether it was already a feature of the earlier
redactions, will perhaps never receive a quite satisfactory answer. It
cannot, however, be denied that there is some force in Professor
Ludwig's <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) argument,--that, if the
arrangement of the several collections had lain with the authors of the
final redaction, the result would probably have been a far greater
uniformity than they now present.

The idea of bringing together the different family collections would
seem first to have suggested itself to the priests at a time when the
hitherto divided Âryan tribes had moved from the Panjab to the eastern
plains and became consolidated into larger communities, and the want of
a more uniform system of worship would naturally make itself felt. To
the same period, then, we may refer the first attempts at a systematic
arrangement of the entire ceremonial of worship, and the definite
distribution of the sacrificial duties among four classes of
priests,--viz. the Adhvaryu, or performer of the material part of the
sacrifice; the Udgât*ri*, or chanter of hymns; the Hot*ri*, or reciter
of solemn sacrificial prayers; and the Brahman, or superintendent of the
entire performance. Though some of these offices had no doubt existed
for a long time, we possess no definite information as to the exact
extent of the duties entrusted to them <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22.md). The institution of the office

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

of Brahman, doubtless the latest of all, marks a new era in the
development of the sacrificial system. While the other priests were only
required to possess an accurate knowledge of their own special
departments, the Brahman was to be the very embodiment of the
sacrificial art and Vedic lore in general, so as to be able to advise
the other priests on doubtful points and to rectify any mistakes that
might be committed during the performance of sacrifices. Neither had the
Hot*ri* priest any special manual of his formulas assigned to him. He
was rather expected to have acquired a thorough knowledge of the whole
of the *Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ, from which the sacrificial prayers recited by
him were exclusively selected. It was probably out of this class--or the
Bahv*rik*as, as the followers of the Rig-veda came to be called--more
than from any other, that individual priests would fit themselves for
the office of Brahman.

As regards the two remaining classes of priests--the Udgât*ri*s and
Adhvaryus--we have no means of determining in what form and to what
extent the stock of chants and sacrificial formulas used by them may
have existed from the time of the institution of their offices down to
the formation of the collections that have been handed down, viz. the
Sâma-veda-sa*m*hitâ and the Ya*g*ur-veda. From the close connection that
exists between the Sâman and the eighth and ninth ma*nd*alas of the
*Ri*k, as well as from the fact that most of the hymns of these two
ma*nd*alas are ascribed to authors whose family collections (including,
in several instances, hymns of their own) are contained in earlier
ma*nd*alas,--we may perhaps assume that already at the time when the
first nine ma*nd*alas were collected the then existing hymns of the
eighth and ninth ma*nd*alas were set apart for the purpose of being
chanted at the Soma-sacrifice. In course of time--hand in hand with the
fuller development of the Soma ritual and the gradual influx of new hymn
material which was either incorporated with the old collections or
formed into a new ma*nd*ala--additional chants (or more suitable ones in
the place of those hitherto

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

used) might be required and selected from the hymns of other ma*nd*alas.
In its original connected form, the material of these chants would
naturally remain all along an essential part of the *Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ, for
the use of the Hot*ri* and Brahman priests; and thus each of these two
collections would henceforth have a history of its own, and
discrepancies in the texts common to both would gradually become more
and more numerous.

The sacrificial texts used by the Adhvaryu priest are contained in the
Ya*g*ur-veda, of which several recensions have come down to us. These
texts consist, in about equal parts, of verses (*rik*) and prose
formulas (ya*g*us). The majority of the former are likewise found in the
*Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ, though not unfrequently with considerable variations,
which may be explained partly from a difference of recension, and partly
as the result of the adaptation of these verses to their special
sacrificial purpose <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md). With the prose
formulas, on the other hand, save a few isolated sacrificial calls
alluded to in the *Ri*k <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md), we meet for
the first time in this collection. In the older recensions of the
Ya*g*ur-veda the texts are, as a rule, followed immediately by their
dogmatic explanation. Now, these theological treatises, composed chiefly
with the view of elucidating the sacrificial texts and explaining the
origin and hidden meaning of the various rites, form one of the most
important departments of the literature of the period which succeeded
the systematic arrangement of the sacrificial ceremonial, and in which
we must place the gradual consolidation of the Brâhmanical hierarchy.
Such as they lie before us, they contain the accumulated wisdom and
speculations of generations of Indian divines. They are essentially
digests of a floating mass of single discourses or *dicta* on various
points of the ceremonial of worship, ascribed to individual teachers,
and handed down orally in the theological schools. Single discourses of
this kind were called brâhma*n*a,--probably either because they were
intended for the instruction and guidance of priests

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (brahman)
generally; or because they were, for the most part, the authoritative
utterances of such as were thoroughly versed in Vedic and sacrificial
lore and competent to act as Brahmans or superintending priests <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md). In later times a collection or digest of
such detached pieces came to be likewise called a Brâhma*n*a. Works of
this kind have come down to us in connection with all the Vedic
Sa*m*hitâs, generally in more than one version which, though on the
whole betraying a common stock of material, often vary considerably,
both in their arrangement and their treatment of these materials. Nay,
owing as they do their origin to different schools of the same Veda,
these recensions not unfrequently take the very opposite view of single
points of ceremonial. Originally the number of such recensions, more or
less differing from each other, must have been much larger; but the
practical tendencies of a later age, which led to the production of
concise manuals of ceremonial rules--the Kalpa-sûtras--adapted to the
sacrificial practices of more than one school, were not favourable to
the perpetuation of these bulky cyclopædias of theological
school-wisdom: thus only the Brâhma*n*as of the schools which had the
greatest number of followers survived; while others were probably never
committed to writing, or at best had a precarious existence down to more
recent times.

While the Brâhma*n*as are thus our oldest sources from which a
comprehensive view of the sacrificial ceremonial can be obtained, they
also throw a great deal of light on the earliest metaphysical and
linguistic speculations of the Hindus. Another, even more interesting
feature of these works, consists in the numerous legends scattered
through them. From the archaic style in which these mythological tales
are generally composed, as well as from the fact that not a few of them
are found in Brâhma*n*as of different schools and Vedas, though often
with considerable variations,

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

it is pretty evident that the ground-work of many of them goes back to
times preceding the composition of the Brâhma*n*as. From a mythological,
and to some extent from a linguistic, point of view these legends thus
form a connecting link between the latter and the Vedic hymns. In the
case of some of these legends--as those of *S*una*hs*epha <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) and the fetching of the Soma from
heaven <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md)--we can even see how they
have grown out of germs contained in the Vedic hymns; their relation to
the latter being thus not unlike that of the Sagas of the younger Edda
to the songs of the older Edda. The Kaushîtaki Brâhma*n*a <span
id="fr_28"></span>[3](#fn_28.md), at the end of a story of this kind about
Soma, remarks that it is thus told by those versed in legend
(âkhyânavida*h*). We may perhaps infer from this passage that there was
a class of people who took a special interest in such legends, and made
it their business to collect and repeat them. Indeed, many of the
elaborate mythical stories with which we meet in the later epical and
Purâ*n*ic literature doubtless owe their origin to simple popular
legends of this kind <span id="fr_29"></span>[4](#fn_29.md).

Besides the genuine myths which we find in the Brâhma*n*as, there is
also a large number of stories which were evidently invented by the
authors of these treatises for the purpose of supplying some kind of
traditional support for particular points of ceremonial <span
id="fr_30"></span>[5](#fn_30.md). However small the intrinsic merit of such
passages, they, too, are not entirely devoid of interest, especially
from a linguistic point of view, since the style of narrative and the
archaic mode of diction which they affect, readily lend themselves to
syntactic turns of expression rarely indulged in by the authors in the
purely explanatory and exegetic parts of their works. And, indeed,
whatever opinion the general reader may form of the Brâhma*n*as, as
purely literary corn-

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

positions--and, assuredly, it cannot be a very high one--to the Sanskrit
student these works (together with their supplements, the Âra*n*yakas;
and their metaphysical appendages, the Upanishads) are of the highest
importance as the only genuine prose works which the Sanskrit, as a
popular language, has produced. For the comparative study of syntax,
which has been taken up with such signal success by Professor Delbrück
and other scholars, the Brâhma*n*as offer a rich field of enquiry. Nor
is the style of these compositions--with its compact grammatical forms
and expressive particles, and its habitual employment of the *oratio
directa* instead of dependent clauses--without a certain rough beauty of
its own, which, however, almost entirely evaporates in a rendering into
modern analytical speech. And notwithstanding the general emptiness of
the speculations of the Indian theologians, 'there are,' as Professor
Max Müller observes <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md), 'passages in
the Brâhma*n*as full of genuine thought and feeling, and most valuable
as pictures of life, and as records of early struggles, which have left
no trace in the literature of other nations.'

Although the Adhvaryus, who had to perform all the manual work connected
with the sacrifice, were originally looked upon as a subordinate class
of priests, their office seems to have risen in the general estimation
with the increasing importance that was attributed to the endless
details of the ceremonial. In a passage of the Taittirîya Upanishad (2,
3). the Ya*g*us is said to be the head, the *Ri*k the right side, the
Sâman the left side, the Âde*s*a <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32.md) the
soul, and the Atharvâṅgiras (Atharva-veda) the tail. With better reason
the Ya*g*ur-veda might be called the body of the sacrifice, since it
contains almost the entire apparatus of sacrificial formulas, while the
other ritualistic works are concerned, either chiefly or entirely, with
the Soma-sacrifice. As a matter of fact, no other Veda has given rise to
so large a number of schools as the

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ya*g*ur-veda <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md). The numerous subdivisions of the
Adhvaryus trace their origin to either of two principal schools, an
older and a younger one, the latter of which is itself an offshoot of
the former. The oral transmission of the large body of exegetic and
legendary matter attached to the sacrificial formulas could hardly fail,
in course of time, to produce considerable variations, in different
localities, both as regards the wording and the arrangement of these
works. Different schools would naturally arise,--each with its own
approved recension of the traditional texts,--which in their turn would
sooner or later become liable to the same process of disintegration.
Such, indeed, has been the case, more or less, with all the Vedic texts,
until mechanical means were devised to arrest this process of change.
The names of many such subdivisions of the older Ya*g*ur-veda are
recorded; but hitherto the recensions of only three of them have come to
light,--viz. the Kâ*th*aka, the Maitrâya*n*î-sa*m*hitâ, and the
Taittirîya-sa*m*hitâ. The two former texts belong to subdivisions of the
Ka*th*as and Maitrâya*n*îyas, two branches of the old school of the
*K*arakas or *K*arakâdhvaryus. The Taittirîyas, on the other hand, seem
to have been an independent branch of the old Ya*g*us <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34.md), the origin of which is ascribed to a
teacher named Tittiri. Their text has come down to us in the recension
of one of its subdivisions <span id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35.md), the
Âpastambins.

The chief characteristic of the old Ya*g*us texts consists, as has
already been indicated, in the constant intermingling

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

of the sacrificial formulas and the explanatory or Brâhma*n*a portions.
It was with the view of remedying this want of arrangement, by entirely
separating the exegetic matter from the formulas, that the new school of
Adhvaryus was founded. The name given to this school is Vâ*g*asaneyins,
its origin being ascribed to Yâ*gñ*avalkya Vâ*g*asaneya. The result of
this new redaction of the Ya*g*us texts was the formation of a
Sa*m*hitâ, or collection of mantras, and a Brâhma*n*a. This
re-arrangement was doubtless undertaken in imitation of the texts of the
Hot*ri* priests, who had a Brâhma*n*a <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) of their own, while their sacrificial
prayers formed part of the *Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ. Indeed, the Taittirîyas
themselves became impressed with the desirability of having a Brâhma*n*a
of their own,--and attained their object by the simple, if rather
awkward, expedient of applying that designation to an appendage to their
Sa*m*hitâ, which exhibits the same mixture of mantra and brâhma*n*a as
the older work. They also incorporated a portion of the Kâ*th*aka text
into their Brâhma*n*a and its supplement, the Taittirîyâra*n*yaka. Of
all the schools of the old Ya*g*us those of the Taittirîyas seem to have
attracted by far the greatest number of adherents; and in southern India
their texts have continued pre-eminently the subject of study till the
present day. In northern India, on the other hand, they have been
largely superseded by their later rivals. On account of the lucid
arrangement of their sacred texts, the Vâ*g*asaneyins called them the
White (*s*ukla) Ya*g*ur-veda; the term of Black or Dark (k*ri*sh*n*a)
Ya*g*ur-veda being, for the opposite reason, applied to the texts of the
older schools. In later times, an absurd story was invented (doubtless
by followers of the White Ya*g*us), in which the origin of the name
Taittirîya is connected with the word tittiri <span
id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37.md), in the sense of 'partridge.'

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

The Brâhma*n*a of the Vâ*g*asaneyins bears the name of *S*atapatha, that
is, the Brâhma*n*a 'of a hundred paths,' because it consists of a
hundred lectures (adhyâyas). Both the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ and the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a have come down to us in two different recensions,
those of the Mâdhyandina and the Kâ*n*va schools. Of the latter
recension of the Brâhma*n*a, however, three books out of seventeen are
wanting in the European libraries and have, as far as I know, not yet
been discovered in India. The Mâdhyandina text both of the Sa*m*hitâ and
the Brâhma*n*a has been edited by Professor Weber; the former with the
various readings of the Kâ*n*va recension. To the same scholar we owe a
German translation of the first adhyâya of the first kâ*nd*a <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md); and he has, moreover, subjected the
entire accessible literature of the White Ya*g*ur-veda--with the
exception of the Kâ*n*va text of the Brâhma*n*a--to a careful
examination, and has extracted from it all that seems calculated to
throw light on its history, so that in this respect little remains to
those who come after him but to state the results of his enquiries.
Professor Max Müller, in his History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, has
also fully discussed the questions regarding the date and authorship of
these texts, and has done much to clear up what was obscure in their
relations to the older Ya*g*us texts and to Vedic literature generally.
Many points, however, still remain doubtful; and, above all, opinions
are as divided as ever regarding the approximate date of the teacher
with whose name tradition connects the origin of the modern school of
the Adhvaryus.

The schools of the Vâ*g*asaneyins are stated to have been either fifteen
or seventeen; and their names are given, though with considerable
variations, in different works. No distinct traces, however, have as yet
been discovered of any recensions besides the two already referred to.
As regards the names of these two,--the Mâdhyandina and Kâ*n*va,--the
latter is the name of one of the chief families of *Ri*shis

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

of the *Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ; and certain orthoepic peculiarities of the
Ya*g*us texts of the Kâ*n*vas would seem to favour the assumption of a
connection of this school with the redaction of the *Ri*k. The name of
the Mâdhyandinas, literally 'meridional,' on the other hand, does not
occur in the older literature. Nor can we draw any definite conclusions,
as to the probable date of their recension, from Lassen's identification
of this name with the Μανδιαδινοί, mentioned by Megasthenes (as quoted
by Arrian) as a people on the banks of a tributary of the Ganges; or
from Professor Weber's conjecture that the Mâdhyandina school may have
taken its origin among that people.

The Mâdhyandina text of the *S*atapatha is divided into fourteen books
(kâ*nd*a). For several reasons, however, some of these books have to be
assigned to a later period than the others. In the first place, the
twelfth kâ*nd*a is called madhyama, 'the middle one;' a fact which in
itself would suggest the idea that, at the time when this nomenclature
was adopted, the last five books (or perhaps books 11-13) were regarded
as a separate portion of the work <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md).
Besides, Pata*ñg*ali, in a kârikâ or memorial couplet to Pâ*n*. IV, 2,
60, mentions the words shash*t*ipatha ('consisting of sixty paths') and
*s*atapatha, with the view of forming derivative nouns from them, in the
sense of one who studies such works. Now, as the first nine books of the
*S*atapatha, in the Mâdhyandina text, consist of sixty adhyâyas, it was
suggested by Professor Weber that it was probably this very portion of
the work to which Pata*ñg*ali applied the term 'shash*t*ipatha,' and
that consequently the first nine books were at that time considered as,
in some sense, a distinct work and were studied as such. This conjecture
has been generally accepted. There is indeed a possibility that
Pata*ñg*ali may have been acquainted with some other

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

recension of the Brâhma*n*a of the Vâ*g*asaneyins which consisted of
only forty adhyâyas; but even in that case the latter would in all
probability correspond to the first nine books of the Mâdhyandina text.
As regards the Kâ*n*va recension, we are unfortunately not yet able,
owing to the want of some of its kâ*nd*as, to determine its exact
extent; and have to rely on a list added by a scribe on the front' page
of one of the kâ*nd*as in the Oxford MS. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md), according to which that text consists of
104 adhyâyas. Still further evidence regarding the mutual relations of
the several portions of our Brâhma*n*a is contained in a passage of the
Mahâbhârata (XII, 11739), where Yâ*gñ*avalkya relates that, at the
inspiration of the Sun, he composed (*k*akre) the *S*atapatha,
including <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) the Rahasya (mystery.md), the
Sa*m*graha (epitome), and the Pari*s*ish*t*a (supplement). Now the tenth
book is really called Agni-rahasya; while the eleventh contains a kind
of summary of the preceding ritual; and kâ*nd*as 12-14 treat of various
other subjects. This relation between the first nine and the remaining
five books is also fully borne out by internal evidence, as well as by a
comparison with the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ. The latter consists of forty
adhyâyas, the first eighteen of which contain the formulas of the
ordinary sacrifices--the Havirya*gñ*as and Soma-sacrifice--and
correspond to the first nine books of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a. The
succeeding adhyâyas have been clearly shown by Professor Weber <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md) to be later additions. As a rule only
those formulas which are contained in the first eighteen adhyâyas are
found in the Taittirîya-sa*m*hitâ; while those of the later adhyâyas are
given in the Taittirîya-brâhma*n*a.

At the end of the *S*atapatha the White Ya*g*us is said to have been
promulgated (â-khyâ) by Yâ*gñ*avalkya Vâ*g*asaneya. Now the name of this
teacher is indeed more frequently met with in the Brâhma*n*a than that
of any other;

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

especially in some of the later books where his professional connection
with *G*anaka, king of Videha, and his skill in theological disputations
are favourite topics. As regards the earlier portion of the work,
however, it is a remarkable fact that, while in the first five books
Yâ*gñ*avalkya's opinion is frequently recorded as authoritative <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md), he is not once mentioned in the four
succeeding kâ*nd*as (6-9). The teacher whose opinion is most frequently
referred to in these books, is *S*â*nd*ilya. This disagreement in
respect of doctrinal authorities, coupled with unmistakable
differences <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md), stylistic as well as
geographical and mythological, can scarcely be accounted for otherwise
than by the assumption of a difference of authorship or original
redaction. Now the subject with which these four kâ*nd*as are chiefly
concerned, is the agni*k*ayana, or construction of the sacred
fire-altar. For reasons urged by Professor Weber, it would appear not
improbable that this part of the ceremonial was specially cultivated in
the north-western districts; and since the geographical allusions in
these four kâ*nd*as chiefly point to that part of India, while those of
the other books refer almost exclusively to the regions along the Ganges
and Jumna, we may infer from this that the fire-ritual, adopted by the
Vâ*g*asaneyins at the time of the first redaction of their texts--that
is, of the first nine kâ*nd*as, as far as the Brâhma*n*a is
concerned--had been settled in the north-west of India.

Here, however, we meet with another difficulty. The tenth book, or
Agnirahasya, deals with the same subject as the preceding four kâ*nd*as;
and here also *S*â*nd*ilya figures as the chief authority, while no
mention is made of Yâ*gñ*avalkya. Moreover, at the end of that kâ*nd*a,
a list of teachers is given in which the transmission of the sacrificial
science (either in its entirety, or only as regards the fire-ritual) is
traced from a teacher Tura Kâvasheya--who is said to have received it
from the god Pra*g*âpati--downwards, through two intermediate teachers,
to *S*â*nd*ilya;

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

and from thence, through six intermediate teachers, to
*S*â*mg*îvî-putra. Tura Kâvasheya is referred to in another passage of
the tenth kâ*nd*a (X, 6, 5, 9) as having built a fire-altar <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) to the gods at Kârotî; and in the
Aitareya-brâhma*n*a he is mentioned as the high-priest who officiated at
the inauguration-ceremony of king *G*aname*g*aya Pârikshita, renowned in
epic legend. From these indications we may, it seems to me, take it for
certain that Tura Kâvasheya and *S*â*nd*ilya (the latter of whom is also
held in high repute by the *Kh*andogas or Sâman-priests) were regarded
by the Vâ*g*asaneyins as the chief arrangers, if not the originators, of
the fire-ritual such as it was finally adopted by that school. On the
other hand, we saw that the first nine books of the *S*atapatha, if
their identification with Pata*ñg*ali's 'shash*t*ipatha.' be correct,
must have been regarded as, in some particular sense, a complete work.
Now this combination of the fire-ritual in kâ*nd*as 6-9 with the
complete exposition of the Havirya*gñ*a and Soma-sacrifice, contained in
the first five books, would seem to presuppose some kind of compromise
between the two schools recognising Yâ*gñ*avalkya and *S*â*nd*ilya
respectively as their chief authority. What, then, are we to understand
to be the exact relations between the later kâ*nd*as, especially the
tenth, and the earlier portion of the work? We do not, and could not,
meet with such a term as '*k*atvâri*ms*at-patha,' or work of forty
paths, as applying to the last five kâ*nd*as of the *S*atapatha; their
nature was too well understood for that, as we see from the passage of
the Mahâbhârata, above referred to. The list of teachers at the end of
the tenth kâ*nd*a shows no sign of any amalgamation of the two schools
up to the time of Sâ*mg*îvî-putra, the last teacher mentioned in it:
with one exception, it belongs exclusively to the *S*â*nd*ilya school.
It contains, however, an additional remark to the effect that from
Sâ*mg*îvî-putra downward the list is 'identical,'--viz. with some other
list. Now this remark can only refer to the [va*ms*a](errata.htm#3.md)
given at the end of the last kâ*nd*a. In this list the

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

transmission of the science of the Adhvaryus is traced--as far as human
agency is concerned--from Ka*s*yapa Naidhruvi, through nine teachers, to
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, and thence, through four other teachers, to
Sâ*mg*îvî-putra <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md). The only name which
this list has in common with the former one, previous to
Sâ*mg*îvî-putra, is that of Ku*s*ri. According to the former list, he
was the teacher of *S*â*nd*ilya, who, in his turn, taught Vâtsya <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47). But since in the same book (X, 5, 5, 1.md)
he is referred to as Vâ*g*a*s*ravasa, and in the list at the end of the
*S*atapatha he is set down as the pupil of Vâ*g*a*s*ravas, the same
teacher is evidently referred to in both lists; and if we can at all
rely on the authenticity of these va*ms*as, we should have to infer from
this coincidence, that there was already some connection between the two
schools prior to both Yâ*gñ*avalkya and *S*â*nd*ilya.

The two lines of teachers meet once more in the name of Sâ*mg*îvî-putra.
In the later list the succession of teachers

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

is then continued by forty-nine more names--all of them formed by the
addition of 'putra' (son) to the mother's name--which, it appears, we
are to supply in the former list. According to Professor Max
Müller <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md), 'Sâ*mg*îvî-putra seems to
have united two lines of teachers.' That this must have been the case,
cannot be doubted, provided, of course, that the va*ms*as are
trustworthy <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md). Nay, I should even be
inclined to assign to the time of Sâ*mg*îvî-putra the final adjustment
of the ritual and its dogmatic exposition such as we find them in the
Shash*t*ipatha (and the first eighteen adhyâyas of the
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ), and consequently the first redaction of that
part of the *S*atapatha. Not that all the matter contained in the latter
part of the work must necessarily be more modern. There can, on the
contrary, be little doubt that much of it is quite as old as anything in
the earlier books; and of the Madhukâ*nd*a, which forms part of the
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka in the last book, we know at any rate, from a
reference to the Madhu-brâhma*n*a in the fourth kâ*nd*a, that some such
tract existed at that time. But such matter as, for some reason or
other, was not included in the systematic exposition of the ceremonial,
would naturally be in a less settled condition and more liable to
modifications and additions.

According to the two lists, Sâ*mg*îvî-putra is removed from *S*â*nd*ilya
by six intermediate teachers, the three older <span
id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50.md) of whom are referred to in kâ*nd*as 6-9;
and from Yâ*gñ*avalkya

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

by four intermediate teachers, the first of whom (Âsuri) <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md) is repeatedly quoted in the second (and
once each in the first, fourth, and fourteenth) kâ*nd*as. Although these
indications do not, of course, supply more than a *terminus a quo* for
the final settlement of this part of the work, they would nevertheless
seem to favour the supposition that the combination of the fire-ritual
with the sacrificial system cannot have taken place at a time far
removed from that of Sâ*mg*îvî-putra. The custom of forming metronymics
by means of 'putra' is of some interest. It first shows itself in the
predecessor of Sâ*mg*îvî-putra's teacher in the Yâ*gñ*avalkya line, and
continues from thence down to the very end of the va*ms*a.
Unfortunately, however, we have no means of ascertaining whether this
custom had already been commonly practised, in certain localities,
before that time, or whether, as seems to me more probable, it was a
fashion of recent date. If the latter alternative could be proved, it
might help to settle the chronological relations between Yâ*gñ*avalkya
and Pâ*n*ini, since it would appear from Pâ*n*. IV, 1, 159 <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) (and VI, 1, 13.md), that the great grammarian
was well acquainted, not only with the practice of forming metronymics
of this kind, but also with that of forming patronymics from such
metronymics.

The relative date of Pâ*n*ini and Yâ*gñ*avalkya has been discussed more
than once by Sanskrit scholars <span id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53.md); but
no agreement has as yet been come to on what Goldstücker justly called
'one of the most important problems of Sanskrit literature.' The chief
difficulty of this problem lies in the ambiguity of Kâtyâyana's
well-known vârttika to Pâ*n*. IV, 3, 105. According to Pâ*n*ini's rule
the names

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

of Brâhma*n*as and Kalpas proclaimed by old (sages) are formed by the
addition of the affix in (to the sages' names). As instances of
Brâhma*n*as, the names of which are formed in this way, the Kâ*s*ikâ
V*ri*tti gives Bhâllavina*h* (proclaimed by Bhallu), *S*âtyayanina*h*,
Aitareyi*n*a*h*. In accordance with this rule the texts of the White
Ya*g*us are called Vâ*g*asaneyina*h*. This name does not; however, occur
in any of Pâ*n*ini's rules, but follows only from the word
'vâ*g*asaneya' being included in the ga*n*a '*s*aunakâdi' to Pâ*n*. IV,
3, 106; and since we have no evidence as to whether any of the words in
a ga*n*a except the first really belong to Pâ*n*ini, it must remain
doubtful whether or not he knew of the existence of the school known by
that name. Kâtyâyana's vârttika runs thus: Among the Brâhma*n*as and
Kalpas proclaimed by the old, there is an exception in regard to
Yâ*gñ*avalkya and others, on account of contemporaneousness: hence
(Yâ*gñ*avalkya's Brâhma*n*as are called, not Yâ*gñ*avalkina*h*, but)
Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni; Saulabhâni B.' The question, then, is, Does
Kâtyâyana mean to say that the Brâhma*n*as proclaimed by Yâ*gñ*avalkya
do not fall under this rule, because he was contemporary with
Pâ*n*ini,--and therefore not an old sage in the sense of the rule,--or,
that those works should have been excepted by Pâ*n*ini from his rule,
because they are of the same age as those (old) Brâhma*n*as to which the
rule applies? The former alternative was the one generally accepted,
until the late Professor Goldstücker made known the text of
Pata*ñg*ali's and Kaiya*t*a's comments <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) on this vârttika. He showed that
Kaiya*t*a, at least, clearly interprets it in the sense that Pâ*n*ini
should have excepted works like the Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni, since
they, too (api), are of the same age as the *S*âtyâyanina*h* and others.
The Mahâbhâshya, on the other hand, is not quite so explicit. It merely
says that the Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni &c. ought to have been
excepted, because they, too (api), are of the same age. Goldstücker
naturally took this explanation to convey the same meaning as that of
Kaiya*t*a. This view was, however, controverted by

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Professor Weber in
his review of Goldstücker's 'Pâ*n*ini.' The interpretation of the
vârttika adopted in the Kâ*s*ikâ V*ri*tti--according to which Pâ*n*ini's
rule does not apply to those works, because Yâ*gñ*avalkya and others are
not old authorities in the sense of Pâ*n*ini's rule--is likewise
rejected by him, since in that case Kâtyâyana's exception would be no
exception at all. On the other hand, Professor Weber thinks that, if we
accept Kaiya*t*a's interpretation, Kâtyâyana's additional remark 'on
account of contemporaneousness' would be entirely superfluous. He,
therefore, proposes, in the passage of the Mahâbhâshya, to take 'api' in
the sense of 'even,' and to interpret the passage thus <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md): 'Among the Brâhma*n*as and Kalpas
proclaimed by the ancients, Pâ*n*ini ought to have made an exception in
regard to Yâ*gñ*avalkya &c., because the Brâhma*n*as and Kalpas
proclaimed by them, though indeed going back to ancient (sages), are
nevertheless contemporaneous (with Pâ*n*ini himself).' This rather
paradoxical argumentation, on the part of Pata*ñg*ali, would have to be
understood to mean, that the Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni and similar
works, though ascribed to old authorities, are in reality modern
productions; or--if we may venture to express it in somewhat different
words--Pâ*n*ini ought to have made an exception in regard to works
which, in point of fact, are no exception at all. Now, if this be the
correct interpretation, I can only say this--that, had Pata*ñg*ali been
anxious to conceal his real meaning, he could scarcely have done so more
effectually than by choosing words which, at first sight, look as clear
as day.

Professor Bühler <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56.md), who has recently
touched upon this controversy, sides with Kaiya*t*a and Goldstücker; and
I, too, can take no other view. But, like him, I see no necessity for
accepting the inferences which Goldstücker has drawn from this vârttika,
viz. that we have to assume so long an interval between Pâ*n*ini and
Kâtyâyana, that authors, whom Kâtyâyana considered as far older than
Pâ*n*ini, were in reality his contemporaries. This assumption, surely,
would involve a degree of ignorance, on the part of

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kâtyâyana,
regarding the age of Pâ*n*ini, such as would seem altogether
unaccountable. The weakness of Goldstücker's argument lies in his
identification of the Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni with the Brâhma*n*a of
the Vâ*g*asaneyins. With Professor Weber I believe that Pâ*n*ini was
perfectly well acquainted with the term 'Vâ*g*asaneyina*h*,' but saw no
occasion for specially mentioning it in his rules. Surely, if his
silence could possibly have been construed into an act of negligence,
Kâtyâyana, who was so intimately connected with the White Ya*g*us that,
on Goldstücker's own showing, he composed the Vâ*g*asaneyi-prâti*s*âkhya
before he wrote his vârttikas, would have been the first to notice it.
The Yâ*gñ*avalkâni Brâhma*n*âni, in their relation to the sacred canon
of the school, seem to me to stand somewhat on a par with the
'Tittiri*n*â proktâ*h* *s*lokâ*h* <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md),'
which, in Pata*ñg*ali's time, were excluded from the term
'Taittirîyâ*h*' as uncanonical, and which Professor Weber would
identify, perhaps rightly, with some portions of the
Taittirîyâra*n*yaka. Both kinds of tracts probably belong to the last
floating materials of Adhvaryu tradition, which had not yet been
incorporated with the canon. Whether or not the Yâ*gñ*avalkâni
Brâhma*n*âni form part of the text of the *S*atapatha which has come
down to us, and what exact portions of that text we have to understand
by this designation, must remain uncertain for the present. Most
probably, however, we have to look for them to certain portions of the
last book (or books) in which Yâ*gñ*avalkya figures so prominently. If
we had a complete copy of the Kâ*n*va recension, we might perhaps be in
a better position for forming an opinion on this subject; for if that
version should really turn out to consist of 104 adhyâyas, four of these
adhyâyas may have to be considered as a later interpolation; and the
fact might have become obscured in the Mâdhyandina recension by a
different division of the text <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58.md). But,
however this may

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

be, it appears to me quite intelligible why such portions should have
been considered as of equal age to the body of the work; in fact they
would probably go back to about the same time as some of the earlier
portions; only that, owing to a longer state of uncertain transmission,
they may have been more liable to changes and additions. If these tracts
are not mentioned by Pâ*n*ini, it may be an accidental omission on his
part, or he may not have been aware of their existence, for geographical
or other reasons: we can hardly expect Pâ*n*ini to have been so
intimately acquainted with the Ya*g*us texts as Kâtyâyana. As regards
the dates of Kâtyâyana and Pata*ñg*ali, I accept with Professor Bühler
and others, as by far the most probable, the fourth and the middle of
the second century B.C. respectively.

Under the title of Vâ*g*asaneyaka, the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a is quoted
once in Lâ*t*yâyana's *S*rauta-sûtra IV, 12, 12; but I have not been
able to find the passage either in the Mâdhyandina text or in that part
of the Kâ*n*va text which I have hitherto had at my disposal, viz.
kâ*nd*as I, II, IV-VII (Kâ*n*va). Far more frequently the work is
quoted, either as Vâ*g*asaneyaka or as Vâ*g*asaneyi-brâhma*n*a, by
Âpastamba, both in his *S*rauta and his Dharma-sûtras. On comparing one
of these quotations in the Dharma-sûtras (I, 4, 12, 3) with the
corresponding passage in the Mâdhyandina recension, Professor Bühler
found that its wording possessed just sufficient resemblance to allow us
to identify the passage which Âpastamba meant, but differed from the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a in many details <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md).' From this he naturally inferred that
Âpastamba probably took his quotations from the Kâ*n*va recension. Now,
although I have not been able to compare this particular passage with
the Kâ*n*va text <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60.md), I have done so
regarding a number of other passages quoted from Âpastamba in Karka's
commentary on the Kâtîya-*S*rauta-sûtra. The result was that in no
single case did Âpastamba's quotations agree with the corresponding
passages in the Kâ*n*va,

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

any more than they did with those of the Mâdhyandina text <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md). In some cases they came nearer to the one
text, in others to the other. To several quotations, again, I could find
nothing corresponding in either text. Now, supposing the quotations, as
given by Karka, to be on the whole correct, there seem to be only two
ways of accounting for these discrepancies, viz. either Âpastamba did
not mean to quote the passages literally, but only to give the substance
of there; or he had a third recension of the *S*atapatha before him.
While some passages would seem to be in favour of the former
alternative, others would scarcely admit of this explanation. This
question, however, requires further investigation, before it can be
definitely settled. In connection with this question the fact will also
have to be taken into account, that Kâtyâyana, in composing his
Vâ*g*asaneyi-prâti*s*âkhya, seems to have had before him a different
recension of the Sa*m*hitâ, from those of the Kâ*n*va and Mâdhyandina
schools <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62.md).

Professor Bühler appears to be inclined to place Âpastamba somewhere
about the fifth century B.C.; and though probably he himself does not
consider the reasons he adduces as conclusive, they seem at any rate to
show that that writer cannot have lived later than the third century B.
C. From

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

the fact that *S*vetaketu, the son of Uddâlaka Âru*n*i, the reputed
teacher (and rival <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63).md) of
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, is counted by Âpastamba among the Avaras or moderns, Dr.
Bühler infers that the promulgator of the White Ya*g*us cannot have
preceded Âpastamba 'by a longer interval than, at the utmost, two or
three hundred years.' That the two authors may not have been separated
from each other by a longer interval seems likely enough; hut, on the
other hand, Âpastamba, by his remark, pays no very great compliment to
the inspired texts of his own school, since Aru*n*a Aupave*s*i, the
grandfather of *S*vetaketu Âru*n*eya, is twice referred to in the
Taittirîya-sa*m*hitâ <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64.md).

The geographical and ethnical allusions contained in the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a have been carefully collected by Professor
Weber <span id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_65.md). With the exception of those
in kâ*nd*as 6-10, as I have already remarked, they point almost
exclusively to the regions along the Ganges and Jumna. In the legend
about Videgha Mâthava <span id="fr_66"></span>[4](#fn_66.md), and his
Purohita Gotama Râhûga*n*a, tradition seems to have preserved a
reminiscence of the eastward spread of Brâhmanical civilisation. Among
the peoples that occupied those regions, a prominent position is
assigned in the *S*atapatha to the closely-allied Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas. The
Kurus occupied the districts between the Jumna and Ganges--the so-called
Madhyade*s*a or middle country--and the Pa*ñk*âlas bordered on them
towards the south-east. According to *S*at. Br. XIII, 5, 4, 7, the
Pa*ñk*âlas were in olden times called Krivi; and a tribe of this name is
evidently referred to in Rig-veda VIII; 20, 24; (22, 12) <span
id="fr_67"></span>[5](#fn_67.md), in connection with the rivers Sindhu and
Asiknî. The Kurus, on the other hand, are not directly referred to in
the *Ri*k; but a king Kuru*s*rava*n*a, 'glory of the Kurus,' and a
patron with the epithet Kaurayâ*n*a are mentioned in the hymns. In
Aitar. Br. VIII, 14, the Uttara (northern) Kurus, together with the
Uttara-Madras, are said to dwell beyond the Himâlaya.

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From these
indications Professor Zimmer infers that, in the times of the hymns, the
Kurus and Krivis--whose names evidently are merely variations of the
same word--may have lived together in the valleys of Kâ*s*mîr, on the
upper Indus; and he also offers the ingenious conjecture, that we may
have to look for the Kuru-Krivis in the twin-people of the Vaikar*n*au,
mentioned in Rig-Veda VII, 18, 11. The names of the principal teachers
of the *S*atapatha mark them as belonging to the land of the
Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas; and as in I, 7, 2, 8, preference is given to a certain
sacrificial practice on the ground that it is the one obtaining among
these peoples, it seems highly probable that the redaction of the work,
or at least of the older portion of it, took place among the
Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md). A prince <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md) of Pa*ñk*âla, Pravâha*n*a *G*aivali, is
mentioned XIV, 9, 1, 1, in connection with Yâ*gñ*avalkya's teacher,
Uddâlaka Âru*n*i.

East of the Madhyade*s*a, we meet with another confederacy of kindred
peoples, of hardly less importance than the Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas, at the time
of the redaction of the Brâhma*n*a, viz. the Kosala-Videhas. In the
legend above referred to they are said to be the descendants of Videgha
Mâthava, and to be separated from each other by the river Sadânîrâ
(either the modern Ga*nd*akî or Karatoyâ). The country of the Videhas,
the eastern branch of this allied people, corresponding to the modern
Tirhut or Puraniya, formed in those days the extreme east of the land of
the Âryas. In the later books of the *S*atapatha, king *G*anaka of
Videha appears as one of the principal promoters of the Brâhmanical
religion, and especially as the patron of Yâ*gñ*avalkya. In XI, 6, 2, 1,
*G*anaka is represented

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

as meeting, apparently for the first time, with *S*vetaketu Âru*n*eya,
Soma*s*ushma Sâtyaya*gñ*i, and Yâ*gñ*avalkya, while they were travelling
(dhâvayadbhi*h*). Probably we are to understand by this that these
divines had then come from the west to visit the Videha country. A
considerable portion of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka deals with learned
disputations which Yâ*gñ*avalkya was supposed to have held at *G*anaka's
court with divers sages and with the king himself. In B*ri*h. Âr. II, 1,
1 (and Kaush. Up. IV, 1) *G*anaka's fame as the patron of Brâhmanical
sages is said to have aroused the jealousy of his contemporary,
A*g*âta*s*atru, king of the Kâ*s*is <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md).
The name *G*anaka is also interesting on account of its being borne
likewise by the father of Sîtâ, the wife of Râma. Unfortunately,
however, there is not sufficient evidence to show that the two kings are
identical. With the legend of the other great epic, the *S*atapatha
offers more points of contact; but on this subject also no definite
results have as yet been obtained, it being still doubtful whether the
internecine strife between the royal houses of the Kurus and Pa*ñk*âlas
which, according to the late Professor Lassen, forms the central fact of
the legend of the Mahâbhârata, had not yet taken place at the time of
the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, or whether it was already a thing of the
past <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md). In the Mahâbhârata, I, 4723,
Pâ*nd*u, in speaking to his wife Kuntî, mentions *S*vetaketu, the son of
the Maharshi Uddâlaka, as having lived 'not long ago <span
id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72.md).'

As regards the two recensions of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, this is
hardly the place to enter into any detailed discussion of their mutual
relations. Nor is my acquaintance with the Kâ*n*va text as yet
sufficiently extensive to do justice to this important question. I
intend, however, to publish before long a number of extracts from
several kâ*nd*as of this recension,--including the text of all the

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

legends as well as other portions which seemed to me of special
interest,--from which Sanskrit scholars will be able to form an opinion
regarding the exact nature of the variations between the two versions.
In my notes to the present translation of the first two kâ*nd*as, I have
considered it desirable occasionally to notice some of the variae
lectiones of the Kâ*n*va school; it should, however, be understood that
these readings have been given solely on the authority of the Oxford
MS., for the loan of which I am deeply indebted to the liberality of the
Curators of the Bodleian Library. With the aid of the Paris MS., the use
of which has also just been kindly granted to me, I hope soon to be able
to verify these extracts. For most of the kâ*nd*as, from the
fourth <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) onwards, our materials have
been lately enriched by a copy which Mr. Whitley Stokes has had made for
Professor Weber from a Benares MS.

The various readings of the Kâ*n*va recension of the
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ have been given in Professor Weber's edition, at
the end of each kâ*nd*a. They may be said to consist either of mere
verbal variations or of additional mantras. In regard to these readings
the Brâhma*n*a of the same school exhibits a feature which may have an
important bearing on the textual criticism of the Sa*m*hitâ. While the
Brâhma*n*a generally shows the same verbal variations in the sacrificial
texts as the Sa*m*hitâ, it, as a rule, takes no notice whatever of the
additional mantras, but agrees in this respect pretty closely with the
Mâdhyandina text. Indeed, so far as I am able to judge, the two
relations seem to coincide almost entirely, as far as the subject-matter
is concerned; the differences, considerable as they sometimes are, being
rather of a grammatical and stylistic nature. Occasional omissions,
which I have hitherto noticed <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74.md), may
perhaps turn out to be due to the carelessness of scribes. As regards
the additional mantras referred to, they may have found their way into
the Sa*m*hitâ at the time when the Sûtras

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

were composed; though, it is true, they do not as a rule appear in the
Kâtîya-sûtra, and no other sûtra of the White Ya*g*us, as far as I know,
has hitherto come to light <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md). On the
other hand, as there are also not a few mantras in the Mâdhyandina
Sa*m*hitâ <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76.md),which are not noticed in
the Brâhma*n*a of that school, this question must be left for future
investigation.

I have already referred to the connection which seems to have existed
between the Kâ*n*va school of the White Ya*g*us and the redactors of the
*Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ. One of the chief points of contact between our existing
recension of the *Ri*k and the Kâ*n*va, text of the Ya*g*ur-veda is the
use of the letters *h* and *lh* instead of *d* and *dh* used by the
Mâdhyandinas. Besides, the *rik*s of the Kâ*n*va text generally approach
mare nearly to the readings of the Rig-veda than those of the other
school. Another, even more interesting, feature which the Kâ*n*va
recension has in common with the *Ri*k, is the constant <span
id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77.md) employment of the ordinary genitive and
ablative of feminine bases, where the other Sa*m*hitâs and Brâhma*n*as
generally use the dative; thus the Kâ*n*vas read 'tasyâ*h*' instead of
'tasyai' (M. I, 1, 4, 16); 'gâyatryâ*h*' instead of 'gâyatryai' (I, 7,
1, 1); 'p*ri*thivyâ*h*' instead of 'p*ri*thivyai' (I, 2, 5, 18);
'kumbhyâ bhastrâyâ*h*' instead of 'kumbhyai bhastrâyai' (I, 1, 2, 7);
'stîr*n*âyâ vede*h*' instead of 'stîr*n*âyai vede*h*' (IV, 2, 5, 3);
'dheno*h*' instead of 'dhenvai' (III, 1, 2, 21), &c. Thus the Kâ*n*va
text is in this respect more in accordance with the *Ri*k-sa*m*hitâ than
even the Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_78"></span>[4](#fn_78.md). Again,
the Kâ*n*vas seem to form the dative of feminine i-bases in accordance
with the usual and older practice of the *Ri*k; at least I find
everywhere 'âhutaye' and 'guptaye' (as also in the Atharvan) instead of
'âhutyai' and 'guptyai' as the Mâdhyandinas (and Taittirîyas) read <span
id="fr_79"></span>[5](#fn_79.md). Of minor points of grammatical

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

differences may be mentioned the form 'nililye,' which occurs once in
the Mâdhyandina text (I, 2, 3, 1), and is otherwise only found in the
Mahâbhârata; while the Kâ*n*va recension has the periphrastic form
(nilayâ*m* *k*akre), which the Mâdhyandina text also offers in the other
two cases (I, 6, 4, 1; IV, 1, 3, 1) in which the word occurs. On the
other hand, the Kâ*n*vas seem to read invariably 'âtmani (dhâ or
k*ri*),' where the Mâdhyandinas have 'âtman,' which is also (doubtless
on metrical grounds) the more usual formation in the Rig-veda <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md). Of cases of material differences I can
only at present adduce the passage I, 1, 4, 12 (M.), where the
Mâdhyandina text is guilty of a transposition of the second and third
castes, while that of the Kâ*n*vas gives them in the proper order.
Though most of these points of difference between the two schools would
seem to tell in favour of the higher antiquity of the Kâ*n*va text,
there will always be great difficulty in deciding this question, as it
is by no means impossible that these variations are entirely due to
different local or family traditions. In favour of the latter
alternative one or two other points may be mentioned. The Mâdhyandina
text, as has already been remarked, offers not a few grammatical and
other differences between the first five and the succeeding four
kâ*nd*as, or, as we may say, between the Yâ*gñ*avalkya and the
*S*â*nd*ilya books of the Shash*t*ipatha. Though I cannot speak with
confidence on this point, as I have not yet examined the Kâ*n*va text of
the *S*â*nd*ilya kâ*nd*as, I may refer here to at least two points, in
which the Kâ*n*vas, in the Yâ*gñ*avalkya portion, agree with the
*S*â*nd*ilya portion of the Mâdhyandina text, viz. the use of the
imperfect (aspardhanta) instead of the perfect (pasp*ri*dhire) in the
opening clause of legends; and the frequent employment of the particle
'vâva' in the place of 'vai.'

As regards the present translation of the first two kâ*nd*as,

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I need hardly say
that I am fully aware of its shortcomings. My chief endeavour has been
to translate as literally as seemed at all compatible with the English
idiom. If, in consequence of this, many passages should be found to read
somewhat awkwardly, I hope at least that the wish to follow the original
as closely as possible, has not rendered them unintelligible. Those who
have given any attention to the Brâhma*n*as and the sacrificial system
of the Hindus, know how difficult the task is, and how easy it is to
commit mistakes regarding the intricate minutiae of the ceremonial. The
Brâhma*n*as presuppose a full knowledge of the course of sacrificial
performance, and notice only such points as afford an opportunity for
dogmatic and symbolic explanations, or seem to call for some
authoritative decision to guard them against what were considered as
heretical practices. In order to enable the reader to follow the course
of the performance with something like completeness, I have supplied in
my notes the chief details from Kâtyâyana's Kalpa-sûtras. That not a few
of these details did not belong to the sacrificial ceremonial of the
*S*atapatha, but were the result of later development, or of an
adaptation of sacrificial practices of other schools, can scarcely be
doubted. Dr. Hillebrandt <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) is of
opinion that sacrificial manuals, somewhat similar to the later
Prayogas, must have existed as early as the time of the composition of
the Brâhma*n*as. In the absence of any direct evidence, speculation on
this point can scarcely lead to any definite results. I may say,
however, that it seems to me quite sufficient to assume that the
performance of sacrifices was taught as a practical art, and that the
theoretic instruction, supplied by the Brâhma*n*as, was conveyed orally
in connection with such practical performances. That the latter was the
case, is sufficiently evident from the constant occurrence in the
Brâhma*n*as of demonstrative pronouns and particles of a 'deictic'
force <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md).

I have occasionally referred to corresponding passages of the
Taittirîyas: an exhaustive comparison of the two branches of the
Ya*g*ur-veda, however interesting this might be, lay outside the scope
of my notes. A general view of

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

the sacrificial system might be considered desirable in this place; but
I have found it necessary to defer this part of my duty as translator to
some future opportunity. Those who desire further information on this
point, I may refer to Professor Weber's general survey of Hindu
sacrifices, in vols. x and xiii of his Indische Studien. No other
scholar has contributed so much to our knowledge of the sacrificial.
ceremonial of the Hindus. I need hardly say that I have also obtained
much useful information from the late Professor Haug's notes to his
translation of the Aitareya-brâhma*n*a, although on many points the
practices of modern *S*rotriyas, on which he chiefly relied, are
manifestly at variance with those enjoined by the old ritualistic
authorities. For the first kâ*nd*a, I have also been able to avail
myself of Dr. Hillebrandt's careful exposition of the new and full-moon
sacrifice; and though I had already worked myself through that part of
the ritual before the appearance of his treatise, his constant
references to the Sûtras of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda have been of great
assistance to me.

The Brâhma*n*as and Kalpa-sûtras treat of the so-called *S*rauta or
Vaidik sacrifices, requiring for their performance three sacrificial
fires; while the Pâka-ya*gñ*as, or simple oblations of cooked food
prepared on the domestic fire, are dealt with in the G*ri*hya-sûtras.
The present volume contains that portion of the Brâhma*n*a which deals
with the Havirya*gñ*as--or offerings of milk, butter, rice, barley, and
similar materials--as distinguished from the animal and Soma sacrifices.
The new and full-moon offering being considered as the normal type of an
ish*t*i, or simplest form of a complete sacrificial performance, the
place of honour is assigned to it in most texts of the Ya*g*us; only
points of difference being generally noted regarding the performance of
ish*t*is, as parts of subsequent sacrifices. In point of time, the
Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsau ought to be preceded--as indeed they are in the
Kâ*n*va text of the Brâhma*n*a--by the Agnyâdhâna, or establishment of a
sacred fire on the part of a young householder; and by the Agnihotra, or
morning and evening libations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_0.md) A. Roberts and W. A.
Rambaut, The Writings of Irenæus, vol. i. p. xv.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_1.md) Mommsen, History of Rome,
translated by W. P. Dickson, vol. i. p. 181.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[x:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_2.md) Ibid. vol. ii. p. 400.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[x:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_3.md) Ibid. vol. i. p. 179.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[x:4](sbe1202.htm#fr_4.md) Ibid. vol. iii. p. 455.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_5.md) Maghavan, the mighty or
bountiful, is a designation both of Indra and the wealthy patron of
priests. Here it is evidently intended to refer to both.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_6.md) See J. Muir, Original
Texts, I, p. 239 seq.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_7.md) See Max Müller, History
of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 485 seq.; A. Weber, Indische Studien,
X, 31 seq. In Rig-veda IV, 50, 8, Vâmadeva is made to say, 'That king
alone, with whom the Brahman walks in front (pûrva eti), lives
well-established in his house; for him there is. ever abundance of food;
before him the people how of their own accord.' If Grassmann was right
in excluding verses 7-11 as a later addition, as I have no doubt he was
(at least with regard to verses 7-9), these verses would furnish a good
illustration of the gradually increasing importance of the office of
Purohita. Professor Ludwig seems to take the verses 7-11 as forming a
separate hymn; but I doubt not that he, too, must consider them on
linguistic grounds, if on no other, as considerably later than the first
six verses. The fact that the last pâda of the sixth verse occurs again
as the closing formula of the hymns V, 55; VIII, 40; and X, 121 (though
also in VIII, 48, 53, where it is followed by two more verses) seems to
favour this view.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_8.md) Cf. J. Muir, Original
Sanskrit Texts, I, p. 283.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_9.md) See Hang's Essays, p.
241; Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 463 seq.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_10.md) See the present
volume, p. 115 note.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvi:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_11.md) See Max Müller,
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 461 seq.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xvi:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_12.md) See especially Taitt.
S. VII, 1, 1, 4. 5; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, pp. 8, 26. III *S*at. Br. II,
4, 3, 6. 7, Indra and Agni are identified with the Kshatra (? power in
general) and the Vi*s*ve [Devâ*h*](errata.htm#0.md) with the Vi*s*.
Sometimes B*ri*haspati or Brahma*n*aspati, the lord of prayer or
worship, takes the place of Agni, as the representative of the priestly
dignity (especially Taitt. S. IV, 3, 10, 1-3; Vâ*g*. S. 14, 28-30); and
in several passages of the *Ri*k this god appears to be identical with,
or at least kindred to, Agni, the purohita and priest (see Max Müller,
Translation of Rig-veda, I, 77; J. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V, p.
272 seq.) In Rig-veda X, 68, 9, where B*ri*haspati is said to have found
(avindat) the dawn, the sky, and the fire (agni), and to have chased
away darkness with his light (arka, sun), he seems rather to represent
the element of light and fire generally (das Ur-licht, cf. Vâ*g*. S. IX,
10-12). In the second <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> Ma*nd*ala the
hymns to B*ri*haspati are placed immediately after those to Agni and
Indra. Though the abstract conception represented by this deity may seem
a comparatively modern one, it will by no means be easy to prove from
the text of the hymns addressed to him, that these are modern. It would
almost seem as if two different tendencies of adoration had existed side
by side from olden times; the one, a more popular and sensuous one,
which, in Vedic times, found its chief expression in Indra and his
circle of deities; and the other, a more spiritual one, represented
originally by Varu*n*a (Mitra, &c.; cf., however, *S*at. Br. IV, 1, 4,
1-4), and in Vedic times, when the sacerdotal element more and more
asserted itself, by B*ri*haspati, and especially by Agni. The
identification of this god with the priestly office was as happy as it
was natural; for Agni, the genial inmate of every household, is indeed
vai*s*vanara, the friend of all men. Shadowy conceptions, such as
B*ri*haspati and Brahman, on the other hand, could evoke no feelings of
sympathy in the hearts of the people generally. Of peculiar interest, in
this respect, are the hymns in which Agni is associated with Indra (see
Max Müller's Science of Language, Second Series, p. 495 J. Muir,
Original Sanskrit Texts, V, pp. 219, 220), and the passages in which
Agni has ascribed to him functions which legitimately belong to Indra;
viz. the slaying of V*ri*tra and destruction of the enemies' cities. The
mutual relation of Indra and Varu*n*a has been well discussed in Dr.
Hillebrandt's treatise 'Varu*n*a and Mitra,' p. 97 seq. It is most
concisely expressed by Vasish*th*a, Rig-veda VII, 83, 9, 'The one
(Indra) slays the enemies in battles; the other (Varu*n*a) ever defends
the ordinances.'

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xvii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_13.md) See the present
volume, p. 48 note; R. Roth. Zeitsch. der D. M. G., VI, p. 73 seq.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xvii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_14.md) The Maruts are
identified with the vi*s*a*h*, or clans, in *S*at. Br. II, 5, 1, 12; 2,
24; 27; 35, etc. In *S*âṅkh. 16, 17, 2-4 the heaven of the Maruts is
assigned to the Vai*s*ya (Ind. Stud. X, p. 26).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xviii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_15.md) See Weber, Ind.
Stud. X, p. 8.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xviii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_16.md) In Ath.-veda IX, 1,
11, the three savanas are assigned to the A*s*vins, Indra-Agni, and the
*Ri*bhus (cf. Ait. Br. VI, 12) respectively; and in another passage of
the same collection, VI, 47, 1, to a. Agni; b. the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*,
Maruts and Indra; and c. the Bards (kavi). In Vâ*g*. S. XIX, 26, also,
the morning libation is assigned to the A*s*vins (? as the two Adhvaryus
of the gods, cf. Sat. I, 1, 2, 17; IV, 1, 5, 15; Ait. Br. I, 18); but in
Taitt. S. II, 2, 3, 1; Ait. Br. III, 13; *S*at. Br. II. 4, 4, 12; IV, 2,
4, 4-5 they are referred to Agni, Indra, and the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*
respectively. See, also, *S*at. Br. IV, 3, 5, 1, where the Vasus
(related to Agni III, 4, 2, 1; VI, 1, 2, 10), Rudras, and Âdityas (cf.
VI, 1, 2, 10, and Ait. Br. III, 13) are connected with the three
libations.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xix:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_17.md) See, for instance,
Ait. Br. IV, 29; 31; V, I.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xix:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_18.md) The special oblations
of the offering of first-fruits consist of a rice-cake to Indra and
Agni, and a pap of rice-grains to the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xix:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_19.md) See Vâ*g*. S. III,
12-13; *S*at. Br. II, 3, 4, 11-I 2. 'Indra-Agni are
everything,--Brahman, Kshatra, and Vi*s*,' *S*at. Br. IV, 2, 2, 14.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xix:4](sbe1202.htm#fr_20.md) See, for instance,
*S*at. Br. I, 4, 5, 4; II, 3, 1, 38; 3, 4, 38; and especially IV, 1, 2,
15, 'for Indra, indeed, is the Maghavan the ruler (net*ri*) of the
sacrifice.' He is, as it were, the divine representative of the human
sacrificer or patron, who is the ya*gñ*apati or lord of sacrifice.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xx:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_21.md) Der Rig-veda, vol.
iii. p. 45.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xx:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_22.md) Compare the following
remarks of M. Haug, who believed in the identity of the Vedic Adhvaryu
and the Zota and Rathwi of the Zend-Avesta:--'At the most ancient times
it appears that all the sacrificial formulas were spoken by the Hotar
alone; the Adhvaryu was only his assistant, who arranged the sacrificial
compound, provided the implements, and performed all manual labour. It
was only at the time when regular metrical verses and hymns were
introduced into the ritual, that a part of the duties of the Hotar
devolved on the Adhvaryu. <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> There are in
the present ritual traces to be found, that the Hotar actually must have
performed part of the duties of the Adhvaryu.' Ait. Br. I, p. 31.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_23.md) See A. Weber,
History of Indian Literature, pp. 9, 115.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_24.md) See M. Haug, Ait.
Br. I, p. 34.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_25.md) See Max Müller,
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 172; Rig-veda-sa*m*hitâ IV,
p. vi. Professors Weber (History of Sanskrit Literature, p. II),
Whitney, Westergaard, and other scholars derive brâhma*n*a from bráhman,
'prayer, worship.'

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_26.md) See R. Roth in
Weber's Ind. Stud. I, 475 seq.; II, 111 seq.; Max Müller, History of
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 408 seq.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxiv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_27.md) See the present
volume, [p. 183](sbe1230.htm#page_183.md). Compare also Professor
Aufrecht's remarks on the myth of Apâlâ, Ind. Stud. IV, p. 8.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxiv:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_28.md) K. B. III, 25; cf.
Weber, Ind. Stud. II, 353.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxiv:4](sbe1202.htm#fr_29.md) Cf. Max Müller,
Upanishads, I, p. 39 note.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxiv:5](sbe1202.htm#fr_30.md) See, for instance,
*S*at. Br. II, 4, 3, 1, where a legend of this kind seems to be directly
ascribed to Yâ*gñ*avalkya.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_31.md) History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 408.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_32.md) That is, the
Brâhma*n*a, according to *S*aṅkara. In *S*at. Br. IV, 6, 7, 6, the *Rik*
and Sâman are identified with Speech, and the Ya*g*us with the Mind.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_33.md) Except, perhaps, the
Sâma-veda, which, in the *K*ara*n*avyûha, is said to have counted a
thousand schools; though that work itself enumerates only seven schools,
one of them with five subdivisions. The number of teachers mentioned in
connection with this Veda is, however, very considerable.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxvi:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_34.md) As such, at least,
the Taittirîyas are mentioned in the *K*ara*n*avyûha. The term Karaka,
however, is also (e*g*. in the Prati*gñ*â-sûtra) applied to the schools
of the Black Ya*g*us generally. If the Berlin MS. of the Kâ*th*aka
professes, in the colophon, to contain the Karaka text of the work
(which Professor Weber takes to refer to the *K*ârâya*n*iyâh), the
Karaka-*s*âkhâ of the Kâ*th*aka has perhaps to be understood in
contradistinction to those portions of the Kâ*th*aka which have been
adopted by the Taittirîyas and incorporated into their Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxvi:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_35.md) The Taittirîyas
divide themselves into two schools, the Aukhîyas and the Khâ*nd*ikîyas;
the Âpastambins are a subdivision of the latter branch. We have also the
list of the contents (anakrama*n*î) of the Âtreyas, a subdivision of the
Aukhîyas.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxvii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_36.md) It has come down to
us in two different recensions, the Aitareya and the Kaushîtaki (or
*S*âṅkhâyana) Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxvii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_37.md) Professor Weber,
however, thinks there may be some reason for this derivation; the name
of Taittirîya having perhaps been applied to this school on account of
the motley (partridge-like) character of its texts. According to the
story alluded to, Yâ*gñ*avalkya, having been taught the old Ya*g*us
texts by Vai*s*ampâyana, incurred the displeasure of his teacher, and
was forced by him to disgorge the sacred science which, on falling to
the ground, became soiled <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> (hence
Black Ya*g*us), and was picked up by Yâ*gñ*avalkya's condisciples, who
had assumed the form of partridges. This story seems first to occur in
the Purâ*n*as; see Wilson's translation of the Vish*n*u Purâ*n*a (ed.
Hall), III, p. 54. Pâ*n*ini (IV, 3, 102) and Pata*ñg*ali only know of
the Taittirîya texts as 'promulgated by Tittiri.'

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_38.md) Zeitsch. der D. M.
G., IV, p. 289 seq.; reprinted in Indische Streifen I, p. 31 seq.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxix:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_39.md) The Kâ*n*va text is
divided into seventeen books. Kâ*nd*as 12-15 correspond to Mâdhyandina
10-13; and kâ*nd*a 16, which treats [of](errata.htm#2.md) the Pravargya
ceremony, corresponds to the first three adhyâyas of the last kâ*nd*a of
the Mâdhyandinas. Thus, in the Kâ*n*va recension the fourteenth kâ*nd*a,
called 'madhyama,' is the middle one of kâ*nd*as 12-16; the seventeenth
kâ*nd*a, or B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, being apparently considered as a
supplement. Perhaps this division is more original than that of the
Mâdhyandinas.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxx:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_40.md) The accuracy of this
list cannot he relied upon, as several mistakes occur in the number of
ka*nd*ikâs there given. It is, however, unlikely that the scribe should
have committed any mistake regarding the number of adhyâyas.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxx:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_41.md) Literally 'together
with the rahasya (sarahasyam),' &c.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxx:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_42.md) History of Indian
Literature, p. 507 seq.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_43.md) See, however, *S*at.
Br. II, 5, 1, 2-3, where Yâ*gñ*avalkya's opinion is referred to as being
contrary to the Rig-veda.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxxi:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_44.md) See Weber, Ind.
Stud. XIII, p. 266 seq.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_45.md) The author of this
passage would seem to imply, though he does not exactly express it, that
this was the first fire-altar built in the proper way.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxxiii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_46.md) I here give, side
by side, the lists, in inverted order, from Sâ*mg*îvî-putra upwards. For
the complete lists, see Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit
Literature, p. 438 seq.

<div align="center">

|                                                                         |                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| End of Book XIV.                                                        | End of Book X.                          |
| 58\. Âditya.                                                            | \(52\) Brahman Svayambhu.               |
| 57\. Ambi*n*î.                                                          |                                         |
| 56\. Vâ*k*.                                                             | \(51\) Pra*g*âpati.                     |
| 55\. Ka*s*yapa Naidhruvi.                                               |                                         |
| 54\. *S*ilpa Ka*s*yapa.                                                 |                                         |
| 53\. Harita Ka*s*yapa.                                                  | \(50\) Tura Kâvasheya.                  |
| 52\. Asita Vârshaga*n*a.                                                |                                         |
| 51\. *G*ihvâvat Bâdhyoga.                                               | \(49\) Vâ*gñ*ava*k*as Râ*g*astambâyana. |
| 50\. Vâ*g*a*s*ravas.                                                    |                                         |
| 49\. Ku*s*ri.                                                           | \(48\) Ku*s*ri.                         |
| 48\. Upave*s*i.                                                         | \(47\) *S*â*nd*ilya.                    |
| 47\. Aru*n*a.                                                           |                                         |
| 46\. Uddâlaka (Âru*n*eya).                                              | \(46\) Vâtsya.                          |
| 45\. Yâ*gñ*avalkya (Vâ*g*asaneya).                                      | \(45\) Vâmakakshâya*n*a.                |
| 44, Âsuri.                                                              | \(44\) Mâhitthi.                        |
| 43\. Asurâya*n*a.                                                       | \(43\) Kautsa.                          |
| 42\. Prâ*s*nî-putra (Âsurivâsin).                                       | \(42\) Mâ*nd*avya.                      |
| 41\. Kâr*s*akeyî-putra.                                                 | \(41\) Mâ*nd*ûkâyani.                   |
| 40\. Sâ*mg*îvî-putra.                                                   | \(40\) Sâ*mg*îvî-putra.                 |
| Follow 39 names formed by the addition of 'putra' to the mother's name. | (Same as elsewhere.)                    |

</div>

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxxiii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_47.md) In the
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka (Kâ*n*va) VI, 5,4 the order is Ku*s*ri, Vâtsya,
*S*â*nd*ilya.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xxxiv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_48.md) History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 437.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xxxiv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_49.md) Professor Weber,
Ind. Stud. II, 201 note, expresses his conviction that 'the va*ms*as
are, on the whole, quite authentic; though they do not of course belong
to the text, but are later additions; judging from the great number of
names, some va*ms*as must have been added at a very late time.' It seems
to me, however, that if the va*ms*as are at all authentic--and I see no
reason for doubt as far as the two lists above referred to are
concerned--we have rather to assume that the lists were kept from early
times and gradually added to. On the other hand, little can be made of
the two va*ms*as at the end of the Madhu and Yâ*gñ*avalkîya kâ*nd*as.
They look rather like attempts--and very unsuccessful ones--at throwing
several independent lists into one.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xxxiv:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_50.md) Viz., Vâtsya IX, 5,
1, 62; Vâmakakshâya*n*a VII, 1, 2, 11; Mâhitthi VI, 2, 2, 10; VIII, 6,
1, 16 seq.; IX, 5, 1, 57. Not mentioned are Kautsa, Mâ*nd*avya, and
Mâ*nd*ûkâyani. A Mâ*nd*avya occurs in the twelfth book of the
Mahâbhârata, as a contemporary of Ganaka and Yâ*gñ*avalkya.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xxxv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_51.md) He is also the
*Ri*shi of Vâ*g*. S. III, 37.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xxxv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_52.md) This rule, which
applies to the people of the north, is not explained in the Mahâbhâshya.
The Kâ*s*ikâ V*ri*tti gives the patronymics of Gârgîputra and
Vâtsîputra, both of whom occur in our va*ms*a. It is worthy of remark
that Kavasha Ailûsha, who is mentioned in Ait. Br. II, 19, and to whom
the hymns Rig-veda X, 30-34 are ascribed, is called Kavasha Ailûshîputra
in the Kâ*th*aka 25, 7. Cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. III, pp. 459, 157, 485.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xxxv:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_53.md) See especially Max
Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 360 seq; Goldstücker,
Pâ*n*ini, p. 132 seq.; Weber, Ind. Stud. V, 65 seq.; XIII, 443; Bühler,
Sacred Laws of the Âryas, I, p. xxxix note.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xxxvi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_54.md) Pâ*n*ini, p. 138.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xxxvii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_55.md) Ind. Stud. V, 68
sec.; XIII, 443.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xxxvii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_56.md) Sacred Laws of the
Âryas, I, p. xxxix note.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xxxviii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_57.md) Mahâbhâshya on
Pâ*n*. IV, 2, 66; 3, 104.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xxxviii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_58.md) Possibly,
however, this redundancy may have been caused by the insertion of the
third or uddhârî-kâ*nd*a, consisting of 124 ka*nd*ikâs, to which there
seems to be nothing corresponding in the Mâdhyandina text. We have no
MS. of this particular kâ*nd*a. I may also mention that, while in the
first kâ*nd*a (or second Kâ*n*va), the Mâdhyandinas count 9, and the
Kâ*n*vas 8 adhyâyas,--in the fourth kâ*nd*a (or <span id="page_xxxix">p.
xxxix</span> fifth Kâ*n*va), on the other hand, the Kâ*n*vas have 8,
instead of 6 adhyâyas; and in the fifth kâ*nd*a (or sixth and seventh
Kâ*n*vas) they have together 7, instead of 5 adhyâyas.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xxxix:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_59.md) Bühler, loc. cit.
p. xxv.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xxxix:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_60.md) The passage occurs
in Mâdhyandina XI, 5, 6, 3.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xl:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_61.md) I select a few
passages:--

|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1\. | Âp. (Katy. VII., I, 36). prâgva*ms*asya madhyama*m* sthû*n*ârâ*g*am âlabhya *g*apatîti vâ*g*asaneyakam.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|     | Mâdhy. III, 1, 1, 11. sa pûrvârdhya*m* sthû*n*ârâ*g*am abhipadyaitad ya*g*ur âha.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|     | Kâ*n*va IV, 1, 1, 7. sa yâsau varshish*th*â pûrvârdhe sâlâsthû*n*â bhavati tam abhipadya *g*apati.                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| 2\. | Âp. (Katy. V, 3, 6). atrâpi mesha*m* *k*a meshî*m* *k*a karotîti vâ*g*asaneyakam.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|     | Mâdhy. II, 5, 2, 15. tatrâpi mesha*m* *k*a meshî*m* *k*a kurvanti.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|     | Kâ*n*va I, 5, 1, 13. mesha*m* *k*a vâ api meshî*m* *k*a kurvanti.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| 3\. | Âp. (Katy. VII, 2)34). (v*ri*trasya kanînikâsîti traikakudenâ*ñg*anenâṅkte) yadi traikaduka*m* nâdhiga*kkh*ed yenaiva kenâ*ñg*anenâ*ñg*îti vâ*g*asaneyakam.                                                                                                                                  |
|     | Mâdhy. III, 1, 3, 12. (traikadukam bhavati; yatra vâ indro v*ri*tram aha*m*s tasya yad akshy âsît ta*m* giri*m* trikakudam akarot . . . .) yadi traikakuda*m* na vinded apy atraikakudam eva syât samânî hy evâ*ñg*anasya bandhutâ.                                                          |
|     | Kâ*n*va IV, 1, 3, 10. (tat traikakuda*m* syât; yatra vâ indro v*ri*tram aha*m*s tasya ha yâ kanînakâsa ya*k* *k*akshus tam eta*m* giri*m* *k*akâra trikakuda*m*; sa yat traikakudam bhavati *k*akshushy evaita*k* *k*akshur dadhâti); yadi traikakuda*m* na vinded api yad eva ki*ñk*a syât. |
| 4\. | Âp. (Katy. VII, 3, 28). ûsh*n*îshe*n*a pradakshi*n*a*m* *s*iro vesh*t*ayata iti vâ*g*asaneyakam.                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|     | Mâdhy. III, 2, 1, 16-27. sa pror*n*ute.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|     | Kâ*n*va IV, 2, 1, 11-12. athaina*m* pror*n*oti,--sa pror*n*oti.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xl:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_62.md) See Weber, Ind. Stud.
IV, p. 69.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xli:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_63.md) See B*ri*h. Âr. 3, 5,
where he is defeated by Yâ*gñ*avalkya in disputation.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xli:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_64.md) Taitt. S. VI, 1, 9,
2; 4, 5, 1.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xli:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_65.md) Ind. Stud. I, 187
seq.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xli:4](sbe1202.htm#fr_66.md) See the present
volume, [p. 204](sbe1232.htm#page_204.md), with note. It would have been
safer to give the name as Videgha Mâthava, instead of Mâthava the
Videgha.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xli:5](sbe1202.htm#fr_67.md) See Ludwig, Rig-veda
III, p. 205; Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 103.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xlii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_68.md) The passage III, 2,
3, 15, where the Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas are apparently placed in the north--in
direct contradiction to XI, 4, 1, 1, where they are placed in opposition
to the Northerners (udî*k*ya*h*)--seems to go against this supposition.
Professor Weber, Ind. Stud. I, 191, tries to get over this difficulty by
translating Kurupa*ñk*âlatrâ by 'as among the Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas,' instead
of among the Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas;' so that the meaning of the passage would
be that 'the same language is spoken in the northern region, as among
the Kuru-Pa*ñk*âlas.' Unfortunately, however, the Kâ*n*va text of the
passage is not favourable to this interpretation. It runs as follows (K.
IV. a, 3, 10):--udî*k*îm pathyayâ svastyâ vâg vai pathyâ svastis tasmâd
atrottarâhai vâg vadatîtyâhu*h* kurupa*ñk*âleshu kurumahâvisheshv ity
etâ*m* hi tayâ di*s*a*m* prâ*g*ânann eshâ hi tasyâ dik pra*gñ*âtâ.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xlii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_69.md) He is styled
râ*g*anyabandhu in *Kh*ândogyop. V, 3, 5.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xliii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_70.md) They occupied the
country about the modern Benares (Kâ*s*î).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xliii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_71.md) Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra
Vai*k*itravîrya, whose sons and nephews form the chief parties of this
great feud, is mentioned in the Kâ*th*aka 10, 6. From this
passage--which, unfortunately, is not in a very good condition in the
Berlin MS.--it would appear that animosities had then existed between
the Kurus and Pa*ñk*âlas. It is doubtful, however, whether this part of
the Kâ*th*aka is older than the bulk of the *S*atapatha. See Weber, Ind.
Stud. III, 469 seq.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xliii:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_72.md) See Weber, Ind.
Stud. I, 176.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xliv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_73.md) Viz. kâ*nd*as 4-7,
9, 10, 12, 14-17.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xliv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_74.md) For instance, the
brâhma*n*as Mâdhy. I, 4, 3; II, 3, 2 and 3; IV, 5, 10; 6, 8 are wanting
in the Oxford MS.; see p. 338, note 3.--In the fourth (fifth Kâ*n*va)
kâ*nd*a, the Kâ*n*vas, on the other hand, have two brâhma*n*as (V, 7, 5;
8, 2, the latter of which treats of the adâbhya graha, Vâ*g*. S. VIII,
99-50) which are not found in the Mâdhyandina text.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xlv:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_75.md) Professor Weber
thinks that the sûtra of Vai*g*avâpa, of which mention is occasionally
made in the commentaries on the Kâtîya-sûtra, may belong to the White
Ya*g*us. See History of Indian Literature, p. 142. Professor Bühler,
Sacred Laws, I, p. xxvi, remarks that 'Kâ*n*va is considered the author
of the still existing Kalpa-sûtras of the Kâ*n*va school;' but I have
found no notice of these sûtras anywhere.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xlv:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_76.md) That is, in those
adhyâyas to which the Brâhma*n*a forms a running commentary.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xlv:3](sbe1202.htm#fr_77.md) I have not met with
any exception in the kâ*nd*as hitherto examined.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xlv:4](sbe1202.htm#fr_78.md) See Aufrecht, Ait.
Br. p. 418.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xlv:5](sbe1202.htm#fr_79.md) See also the form
'dheno*h*' mentioned above.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xlvi:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_80.md) Another curious
feature of the Kâ*n*va text is the frequent insertion of an 'ity
uvâ*k*a' in the middle of speeches, much like the colloquial 'says he.'
As an instance I may adduce K. IV, 2, 3, 3 (M. III, 2, 3, 5):--Sâ
hovâ*k*â ’ham eva vo ya*gñ*am amûmuham iti hovâ*k*a yad eva mayi tanvânâ
iti mâ*m* ya*gñ*âd antaragâta tenaiva vo ya*gñ*am amûmuham iti to
mahya*m* nu bhâga*m* kalpayatety atha vo ya*gñ*a*h* praro*k*ishyata hi
tatheti ho*k*us, &c. The Kâ*n*vas also invert much more frequently an
'iti' in the middle of speeches.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xlvii:1](sbe1202.htm#fr_81.md) Das Altindische
Neu- and Vollmondsopfer, p. xv.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xlvii:2](sbe1202.htm#fr_82.md) See, for instance,
*S*at. Br. I, 3, 1, 7; 8, 1, 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 1. First Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe1203.md)
