[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1249) 
[Next](sbe1251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3">2:3:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:1">2:3:3:1</span></span>1. Now
when Pra*g*âpati, in creating living beings, created Agni, the latter,
as soon as born, sought to burn everything here: and so everybody tried
to get out of his way <span id="fr_774"></span>[1](#fn_770). The
creatures then existing sought to crush him. Being unable to endure
this, he went to man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:2">2:3:3:2</span></span>2. He
said, 'I cannot endure this: come, let me enter into thee! Having
reproduced me, maintain me; and as thou wilt reproduce and maintain me
in this world, even so will I reproduce and maintain thee in yonder
world!' He (man) replied, 'So be it.' And having reproduced him, he
maintained him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:3">2:3:3:3</span></span>3. Now
when he establishes the two fires, he reproduces that (Agni); and having
reproduced him, he maintains him; and as he reproduces and maintains him
in this world, even so does he (Agni) reproduce and maintain him in
yonder world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:4">2:3:3:4</span></span>4. One
must not, therefore, remove it (the sacrificial fire from the hearth)
prematurely, for too

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

soon it languishes for him; and as it languishes for him too soon in
this world, even so does it languish for him too soon in yonder world:
one must not, therefore, remove it prematurely.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:5">2:3:3:5</span></span>5. And
when he dies, and they place him on the (funeral) fire, then he is
reproduced from out of the fire; and he (Agni) who heretofore was his
son <span id="fr_775"></span>[1](#fn_771), now becomes his father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:6">2:3:3:6</span></span>6. Hence
it has been said by the *Ri*shis (Rig-veda I, 89, 9), 'A hundred autumns
(may there he) before us, O gods, during which ye complete the life-time
of our bodies, during which sons become fathers! do not cut us off,
midway, from reaching the full term of life!' for he (Agni) who is the
son, now in his turn becomes the father: this, then, is why one must
establish the fires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:7">2:3:3:7</span></span>7. Now
yonder burning (sun) doubtless is no other than Death; and because he is
Death, therefore the creatures that are on this side of him die. But
those that are on the other side of him are the gods, and they are
therefore immortal. It is by the rays (or reins, thongs, ra*s*mi) of
that (sun) that all these creatures are attached to the vital airs
(breaths or life), and therefore the rays extend down to the vital airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:8">2:3:3:8</span></span>8. And
the breath of whomsoever he (the sun) wishes he takes and rises, and
that one dies. And whosoever goes to yonder world not having escaped
that Death, him he causes to die again and again in yonder world, even
as, in this world, one regards not him that is fettered, but puts him to
death whenever one wishes.

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:9">2:3:3:9</span></span>9. Now
when, in the evening after sunset, he offers two libations, then he
firmly plants himself on that Death with those fore-feet of his; and
when, in the morning before sunrise, he offers two libations, then he
plants himself on that Death with those hind-feet of his. And when he
(the sun) rises, then, in rising, he takes him up and thus he (the
sacrificer) escapes that Death. This, then, is the release from death in
the Agnihotra: and, verily, he who knows that release from death in the
Agnihotra, is freed from death again and again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:10">2:3:3:10</span></span>10.
What the arrow-head is to the arrow, that the Agnihotra is to
sacrifices. For whither the head of the arrow flies, thither the whole
arrow flies: and so are all his works of sacrifice freed by this
(Agnihotra) from that Death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:11">2:3:3:11</span></span>11. Now
day and night, revolving, destroy (the fruit of) man's righteousness in
yonder world. But day and night are on this side (of the sun) from him
(after he has gone up to heaven); and so day and night do not destroy
(the fruit of) his righteousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:12">2:3:3:12</span></span>12. And
as, while standing inside a chariot, one would look down from above on
the revolving chariot-wheels, even so does he look down from on high
upon day and night: and, verily, day and night destroy not the reward of
him who thus knows that release from day and night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:13">2:3:3:13</span></span>13.
\[The sacrificer\] having gone round the Âhavanîya, (after entering)
from the east <span id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_772), passes

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

between (it and) the Gârhapatya (to his seat). For the gods do not know
(this) man <span id="fr_777"></span>[1](#fn_773); but when he now passes
by them between (the fires), they know him, and think, 'This is he that
now offers to us.' Moreover, Agni (the fire) is the repeller of evil;
and these two, the Âhavanîya and Gârhapatya, repel the evil from him who
passes between them; and the evil being repelled from him, he becomes a
very light in splendour and glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:14">2:3:3:14</span></span>14. On
the north side is the door of the Agnihotra <span
id="fr_778"></span>[2](#fn_774): thus (he approaches it) as he would
enter (a house) by a door. If, on the other hand, he were to sit down
after approaching from the south, it would be as if he walked outside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:15">2:3:3:15</span></span>15. The
Agnihotra, truly, is the ship (that sails) heavenwards. The Âhavanîya
and Gârhapatya are the two sides <span id="fr_779"></span>[3](#fn_775)
of that same heavenward-bound ship; and that milk-offerer is its
steersman.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:16">2:3:3:16</span></span>16. Now
when he walks up towards the east, then he steers that (ship) eastwards
towards the

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

heavenly world, and he gains the heavenly world by it. When ascended
from the north it makes him reach the heavenly world; but if one were to
sit down in it after entering from the south, it would be as if he tried
to enter it after it has put off and he were left behind and remained
outside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:17">2:3:3:17</span></span>17. And
again, the stick which he puts on the fire (corresponds to) a brick, and
the formula wherewith he offers is the Ya*g*us-text wherewith he puts on
that brick <span id="fr_780"></span>[1](#fn_776); and when the brick is
put on, then a libation is made: hence those same libations of the
Agnihotra are offered on his pile of bricks <span
id="fr_781"></span>[2](#fn_777).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:18">2:3:3:18</span></span>18. The
fire, assuredly, is Pra*g*âpati,--and Pra*g*âpati is the year. Year
after year, therefore, is his Agnihotra consummated with the piled-up
fire-altar; and year after year does he obtain the piled-up fire altar,
whosoever, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:19">2:3:3:19</span></span>19.
Seven hundred and twenty eighties of *Ri*k-verses (he should recite at
the Agnihotra in the course of a year). When he offers the Agnihotra in
the morning and evening, then there are two libations: hence those
libations of his, in the course of a year, amount to--

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:3:3:20">2:3:3:20</span></span>20.
Seven hundred and twenty. Thus, indeed, his Agnihotra is accomplished,
year after year, with the great chant <span
id="fr_782"></span>[3](#fn_778); and year after year does he obtain

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

the great chant, whosoever, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_770"></span>[342:1](sbe1250.htm#fr_774) Ity âbilam âsa,
i.e. 'there was a (general rush) to a hole,' (or perhaps 'to the
outlet.')

<span id="fn_771"></span>[343:1](sbe1250.htm#fr_775) Viz. inasmuch as
the householder, by the Âdhâna, produces, generates Agni.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[344:1](sbe1250.htm#fr_776) According to Kâty.
IV, 13, 12 \[and Schol.\], the householder \[after taking out the fires
and performing his regular twilight adoration (sandhyâ), that is,
muttering the Sâvitrî, Rig-veda III, 62, 10 (see *S*at. Br. II, 3, 4,
39); when the sun has half disappeared or until it becomes visible; cf.
Â*s*val. G*ri*hyas. XX, 3, 7\] passes between the Gârhapatya and
Dakshi*n*a fires, or south of them, <span id="page_345">p. 345</span>
\[enters the Âhavanîya house by the east door\], circumambulates the
fire from right to left (apadakshi*n*am), and sits down in his place
(south of the Âhavanîya fire and altar). The same circumambulation is
performed by the wife, who thereupon sits down in her place, south-west
of the Gârhapatya.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[345:1](sbe1250.htm#fr_777) Or, 'the gods are
not aware of (this) man' (na vai devâ manushya*m* vidu*h*). The gods are
supposed to be assembled around the altar; see I, 3, 3, 8.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[345:2](sbe1250.htm#fr_778) I do not understand
this, there being no door on the north side of the Âhavanîya fire-house.
According to the commentator this passage is directed against those who
make the sacrificer betake himself to the Âhavanîya from (or along) the
south; and he quotes the words 'dakshi*n*ena vâ' from Kâtyâyana,
apparently IV, 13, 12, where it is said that the sacrificer, in going to
the Âhavanîya, has to pass between the two western fires, 'or south of
them.'

<span id="fn_775"></span>[345:3](sbe1250.htm#fr_779) 'Nauma*nd*e' ?
according to the commentator = bhittî (the two walls or sides). The
Petersb. Dict. proposes 'the two rudders (or oars).'

<span id="fn_776"></span>[346:1](sbe1250.htm#fr_780) Viz. at the
Agni*k*ayana, or piling up of the brick-altars at the Soma-sacrifice. As
to the putting on of the stick, see II, 3, i, 17. The Kâ*n*va text of
the Vâ*g*. S. (but not that of the Brâhm.) gives the formula
'Agni*g*yotisha*m* (Sûrya*g*yotisha*m*, in the morning) tvâ vâyumatîm,'
&c. See Kâty. IV, 14, i3; 15, 9.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[346:2](sbe1250.htm#fr_781) After the
completion of the fifth, and last, layer of the brick-altar, oblations
of various materials are made thereon; especially the *S*atarudriyahoma,
consisting of 425 single oblations; *S*at. Br. IX, 1, 1, 1 seq., 2, 1, 1
seq.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[346:3](sbe1250.htm#fr_782) The mahad (or,
b*ri*had) uktha or great chant, which marks <span id="page_347">p.
347</span>  the conclusion of the Agni*k*ayana, consists of 3 × 80
[t*rik*as](errata.htm#8) (strophes of three verses each), or together
720 verses. On the frequent use of number 80 in the fire-ritual, see
Weber, Ind. Stud. XIII, p. 167.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 3, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1251)
