[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1260) 
[Next](sbe1262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2">2:6:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:1">2:6:2:1</span></span>1.
Verily, by means of the Great Oblation the gods slew V*ri*tra; by it
they gained that supreme authority which they now wield. Now whichever
of them were hit by (the Asuras’) arrows in that battle, those same
darts they extracted, those they pulled out, by performing the
Tryambaka-offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:2">2:6:2:2</span></span>2. And,
accordingly, when he performs those offerings, he either does so hoping
that thus no arrow

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (misfortune) will
hit any of his, or because the gods did so. And thereby he delivers from
Rudra's power both the descendants that are born unto him and those that
are unborn; and his offspring is brought forth without disease and
blemish. This is why he performs these offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:3">2:6:2:3</span></span>3. They
are (offered) to Rudra: Rudra's, indeed, is the dart; and hence (these
offerings) belong to Rudra. They consist of (cakes) on one potsherd: 'To
one deity they shall belong!' so (he thinks, and) therefore they consist
of (cakes) on one potsherd.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:4">2:6:2:4</span></span>4. There
is one for each individual,--as many as he has descendants,--exceeded by
one. (There being) one for each individual, he thereby delivers from
Rudra's power the descendants that are born unto him; and there being an
additional one, he thereby delivers from Rudra's power the descendants
that are not yet born to him: this is why there are (as many cakes as
there are descendants) exceeded by one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:5">2:6:2:5</span></span>5. He
takes out (the rice for) those (cakes), while seated behind the
Gârhapatya, sacrificially invested and facing the north. From thence he
rises and threshes (the rice), while standing with his face towards the
north. He places the two mill-stones on (the black antelope skin, so as
to incline) towards the north; and puts the potsherds on the north side
of the Gârhapatya hearth. As to why they keep the northern
quarter,--that indeed is the quarter of that god (Rudra), and hence they
keep the northern quarter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:6">2:6:2:6</span></span>6. They
(the cakes) may be anointed (with ghee),--for the havis is
anointed <span id="fr_986"></span>[1](#fn_982);--but let them rather be

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

unanointed; for, indeed, Rudra would be hankering after the
(sacrificer's) cattle, if he were to anoint (the cakes): let them
therefore be unanointed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:7">2:6:2:7</span></span>7. Having
removed all (the cakes from the potsherds) into one dish, and taken a
fire-brand from the Dakshi*n*a-fire, he walks aside towards the
north--for that is the region of that god--and offers. He offers on a
road,--for on roads that god roves; he offers on a cross-road,--for the
cross-road, indeed, is known to be his (Rudra's) favourite haunt <span
id="fr_987"></span>[1](#fn_983). This is why he offers on a cross-road.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:8">2:6:2:8</span></span>8. He
offers with the central leaflet of a palâ*s*a-leaf. The palâ*s*a-leaf,
truly, is the Brahman (priesthood) <span
id="fr_988"></span>[2](#fn_984): with the Brahman, therefore, he offers.
He takes a cutting from (the northern part of) all the cakes; from the
additional one alone he takes no cutting.

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:9">2:6:2:9</span></span>9. He
offers <span id="fr_989"></span>[1](#fn_985), with the text (Vâ*g*. S.
III, 57 a), 'This is thy share, O Rudra! graciously accept it together
with thy sister Ambikâ! Svâhâ!' Ambikâ <span
id="fr_990"></span>[2](#fn_986), indeed, is the name of his (Rudra's)
sister; and this share belongs to him conjointly with her; and because
that share belongs to him conjointly with a woman (strî), therefore
(these oblations) are called Tryambakâ*h*. Thereby, then, he delivers
from Rudra's power the descendants that have been born unto him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:10">2:6:2:10</span></span>10. Now
as to that additional (cake),--he buries it in a mole-hill <span
id="fr_991"></span>[3](#fn_987), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. III, 57 b),
'This is thy share, O Rudra! the mole is thy animal (victim).' He thus
assigns to him the mole as the only animal <span
id="fr_992"></span>[4](#fn_988), and he (Rudra) does not therefore
injure any other animal. Then as to why he buries (the cake): concealed,
indeed, are embryos, and concealed also is what is buried,--that is why
he buries it. By this (offering) he delivers from the power of Rudra
those descendants of his, that are not yet born.

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:11">2:6:2:11</span></span>11.
Thereupon they return (to the fire) and mutter (Vâ*g*. S. III, 58, 59),
'We have satisfied the claims of Rudra, satisfied the divine Tryambaka,
that he may make us richer, that he may make us more prosperous, that he
may render us steady in our purpose.--Thou (O Rudra) art a remedy for
the cow, a remedy for the horse, a remedy for man; a blessing for the
ram and the ewe.' This is the prayer for blessing at this performance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:12">2:6:2:12</span></span>12.
They then walk thrice round the altar not sun-wise, beating their left
thighs (with the right hand), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. III, 60 a), 'We
worship Tryambaka, the fragrant increaser of prosperity. Even as a gourd
(is severed) from its stem, so may I be severed from death, not from
immortality!' This is the prayer for blessing at this performance:
thereby they invoke a blessing (upon the Sacrificer), for verily blessed
is he who shall be severed from death, not from immortality. That is why
he says, 'May I be severed from death, not from immortality.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:13">2:6:2:13</span></span>13. Let
the maidens then also walk round, thinking, 'May we enjoy prosperity!'
That sister of Rudra, named Ambikâ, indeed is the dispenser of
happiness: hence the maidens also should walk round, thinking, 'May we
enjoy prosperity!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:14">2:6:2:14</span></span>14. The
text (prescribed) for them is (Vâ*g*. S. III, 60 b), 'We worship
Tryambaka, the fragrant bestower of husbands. Even as a gourd (is
severed) from its stem, so may I be severed from this. (world), not from
thence (yonder world)!' By saying 'from this,' she means to say 'from my
relatives;' and by saying 'not from thence,' she means to say 'not from
husbands.' Husbands, doubtless, are the support of woman: hence she says
'not from thence.'

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:15">2:6:2:15</span></span>15.
Then they (the Sacrificer and priests) again walk round thrice sunwise,
beating their right thighs, with the same text. As to why they again
walk round thrice sunwise,--they think, 'Sunwise this sacred work of
ours shall be accomplished,' and therefore they again walk thrice round
sunwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:16">2:6:2:16</span></span>16. The
Sacrificer now takes those (remains of the cakes) into his joined palms
and throws them upwards higher than a cow can reach <span
id="fr_993"></span>[1](#fn_989). Thereby they cut out his (Rudra's)
darts from their bodies. If they fail to catch them <span
id="fr_994"></span>[2](#fn_990), they touch (those that have fallen to
the ground). Thereby they make them medicine, and hence, if they fail to
catch them, they touch them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:17">2:6:2:17</span></span>17.
Having then packed them into two net-work baskets and tied them to the
two ends of either a bamboo staff or the beam of a balance, he steps

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

aside towards the north; and if he meets with a tree or a stake or a
bamboo or an ant-hill, he fastens them thereon, with the text (Vâ*g*. S.
III, 61), 'These, O Rudra, are thy provisions; therewith depart beyond
the Mû*g*avats!'--(supplied) with provisions people indeed set out on a
journey: hence he thereby dismisses him supplied with provisions
whithersoever he is bound. Now in this case his journey is beyond the
Mû*g*avats: hence he says, 'Depart beyond the Mû*g*avats!'--'with thy
bow unstrung and muffled up--,' whereby he means to say, 'Depart
propitious, not injuring us <span id="fr_995"></span>[1](#fn_991);'
'Clad in a skin,'--whereby he lulls him to sleep <span
id="fr_996"></span>[2](#fn_992); for while sleeping he injures no one:
hence he says, 'Clad in a skin.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:18">2:6:2:18</span></span>18.
They then turn to the right about, and return (to the uttaravedi)
without looking back. Having returned thither, they touch water; for
they have been performing a ceremony relating to Rudra <span
id="fr_997"></span>[3](#fn_993), and water is (a means of) purification:
with water, that (means of) purification, they accordingly purify
themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:6:2:19">2:6:2:19</span></span>19.
Thereupon he shaves his hair and beard, and takes up the fire (of the
uttaravedi),--for only after changing his place (to the ordinary
sacrificial ground) he performs the (Full-moon) sacrifice on that fire,
since it is not proper that he should perform the

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Agnihotra on the
uttaravedi: for this reason he changes his place. Having gone to the
house, and 'churned out' the fires <span
id="fr_998"></span>[1](sbe1262.htm#fn_994), he performs the Full-moon
offering. The Seasonal offerings, doubtless, are detached sacrifices;
whereas the Full-moon offering is a regular, established sacrifice:
hence he finally establishes himself by means of that regular sacrifice,
and therefore changes his place (to the ordinary sacrificial ground).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_982"></span>[438:1](sbe1261.htm#fr_986) This refers to the
so-called prâ*n*adâna, or 'bestowal of life <span id="page_439">p.
439</span> (or soul),' that is, the anointing of the sacrificial dishes
with ghee, previously to their being placed on the altar. The anointing
takes place with the text (Vâ*g*. S. ed. p. 35), 'That life (or soul,
prâ*n*a) of thine which has entered into the cattle, and becomes
diffused through the various forms of the gods,--endowed with (that)
life (âtmanvân)--for thou art laden with ghee--go to Agni, O Soma! and
obtain bliss (svar) for the Sacrificer!' Katy. II, 8, 14. At the new and
full-moon sacrifice, this ceremony is not even alluded to in our
Brâhma*n*a, either in this or the Kâ*n*va recension. See I, 3, 4, 16.
The Kâ*n*va text reads, 'They may be anointed,' so they say, &c.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[439:1](sbe1261.htm#fr_987) 'He offers on a
cross-road, for such is the halting-place (pa*d*bî*s*a) of the Agnis,'
Taitt. Br. I, 6, 10, 3.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[439:2](sbe1261.htm#fr_988) 'The central
leaflet of the palâ*s*a-leaf is the Brahman,' Kâ*n*va text. The leaf of
the palâ*s*a (Butea Frondosa) consists of three leaflets,--leathery,
above shining and pretty smooth, and below slightly hoary; the central
(or terminal) one being obovate and considerably larger than the lateral
ones (which, according to Roxburgh, Flora Ind., III, p. 244, are from 4
to 6 inches long, and from 3 to 4½ broad). 'Palâ*s*a*s*âkhâyâm yâni
trî*n*i par*n*âni tatra madhyamam par*n*am pra*s*astayâ srugrûpam,' Sây.
on Taitt. S. I, 8, 6.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[440:1](sbe1261.htm#fr_989) He consecrates, by
the usual fivefold lustration, some spot on a cross-way, to the north of
the sacrificial ground, and after laying down the fire-brand taken from
the Dakshi*n*âgni, he offers thereon, using the central leaflet of a
palâ*s*a-leaf as the offering-spoon.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[440:2](sbe1261.htm#fr_990) In Taitt. Br. I, 6,
10, 4, this sister of Rudra is identified with the autumn, wherewith the
god is wont to kill (viz. by means of catarrh, fever, &c., Sây.). See
also Weber, Ind. Stud. I, 183; Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. iv.
p. 321.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[440:3](sbe1261.htm#fr_991) 'Âkhûtkara;'
'âkhukarîsha,' Kâ*n*va text. Possibly a mouse-hole, or the earth thrown
up by a mouse, is meant. See [p. 278](sbe1240.htm#page_278), note
[3](sbe1240.htm#fn_641). Cf. Taitt. Br. I, 6,10, 2: 'N.N. is thy
victim,' thus saying, let him indicate the one he (the Sacrificer)
hates; thereby he delivers over to him (Rudra) the one he hates. If he
hate no one, let him say, 'the mole (mouse) is thy victim.'

<span id="fn_988"></span>[440:4](sbe1261.htm#fr_992) 'Thus he makes over
to him only the mole as victim, and puts it into his mouth,' Kâ*n*va
text.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[442:1](sbe1261.htm#fr_993) 'Yathâ gaur
nodâpnuyât' 'Yâvad gaur nodâpnuyât tâvat,' Kâ*n*va text. Sâya*n*a takes
go to mean 'earth,' and interprets, 'in such a way that the earth does
not obtain it (i.e. that they do not fall to the ground).' Kâty.
prescribes, V, 10, 18, The Sacrificer, with his joined open hands,
throws the Rudra-cakes upwards as high as not to be reachable by a cow
(ago*h*prâpa*n*am); 19, He catches them; 20, If they cannot be (caught),
then touching (of those that have fallen on the ground).

<span id="fn_990"></span>[442:2](sbe1261.htm#fr_994) I adopt (not
without reluctance) Sâya*n*a's interpretation of vilipsanta*h* (=
labdhum a*s*aktâ*h*), which seems to be that of Kâtyâyana also. The St.
Petersburg Dict. takes it in the sense of (if they are) desirous of
distributing them.' Taitt. Br. I, 6, 10, 5 has merely utkiranti bhagasya
lîpsante,' 'they throw (them) up, (whereby) they desire to obtain
prosperity.' Âpastamba, as quoted by Sây. on Taitt. S. I, 8, 6,
says,--Having thrown up the cakes and caught them again (pratilabhya),
and having, with 'We worship Tryambaka,' put them into the Sacrificer's
joined palms; and having taken them up separately (? apâdâya), with (or
thinking) 'We desire to obtain you of (? from) Bhaga;' let them put them
together (samâvapeyu*h*) thrice in this way.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[443:1](sbe1261.htm#fr_995) In the Vâ*g*.
Sa*m*hitâ this forms part of the text, but it is clearly a gloss taken
from the Brâhma*n*a. The Kâ*n*va recension of the Brâhma*n*a has
'--pinâkâvasa ity ahi*m*san na*h* *s*iva*h* *s*ânto ’tîhîty evaitad
âha,' which has likewise found its way into the Sa*m*hitâ of that
school. On the Mû*g*avats, see Muir, Orig. Sanskrit Texts, vol. ii. p.
352.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[443:2](sbe1261.htm#fr_996) According to Kâty.
V, 10, 22, he mutters the word 'skin-clad' while steadying the two
baskets.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[443:3](sbe1261.htm#fr_997) See [p.
2](sbe1203.htm#page_2), note [2](sbe1203.htm#fn_84).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 6, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe1262)
