[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1210.md) 
[Next](sbe1212.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5">1:2:5</span></span>

### FIFTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:1">1:2:5:1</span></span>1. The
gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati, were
contending for superiority. Then the gods were worsted, and the Asuras
thought: 'To us alone assuredly belongs this world!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:2">1:2:5:2</span></span>2. They
thereupon said: 'Well then, let us divide this world between us; and
having divided it, let us subsist thereon!' They accordingly set about
dividing it with ox-hides from west to east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:3">1:2:5:3</span></span>3. The
gods then heard of this, and said: 'The Asuras are actually dividing
this earth: come, let us go to where the Asuras are dividing it. For
what would become of us, if we were to get no share in it?' Placing
Vish*n*u, (in the shape of) this very sacrifice, at their head, they
went (to the Asuras).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:4">1:2:5:4</span></span>4. They
then said: 'Let us share in this earth along with yourselves! Let a part
of it be ours!' The Asuras replied rather grudgingly: 'As much as this
Vish*n*u lies upon, and no more, we give you!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:5">1:2:5:5</span></span>5. Now
Vish*n*u was a dwarf <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192.md). The gods,
however,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

were not offended at this, but said: 'Much indeed they gave us, who gave
us what is equal in size to the sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:6">1:2:5:6</span></span>6. Having
then laid him down eastwards, they enclosed him on all (three) sides
with the metres, saying (Vâ*g*. S. I, 27), on the south side, 'With the
Gâyatrî metre I enclose thee!' on the west side: 'With the Trish*t*ubh
metre I enclose thee!' on the north side: 'With the *G*agatî metre I
enclose thee <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193.md)!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:7">1:2:5:7</span></span>7. Having
thus enclosed him on all (three) sides, and having placed Agni (the
fire) on the east side, they went on worshipping and toiling with it (or
him, i.e. Vish*n*u, the sacrifice). By it they obtained (sam-vid) this
entire earth; and because they obtained by it this entire (earth),
therefore it (the sacrificial ground) is called vedi (the altar). For
this reason they say, 'As great as the altar is, so great is the earth;'
for by it (the altar) they obtained this entire (earth). And, verily, he
who so understands this, wrests likewise this entire (earth) from his
rivals, excludes his rivals from sharing in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:8">1:2:5:8</span></span>8.
Thereupon this Vish*n*u became tired; but being enclosed on all (three)
sides by the metres, with the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

fire on the east, there was no (means of) escaping: he then hid himself
among the roots of plants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:9">1:2:5:9</span></span>9. The
gods said: 'What has become of Vish*n*u? What has become of the
sacrifice?' They said: 'On all (three) sides he is enclosed by the
metres, with Agni to the east, there is no (way of) escaping: search for
him in this very place!' By slightly digging they accordingly searched
for him. They discovered him at a depth of three inches (or thumb's
breadths): therefore the altar should be three inches deep; and
therefore also Pâ*ñk*i <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194.md) made the
altar for the Soma-sacrifice three inches deep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:10">1:2:5:10</span></span>10.
This, however, one must not do. Among the roots of the plants he
(Vish*n*u) hid himself: therefore let him (the Adhvaryu) bid (the
Âgnîdhra) to cut out the roots of the plants. And since they found
(anu-vid) Vish*n*u in that place, therefore it is called vedi (altar).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:11">1:2:5:11</span></span>11.
When they had found him, they enclosed him with a second enclosure,
saying (Vâ*g*. S. I, 27), 'Of good soil art thou, and auspicious art
thou!' on the south side; for when they had thus obtained this earth
they made it of good soil and auspicious;--'Pleasant art thou, and soft
to sit upon!' they said on the west side, for when they had thus
obtained this earth, they made it pleasant and soft to sit
upon;--'Abounding in food and drink art thou!' they said on the north
side, for when they had thus obtained this earth, they made it abounding
in food and drink.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:12">1:2:5:12</span></span>12.
Threefold <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195.md) he draws round the first
line of enclosure, threefold the second: hence sixfold (the two); for
six seasons there are in the year, and the year, as Pra*g*âpati (Lord of
Creation), is the sacrifice <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_196.md). As
large as the sacrifice, as wide as its extent is, so wide does he
thereby enclose it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:13">1:2:5:13</span></span>13.
With six sacred words <span id="fr_197"></span>[3](#fn_197.md) he draws
around the first line of enclosure, with six the second: thus (together)
twelvefold, for twelve no doubt are the months of the year; and the
year, as Pra*g*âpati, is the sacrifice. As large as the sacrifice, as
wide as its extent is, so wide does he thereby enclose it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:14">1:2:5:14</span></span>14.
'Let it (the altar) measure a fathom <span
id="fr_198"></span>[4](#fn_198.md) across on the west side,' they say:
that, namely, is the size of a man, and it (the altar) should be of
(the) man's size. 'Three cubits long (should be) the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "easterly
line <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199.md)," for threefold is the
sacrifice,' (so they say, but) in this there is no (fixed) measure: let
him make it as long as he thinks fit in his own mind!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:15">1:2:5:15</span></span>15. The
two shoulders (of the altar) he carries along both sides of the
(Âhavanîya) fire. For the altar (vedi, fem.) is female and the fire
(agni, masc.) is male; and the woman lies embracing the man: thereby a
copulation productive of offspring is obtained. For this reason he
carries the two shoulders (of the altar) along both sides of the fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:16">1:2:5:16</span></span>16. It
(the altar) should be broader on the west side, contracted in the
middle, and broad again on the east side; for thus shaped they praise a
woman: 'broad about the hips, somewhat narrower between the shoulders,
and contracted in the middle (or, about the waist).' Thereby he makes it
(the altar) pleasing to the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:17">1:2:5:17</span></span>17. It
should be sloping towards east, for the east is the quarter of the gods;
and also sloping towards north, for the north is the quarter of men. To
the south side he sweeps the rubbish (loose soil), for that is the
quarter of the deceased ancestors. If it (the altar) were sloping
towards south, the sacrificer would speedily go to yonder world; and
thus (by making the altar in the prescribed way) the sacrificer lives
for a long time: for this reason he sweeps the loose soil to the south
side. Let

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

him then cover it (the altar) over with (fresh) rubbish: for rubbish
means cattle, and well-stocked with cattle he thereby makes it <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:18">1:2:5:18</span></span>18. He
(the Âgnîdhra) smooths it down (from east to west). The gods, namely,
when they were preparing for the contest, said to one another: 'Come,
let us remove to the moon for safety what imperishable place of worship
there is on this earth; so that if the Asuras, on vanquishing us, should
drive us away from here, we may afterwards, by praising and mortifying,
prevail again!' They accordingly removed to the moon what imperishable
place of worship there was on this earth. That now is the black (spots)
in the moon: hence they say, 'In the moon is the place of worship for
this earth.' It is in this place of worship also that his sacrifice is
performed: for that reason he smooths (the altar) down <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:19">1:2:5:19</span></span>19. He
smooths it down, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 28): 'Before the bloody
(battle) with its rushings hither and thither <span
id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_202.md), O mighty one!' the bloody one no doubt
is the battle, for in battle

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

bloody deeds are done, and slain lie man and horse; and before that
battle they removed it (the altar to the moon); therefore he says,
'Before the bloody (battle) with its rushings hither and thither, O
mighty one!'--'lifting up the life-bestowing earth,' for after lifting
up what was living on this earth, they removed it to the moon; therefore
he says, 'lifting  up the life-bestowing earth; which they raised to the
moon by prayers,' 'which they placed in the moon by worship,' he thereby
says,--'that (earth) the wise still point out and worship,' to that they
accordingly address their worship; and the offering of him also who so
understands this, is performed in that place of worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:20">1:2:5:20</span></span>20. He
now says (to the Âgnîdhra; Vâ*g*. S. I, 28), 'Put the sprinkling-water
down (on the altar)!' That thunderbolt, the wooden sword, and the priest
(brâhma*n*a) have hitherto defended that sacrifice. Now the water also
is a thunderbolt: that thunderbolt he thereby lays down for its defence.
While the sprinkling-water is being held close above the wooden sword,
he takes up the latter. If he were to set the sprinkling-water down,
while the wooden sword is still lying, the two thunderbolts would come
into collision with each other; but in this way the two thunderbolts do
not come into collision with each other: for that reason he takes up the
wooden sword, while the sprinkling-water is being held close above it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:21">1:2:5:21</span></span>21. He
pronounces this (entire) speech:--'Put the sprinkling-water down (on the
altar)! put fuel and barhis (sacrificial grass) beside it! wipe the
ladles! gird the (sacrificer's) wife! come hither with the clarified
butter!' This is a direction (given to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the Âgnîdhra); he (the Adhvaryu) may pronounce it, if he choose; or, if
he so choose, he may omit it: for he (the Âgnîdhra) himself knows that
this work has now to be done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:22">1:2:5:22</span></span>22. He
then flings the wooden sword northwards (on the heap of rubbish). If he
wishes to exorcise <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203), (he does so.md),
with the text, 'I fling thee as a thunderbolt for so and so!' and as a
thunderbolt the wooden sword accordingly strikes down (the enemy).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:23">1:2:5:23</span></span>23. He
then washes his hands <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204.md); for what
there was bloody (or injured) on it (the altar) that he thereby removes
from it: that is why he washes his hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:24">1:2:5:24</span></span>24. Now
those who made offerings in former times, touched (the altar and
oblations) at this particular time, while they were sacrificing. They
became more sinful. Those who washed (their hands) became righteous.
Then unbelief took hold of men: 'Those who sacrifice become more sinful,
and those who sacrifice not become righteous,' they said. No sacrificial
food then came to the gods from this world: for the gods subsist on what
is offered up from this world <span id="fr_205"></span>[3](#fn_205.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:25">1:2:5:25</span></span>25. The
gods thereupon said to B*ri*haspati Âṅgirasa, 'Verily, unbelief has come
upon men; ordain thou the sacrifice to them!' B*ri*haspati Âṅgirasa then
went and said, 'How comes it that you do not sacrifice?' They replied,
'From a desire for what

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

should we sacrifice, since those who sacrifice become more sinful, and
those who sacrifice not become righteous?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:5:26">1:2:5:26</span></span>26.
B*ri*haspati Âṅgirasa then said, 'What we have heard of as
produced <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_206.md) for the gods that is this
sacrifice, that is to say, the cooked oblations and the prepared altar;
therewith you have performed while touching: that is why you have become
more sinful. Sacrifice therefore without touching, for thus you will
become righteous!' 'How long?' they asked. 'Till the spreading of the
sacrificial grass (on the altar),' he said. By the sacrificial grass,
namely, it (the altar) becomes appeased. If, therefore, before the
spreading of the sacrificial grass anything were to fall on it, let him
only remove it at the time when he spreads the sacrificial grass; for
when they spread the sacrificial grass, then they also step on it with
the foot. He who knowing this sacrifices without touching, becomes
indeed righteous: let him therefore sacrifice, without touching (the
altar and oblations).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[59:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_192.md) This legend is given
in Muir's Original Sanskrit Texts, IV, p. 122, where it is pointed out
that we have here the germ of the Dwarf Incarnation of Vish*n*u; and in
A. Kuhn's treatise, 'Ueber Entwickelungsstufen der Mythenbildung,' p.
128, where the following remarks are made on the story: 'Here also we
meet with the same struggle between light and darkness: the gods of
light are vanquished and obtain from the Asuras, who divide the earth
between themselves, only as much room as is covered by Vish*n*u, who
measures the atmosphere with his three steps. He represents (though I
cannot prove it in this place) the sun-light, which, on shrinking into
dwarf's size in the evening, is the only means of preservation that is
left to the gods, who cover him with metres, i.e. with sacred hymns
(probably in order to defend him from the powers of darkness), and in
the end kindle Agni in the east--the dawn--and thereby once more obtain
possession of the earth.' Compare also the corresponding legend in
Taitt. Br. III, 2, 9, 7, <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> where the gods
are granted by the Asuras as much as they can enclose; and by the Vasus
being placed in the south, the Rudras in the west, the Âdityas in the
north, and Agni in the east, they obtain the whole of the earth.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[60:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_193.md) In the actual
performance of the sacrifice this represents the pûrva-parigraha, or
first enclosing of the altar by a single line being drawn with the
wooden sword on each of the three sides (viz. S.W. to S.E.; S.W. to
N.W.; N.W. to N.E.) whilst muttering the respective texts. Before doing
so he has, however, to ask and receive the permission of the Brahman,
mutatis mutandis, in the usual way (cf. p. 7 note): the same forms have
to be gone through at the marking of the second and third enclosures.
Katy. II, 6, 25 seq. On the ritualistic application of the metres, see
note on I, 3, 2, 9.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[61:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_194.md) This teacher is
mentioned again, *S*at. Br. II, 1, 4, 27, along with two others, viz.
Âsuri and Mâdhuki, but nothing further is known of him. According to the
Black Ya*g*us the altar is made four (not three) aṅgulas deep.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[62:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_195.md) Viz. each enclosing
line consists of three divisions corresponding to the three sides (S.,
W., N.) of the altar.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[62:2](sbe1211.htm#fr_196.md) Pra*g*âpati (Lord of
Creation) is here, as elsewhere, identified with the year (probably as
the representative of the eternal process of regeneration) and
consequently with the annual cycle of sacrificial performance, or the
sacrifice itself. Cf. *S*at. Br. I, 5, 2, 16; X, 4, 3, 1.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[62:3](sbe1211.htm#fr_197.md) According to
Sâya*n*a, because each of the three mantras, 'gâyatre*n*a
(traish*t*ubhena, *g*âgatena resp.) tvâ *kh*andasâ pari g*ri*h*n*âmi,'
consists of two parts, the first ending with tvâ, the second with
g*ri*h*n*âmi, which makes together six. Similarly with the second triad
of mantras. In the former case the Taittirîya text (Taitt. S. I, 1, 9,
3), 'The Vasus may enclose thee with the Gâyatrî metre, the Rudras with
the Trish*t*ubh metre, the Âdityas with the *G*agatî metre!' would
furnish a more natural explanation of the six sacred words.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[62:4](sbe1211.htm#fr_198.md) Vyâma, the space
between the extreme ends of the outstretched arms. It is doubtful
whether it is here intended for a fixed measure, or whether it is a
relative one, depending on the size of the respective sacrificer. The
size of a man was supposed to be equal to the extent of his outstretched
arms.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[63:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_199.md) I.e. a line drawn
from the middle of the western side through the centre of the altar to
the Âhavanîya fire. The same line prolongated from the western side of
the altar westwards to the Gârhapatya would measure eight (eleven or
twelve) steps (prakrama or vikrama, of two feet or pada each) from fire
to fire. See I, 7, 3, 23-25.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[64:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_200.md) Purîsha, rubbish;
'sandy or gravel-like soil,' Sây. on Taitt. Br. III, 2, 9, 12; purîsha
also means 'fæces, manure,' in which sense it is probably taken
symbolically for 'cattle.' The Taitt. Br. better: 'well supplied with
cattle he thereby makes him (the sacrificer).'

<span id="fn_201"></span>[64:2](sbe1211.htm#fr_201.md) ? By stroking along
the altar he shifts it to the moon.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[64:3](sbe1211.htm#fr_202.md) The interpretation
of purâ krûrasya vis*ri*pa*h* here given by the author, and also by
Mahîdhara on Vâ*g*. S. I, 28, is more than doubtful. Sâya*n*a on Taitt.
S. I, 1, 9 is probably more correct in taking purâ vis*ri*pa*h* (abl. or
gerund) krûrasya to mean 'before the sneaking away of the cruel enemy
(Araru, lying fettered on the heap of rubbish)'--he supplies: 'thou, O
altar, containest merely the divine oblations, but since his removal
thou containest everything.' Cf. also Weber, Ind. Streifen, II, p. 463.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[66:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_203.md) Otherwise he uses
the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 28): 'A killer of the enemy art thou!' Kâty. II,
6, 42.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[66:2](sbe1211.htm#fr_204.md) He does so (on the
utkara) and then lays down the wooden sword west of the pra*n*îtâ water.
Kâty. II, 6, 43.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[66:3](sbe1211.htm#fr_205.md) Men, on the other
hand, subsist on what is bestowed on them from yonder world. Taitt. S.
III, 2, 9, 7; Taitt. Br. II, 2, 7, 3.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[67:1](sbe1211.htm#fr_206.md) Parishûtam, which
Sâya*n*a interprets by parig*ri*hîtam, 'hedged round' \[? 'set apart'\].
The Kâ*n*va MS. reads parishutam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 1. Third Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe1212.md)
