[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1238) 
[Next](sbe1240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:1">1:9:3:1</span></span>1. The
sacrifice being now complete, he (the Adhvaryu) walks round (the fire)
to the south, and pours out a vessel (of water); for thus it is (poured
out) towards north: therefore he pours it out after walking round to the
south, He who sacrifices, doubtless, sacrifices with a desire that he
also may obtain a place in the world of the gods. That sacrifice of his
then goes forth towards the world of the gods: after it follows the fee
which he gives (to the priests), and holding on to the priests' fee
(follows) the sacrificer.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:2">1:9:3:2</span></span>2. That
same path leads either to the gods or to the fathers <span
id="fr_625"></span>[1](#fn_621). On both sides two flames are ever
burning: they scorch him who deserves to be scorched, and allow him to
pass who deserves to pass <span id="fr_626"></span>[2](#fn_622). Now,
water is (a means of) lustration: hence he thereby lustrates that path.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:3">1:9:3:3</span></span>3. A full
(vessel) he pours out, because full means all: hence he thereby
lustrates that (path) by means of the All. He pours it out continuously,
uninterruptedly: hence he thereby lustrates that (path) in a continuous,
uninterrupted manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:4">1:9:3:4</span></span>4. And
again why he pours out a vessel (of water) is: where anything is done
wrongly at the sacrifice, there they tear or wound it; and--water being
(a means of) lustration--he lustrates it by that (means of) lustration,
water; he heals it with water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:5">1:9:3:5</span></span>5. A full
(vessel) he pours out, because full means all: hence he thereby heals it
by means of the All. Continuously, uninterruptedly he pours it out:
hence he thereby heals it in a continuous (lasting), uninterrupted
manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:6">1:9:3:6</span></span>6. He
(the sacrificer) intercepts it with his open hands held together, while
reciting the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 24),

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'We have united
with lustre, with vigour, with the bodies <span
id="fr_627"></span>[1](#fn_623), with the happy spirit. May Tvash*tri*,
the dispenser of boons, grant us riches, and make even what was injured
in our body!' What was torn, that he thereby heals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:7">1:9:3:7</span></span>7. He
then touches his face (with the water in his hands). The reason why he
thus touches his face is twofold: water means ambrosia, and with
ambrosia he accordingly touches himself; also he thereby transfers to
himself that sacred work (the sacrifice): for these reasons he touches
his face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:8">1:9:3:8</span></span>8. He now
strides the (three) Vish*n*u-strides. He who sacrifices assuredly
gratifies the gods. In gratifying the gods by that sacrifice--partly by
ri*k*s, partly by ya*g*us, partly by oblations--he acquires a share
among them; and having acquired a share among them, he goes to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:9">1:9:3:9</span></span>9. And
again why he strides the Vish*n*u-strides, is; Vish*n*u, truly, is the
sacrifice, by striding (vi-kram) he obtained for the gods that
all-pervading power (vikrânti) which now belongs to them. By his first
step he gained this same (earth), by the second this aërial expanse, and
by his last (step) the sky. And this same pervading power Vish*n*u, as
the sacrifice, obtains by his strides for him (the sacrificer): for this
reason he strides

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

the Vish*n*u-strides. Now it is indeed from this (earth) that most
(beings) go (upwards).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:10">1:9:3:10</span></span>10.
Hence (he strides thrice) with the texts (Vâ*g*. S. II, 25 a-c), 'On the
earth Vish*n*u strode by means of the gâyatrî metre: excluded therefrom
is he who hates us, and whom we hate!' 'In the air Vish*n*u strode by
means of the trish*t*ubh metre: excluded therefrom is he who hates us,
and whom we hate!' 'In the sky Vish*n*u strode by means of the *g*agatî
metre: excluded therefrom is he who hates us, and whom we hate!' When
one has thus ascended these worlds, that is the goal, that the safe
refuge: the rays of him (the sun) who burns there, are the righteous
(departed) <span id="fr_628"></span>[1](#fn_624); and what highest light
there is <span id="fr_629"></span>[2](#fn_625), that is Pra*g*âpati or
the heavenly world. Having then in this way ascended these worlds, he
reaches that goal, that safe refuge. Now he who wishes to give
instructions from hence, should come hitherwards from above. Twofold is
the reason why he should come hitherwards from above:

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:11">1:9:3:11</span></span>11. By
(or, from) the escape (of the enemies) <span
id="fr_630"></span>[3](#fn_626) indeed the conquering gods formerly
gained first the sky, and then this aërial expanse; and thereupon

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

they drove their enemies away from this (earth), whence there was no
escape. And in like manner he (the priest) also by the escape (of the
enemies) gains first the sky, and then this aërial expanse; and
thereupon he drives his enemies away from this (earth), whence there is
no escape. This earth indeed is a firm footing: hence he thereby stands
firm on this firm footing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:12">1:9:3:12</span></span>12. And
in this way also (he may stride) <span id="fr_631"></span>[1](#fn_627):
'In the sky Vish*n*u strode by means of the *g*agatî metre: excluded
therefrom is he who hates us, and whom we hate!' 'In the air Vish*n*u
strode by means of the trish*t*ubh metre: excluded therefrom is he who
hates us, and whom we hate!' 'On the earth Vish*n*u strode by means of
*th*e gâyatrî metre: excluded therefrom is he who hates us, and whom we
hate!'--With the texts (Vâ*g*. S. II, 25 d, e), '(Excluded) from this
food! from this resort!' (pratish*th*â, he looks down upon his portion
and the altar respectively.) For on this (earth) all this food is safely
established (pratish*th*ita): for this reason he says, 'From this food!
from this resort!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:13">1:9:3:13</span></span>13. He
then looks towards the east. The east, indeed, is the region of the
gods: for this reason he looks towards the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:14">1:9:3:14</span></span>14. He
looks, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 25 f), 'We have gone to the realm of
light (svar).' The

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

realm of light assuredly means the gods: hence he thereby says, 'We have
gone to the gods.'--With (ib. g), 'We have united with splendour' (he
looks on the Âhavanîya fire): he thereby says, 'We have united with the
gods.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:15">1:9:3:15</span></span>15. He
then looks up to the sun, for that is the final goal, that the safe
resort. To that final goal, to that resort he thereby goes: for this
reason he looks up to the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:16">1:9:3:16</span></span>16. He
looks up, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 26 a), 'Self-existent art thou,
the best ray of light!' The sun is indeed the best ray of light <span
id="fr_632"></span>[1](#fn_628), and therefore he says, 'Self-existent
art thou, the best ray of light.' '"Light-bestowing art thou: give me
light (var*k*as)!" so say I,' said Yâ*gñ*avalkya, 'for at this indeed
the Brâhma*n*a should strive, that he be brahmavar*k*asin (illumed by
the brahma, or sacred writ).' Aupoditeya <span
id="fr_633"></span>[2](#fn_629), on the other hand, said, 'He indeed
will give me cows <span id="fr_634"></span>[3](#fn_630): (therefore I
say), "Cow-giving art thou, give me cows!"' Thus whatever wish he (the
sacrificer) entertains (and expresses), that wish is granted to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:17">1:9:3:17</span></span>17. He
then turns (from left to right), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 26 b), 'I
move along the course of

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

the sun;' having reached that final goal, that safe resort, he now moves
along the course of that (sun) <span id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_631).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:18">1:9:3:18</span></span>18.
Thereupon he steps to (upa-sthâ) the Gârhapatya fire. Twofold is the
reason why he steps to the Gârhapatya: the Gârhapatya is a house, and a
house is a safe resort, hence he thereby stays in a house, that is, in a
safe resort. And, besides, what full measure of human life there is for
him here, that he thereby attains (upa-sthâ). This is why he steps to
the Gârhapatya fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:19">1:9:3:19</span></span>19. He
steps to it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 27 a), 'O householder Agni,
may I become a good householder through thee, O Agni, the householder!
Mayest thou, O Agni, become a good householder through me, the
householder!' there is nothing in this requiring explanation.--'May our
household matters be unlike a cart with only one bullock,' he thereby
says, 'may our household matters be free from calamities;'--'for a
hundred winters!' he thereby says, 'may I live a hundred years.' He need
not, however, say this; for man lives even longer than a hundred years:
hence he need not say this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:20">1:9:3:20</span></span>20. He
then turns (from left to right), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 27 b), 'I
move along the course of the sun:' having reached that final goal, that
safe resort, he now moves along the course of that (sun).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:21">1:9:3:21</span></span>21. Now
(in pronouncing the following text) he

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

inserts his son's name: 'May this son (N.N.) carry on this manly deed of
mine <span id="fr_636"></span>[1](#fn_632)!' Should he have no son, let
him insert his own name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:22">1:9:3:22</span></span>22. He
then steps up to the Âhavanîya fire. Silently he steps to it, thinking,
'In the east my sacrifice shall be completed!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:3:23">1:9:3:23</span></span>23.
Thereupon he divests himself of the vow, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 28
b), 'Now am I he that I really am.' For, in entering upon the vow, he
becomes, as it were, non-human; and as it would not be becoming for him
to say, 'I enter from truth into untruth;' and as, in fact, he now again
becomes man, let him therefore divest himself of the vow, with the text,
'Now am I he that I really am <span id="fr_637"></span>[2](#fn_633).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_621"></span>[267:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_625) Cf. Mahâbh. XII,
525, 'Two paths are known, one leading to the gods, and one leading to
the fathers; and ib. XIII, 1082, That sun is said to be the gate of the
paths leading to the gods; and that moon is said to be the gate of the
paths leading to the fathers.' See also *Kh*and. Up. V, 3. In *S*at. Br.
VI, 6, 2, 4 the gate of the heavenly world is said to be situated in the
northeast; whilst that of the world of the fathers, according to XIII,
8, 1, 5, lies in the south-east. Cf. Kaushît. Up. I, 2 seq. (Max Müller,
Up. I, p. 274), 'Verily, the moon is the door of the heavenly world,'
&c.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[267:2](sbe1239.htm#fr_626) According to
Harisvâmin, they scorch him who has not fulfilled his duties, and allow
him to pass who has done so.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[268:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_627) That is, with the
departed persons, the fathers; or, more probably, with new bodies (?),
cf. the funereal hymns, Rig-veda X, 14-18; especially X, 35, 14; 16, 5;
14, 8. Perhaps, however, it would be better to construe, 'by (our)
bodies we have united with lustre and vigour; by (our) mind with bliss.'
In IV, 6, 1, 1 it is said, that the sacrificer is born in the next world
with his entire body; similarly XI, 1, 8, 6; XII, 8, 3, 31. For further
quotations regarding the views on future existence, see A. Weber, Ind.
Streifen, I, p. 20 seq.; J. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V, p. 314
seq.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[269:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_628) In VI, 5, 4, 8 we
shall meet with the statement, that 'the stars (nakshatra) are the
lights of righteous men who go to the heavenly world.' In the same
passage, however (as in others), the nakshatras (lunar mansions) are
represented as divine female beings (with unclipped wings; cf. Vâ*g*. S.
XI, 61), with whom, in IX, 4, 1, 9, the moon is said to live together,
as the Gandharvas with the Apsaras.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[269:2](sbe1239.htm#fr_629) See par. 16 with
note. The Kâ*n*va text reads, 'yat param bhâti.'

<span id="fn_626"></span>[269:3](sbe1239.htm#fr_630) Apasara*n*ata*h*;
i.e. by allowing the enemies to escape, viz.; first from the sky to the
air, and then from the air to the earth. It also, however, has the
meaning of 'from escape;' that is, the gods drove the enemies to the
earth, whence there was no escape for them.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[270:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_631) The sacrificer in
making the strides of Vish*n*u, may begin either with the stride on
earth or with that in the sky (Kâty. III, 8, 11, 12). He begins from the
southern hip (or south-west corner) of the altar, and makes three
strides eastward with his right foot in front, reciting one formula with
each stride, along the south side of the altar up to the Âhavanîya fire.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[271:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_632) Seven rays of the
sun are mentioned, Rig-veda I, 105, 9; II, 5, 2;
[Ath](errata.htm#7)-veda VII, 107, 1. Mahîdhara remarks that four of
them lie in, or point to, the four quarters; one pointing upwards and
another downwards; and the seventh, and best, being the disc of the sun
itself, called Hira*n*yagarbha. This apparently is the param bhâs, or
most excellent light, which in par. 10 is identified with Pra*g*âpati,
or the heavenly world.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[271:2](sbe1239.htm#fr_633) That is, Tumi*ñg*a
Aupoditeya Vaiyâghrapadya, as the Kâ*n*va text reads; cf. Taitt. S. I,
7, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[271:3](sbe1239.htm#fr_634) The heavenly rays
of light are regarded as the heavenly cows,. Naigh. I, 5; Nir. II, 6.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[272:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_635) When he has
executed the pradakshi*n*a movement, he has to repeat the movement in
the opposite direction, in accordance with the general rule, Katy. I, 8,
24. The same applies to par. 20. On the sun-wise circumambulation, with
and without fire, see [p. 37](sbe1207.htm#page_37) note, [p.
45](sbe1208.htm#page_45) note; also Martin, Western Isles, pp. 16-20,
85, 97, 116-119, 241, 277; Forbes Leslie, Early Races of Scotland,
index, s.v. deisiol.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[273:1](sbe1239.htm#fr_636) The Mâdhyandina
text of the Vâ*g*. S. does not give this formula. The Kâ*n*va text of
the Sa*m*hitâ has the following (Weber's edition, p. 59), 'Woven art
thou, a web art thou: weave me along (? extend my life) at this
sacrifice, at this holy deed, in this food, in this world!' 'May my son
weave on (continue) this work, this manly deed of mine!' Thus also Kâty.
III, 8, 25. The Kâ*n*va text of the Brâhma*n*a, however, mentions only
the formula given above. According to Laugâkshi he names his favourite
son; according to *S*âṅkhâyana, his eldest son, or as many sons as he
has. See comm. on Kâty. IV, 12, II.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[273:2](sbe1239.htm#fr_637) See I, 1, 1, 6. For
another mode of divesting oneself of the vow, see I, 1, 1, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 1. First Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe1240)
