[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc08)  [Next](osc10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (6) GOOD FRIDAY: Hot Cross Buns.

Every Good Friday morning the baker does a brisk business in hot cross
buns, probably with little interest in the origin of the custom, his eye
being rather upon the number sold and the accruing profits. There are
three points to be considered: they are the three words
themselves--buns, cross, and hot. The last mentioned seems to be a mark
of modern taste and haste, for in past centuries they were "cross buns"
pure and simple. To eat them piping hot out of the oven is an innovation
of comparatively recent date. The sign of the Cross is easily accounted
for, seeing it was part and parcel of the ritual of Roman Catholic
worship.

In a curious and rare book, entitled The Canterburian's Self-Conviction
(1640), in the Scottish dialect, no place or printer's name to assist
identification, is this passage: "They avow that signing with the signe
of the Cross at rysing or lying downe, at going out or coming in, at
lighting of candles, closing of windowes, or any such action, is not
only a pious and profitable ceremonie, but a very apostolick tradition."

Pennant, in his Welsh MS., says: "At the delivery of the bread and wine
at the Sacrament, several, before they receive the bread or cup, though
held out to them, will flourish a little with their thumb, something
like making the figure of the Cross. They do it (the women mostly) when
they say their prayers on their first coming to church."

Dalrymple, in his Travels in Spain, says that there "not a woman gets
into a coach to go a hundred yards, nor a postilion on his horse,
without crossing themselves. Even the tops of tavern bills and the
directions of letters are marked with Crosses."

Among the Irish, when a woman milks her cow, she dips her fingers into
the milk, with which she crosses the beast, and piously ejaculates a
prayer, saying, "Mary and our Lord preserve thee, until I come to thee
again."

But the origin of "buns" presents a little more difficulty. Hutchinson,
in his History of Northumberland, following Mr Bryant's Antient
Mythology, derives the Good Friday Bun from the sacred Cakes which were
offered at the Arkite Temples, styled Boun, and presented every seventh
day.

Mr Bryant has also the following passage on this subject:--"The
offerings which people in ancient times used to present to the Gods were
generally purchased at the entrance of the Temple; especially every
species of consecrated bread, which was denominated accordingly. One
species of sacred bread which used to be offered to the Gods, was of
great antiquity, and called Boun. The Greeks, who changed the Nu final
into a Sigma, expressed it in the nominative Bous, but in the accusative
more truly Boun. Hesychius speaks of the Boun, and describes it a kind
of cake with a representation of two horns. Julius Pollux mentions it
after the same manner, a sort of cake with horns. Diogenes Laertius,
speaking of the same offering being made by Empedocles, describes the
chief ingredients of which it was composed. 'He offered one of the
sacred Liba, called a Bouse, which was made of fine flour and honey.' It
is said of Cecrops that he first offered up this sort of sweet bread.
Hence we may judge of the antiquity of the custom from the times to
which Cecrops is referred. The prophet Jeremiah takes notice of this
kind of offering when he is spealing of the Jewish women at Pathros, in
Egypt, and of their base idolatry; in all which their husbands had
encouraged them. The women, in their expostulation upon his rebuke, tell
him: 'Did we make her cakes to worship her?' Jerem. xliv. 18, 19; vii.
18. "Small loaves of bread," Mr Hutchinson observes, "peculiar in their
form, being long and sharp at both ends, are called Buns." These he
derives as above, and concludes: "We only retain the name and form of
the Boun, the sacred uses are no more."

It would appear, therefore, as if we have to thank some Pagan custom for
this Good Friday habit of eating hot cross buns, a custom which, like
many others, was taken over by the Church and Christianised. In these
days the religious significance has been completely lost, and the cross
bun is no longer emblematical of a crucified God. It is an
ecclesiastical remainder which has become a social habit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (7) Good Friday Loaves](osc10.md)
