[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc05)  [Next](osc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (3) SIMNEL SUNDAY.

The fourth Sunday in Lent is in most Lancashire towns called Simnel
Sunday, and Simnel cakes--ornamental and rich cakes like those made at
'Xmas time--are eaten. A writer in The Gentleman's Magazine (1867)
informs us that "from time beyond memory thousands of persons come from
all parts to that town (Bury) to eat Simnels. Formerly, nearly every
shop was open, with all the public-houses, quite in defiance of the law
respecting the closing during 'service'; but of late years, through the
improved state of public opinion, the disorderly scenes to which the
custom gave rise have been partially amended. Efforts have been made to
put a stop to the practice altogether, but in vain." This was forty
years ago, and the trade in Bury "Simnels," owing to quick and cheap
transit, has practically put an end to the local celebrations. The
origin of the word Simnel is in doubt. In Wright's Vocabularies it
appears thus: "Hic arlaecopus=symnelle." This form was in use during the
fifteenth century. In the Dictionarius of John de Garlande, completed in
Paris in the thirteenth century, it appears
thus:--"Simeneus=placentae=simnels." Such cakes were stamped with the
figure of Christ or of the Virgin. We can only conclude that as
cakes--witness the shewbread of the Hebrews--have always occupied an
important place in early forms of worship, there was a successful effort
in the north to localise a Christianised form of celebration; for the
mixture of joviality and religious austerity which characterised Simnel
Sunday in past centuries is in keeping with the same display on other
occasions in countries further south.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (4) Maunday Thursday (Or Shere Thursday)](osc07)
