[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc11)  [Next](osc13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (9) EASTER HOLIDAYS.

By the law concerning holidays made in the time of King Alfred the
Great, it was appointed that the week after Easter should be kept holy.
From this we might safely presume on the true intention of the Church,
namely a time of rejoicing in the spiritual sense. But in the long run
rejoicing tends to assume one form, i.e. social festivity. Belithus
tells us it was customary in some churches for the Bishops and
Archbishops themselves to play with the inferior clergy at hand ball,
and this, as Durand asserts, even on Easter Day itself. The Roman Church
certainly erected a standard on Easter Day in token of Christ's victory,
but it would perhaps be indulging fancy too far to suppose that Bishops
and governors of churches who used to play at hand ball at this season,
did it in a mystical way and with reference to the triumphal joy of this
season. With nations in the state of civilisation in which Europe was
found in the early centuries it is not to be wondered at that an
ecclesiastical fact, intended to be celebrated festively, should assume
the outward expression of an agricultural feast with all the boisterous
freedom of a pagan festival. For instance there was the custom of
lifting or heaving at Easter, a custom which took a long time to kill,
and one where it is possible to trace stages of development from seeming
improprieties to respectability. In the Northern counties, as will be
seen, there was a roughness which is absent in the same custom in London
and the South. A writer in The Gentleman's Magazine (1784) says:--

"Lifting was originally designed to represent our Saviour's
resurrection. The men lift the women on Easter Monday, and the women the
men on Tuesday. One or more take hold of each leg, and one or more of
each arm near the body, and lift the person up, in a horizontal
position, three times. It is a rude, indecent, and dangerous diversion,
practised chiefly by the lower class of people. Our magistrates
constantly prohibit it by the bellman, but it subsists at the end of the
town; and the women have of late years converted it into a money job. I
believe it is chiefly confined to these Northern counties."

The following extract is from the Public Advertiser for Friday, April
13th, 1787:--

"The custom of rolling down Greenwich-hill at Easter is a relique of old
City manners, but peculiar to the metropolis. Old as the custom has
been, the counties of Shropshire, Cheshire, and Lancashire boast one of
equal antiquity, which they call Heaving, and perform with the following
ceremonies, on the Monday and Tuesday in the Easter week. On the first
day, a party of men go with a chair into every house to which they get
admission, force every female to be seated in their vehicle, and lift
them up three times, with loud huzzas. For this they claim the reward of
a chaste salute, which those who are too coy to submit to may get
exempted from by a fine of one shilling, and receive a written
testimony, which secures them from a repetition of the ceremony for that
day. On the Tuesday the women claim the same privilege, and pursue their
business in the same manner, with this addition--that they guard every
avenue to the town, and stop every passenger, pedestrian, equestrian or
vehicular."

That it was not entirely confined, however, to the Northern counties,
may be gathered from the following letter, which Mr Brand received from
a correspondent of great respectability in 1799:--

"Dear Sir--Having been a witness lately to the exercise of what appeared
to me a very curious custom at Shrewsbury, I take the liberty of
mentioning it to you, in the hope that amongst your researches you may
be able to give some account of the ground or origin of it. I was
sitting alone last Easter Tuesday at breakfast at the Talbot in
Shrewsbury, when I was surprised by the entrance of all the female
servants of the house handing in an arm chair, lined with white, and
decorated with ribbons and favours of different colours. I asked them
what they wanted? Their answer was, they came to heave me. It was the
custom of the place on that morning; and they hoped I would take a seat
in their chair. It was impossible not to comply with a request very
modestly made, and to a set of nymphs in their best apparel, and several
of them under twenty. I wished to see all the ceremony, and seated
myself accordingly. The group then lifted me from the ground, turned the
chair about, and I had the felicity of a salute from each. I told them I
supposed there was a fee due upon the occasion, and was answered in the
affirmative; and, having satisfied the damsels in this respect, they
withdrew to heave others. At this time I had never heard of such a
custom; but on inquiry, I found that on Easter Monday, between nine and
twelve, the men heave the women in the same manner as on the Tuesday,
between the same hours, the women heave the men. I will not offer any
conjecture on the ground of the custom, because I have nothing like data
to go upon; but if you should happen to have heard anything satisfactory
respecting it, I should be highly gratified by your mentioning it. I
have the honour to be, with much respect, Sir,  
Your obedient and faithful servant,  
THO. LOGGAN.  
Basinghall Street,  
May 7, 1799."

But lifting was only one of the sports of old Eastertide. There were
games on land and water, and much eating and drinking, indeed it was a
season not kept holy but devoted entirely to merriment. Such are the
origins of our own Easter vacations, when for a short spell we visit the
seaside and prepare for the work of an arduous summer. To some people
the absence of picturesque usage and ceremony is an irreparable loss; to
others the absence of vulgar customs and general horse play is a
testimony to the advance of civilisation. Certainly it is a pity to lose
the picturesque, but on the whole there is more gain than loss in the
sober and sombre Easter vacation of to-day as compared with the
rollicking past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (10) Biddenden Cakes](osc13.md)
