[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc16)  [Next](osc18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (14) BAAL FIRE--ST. JOHN'S EVE.

Readers of the Old Testament are well acquainted with the condemnation
passed upon the worship of Baal, but some of them may be surprised to
know that there is a custom in Northumberland of lighting Baal fires on
St. John's Eve, which is a relic of ancient Baal worship. The identity
between the celebration of the pagan rite of old and of the modern
remainder is too obvious to be doubted. The ancients passed their
children through the fire, and the villagers at Whalton used to jump
over and through the flames. Moreover, as will be seen from the
historical references to be given shortly, there is further ground
provided for establishing a genuine fire worship. Of the Whalton custom
a modern writer says:--" As midsummer approaches, much wood is marked
out for the bonfire, sometimes with the consent of local farmers. When
this has been cut, it is brought into the village with a certain amount
of formality. On the evening of the 4th July a cart is borrowed and
loaded with branches of faggots, some of the men get into the shafts,
more are hooked on by means of long ropes, and then, with a good deal of
shouting and horn blowing, the lumbersome vehicle is run down into the
village." The same site for the fire is chosen year after year, and it
has never been changed. The village turns out en masse to see the
bonfire built. The children join hands and dance round the stack of wood
and branches until they are tired; youths and maidens also dance a
little distance away.

At dark a cry is raised: "Light her!" Soon the whole village is
illuminated by a huge blaze, and the Baal fire is at its height. No
ceremony follows, but tradition says people used to jump over the fire
and through it, a tradition which is well founded, for we have strong
evidence of such practices in Scotland and Ireland.

In Sir John Sinclair's Statistical Account of Scotland (1794), the
minister of Callander, in Perthshire, speaking of "Peculiar Customs,"
says:--"The people of this district have two customs, which are fast
wearing out, not only here but all over the Highlands, and therefore
ought to be taken notice of while they remain. Upon the first day of
May, which is called Beltan or Bal-tein-day, all the boys in a township
or hamlet meet in the moors. They cut a table in the green sod, of a
round figure, by casting a trench in the ground of such circumference as
to hold the whole company. They kindle a fire, and dress a repast of
eggs and milk in the consistence of a custard. They knead a cake of
oatmeal, which is toasted at the embers against a stone. After the
custard is eaten up, they divide the cake into so many portions, as
similar as possible to one another in size and shape, as there are
persons in the company. They daub one of these portions all over with
charcoal until it be perfectly black. They put all the bits of the cake
into a bonnet. Every one, blindfold, draws out a portion. He who holds
the bonnet is entitled to the last bit. Whoever draws the black bit is
the devoted person who is to be sacrificed to Baal, whose favour they
moan to implore, in rendering the year productive of the sustenance of
man and beast. There is little doubt of these inhuman sacrifices having
been once offered in this country as well as in the East, although they
now pass from the act of sacrificing, and only compel the devoted person
to leap three times through the flames; with which the ceremonies of
this festival are closed."

In the same work, the minister of Logierait, in Perthshire, says:--"On
the 1st of May, O. S., a festival called Beltan is annually held here.
It is chiefly celebrated by the cowherds, who assemble by scores in the
fields to dress a dinner for themselves of boiled milk and eggs. These
dishes they eat with a sort of cakes baked for the occasion, and having
small lumps, in the form of nipples, raised all over the surface. The
cake might, perhaps, be an offering to some deity in the days of
Druidism."

Pennant's account in his Tour in Scotland (1771) of this rural sacrifice
is more minute. He tells us that, on the 1st of May, in the Highlands of
Scotland, the herdsmen of every village hold their Bel-tein.

"They cut a square trench in the ground, leaving the turf in the middle;
on that they make a fire of wood, on which they dress a large caudle of
eggs, butter, oatmeal, and milk, and bring, besides the ingredients of
the caudle, plenty of beer and whisky; for each of the company must
contribute something. The rites begin with spilling some of the caudle
on the ground, by way of libation; on that, every one takes a cake of
oatmeal, upon which are raised nine square knobs, each dedicated to some
particular being, the supposed preserver of their flocks and herds, or
to some particular animal, the real destroyer of them. Each person then
turns his face to the fire, breaks off a knob, and, flinging it over his
shoulders, says: 'This I give to thee, preserve thou my horses;' 'This
to thee, preserve thou my sheep;' and so on. After that they use the
same ceremony to the noxious animals. 'This I give to thee, O fox! spare
thou my lambs;' 'this to thee, O hooded crow;' 'this to thee, eagle!'
When the ceremony is over, they dine on the caudle; and after the feast
is finished, what is left is hid by two persons deputed for that
purpose; but on the next Sunday they reassemble and finish the reliques
of the first entertainment." "That the Caledonians paid a superstitious
respect to the sun, as was the practice among other nations, is
evident," says Ellis, "not only by the sacrifice at Baltein but upon
many other occasions. When a Highlander goes to bathe, or to drink
waters out of a consecrated fountain, he must always approach by going
round the place from east to west on the south side in imitation of the
apparent diurnal motion of the sun. This is called in Gaelic going round
the right or the lucky way. And if a person's meat or drink were to
affect the wind-pipe, or come against his breath, they instantly cry out
disheal, which is an ejaculation praying that it may go the right way."

The Baal worship is even more pronounced in Irish history. In The Survey
of the South of Ireland we read something similar to what has already
been quoted in a note from The Statistical Account of Scotland. "The
sun" (says the writer) "was propitiated here by sacrifices of fire: one
was on the 1st of May, for a blessing on the seed sown. The 1st of May
is called in Irish language La Beal-tine, that is, the day of Beal's
fire. Vossius says it is well known that Apollo was called Belinus, and
for this he quotes Herodian, and an inscription at Aquileia, Apollini
Beline. The Gods of Tyre were Baal, Ashtaroth, and all the Host of
Heaven, as we learn from the frequent rebukes given to the backsliding
Jews for following after Sidonian idols; and the Phenician Baal, or
Baalam, like the Irish Beal, or Bealin, denotes the sun, as Ashtaroth
does the moon."

In another place the same author says:--"It is not strange that many
Druid remains should still exist; but it is a little extraordinary that
some of their customs should still be practised. They annually renew the
sacrifices that used to be offered to Apollo, without knowing it. On
Midsummer's Eve, every eminence, near which is a habitation, blazes with
Bonfires--and round these they carry numerous torches, shouting and
dancing, which affords a beautiful sight, and at the same time confirms
the observation of Scaliger:--'En Irelande ils sont quasi tous papistes,
mais c'est Papauté meslee de Paganisme, comme partout.' Though
historians had not given us the mythology of the pagan Irish, and though
they had not told us expressly that they worshipped Beal, or Bealin, and
that this Beal was the Sun and their chief God, it might nevertheless be
investigated from this custom, which the lapse of so many centuries has
not been able to wear away. . . I have, however, heard it lamented that
the alteration of the style had spoiled these exhibitions; for the Roman
Catholics light their Fires by the new style, as the correction
originated from a pope; and for that very same reason the Protestants
adhere to the old."

I find the following, much to our purpose, in The Gentleman's Magazine
for February 1795:--"The Irish have ever been worshippers of Fire and of
Baal, and are so to this day. This is owing to the Roman Catholics, who
have artfully yielded to the superstitions of the natives, in order to
gain and keep up an establishment, grafting Christianity upon Pagan
rites. The chief festival in honour of the Sun and Fire is upon the 21st
of June, when the sun arrives at the summer solstice, or rather begins
its retrogade motion. I was so fortunate in the summer of 1782 as to
have my curiosity gratified by a sight of this ceremony to a very great
extent of country. At the house where I was entertained, it was told me
that we should see at midnight the most singular sight in Ireland, which
was the lighting of Fires in honour of the Sun. Accordingly, exactly at
midnight, the Fires began to appear; and taking the advantage of going
up to the leads of the house, which had a widely extended view, I saw on
a radius of thirty miles, all around, the Fires burning on every
eminence which the country afforded. I had a farther satisfaction in
learning, from undoubted authority, that the people danced round the
Fires, and at the close went through these fires, and made their sons
and daughters, together with their cattle, pass through the Fire; and
the whole was conducted with religious solemnity." This is at the end of
some Reflections by the late Rev. Donald M'Queen, of Kilmuir, in the
Isle of Skye, on ancient customs preserved in that Island.

The Roman Catholic bishop, Dr Milner, was opposed to the notion of the
Irish having ever been worshippers of Fire and of Baal. In An Inquiry
into certain Vulgar Opinions concerning the Catholic Inhabitants and the
Antiquities of Ireland (Lond. 1808), he tells us that the "modern
hunters after paganism in Ireland think they have discovered another
instance of it (though they derive this neither from the Celtic
Druidesses nor the Roman Vestals, but from the Carthaginians or
Phoenicians) in the fires lighted up in different parts of the country
on the Eve of St. John the Baptist, or Midsummer Day. This they
represent as the idolatrous worship of Baal, the Philistine god of Fire,
and as intended by his pretended Catholic votaries to obtain from him
fertility for the earth. The fact is, these fires, on the eve of the
24th of June, were heretofore as common in England and all over the
Continent as they are now in Ireland, and have as little relation with
the worship of Baal as the bonfires have which blaze on the preceding
4th of June, being the King's birth-day: they are both intended to be
demonstrations of joy. That, however, in honour of Christ's precursor is
particularly appropriate, as alluding to his character of bearing
witness to the light (John vi. 7) and his being himself a bright and
shining light (John v. 35)."

It is only natural that a Christian apologist should take up this
attitude, but the verdict of history is against him; for, in addition to
the testimony from Scotland and Ireland, there is similar testimony from
England to the actual survivals, one of which has already been noticed.

Borlase in his Antiquities of Cornwall tells us:--"Of the fires we
kindle in many parts of England, at some stated times of the year, we
know not certainly the rise, reason, or occasion, but they may probably
be reckoned among the relics of the Druid superstitious Fires. In
Cornwall, the festival Fires, called Bonfires, are kindled on the Eve of
St. John the Baptist and St. Peter's Day; and Midsummer is thence, in
the Cornish tongue, called 'Goluan,' which signifies both light and
rejoicing. At these Fires the Cornish attend with lighted torches,
tarr'd and pitch'd at the end, and make their perambulations round their
Fires, and go from village to village carrying their torches before
them; and this is certainly the remains of the Druid superstition, for
'faces praeferre,' to carry lighted torches, was reckoned a kind of
Gentilism, and as such particularly prohibited by the Gallick Councils:
they were in the eye of the law 'accensores facularum,' and thought to
sacrifice to the devil, and to deserve capital punishment."

Echoes of the ceremony are also found in unexpected quarters:--Every
Englishman has heard of the "Dance round our coal-fire," which receives
illustration from the probably ancient practice of dancing round the
fires in our Inns of Court (and perhaps other halls in great men's
houses). This practice was still in 1733 observed at an entertainment at
the Inner Temple Hall, on Lord Chancellor Talbot's taking leave of the
house, when "the Master of the Revels took the Chancellor by the hand,
and he, Mr Page, who with the Judges, Sergeants, and Benchers, danced
round the Coal Fire, according to the old ceremony, three times; and all
the times the antient song, with music, was sung by a man in a Bar
gown."

In an old collection of Epigrams and Satires this leaping over the
Midsummer fire is mentioned among other pastimes:--

At Shrove-groate, ventor-point or crosse and pile  
At leaping over a Midsummer bone-fier.  
Or at the drawing clear out of the myer.

Leaping over the fires is mentioned among the superstitious rites used
at the Palilia in Ovid's Fasti. The Palilia were feasts instituted in
honour of Pales, the goddess of Shepherds on the Calends of May. But
fire ceremonies are not the property of one nation: they belonged to
all, and to-day in Japan it is possible to see the celebration of
fire-walking. From Japan one may travel to other Continents and see
similar phenomena. As civilisation advances these customs tend to die
down; but there can be no doubt the few remaining fire festivals in this
country are the relics of a very old and superstitious worship, which
our semi-savage forefathers indulged in at a time when the sun and moon
were not items of science, but Gods of a truth. Christianity was
responsible for most of the abolition of these curious practices. For
instance, the Sixth Council of Constantinople, A.D. 680, by its 65th
canon (cited by Prynne in his Histriomastix), has the following
interdiction:--"Those Bonefires that are kindled by certaine people on
New Moones before their shops and houses, over which also they are
ridiculously and foolishly to leape, by a certaine antient custome, we
command them from henceforth to cease. Whoever therefore shall doe any
such thing; if he be a clergyman, let him be deposed; if a layman, let
him be excommunicated; for, in the Fourth Book of the Kings, it is thus
written: 'And Manasseh built an altar to all the hoast of heaven, in the
two courts of the Lord's house, and made his children to pass through
the Fire,' etc."

Prynne--the Puritan stalwart--remarks on this:--"Bonefires therefore had
their originall from this idolatrous custome, as this Generall Councell
hath defined; therefore all Christians should avoid them." And the
Synodus Francica under Pope Zachary, A.D. 742, cited ut supra, inhibits
"those sacrilegious Fires which they call Nedfri (or Bonefires), and all
other observations of the Pagans whatsoever."

A custom that has survived so long in particular places--though few--in
England, occasions the enquiry: How have they prevented the death which
overtook the celebration elsewhere? At Whalton the people are more a
people to themselves than others, because they are removed from train,
tram, and motor bus. By and bye these agents of civilisation will reach
them, and the end will be in sight. A new generation with new ideas will
spring up, and there will be less disposition to gather the faggots and
burn them as the darkness comes down. Finally, Baal fire, even as a
fire, will cease to be, and one more custom will pass into history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (15) Hocktide--or Hoke Day](osc18.md)
