[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc09)  [Next](osc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (7) GOOD FRIDAY LOAVES.

In some parts of the country it used to be thought, probably is still
thought, wise to retain a loaf baked on Good Friday, under the
impression that it acts as a charm and a medicinal cure. A writer in The
Gentleman's Magazine (1867) says on the subject of Suffolk
superstitions:--"Calling at a cottage one day I saw a small loaf hanging
up oddly in a corner of the house. I asked why it was placed there, and
was told it was a Good Friday loaf--a loaf baked on Good Friday; that it
would never grow mouldy (and on inspecting it I certainly found it very
dry) and that it was very serviceable against some diseases, the bloody
flux being mentioned as an example. Some weeks afterwards I called
again, with a friend, at the same house, and drew his attention to the
loaf which was hanging in its accustomed corner. The owner of the house
endeavoured to take the loaf down gently, but failing in the attempt, he
gave a violent pull, and the precious loaf to his dismay was shivered to
atoms; but in the catastrophe gave us further proofs of its
extraordinary dryness. The old man collected the fragments and hung them
up in a paper bag with all the more reverence on account of the good
which the loaf, as he alleged, had done his son. The young man, having
been seized with a slight attack of English cholera in the summer,
secretly 'abscinded' and ate a piece of the loaf, and when his family
expressed astonishment at his rapid recovery, he explained the mystery
by declaring that he had eaten of the Good Friday loaf, and had been
cured by it."

This is a curious instance of a religious festival day being regarded as
able to impart a peculiar consecration to material substances. That the
bread should not become mouldy is easily explained by its position; that
it should cure cholera is just as easily understood, for the cure was
faith-healing--nothing more, nothing less.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (8) Picking Up Sixpences At Smithfield](osc11.md)
