[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc21)  [Next](osc23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (19) ALL FOOLS' DAY.

The unsuspecting City man who, on the point of commencing his day's work
at 10 a.m. on any April 1st, receives a 'phone message from a friend
desiring an immediate interview on important business, gets out at once
for the place of meeting, only to find that the friend knows nothing
about it, and has actually had no occasion to use the 'phone at all up
to that moment. Then the City man remembers the date, and realises that
he has been fooled. It is still early, just 10:30 a.m., and he begins to
take his revenge on other friends, until things may be said to "hum."
But whilst the fun is fast and furious, very few of these practical
jokers can say how the custom of fooling on this day arose; and if one
turns to his handy Encyclopaedia for information, he will read that "it
is of unknown antiquity."

As might be expected, some writers attempt to trace the origin to a
Nature feast--that of the Vernal Equinox--and through Nature to a
starting point in Christian history. Maurice, in his Indian Antiquities
(vol VI., p. 71) speaks of the first of April as the ancient feast of
the Vernal Equinox, equally observed in India and Britain. He goes on to
say that the date was held as a high and general festival, "in which an
unbounded hilarity reigned through every order of its inhabitants; for
the sun at that period of the year, entering into the sign Aries, the
New Year, and with it the season of rural sports and vernal delight, was
then supposed to have commenced. The proof of the great antiquity of the
observance of this annual festival, as well as the probability of its
original establishment in an Asiatic region, arises from the evidence of
facts afforded us by astronomy. Although the reformation of the year by
the Julian and Gregorian Calendars, and the adaptation of the period of
its commencement to a different and far nobler system of theology, have
occasioned the festival sports, anciently celebrated in this country on
the first of April, to have long since ceased; and although the changes
occasioned, during a long lapse of years, by the shifting of the
Equinoctional points, have in Asia itself been productive of important
astronomical alterations, as to exact aera of the commencement of the
year; yet, on both Continents, some very remarkable traits of the
jocundity which then reigned, remain even to these distant times. Of
those preserved in Britain, none of the least remarkable or ludicrous is
that relic of its pristine pleasantry, the general practice of making
April-Fools, as it is called, on the first day of that month; but this,
Colonel Pearce (Asiastic Researches, vol. 11., p. 334) proves to have
been an immemorial custom among the Hindoos, at a celebrated festival
holden about the same period in India, which is called the Huli
Festival. 'During the Huli, when mirth and festivity reign among the
Hindoos of every class, one subject of diversion is to send people on
errands and expeditions that are to end in disappointment, and raise a
laugh at the expense of the person sent. The Huli is always in March,
and the last day is the general holiday. I have never yet heard any
account of the origin of this English custom; but it is unquestionably
very ancient, and is still kept up even in great towns, though less in
them than in the country. With us, it is chiefly confined to the lower
class of people; but in India high and low join in it; and the late
Suraja Doulah, I am told, was very fond of making Huli Fools, though he
was a Mussulman of the highest rank. They carry the joke here so far as
to send letters making appointments, in the names of persons who it is
known must be absent from their houses at the time fixed upon; and the
laugh is always in proportion to the trouble given.' The least inquiry
into the ancient customs of Persia, or the minutest acquaintance with
the general astronomical mythology of Asia, would have told Colonel
Pearce that the boundless hilarity and jocund sports prevalent on the
first day of April in England, and during the Huli Festival of India,
have their origin in the ancient practice of celebrating with festival
rites the period of the Vernal Equinox, or the day when the new year of
Persia anciently began."

Thus it would appear that All Fools' Day is not a British or even a
continental monopoly, for the French "Poisson d'Avril" owes its
existence to the same cause as our own. But why "All" Fools' Day? "All"
is said by some authorities to be a corruption of "auld," i.e. old,
mention being found in the Romish calendar of a "Feast of Old Fools."
(Auldborough, in Yorkshire, now Aldborough, is always pronounced
Allborough.) But this feast was held on January 1st, and although
removals of feasts were not unknown in the crowded state of the Roman
calendar, the theory that the ancient Druids were the old fools, whom
the new Christians taunted and set apart for a day of "mafficking," is
hardly tenable. The Christian interpretation is given by Bellingen in
his Etymology of French Proverbs. The word "poisson" in the phrase
"poisson d'Avril" is his starting point.

"Poisson," he contends, is corrupted through the ignorance of the people
from "Passion"--and length of time has almost totally defaced the
original intention, which was as follows: that as the Passion of our
Saviour took place about this time of the year, and as the Jews sent
Christ backwards and forwards to mock and torment him, i.e. from Annas
to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and from
Herod back again to Pilate, this ridiculous or rather impious custom
took its rise from thence, by which we send about from one place to
another such persons as we think proper objects of our ridicule.

This is rather too ingenious to be convincing. The most natural
suggestion was made by Dr. Pegge, Rector of Whittington, in The
Gentleman's Magazine for April, 1766. After discussing the theories
previously outlined, he says:--"Now, thirdly, to account for it; the
name undoubtedly arose from the custom, and this, I think, arose from
hence: our year formerly began, as to some purposes and in some
respects, on the 25th of March, which was supposed to be the Incarnation
of our Lord; and it is certain that the commencement of the new year, at
whatever time that was supposed to be, was always esteemed an high
festival, and that both amongst the antient Romans and with us. Now
great festivals were usually attended with an Octave (see Gentleman's
Magazine, 1762, p. 568), that is, they were wont to continue eight days,
whereof the first and last were the principal; and you will find the 1st
of April is the octave of the 25th of March, and the close or ending,
consequently, of that feast, which was both the Festival of the
Annunciation and of the New Year. From hence, as I take it, it became a
day of extraordinary mirth and festivity, especially amongst the lower
sorts, who are apt to pervert and make a bad use of institutions which
at first might be very laudable in themselves."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (20) Lichfield Greenhill Bower](osc23.md)
