[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc27)  [Next](osc29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (25) WROTH MONEY.

Brand does not appear to have noticed this interesting custom, and for
the following paragraphs I am indebted to Sir Benjamin Stone's Pictures
of National Life and History, with notes by Michael McDonagh. Speaking
of the ceremony at Knightlow Cross, he says:--"A tribute which dates
back for 1,000 years, and connects the present with that remote past,
when the central counties of England were for the most part a wild and
uncultivated chase, is rendered on Knightlow Hill, near Dunchurch,
Warwickshire, on the early morn of St. Martin's Day. Known as 'wroth
money,' it is paid to the Duke of Buccleuch, as an acknowledgment of
certain concessions made by his ancestors on pain of a forfeit for every
penny of 20S. or 'a white bull with red nose and red ears.' Before dawn
on St. Martin's Day, representatives of the townships which owe tribute,
as well as crowds of spectators, wend their way to Knightlow Hill from
all points of the compass. There on the summit, and close to the
Holyhead Road, they gather round the base of an old cross. The Duke's
agent then reads out the name of the parishes and hamlets which are
called upon to make payments, whereupon the persons responsible for such
dues drop their coins into the hollow of a large stone. In all there are
25 places which have to pay wroth money, the amount ranging from 1d. to
2s. 3-½d. The whole amount due (only 9s. 4d.) is usually collected,
though within recent years there have been defaulters on several
occasions. Once during the last century the prescribed penalty for
nonpayment was enforced. When the collection is completed and the Duke's
agent has checked the names on the list, the company adjourn to the
village inn, which by its sign, the 'Dun Cow,' helps to perpetuate the
legend of the slaying of the gigantic dun cow by Guy, Earl of Warwick.
Here breakfast is served at the Duke's expense to those who have made
payment, and subsequently the whole company, long churchwarden pipes in
hand, drink his grace's health in tumblers of rum and milk. . . . In an
ancient charter preserved in Broughton House, Northamptonshire--a
charter which has only once been challenged, and having then (in 1685)
been confirmed, has since remained undisputed--wroth money is merely
declared to be a legal tribute for ancient privileges, the nature of
those privileges not being defined."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (26) Christmas](osc29)
