[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc36)  [Next](osc38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (5) MAY MARRIAGES.

It is accounted unlucky to be married in May. We seem to have got the
superstition from the Romans. Ovid says in his Fasti, lib v.:--

"Nec vidum taedis eadem, nec virginis apta  
Tempora. Quae nupsit, non diuturna fuit.  
Hac quoque de causa (si te proverbia tangunt),  
Mense malas Maio nubere vulgas ait."

But there is evidence of heresy during the long centuries of British
history, and specified dates in May are quoted as good for marriages.

In the Roman Calendar, so often quoted, several days are marked as unfit
for marriages: "Nuptiae non fiunt," ie. "Feb. 11, June 2, Nov. 2, Dec.
1." On the 16th of September, it is noted, "Tobiae sacrum. Nuptiarum
Ceremoniae a Nuptiis deductae, videlicet de Ense, de Pisce, de Pompa, et
de Pedibus lavandis." On the 24th of January, the Vigil of St Paul's
Day, there is this singular restriction, "Viri cum Uxoribus non cubant."

In a most curious old Almanac for the year 1559, "by Lewes Vaughan, made
for the merydian of Gloucestre," are noted as follow: "The tymes of
Weddinges when it begynneth and endeth." "Jan. 14, Weding begin. Jan.
21, Weddinge goeth out. April 3, Wedding be. April 29, Wedding goeth
out. May 22, Wedding begin." And in another Almanac for 1655, by Andrew
Waterman, mariner, we have pointed out to us, in the last page, the
following days as "good to marry, or contract a wife (for then women
will be fond and loving), viz., January 2, 4, 11, 19, and 21. Feb. 1, 3,
10, 19, 21. M arch 3, 5, 12, 20, 23. April 2, 4, 12, 20, and 22. May, 2,
4, 12, 20, 23. June 1, 3, 11, 19, 21. July 1, 3, 12, 19, 21, 31. August
2, 11, 18, 20, 30. Sept. 1, 9, 16, 18. 28. Oct. 1, 8, 15, 17, 27, 29.
Nov. 5, 11, 13, 22, 25. Dec. 1, 8, 10, 19, 23, 29."

It is to be feared, however, that British women will not listen to the
counsels of Mr Waterman. They have decided that May is a bad month to
marry in, and they will not forego their opinions. Of course, the
superstition itself is sheer nonsense; there is not an atom of evidence
to prove that it is different from any other month as being malevolent
towards matrimony. The one reason why the superstition has held its
course almost unbroken is that women would abstain from marriage eleven
months out of the twelve if tradition said the eleven were ill-starred.
I have never met a man who did not smile at the notion. But once set a
train of superstitious thought agoing as to fate and fortune in
marriage, and women will accept it whole-heartedly. Perhaps the number
of unhappy marriages is a silent factor in the game.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (6) Throwing The Shoe](osc38.md)
