[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc41)  [Next](osc43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIVINATION AND OMENS

### (1) DREAMS.

George du Maurier, in his Peter Ibbetson, has given one of the best
descriptions extant of the life of dreams. He says the whole cosmos is
in a man's brains, so much at least as a man's brains will hold. And
when sleep relaxes the will, and there are no earthly surroundings to
distract attention--no duty, pain, or pleasure to compel it--riderless
fancy takes the bit in his teeth, and the whole cosmos goes mad, and has
its wild will of us. There are the "ineffable false joys"--how well we
know them; "the unspeakable false terror and distress"--we know them,
too; and they chase each other without rhyme or reason, and play hide
and seek across the twilit field, and through the dark recesses of our
clouded and imperfect consciousness. No wonder that early man, with
sufficient intelligence to remember his dreams, and ponder over them
fearfully, was, in his ignorance, persuaded they conveyed serious
messages to him, messages in which the more clever men of the group saw
an opening for personal ascendancy by devising a system of
interpretation, and thus assuming a position of importance and
leadership in the tribe. That dreams should occupy so prominent a
position in divination is not at all surprising. Dream life--indeed
sleep life altogether--is still an unsolved problem, and when the
coincidences of events as between dreaming and waking are taken into
account, it is most natural that primitive man and civilised man should
try to turn dreams into a science, and formulate a skilful list of
interpretations. Besides, in all Christian countries there is a solid
reason for accepting information conveyed in dreams, inasmuch as the
sacred narratives in the Bible allege Divine guidance by this means. We
may, of course, have our own interpretation of such phenomena, but the
wide stretch of centuries covered by these facts is not without
significance, showing as it does the strong and tenacious grip which
dream interpretation had upon the race. From Jacob's dream to that of
Pilate's wife is a far cry, and yet both Jew and Pagan agreed in the
real importance of the dream as a guide to life and conduct.

But a distinction was made between the various kinds of dreams, or
rather the better type of mind attempted to make such a distinction,
though seldom with success. In the Christian and Pagan worlds no notice
was taken of the wild, incoherent, purposeless dream, except by a class
of low magicians who sought money by exploiting the fears of the
fearful. Nevertheless, if one kind of dream came from God, or the gods,
where did the others come from? Here was an opportunity for the sharks
of occultism, and for the charlatan generally. The dream-book and the
diviner came into being, and they have never yielded to pressure from
civil or military authorities. You cannot stamp out a superstition which
has its basis in the operations of sleep, over which men and women have
practically no control. Only a right understanding of the subject can
rob the superstitious of their fears and the credulous of their
credulity. To forbid dreaming by Act of Parliament would be a
nonsensical procedure; and yet it is just as absurd to attempt to keep
people from wondering what is the meaning of their dreams.

If we look carefully for the origin of dream superstition, we shall find
one source in the Pagan tradition of the importance of dreams in
conjunction with the high place given to them in the Bible; another
source is the long and historical list of remarkable coincidences; and a
third source is the somewhat humiliating fact that we do not yet know
the nature of dreams and sleep.

Take the last point first. Here is a brief account of some experiments
regarding the brain and the mysteries of sleep recently made by
Professor Wenley of Michigan University, who declares authoritatively
that the investigations have destroyed many accepted theories. The
accepted theory of sleep has been the lessening of the blood-pressure in
the brain.

The experiments showed directly opposite conditions. By delicate and
most careful measurements, the following results were tabulated:--

'The size or volume of the brain increases when the individual goes to
sleep, and decreases when he awakens. On this point it was noted that in
some cases the brain became smaller at first, and then increased as the
sleep became deeper. Very striking was the evidence that the size of the
arterial pulse in the brain increases steadily with the increase in the
volume--i.e., that the dilating of the arteries after each beat of the
heart is more pronounced. This is particularly true when the subject is
propped up. As the sleep passes off, the brain volume decreases, but
then the blood-pressure increases. These results show that whatever
sleep may be caused by, it is not a lessening of the blood-supply to the
brain, for there is no such lessening.'

What kind of consciousness, therefore, is dream consciousness? The
question remains unanswered.

What impresses most of us in regard to dreams is that, although the
fearful experience of the after effects of a lobster salad supper is
classified as a dream, there are sober, more sensible, realistic dreams
which appear to convey information in reference to the future. Are these
messages from extraneous intelligences, or just the chance successes of
dreaming moments? It is not easy to say. Unless the reader has had such
a dream, he is inclined to be sceptical as to its existence. This
scepticism is hardly justified when one considers the mass of evidence
submitted by people who have no object in stating untruths.

And even when 25 per cent. is deducted for exaggeration, or faulty
memory, there is a residue which chance can hardly account for, without
straining the facts of psychology. I propose to reproduce a few cases,
making a commencement by recording the dream of a British Consul, as
contained in Hutchinson's Dreams and Their Meanings:--

"Mr Haggard of the British Consulate, Trieste, Austria, gives the
following account of a premonitory dream and its fulfilment:--

'21st September, 1893.

'A few months ago I had an extraordinary vivid dream, and waking up
repeated it to my wife at once. All I dreamt actually occurred about six
weeks afterwards. There seems to have been no purpose in the dream, and
one cannot help thinking what was the good of it. I dreamt that I was
asked to dinner by the German Consul General, and, accepting, was
ushered into a large room with trophies of East African arms on shields
against the walls. (I have myself been a good deal in East Africa.)
After dinner I went to inspect the arms, and amongst them saw a
beautifully gold-mounted sword which I pointed out to the French
Vice-Consul, who at that moment joined me, as having probably been a
present from the Sultan of Zanzibar to my host, the German Consul
General. At that moment the Russian Consul came up, too. He pointed out
how small was the hilt of the sword, and how impossible in consequence
it would be for a European to use the weapon; and whilst talking, he
waved his arm in an excited manner over his head, as if he were wielding
the sword, and to illustrate what he was saying. At that moment I woke
up, and marvelled so at the vividness of my dream that I woke my wife
up, too, and told it to her. About six weeks afterwards my wife and
myself were asked to dine with the German Consul General; and the dream
had long been forgotten by us both. We were shown into a large
withdrawing-room, which I had never been in before, but which somehow
seemed familiar to me. Against the walls were some beautiful trophies of
East African arms, among which was a gold-hilted sword, a gift from the
Sultan of Zanzibar. To make a long story short, everything happened
exactly as I had dreamt.' In a long letter Mrs Haggard confirms her
husband's narrative."

Before attempting an interpretation of this occurrence, I should like to
bring to the reader's notice Mr Greenwood's theory of mental duality. He
says:--

"It is easy to imagine the mind of man dual--its faculties supplied in a
double set. Duality seems to be a common law in nature. The brain, which
is the mind machine, is itself a dual organ; and nearly all the
difficulty of understanding dreams would disappear if we could believe
that our mental faculties are duplex, and that, though the two sets work
together, inseparably and indistinguishably, while we live our natural
lives in the waking world, they are capable of working apart, the one
under the observation of the other, more or less, when all are out of
harness by the suspension of the senses in sleep." In remarking on this
passage Mr H. G. Hutchinson says:--"We give an instance of this kind of
dream, which appears to us to be only thoroughly accounted for by the
theory of dual personality. The lady who was the dreamer lives in
Kensington, and had an office in which she carried on a business in
Knightsbridge, the office being about two miles from her house:--'On the
night of--I dreamt very distinctly that I saw a crowd, and I heard a
voice saying, 'She is quite dead, I've cut her throat. I've cut her
throat.' I was very frightened, as it impressed me as being so real. I
awoke and noted the time, 4 A.M. The next morning at breakfast I told my
family, including my cousin, Miss M. D. When I arrived at my place of
business, I saw a crowd outside the next door house, and found on
enquiry that a man had murdered his wife by cutting her throat about 4
A.M. in this house. (Signed) A. W. W.'

'My cousin told me her dream at breakfast on and I remember hearing in
the evening that a murder had taken place in the house next door to my
cousin's office in the early morning.  
(Signed.) M. D.'

"Miss A. W. W. was worried about her business at the time; does it not
seem a simple explanation that her dual personality was haunting her
office at the time, and saw the commotion when the police discovered the
crime, and thus conveyed the impression to her sleeping brain?"

I am afraid this dual theory is pressed too far and asked to account for
too much. In our dreams we are the same Egos as in our waking moments;
and we see the same people we know in daily life, and recognise them;
proving that there is an exercise of the same memory centres as in
conscious life. The direction in which we are likely to find the truth
is telepathy, although how even that, as yet, undemonstrated science can
see into the future (as in the consul's dream), passes our
comprehension. Nevertheless, if sleep itself is still a problem minus a
solution, it need not disturb our equanimity to have a few unsolved
items in the world of dreams. The subject is only referred to here as an
explanation of the tenacity of dream superstitions; for if we knew why
we dream of wheat one night, and falling down a precipice the next, we
might reasonably expect an enlightened world to treat their dreams
humorously--not seriously as too often is their wont.

Dreams are still believed in by a vast number of people as conveying
warnings, or news about the events of the future. They do not accept the
superstition openly, but secretly: they divine their dreams in the
privacy of their rooms with the dream book open before them. One of
these books I propose to examine at some length, because it is popular
in style, detailed in its rules of interpretation, and evidently a good
seller. My copy is marked the third edition: 10,000 copies. I refer of
course, to Raphael's Dream Book. The author starts out with what he
evidently believes is safe ground, namely that dreams are prophetic
because they have a divine significance, as is proved from the
narratives of the Bible. Now it must be admitted that to believers in
the Bible, i.e. the literal truth, of O.T. biographies especially, this
is a fact with considerable weight. If the Deity has guided his people
by dreams in one age, why not in another? The question is not altogether
illogical, and it explains in great measure a man who has had a
remarkable and vivid dream about an event in his own career. But this
point has been dealt with already, and I hasten on to scrutinise
Raphael's method of divination. Here it is:--

### EXAMPLE

Suppose I am desirous of knowing the interpretation of my dream, I
proceed to make at random ten rows of ciphers or noughts. Thus--

 

Sign 1.

|                  |     |             |       |     |
|------------------|-----|-------------|-------|-----|
| oooooooooooo,    | 12  | ciphers, or | even, | oo  |
| ooooooooo,       | 9   | "           | odd,  | o   |
| ooooooooooooooo, | 15  | "           | odd,  | o   |
| oooooo,          | 6   | "           | even, | oo  |
| oooooooooo,      | 10  | "           | even, | oo  |

Sign 2.

|                 |     |             |       |     |
|-----------------|-----|-------------|-------|-----|
| oooooooooooooo, | 14  | ciphers, or | even, | oo  |
| ooooooooooo,    | 11  | "           | odd,  | o   |
| ooooooooooooo,  | 13  | "           | odd,  | o   |
| oooooooooooooo, | 14  | "           | even, | oo  |
| oooooooooooo,   | 12  | "           | even, | oo  |

 

Now I put Signs Nos. 1 and 2 together. Thus--

Index.

|     |     |     |     |          |          |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|----------|----------|-----|
| oo  | oo  | =   | 4   | ciphers, | or even, | oo  |
| o   | o   | =   | 2   | "        | "        | oo  |
| o   | o   | =   | 2   | "        | "        | oo  |
| oo  | oo  | =   | 4   | "        | "        | oo  |
| oo  | oo  | =   | 4   | "        | "        | oo  |

 

Having added the ciphers together, they produce what is called the
Index. With this Index I refer to the Table of Indexes, and find this
Sign

o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o

 

refers to the Hieroglyphical Emblem of Aries. Then I turn to the
Interpretations and find Aries, which is on page 9, and amongst the
Signs I look for those above, viz.,

o o    o o

 o      o

 o      o

o o    o o

o o    o o

 

and the Interpretation of the Dream is--An uncommon omen; cares and
toils are denoted. A harassing time after this dream. Be very careful.

Possibly Raphael thought this method of divining was rather irksome at
times, so he provided a long list of what might be called snap-shot
interpretations, equipped with an alphabetical arrangement to facilitate
reference. A sample page will give the reader an idea of the scheme:--

HARVEST.--To dream of harvest, and that you see the reapers at work, and
hear the shouts of "Harvest home!" is a most favourable dream. You could
not have had a better. It denotes prosperity to the farmer especially,
many customers to the tradesmen, a safe and prosperous voyage to the
mariner, and lucrative bargains to the merchant.

HAT.--To dream you have a new hat, portends success. To dream you lose
your hat, or that it is taken off your head, you have an enemy not far
off who will both openly and secretly seek your injury.

HATE.--To dream you hate a person, denotes you will always have a good
friend in the time of need.

HAWK.--If you dream you see a hawk, it signifies you are going to begin
some new enterprise; if the hawk darts down and takes a chicken, or a
bird, you will succeed; but if the little bird attack the hawk, you will
meet many difficulties and, perhaps, failure.

HAY.--To dream you cut hay, indicates you will have great influence in
society. To dream of raking it, denotes you will be respected by gentry
and nobility.

HEART.--To dream your heart is diseased, denotes you have too much blood
in your system; should you dream you are affected with palpitation or
violent beating of the heart, it denotes great trouble.

HEAT.--To dream of being in a place extremely hot, or if the weather is
so hot that the heat affects you, denotes anger, and that some person is
preparing to attack you, or give you a good scolding.

HEAVEN.--To dream of heaven, denotes a change of worlds, and that the
remnant of your life will be spiritually happy, and your death peaceful.

HEDGES.--To dream of green hedges, is a sign of agreeable circumstances.
If you cannot pass on your way for thorny hedges, it denotes that in
business you will suffer by competitions, and in love by rivals.

HEDGEHOG.--To dream you see one, denotes you will meet an old friend
whom you have not seen for years.

HEIR.--To dream you are an heir to property, signifies you will be left
almost penniless by those of your relations who are wealthy. It is not a
good dream.

HELL.--This dream forebodes bodily and mental agony, arising from
enemies, loss in trade, bereavements, etc.

HEN.--To hear hens cackle in your dream, signifies joy, love.

Of course it is easy to say "bosh," and to declare this interpretation
of dreams is a more amusement. It is more than that. Deep down in their
hearts many people fear "there is something in it;" and although they
never openly acknowledge the fact, they--women especially--shew their
curiosity and their superstition by harbouring the dream book and
pondering its interpretations. A lively sense of humour is the best
antidote. The girl who dreams of a new hat--and many do--and believes it
really means success, is a hopeless creature. And the authors and
publishers of dream books should have the attention of the Censor.

Considering the 40 millions of people living in these islands, the
really remarkable dreams are few in number, that is, remarkable in the
prophetic sense; for, granting that a good percentage never become known
to the public, the presumption is that only men and women with strong
telepathic natures "dream the dream that comes true." Such people are
exceedingly scarce, and most of our dreams have origins like that
described by Macnish in his Philosophy of Sleep:--

"I believe that dreams are uniformly the resuscitation or re-embodiment
of thoughts which have formerly, in some shape or other, occupied the
mind. They are old ideas revived, either in an entire state, or
heterogeneously mingled together. I doubt if it be possible for a person
to have, in a dream, any idea whose elements did not, in some form,
strike him at a previous period. If these break loose from their
connecting chain, and become jumbled together incoherently, as is often
the case, they give rise to absurd combinations; but the elements still
subsist, and only manifest themselves in a new and unconnected shape. As
this is an important point, and one which has never been properly
insisted upon, I shall illustrate it by an example--

'I lately dreamed that I walked upon the banks of the Great Canal in the
neighbourhood of Glasgow. On the side opposite to which I was, and
within a few feet of the water, stood the splendid portico of the Royal
Exchange. A gentleman, whom I knew, was standing upon one of the steps,
and we spoke to each other. I then lifted a large stone, and poised it
in my hand, when he said that he was certain I could not throw it to a
certain spot which he pointed out. I made the attempt, and fell short of
the mark. At this moment a well-known friend came up, whom I knew to
excel at putting the stone; but, strange to say, he had lost both his
legs, and walked upon wooden substitutes. This struck me as exceedingly
curious; for my impression was that he had only lost one leg, and had
but a single woodon one. At my desire he took up the stone, and, without
difficulty, threw it beyond the point indicated by the gentleman upon
the opposite side of the canal. The absurdity of this dream is extremely
glaring; and yet, on strictly analysing it, I find it to be wholly
composed of ideas, which passed through my mind on the previous day,
assuming a new and ridiculous arrangement. I can compare it to nothing
but to cross readings in the newspapers, or to that well-known amusement
which consists in putting a number of sentences, each written on a
separate piece of paper, into a hat, shaking the whole, then taking them
out one by one as they come, and seeing what kind of medley the
heterogeneous compound will make when thus fortuitously put together.
For instance, I had, on the above day, taken a walk to the canal along
with a friend. On returning from it, I pointed out to him a spot where a
new road was forming, and where, a few days before, one of the workmen
had been overwhelmed by a quantity of rubbish falling upon him, which
fairly chopped off one of his legs, and so much damaged the other that
it was feared amputation would be necessary. Near this very spot there
is a park, in which, about a month previously, I practised throwing the
stone. On passing the Exchange on my way home, I expressed regret at the
lowness of its situation, and remarked what a fine effect the portico
would have were it placed upon more elevated ground. Such were the
previous circumstances, and let us see how they bear upon the dream. In
the first place, the canal appeared before me. (2) Its situation is an
elevated one. (3) The portico of the Exchange, occurring to my mind as
being placed too low, became associated with the elevation of the canal,
and I placed it close by on a similar altitude. (4) The gentleman I had
been walking with was the same whom, in the dream, I saw standing upon
the steps of the portico. (5) Having related to him the story of the man
who lost one limb, and had a chance of losing another, this idea brings
before me a friend with a brace of wooden legs, who, moreover, appears
in connection with putting the stone, as I know him to excel at that
exercise. There is only one other element in the dream which the
preceding events will not account for, and that is, the surprise at the
individual referred to having more than one wooden leg. But why should
he have even one, seeing that in reality he is limbed like other people?
This, also, I can account for. Some years ago, he slightly injured his
knee while leaping a ditch, and I remember jocularly advising him to get
it cut off. I am particular in illustrating this point with regard to
dreams, for I hold that, if it were possible to analyse them all, they
would invariably be found to stand in the same relation to the waking
state as the above specimen. The more diversified and incongruous the
character of the dream, and the more remote from the period of its
occurrence the circumstances which suggest it, the more difficult does
its analysis become; and, in point of fact, this process may be
impossible, so totally are the elements of the dream often dissevered
from their original source, and so ludicrously huddled together."

The serious side of dream superstitions is the same as the serious side
of palmistry: an interpretation which points to disaster may induce the
subject voluntarily to end his life. Most dreams, like the one just
outlined, are capable of reconstruction from purely natural elements in
our own experiences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (2) Witchcraft](osc43)
