[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc47)  [Next](osc49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (7) CRYSTAL GAZING.

A London publisher of books on mental science and occultism advertises a
crystal gazing outfit in the following terms:--

CRYSTAL GAZING OUTFIT, A COMPLETE.--This outfit consists of a perfectly
cut and polished 2 in. transparent solid crystalline sphere; a
beautifully turned and polished ebony pedestal, and a circular full of
instructions and suggestions. 3s 6d net, boxed and post free 3s 9d,
foreign postage is extra.

By Crystal Gazing is meant the practice of gazing steadily into the
limpid depths of a solid, crystalline sphere, for the purpose of seeing
visions therein. Many people can thus see "pictures" of great personal
interest and importance. The visions seem to be in the crystal itself,
but the scientific explanation is that the peculiar effect upon the
optic nerve provokes to activity some latent clairvoyant function of the
brain, which may have been extensively used by primeval man.

It is well known among psychic investigators that Crystal Gazers often
see visions of a clairvoyant or telepathic nature. For instance, the
experimenter might see, in his Crystal, a moving picture representing a
distant friend in a most exciting situation. Subsequent inquiry, by
correspondence, has been known to show that the vision correctly
portrayed the actual event at the identical time it took place. This is
a mere suggestion of the many interesting phenomena developed by Crystal
Gazing. It is a harmless, amusing pastime.

As a matter of fact, the Crystal is a beautiful ornament, and is worth
its price as a paper weight. This is the cheapest and best Crystal
Gazing offer ever made.

This is business and exposition combined. No doubt the publisher knows
very well that he is on right and safe lines, for has not Mr Andrew Lang
himself written most interestingly about "scrying," as crystal gazing is
called, and did he not record the following incident?--

"I had given a glass ball to a young lady, Miss Baillie, who had
scarcely any success with it. She lent it to Miss Leslie, who saw a
large, square, old-fashioned, red sofa, covered with muslin (which she
afterward found in the next country-house she visited). Miss Baillie's
brother, a young athlete, laughed at these experiments, took the ball
into his study, and came back looking 'gey gash.' He admitted that he
had seen a vision--somebody he knew, under a lamp. He said he would
discover during the week whether he saw right or not. This was at 5.30
on a Sunday afternoon. On Tuesday Mr Baillie was at a dance in a town 40
miles from his house, and met a Miss Preston. 'On Sunday,' he said,
'about half-past five, you were sitting under a standard lamp, in a
dress I never saw you wear, a blue blouse with lace over the shoulders,
pouring out tea for a man in blue serge, whose back was towards me, so
that I only saw the tip of his moustache.' 'Why, the blinds must have
been up,' said Miss Preston. 'I was at Dulby,' said Mr Baillie, and he
undeniably was."

Yes, when Mr Andrew Lang certifies the reality of crystal gazing, it is
justified in the eyes of many people, and instead of being a modern
credulity, it becomes a modern--well, not exactly a modern science--it
is not far enough advanced for that--but it assumes a rational
atmosphere which nothing else could give it. Hence the popularity of the
crystal and the cult of the "gaze." But is there anything in it after
all? Certainly there is; it is, in fact, a sub-department of hypnotism,
the facts of which few readers will care to question. But as yet not
many would-be "scryers" are as successful as their efforts are
presevering.

French criticism has been somewhat severe.

"Dr Pierre Janet, one of Charcot's coadjutors at the Saltpetriére, said
in a lecture at the University of Lyons, in France, that very few
persons really 'see things' in crystals, the estimate of 20 per cent.
put forward by the Society for Psychical Research being, in his opinion,
exaggerated. He has found, too, that this faculty is seldom met with
among persons in sound bodily and mental health, it being, in fact, a
neurosis, or disease of the nerves, to which only abnormally nervous or
hysterical persons are subject. The state induced by prolonged gazing at
a faintly luminous object is, on the same authority, a kind of
incomplete hypnotism in which hallucinations occur which are in every
way deceptions of the senses. But these hallucinations have for their
subjects only those things which are within the conscious or unconscious
memory of the gazer, and one is just as little likely to gain from them
any hint of facts lying within the gazer's knowledge, as to learn the
future from the stammerings of anybody drunk. Thus in one case collected
by the Psychical Research Society, where the speculatrix--to use the
old-fashioned word for such seers--saw in the crystal a newspaper
announcing the death of a friend, which afterward turned out to have
actually happened, Dr Janet is able to show that there was in the room a
real newspaper with the announcement in question, the inference being
that the speculatrix had read and mentally noted it without consciously
grasping its significance. This experience might be paralleled by one
from Binet, where a student on his way to an examination in Botany, saw
to his astonishment the words Verbascum thapsus written on the swing
door of a well known restaurant. A second examination transformed the
two words into the simple 'bouillon,' and it was only then that he
remembered that Verbascum thapsus was the Linnaean name of the herb
called by French peasants bouillon blanc."

This kind of criticism cannot be ignored, but it savours of the dogmatic
attitude taken up by Dr Crichton Browne (in his Dreamy Mental States)
towards anything and everything which cannot be justified by the present
knowledge embodied in medical science. There is surely a better way of
dealing with phenomena that are capable of scientific verification. If
it be possible to see persons and things at a distance by looking into a
glass of water, round piece of glass, or other object with a shining
surface, then the laws of the scientific method, i.e. observation and
experiment, can be employed with sufficient exactitude to determine the
truth or error of the claims put forward. Research Societies have
already made the attempt, but the results have not been all that one
could wish. Spasmodic efforts have not the same value as systematic and
repeated investigation at the hands of a number of trained men.

Crystal gazing presents one of a batch of interesting phenomena, which
began to assert themselves in the early history of man; were for ages
classed as credible facts, then branded as unholy superstitions; lastly,
they display a tendency to return to the first position, with the added
confirmation which comes from science. Thus the origin of the practice
is easily found. Early in the history of man some member of the race,
more gifted than his fellows in the sense of being more susceptible to
finer influences, saw, or imagined he saw, visions in the shining pool.
He communicated these to his comrades, and some of them confirmed the
fact by seeing the visions also. Then the cult, began and developed into
divination as we see it in Pagan rites, and even in the Old Testament.
The crystal itself is not a necessity. As Mr Lang says, people stared
into a "crystal ball; a cup; a mirror; a blot of ink (Egypt and India);
a drop of blood (the Maoris of New Zealand); a bowl of water (American
Indians); a pond (Roman and African); water in a glass bowl (Fez); or
almost any polished surface." Unlike many superstitions of the past
this, along with others of occult character, holds the fort against all
comers; sometimes the enemy makes a breach in the walls and otherwise
demolishes the citadel, but the repairs are as rapidly executed, and
"scrying"--partly a serious study and partly a social pastime--lives on
confident in its future success. It will be interesting to see what will
happen during the next twenty-five years, but unless the subject is
severely analysed and experimented upon it will, at the end of that
time, be where it is to-day; a number of people in all grades of society
will be ardent devotees, and a still greater number will call them "a
credulous crowd," worse than the superstitious nations of the past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (8) Colour Superstitions](osc49)
