[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc48)  [Next](osc50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (8) COLOUR SUPERSTITIONS.

Few, if any, of the subjects dealt with in this book offer more items of
interest for the student than this which has relation to the importance
of colour. There has always been a superstitious use of colour in
connection with astrology, the planets not only having a number, but a
favourite hue, which those people whose date of birth falls within the
sphere of the planet should be careful to cultivate. Hence the readiness
of the West End occultist to furnish your number and colour as
determined by your name. No doubt, from this point of view, the
rationale of personal colour, sanctioned by fate or fortune, is just as
sound or unsound as anything else in astrological lore. But the point of
interest lies here: modern medical research has proved the importance of
colour in a curative sense. Your native colour may be pink, and mine may
be green, according to the lore of antiquity; it does not matter much
one way or the other. But it matters a great deal whether we lie in a
room of sickness with a red wall paper or a blue one, if there really be
a traceable influence of colour on mental conditions.

Now is there such an influence? I think a fairly good case can be made
out that there is. Take some of the lowest forms of life--infusoria, for
example. Downes and Burns in Light and Colour have noticed that
infusorial life develops faster under the influence of red and yellow
light. Seeds germinate most rapidly under violet and blue rays, and the
hatching of silk worms is greatly facilitated by placing the eggs under
violet glass. It has been observed also that flies and other insects do
not flourish, or are killed outright, by the light which comes through
blue glass or blue gauze. When we come to the insect world, the very
existence of flowers, with their almost endless gradations of colour and
tint, must be taken as a reasonably clear demonstration that colour has
some influence upon the feelings of flower-haunting butterflies, bees,
and beetles, though even these feelings may be merely those of
preference or indifference. Colour was of the highest significance to
primitive man; it is to man as we know him to-day. Dr. Ponza, director
of the lunatic asylum at Alessandria, Piedmont, cured many of his insane
patients by confining them in rooms, the glass and walls of which were
of some uniform colour, such as red, or blue, or violet. One taciturn
melancholic became gay and talkative after a sojourn of three hours in a
red chamber. Others, after having stayed in these coloured rooms for a
time, shewed other equally great changes for the better in their mental
condition. Chromotherapy is still a science hardly in its infancy, but,
when it has received more attention than it has had up to the present,
we may expect some interesting developments.

Now this is as far as we can go in matters relating to colour, at least
with confidence. It is impossible to draw up a list of colours
representing intellectual and moral qualities on a foundation of exact
science. A list of dogmatic statements is the easiest thing in the world
to produce, and a popular author has done it in his Colour as a Curative
Agent. Thus on p. 35 I read the following:--

"Red--Love, affection, or lust.  
Scarlet--Emotion, anger.  
Deep Crimson--Animality.  
Bright Red--Courage or confidence.  
Dull Orange--Less understanding.  
Brownish Orange--Worldly wisdom.  
Light Yellow--Common sense."

and so forth.

In vain do we look for the basis of this ethics of colour; it cannot be
found. We do not deny that in the Bible sin is scarlet, and that
Mephistopheles usually appears in scarlet; one could from the pages of
literature almost justify the list we have quoted from a popular writer.
But we want more than that. Even though Fox and Gould affirm yellow and
gold correspond to the intellectual, green to the utilitarian, red to
the sensual, and blue to the spiritual, moral, or religious nature of
man, we require the whole phenomena to be treated according to the
scientific method before we can accept the ipse dixit of any writer.
There may be a colour belonging to us as individuals; the month in which
we were born and the planet that was in the ascendant at the time may
have conferred it on us; each planet may denote a colour; but of these
dogmas and many others nobody seems to know anything that can be
dignified with the name of knowledge. The fact is they are rank
superstitions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (9) Numbers](osc50.md)
