[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc54)  [Next](osc56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (14) SPILLING THE SALT.

If, whilst at dinner, you should be so unfortunate as to spill the salt,
and it falls towards your right-hand or left-hand neighbour, it is
accounted an unlucky omen. Why, nobody can say--with any show of good
reasoning. Salt has always figured prominently in religious rites and
ceremonies. Both Greeks and Romans mixed salt with their sacrificial
cakes, being, as an element, a necessary concomitant of the sacrifice,
not a mere adjunct. Thus in the Ferialia, or offerings to the Diis
Manibus, when no animal was slain:

"The Manes' rights expenses small supply,  
The richest sacrifice is piety.  
With vernal garlands a small Tile exalt,  
A little flour and little grain of Salt."

That the flour and salt were both designed as propitiatory offerings to
redeem them from the vengeance of the Stygian or infernal gods, may be
proved from a like custom in the Lemuria, another festival to the same
Diis Manibus, where beans are flung instead of the flour and salt; and
when flung, the person says:

"And with these beans I me and mine redeem."

That a Pagan should come to regard salt as an emblem of redemptive power
is, therefore, not surprising; and from this it is but a step to the
belief that a spilling of it at table should be an omen of serious
import. In olden times salt was regarded as incorruptible, and it became
the symbol of friendship; consequently an overturning of the salt-cellar
betokened the breaking of friendship. But there was a "counter" stroke
available. If the man towards whom the salt falls will, without
hesitation or remark, take up a single pinch of salt between the finger
and the thumb of his right hand and cast it over his left shoulder, the
threatened misfortune will be averted. Tradition has it that the left
shoulder is selected to appease the devil.'

Such superstitions are among those complex growths of ideas, the
disentanglement of which is quite an impossibility. There are nations to
whom salt was an almost sacred symbol; there are others--Egypt, for
instance--to whom it was a common metaphor for calamity and desolation.
But as a superstition it has some peculiar, insistent force, for the
spilling of salt is a common accident, and it is by no means uncommon to
see the rite of throwing over the left shoulder carried out immediately;
not, it is true, with any real fear of evil, but in order, as one lady
put it, "to be on the safe side." Some writers believe that da Vinci's
picture of the Last Supper, in which Judas Iscariot is represented as
overturning the salt, is the real origin of the salt superstition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (15) Thirteen at Table](osc56.md)
