[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc67)  [Next](osc69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (2) THE HORN DANCE--ABBOTS BROMLEY.

Mr MacDonagh, in his notes to Sir Benjamin Stone's Pictures of National
Life and History, says that when Henry III. granted the "Charta de
Foresta" there was great rejoicing in some parts of England, and that
the modern horn dance is the repetition of an old custom instituted to
celebrate that event." Previous monarchs had afforested such vast areas
that the greater part of the country had become forest, and this
circumstance, coupled with the very severe penalties imposed for
offences connected with the chase, had bred much discontent among the
people. The charter restored to them large tracts of land as well as
mitigated the barbarous punishments, mutilation and death being
forbidden; consequently it was hailed with joy and celebrated with a
dramatic form of dance which was performed in the characters of stags
and huntsmen."

The characters of the dance are curiousIy dressed in spotted breeches,
and carry reindeer horns mounted on a pole. A musician plays an
accordion (which seems an infinite pity) but all the other implements
are kept by the vicar in the church tower. The early history of the
horns is unknown. There is a "fool," and Robin Hood and a sportsman make
up the list. The dance itself is of the nature of a hunt down the main
street. The "deer" rush away and the hunters "shoot" them. The idea is
apparently to assert the rights of the chase.

The use of horns in this case is quite logical and natural, but there is
some obscurity in their use at the Charlton Horn Fair described by
Grose. "It consists of a riotous mob, who, after a printed summons
dispersed through the adjacent towns, meet at Cuckold's Point, near
Deptford, and march from thence in procession through that town and
Greenwich to Charlton, with horns of different kinds on their heads; and
at the fair there are sold ram's horns, and every sort of toy made of
horn; even the gingerbread figures have horns." It appears from Fuller's
Whole Life (1703) that it was the fashion in his time to go to Horn Fair
dressed in women's clothes. "I remember being there upon Horn Fair Day,
I was dressed in my landlady's best gown and other women's attire, and
to Horn Fair we went, and as we were coming back by water, all the
cloaths were spoiled by dirty water, &c., that was flung on us in an
inundation, for which I was obliged to present her with two guineas to
make atonement for the damage sustained, &c."

The horns on a stick figure in another custom mentioned by Grose in his
Classical Dictionary of the Mother Tongue:--

"HIGHGATE. Sworn at Highgate.--A ridiculous custom formerly prevailed at
the public houses in Highgate, to administer a ludicrous oath to all
travellers of the middling rank who stopped there. The party was sworn
on a pair of horns, fastened on a stick; the substance of the oath was,
never to kiss the maid when he could kiss the mistress, never to drink
small beer when he could get strong; with many other injunctions of the
like kind, to all which was added the saving clause, 'Unless you like it
best.' The person administering the oath was always to be called Father
by the juror, and he in return was to style him Son, under the penalty
of a bottle."

The ancient use of horns has not yet been solved to the satisfaction of
antiquarians, but at any rate the Abbot's Bromley ceremony is able to
account for itself in a manner that older and extinct customs cannot
equal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (3) ''Telling the Bees''](osc69)
