[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc65)  [Next](osc67.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (25) COMETS.

If the usual appearance of Nature was sufficiently marvellous to beget
all kinds of superstitions in the mind of the untutored savage, it is
only natural that the sudden advent of a blazing comet in the sky should
affright him, and give rise to all kinds of crude notions about coming
disasters. To some extent this is true of the civilised world,
especially that part of it which is morbidly religious and dominated by
prophecies respecting the Second Coming of Christ. Take the year 1712.
Whiston--the mathematical divine, the translator of Josephus--had
predicted that the comet of 1712 would appear on Wednesday, the 14th
October, at five minutes after five o'clock A.M.; and that the world
would be destroyed by fire on the Friday following. His reputation for
science was as high as his character for orthodoxy was questionable, and
the comet appeared punctually--leading to an inferential fear that the
rest of the prediction would be as punctually fulfilled. A number of
persons got into boats and barges in the Thames, thinking the water the
safest place. South Sea and India stock fell. The captain of a Dutch
ship threw all his powder into the river, that the ship might not be
endangered. At noon, after the comet appeared, it is said that more than
one hundred clergymen were ferried over to Lambeth Palace, to request
that proper prayers might be prepared, there being none in the church
service appropriate to such an emergency. People believed that the Day
of Judgment was at hand, and acted, some on this belief, but more as if
some temporary evil was to be expected. Many wrongs were righted, many
breaches of morality repaired. There was a great run on the bank; and
Sir Gilbert Heathcote, at that time head director, issued orders to all
the fire-offices in London, requesting them to keep a good look-out, and
have a particular eye on the Bank of England. On the whole, the poor
Londoners of that generation appear to have behaved rather foolishly in
the moment of imagined doom.

But in this year of grace 1910, when the daily press is full of
references to the Miners' Comet and to Halley's Comet, there are
semi-superstitious journalists and rabid politicians who are trying to
see "signs" in the heavens. It is not a question of providing "copy"
during the stress of a General Election, or of supplying notes about
what happened when Halley's Comet appeared on previous occasions; the
references were so put that the reader could not help getting the
impression of a keen desire on the part of the writer to turn the comet
into an omen of ill. We laugh at Whiston, but candidly we are not much
better when we attempt to make political capital out of a star with a
tail. Why not believe in astrology at once?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (1) Holy Wells](osc67.md)
