[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc66)  [Next](osc68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MISCELLANEOUS

### (1) HOLY WELLS.

The Britisher acquainted with his Bible has an easy explanation of the
superstitious regard for wells and fountains: "in hot and dry countries
water is so valuable and necessary that the sources of the supply come
to be looked upon as almost divine; verily the gifts of the gods.
Whatever remnants of this superstition still remain are due to this
natural cause." But such an explanation is quite inadequate, inasmuch as
it merely accounts for the Eastern sense of water's value as an economic
necessity. Over and above that, however, there is evidence to show that
all nations have held wells and fountains in a kind of religious awe; in
fact, the religious element has been uppermost, and although there is
always an organic connection between the material benefit and the
spiritual ideal, that connection is very slight in humid countries like
Ireland, where at one time the worship of wells was as extravagant as
anywhere in the Far East. On an island near the centre of Lough Fine
there used to be a place for pilgrims anxious to get rid of their sins,
the journey over the water being an important part of the business. It
was believed to be easier to get rid of sin on an island than on the
mainland. In Scotland (Tullie Beltane) there is a Druid temple of eight
upright stones. Some distance away is another temple, and near it a well
still held in great veneration, says a writer in The Gentleman's
Magazine (1811). "On Beltane morning superstitious people go to this
well and drink of it; then they make a procession round it nine times;
after this they in like manner go round the temple. So deep-rooted is
this heathenish superstition in the minds of many who reckon themselves
good Protestants, that they will not neglect these rites even when
Beltane falls on a Sabbath." Side by side with this account may be
placed another (taken from The Statistical Account of Scotland, vol.
xii., 1794). The place referred to is Kirkmichael, in Banff. "Near the
kirk of this parish there is a fountain, once highly celebrated, and
anciently dedicated to St Michael. Many a patient have its waters
restored to health, and many more have attested the efficacy of their
virtues. But, as the presiding power is sometimes capricious, and apt to
desert his charge, it now lies neglected, choked with weeds, unhonoured
and unfrequented. In better days, it was not so; for the winged
guardian, under the semblance of a fly, was never absent from his duty.
If the sober matron wished to know the issue of her husband's ailment,
or the love-sick nymph that of her languishing swain, they visited the
well of St Michael. Every movement of the sympathetic fly was regarded
in silent awe; and as he appeared cheerful or dejected, the anxious
votaries drew their presages their breasts vibrated with correspondent
emotions. Like the Delai Lama of Thibet, or the King of Great Britain,
whom a fiction of the English law supposes never to die, the guardian
fly of the well of St Michael was believed to be exempted from the laws
of mortality. To the eye of ignorance he might sometimes appear dead,
but, agreeably to the Druidic system, it was only a transmigration into
a similar form, which made little alteration on the real identity." "Not
later than a fortnight ago" (it is added) "the writer of this account
was much entertained to hear an old man lamenting with regret the
degeneracy of the times, particularly the contempt in which objects of
former veneration were held by the unthinking crowd. If the infirmities
of years and the distance of his residence did not prevent him, he would
still pay his devotional visits to the well of St Michael. He would
clear the bed of its ooze, open a passage for the streamlet, plant the
borders with fragrant flowers, and once more, as in the days of youth,
enjoy the pleasure of seeing the guardian fly skim in sportive circles
over the bubbling wave, and with its little proboscis imbibe the
panacean dews."

In Wales, the same regard for Holy Wells is perhaps more distinctive
than in other parts of the country, probably because the medical or
curative properties have been more closely allied with the religious
element. Holywell (or St. Winefred's) was a famous well for stricken
pilgrims so far back as the fourteenth century, and the modern
holiday-maker doing a North Wales tour, can still see the pilgrims of
the day journeying to St. Winefred's, in the hope of leaving their
troubles behind them. Pennant, in his Tour in Wales, speaking of the
village of Llandegla, where is a church dedicated to St. Tecla, virgin
and martyr, who, after her conversion by St. Paul, suffered under Nero
at Iconium, says:--"About two hundred yards from the church, in a
quillet called Gwern Degla, rises a small spring. The water is under the
tutelage of the saint, and to this day held to be extremely beneficial
in the falling sickness. The patient washes his limbs in the well; makes
an offering into it of fourpence; walks round it three times; and thrice
repeats the Lord's Prayer. These ceremonies are never begun till after
sunset, in order to inspire the votaries with greater awe. If the
afflicted be of the male sex, like Socrates, he makes an offering of a
cock to his AEsculapius, or rather to Tecla, Hygeia; if of the fair sex,
a hen. The fowl is carried in a basket, first round the well, after that
into the churchyard, when the same orisons and the same
circum-ambulations are performed round the church. The votary then
enters the church, gets under the communion-table, lies down with the
Bible under his or her head, is covered with the carpet or cloth, and
rests there till break of day, departing after offering sixpence, and
leaving the fowl in the church. If the bird dies, the cure is supposed
to have been effected, and the disease transferred to the devoted
victim."

It would be possible to duplicate instances of this kind all over the
country, but the most interesting cases are those relating to the
superstition of decorating wells and fountains. Here is an illuminating
letter from a correspondent of The Gentleman's Magazine (1794):--

"Your correspondent F. J. having given you a short account of the custom
still prevalent at Tissington, in Derbyshire, of decorating wells on
Holy Thursday, please to inform him that it was anciently no uncommon
practice; and two places in the county of Stafford instantly occurred to
my recollection (Brewood and Bilbrook), where the same custom was
observed of late years, if not at the present time. And I believe the
same kind of ornaments were used to decorate all Gospel-places, whether
wells, trees, or hills. In Popish times this respect was paid to such
wells as were eminent for curing distempers upon the Saint's Day whose
name the well bore, the people diverting themselves with cakes and ale,
music and dancing; which was innocent enongh in comparison with what had
been formerly practised at different places, when even the better sort
of people placed a sanctity in them, brought alms and offerings, and
made vows at them; as the ancient Germans and Britons did, and the
Saxons and English were too much inclined to; for which St. Edmund's
Well, near Oxford, and St. Lawrence's at Peterborough were once famous.
This superstitious devotion, which was called well worship, was not
approved of by the heads of the Church, and was strictly prohibited by
our Anglican Councils: (1) under King Edgar; (2) under King Canute; (3)
in a Council at London under St. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1102;
as it was also particularly at those two wells near Oxford and at
Peterborough by Oliver Sutton, Bishop of Lincoln."

I propose now to give an account of how the Tissington Well was
decorated, and then to enquire into the origin of the ceremony itself.
"The flowers were inserted in moist clay and put upon boards, cut in
various forms, surrounded with boughs of laurel and white thorn, so as
to give an appearance of water issuing from small grottoes. The flowers
were adjusted and arranged in various patterns to give the effect of
mosaic work, having inscribed upon them texts of Scripture appropriate
to the season, and sentences expressive of the kindness of the Deity."
The sams writer (1823) adds: "I will now proceed to give an account of
the circumstances attendant on this annual festival on May 8, 1823,
while I was on a visit at Ashburn with my friend, the Rev. Thomas Gibbs,
second master of the Grammar School there, and curate of Tissington.
There are five wells, and the Psalms appointed for the morning service,
with the Epistle and Gospel for the day, being omitted at church, were
read by Mr Gibbs, one at each well, when a Psalm was also sung by the
parish choir. I officiated in the church, and preached a sermon on the
occasion . . . from the church, the congregation walked to the first, or
the Hall Well. As there is a recess at the back of the well, and an
elevated wall, a great profusion of laurel branches were placed upon it,
interspered with daffodils, Chinese roses, and marsh marigolds. Over the
spring was a square board surrounded with a crown, composed of white and
red daisies. The board, being covered with moss, had written upon it in
red daisies:

'While He blessed them, He was carried up into Heaven.'

The second well was Hand's Well. This was also surrounded with laurel
branches, and had a canopy placed over it, covered with polyanthuses.
The words on the canopy were:

'The Lord's unsparing hand  
Supplies us with this spring.'

The letters were formed with the bud of the larch, and between the lines
were two rows of purple primroses and marsh marigolds. In the centre
above the spring, on a moss ground, in letters of white daisies:

'Sons of Earth  
The triumph join.'

The second Psalm for the day was read here. The third was Frith's Well.
This was greatly admired, as it was situated in Mr Frith's garden and
the shrubs around it were numerous. Here were formed two arches, one
within the other. The first had a ground of wild hyacinths and purple
primroses, edged with white, on which was inscribed, in red daisies:

'Ascension.'

The receding arch was covered with various flowers, and in the centre on
a ground of marsh marigolds, edged with wild hyacinths in red daisies:

'Peace be unto you.'

Here was read the third Psalm of the day. The fourth, or Holland's Well,
was thickly surrounded with branches of white thorn, placed in the
earth. This well springs from a small coppice of firs and thorn. The
form of the erection over it was a circular arch, and in the centre on a
ground of marsh marigolds, edged with purple primroses, in red daisies
these words:

'In God is all.'

At this well was read the Epistle. The fifth, or Goodwin's Well, was
surrounded with branches of evergreens, having on a Gothic arch in red
daisies:

'He did no sin.'

At this well was read the Gospel. The day concluded by the visitors
partaking of the hospitality of the inhabitants, and being gratified
with a well-arranged band playing appropriate pieces of music at each
other's houses."

This rather lengthy description is worth reproducing, because it shows
how an old superstition can be purified of its worst elements, and
transformed into a truly Christian celebration. It is noteworthy also as
a long-continued and successful protest against the condemnation of such
festivals by Bishops and Councils. In itself the festival was as
logical, and infinitely more beautiful than, a modern harvest
thanksgiving service.

Decorating with rags is a variation difficult to account for. Grose
makes an attempt to explain the custom, quoting from an old
M.S.:--"Between the towns of Alten and newton, near the foot of the
Rosberrye Toppinge, there is a well dedicated to St. Oswald. The
neighbours have an opinion that a shirt, or shift, taken off a sick
person and thrown into that well, will show whether the person will
recover or die; for, if it floated, it denoted the recovery of the
party; if it sunk, there remained no hope of their life; and to reward
the saint for his intelligence, they tear off a rag of the shirt, and
leave it hanging on the briers thereabouts; where," says the writer, "I
have seen such numbers as might have made a fayre rheme in a
paper-myll."

There is an echo of this theory in The Statistical Account of
Scotland:--"A spring in the Moss of Melshach, of the chalybeate kind, is
still in reputation among the common people. Its sanative qualities
extend even to brutes. As this Spring probably obtained vogue at first
in days of ignorance and superstition, it would appear that it became
customary to leave at the well part of the clothes of the sick and
diseased, and harness of the cattle, as an offering of gratitude to the
divinity who bestowed healing virtues on its waters. And now, even
though the superstitious principle no longer exists, the accustomed
offerings are still presented."

Again, the same authority says of the parish of Mary-Kirk,
Kincardine:--"There is at Balmano a fine spring well, called St. John's
Well, which in ancient times was held in great estimation. Numbers who
thought its waters of a sanative quality, brought their rickety children
to be washed in its stream. Its water was likewise thought a sovereign
remedy for sore eyes, which, by frequent washing, was supposed to cure
them. To show their gratitude to the saint, and that he might be
propitious to continue the virtues of the waters, they put into the well
presents, not indeed of any great value, or such as would have been of
the least service to him if he had stood in need of money, but such as
they conceived the good and merciful apostle, who did not delight in
costly oblations, could not fail to accept. The presents generally given
were pins, needles, and rags taken from their clothes. This may point
out the superstition of those times."

Macaulay in his History of St. Kilda, speaking of a consecrated well in
that island called Tobirnimbuadh, or the spring of diverse virtues, says
that "near the fountain stood an altar, on which the distressed votaries
laid down their oblations. Before they could touch sacred water with any
prospect of success, it was their constant practice to address the
Genius of the place with supplication and prayers. No one approached him
with empty hands. But the devotees were abundantly frugal. The offerings
presented by them were the poorest acknowledgments that could be made to
a superior being, from whom they had either hopes or fears. Shells and
pebbles, rags of linen or stuffs worn out, pins, needles, or rusty
nails, were generally all the tribute that was paid; and sometimes,
though rarely enough, copper coins of the smallest value. Among the
heathens of Italy and other countries, every choice fountain was
consecrated, and sacrifices were offered to them, as well as to the
deities that presided over them. See Ovid's Fasti, lib. iii. 300.

'Fonti rex Numa mactat ovem.'

"Horace, in one of his odes, made a solemn promise that he would make a
present of a very fine kid, some sweet wine and flowers to a noble
fountain in his own Sabine Villa." There appears to be good reason for
supporting this theory that the rags and pieces of cloth represent the
healing power of the well, a theory which finds confirmation from
travellers in other parts of the world. Hannay in his Travels in Persia
says: "After ten days' journey we arrived at a desolate caravanserai,
where we found nothing but water. I observed a tree with a number of
rags tied to the branches: these were so many charms, which passengers
coming from Ghilan, a province remarkable for agues, had left there, in
a fond expectation of leaving their disease also on the same spot."

Park in his Travels in the interior of Africa says:--"The company
advanced as far as a large tree, called by the natives Neema Taba. It
had a very singular appearance, being covered with innumerable rags or
scraps of cloth, which persons travelling across the wilderness had at
different times tied to its branches; a custom so generally followed
that no one passes it without hanging up something." Mr Park followed
the example, and suspended a handsome piece of cloth on one of the
boughs.

But apart from medical powers, wells were regarded as possessing occult
powers: this is seen in the existence of the wishing well. Pennant, in
describing St. Winefred's, says that "near the steps, two feet beneath
the water is a large stone, called the wishing stone. It receives many a
kiss from the faithful, who are supposed never to fail in experiencing
the completion of their desires, provided the wish is delivered with
full devotion and confidence." And Moore in his Monastic Remains, says
of Walsingham Chapel, Norfolk:--"The wishing wells still remain--two
circular stone pits filled with water, enclosed with a square wall,
where the pilgrims used to kneel and throw in a piece of gold whilst
they prayed for the accomplishment of their wishes."

Reviewing the whole subject, one can see how natural is both the
superstition and its gradual disappearance. Not that it has yet
disappeared, for large pilgrimages leave this country every year for
Lourdes; and as already stated, St. Winefred's has its yearly visitants.
These people would not call themselves superstitious: they believe God
and the Virgin are associated with these waters in a special sense, over
and above any medical properties such waters may possess, like those of
Harrogate, Matlock, and Homburg. The evidence for a divine association
is the vision of the Virgin seen by some of the faithful, and when this
vision is supported by numerous cures, nothing is wanting to complete
conviction. Somebody asks, "Are the cures genuine?" The answer is, "Many
of them are." The true explanation is the effect of mind on body by
means of faith. Scores of testimonies outside the Church altogether are
to be found in the pages of medical literature, indeed medical men are
themselves becoming more and more disinclined to administer drugs, using
mental, natural, and dietetic measures instead. But the feelings of the
faithful in believing that the Deity has a partiality for wells and
fountains is the survival of an ancient superstition, perhaps one might
say the most ancient superstition in the world. Everything had its
spirit, in the belief of primeval man; the tree, the brook, the
mountain, the cave--each was presided over by a spirit who needed to be
propitiated by sacrifice, prayer, or charm, ere the poor human could
receive the benefits he sought for. It is a far cry from Animism to
Lourdes, but there is a definite connection between the two. Both
believed in the spirit of the well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (2) The Horn Dance--Abbots Bromley](osc68)
