[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (13) PLAYING CARD SUPERSTITIONS.

It is somewhat singular that Brand should have confined his notes to the
growth of the various card games in England, omitting entirely all
reference to the superstitions which cloud the atmosphere of the
gambler, and even the card player who does not play for money, or, if he
does, for very small stakes. In games of chance and skill combined, we
find just that sort of uncertain feeling which provokes all kinds of
theories as to what is right and wrong; the right and wrong in this
association meaning no more than success or failure. A search for such
superstitious theories is speedily rewarded; the joint authors of The
Encyclopædia of Superstitions have collected quite a little crowd of
them; some old, some new; some whimsical and without reason; others
indicative of observation, and having a basis in common-sense. I propose
first to enumerate a few of them, and afterwards to make an attempt at
the discovery of their origin.

### OMENS RELATING TO CARD GAMES.

1\. To play cards on the table without a table-cloth is unlucky.

2\. He who lends money at play will lose; he who borrows money at play
will win.

3\. In playing cards, walk straight from the table and make a round
turn, if playing for money.

4\. There is a superstition at Monto Carlo that immediately after a
suicide all those playing against the bank will win. There is therefore
a perfect rush for the tables when the lugubrious news is known.

5\. If you wish a person to win at cards, stick a pin in his coat.

6\. To drop a card on the floor when playing is a bad omen.

7\. To sing while playing cards is a sign that your side will lose.

8\. Don't play at a table with a cross-eyed man whether he is your
partner or opponent; you will lose.

9\. If you get into a passion when playing cards you will have more bad
luck; for the demon of bad luck always follows a passionate player,

It is truly difficult to imagine how the first item could have
originated; there is absolutely no sense in a connection between skill
in a game and the covering of the table on which it is played; if the
objection had arisen out of the difference between a mahogany table and
a steel table, one might have fancied electric forces, or mesmeric
forces, had something to do with the origin of this vain notion. It has
been suggested that the table-cloth gives an opportunity of
"manipulating" cards which a bare table does not. Perhaps. And yet all
superstitions cannot have arisen in the minds of cheats and dubious
people.

No. 2 is contrary to experience, at anyrate the second half is. The
plunger who will lose all his own money and borrows to continue playing,
generally loses.

No. 3 has a touch of humour in it--grim humour, no doubt. It seems to
come from the heart of a wily but skilful player, who knows the
fascination of the game to the novice with keenly awakened desires; and
when age and experience speak they counsel a walk away from the table,
"a round turn " and--well, that is just it; it is a chance afforded the
player to think. "Shall I play or shall I not--for it is for money?"
This is about as sensible a bit of superstition as could be invented.

NO. 4 is a specimen of the modern mind at work. And how like the old
mind! It is as if the players said, "The God of Chance has had a big
success; he has won thousands and thousands; and he has driven his
victim to suicide and death. He can't be the same god for a day or two;
we must give him time to get over the dreadful event. So we will play
whilst he is sorrowing." This logic would hardly do credit to a Comanche
Indian, but there it is all the same. A Monto Carlo player commits
suicide, and there follows a rush for the tables. Why? Because the
players believe in luck, and for some reason they fancy a sufferer's
death must inevitably turn the tide in favour of themselves.

The crooked pin referred to in No. 5 is an idea borrowed from other
sources. Brand has a note to the effect that:--"About a mile to the west
of Jarrow (near Newcastle-upon-Tyne) there is a well, still called
Bede's Well, to which as late as the year 1740 it was a prevailing
custom to bring children troubled with any disease or infirmity; a
crooked pin was put in, and the well laved dry between each dipping. My
informant has seen twenty children brought together on a Sunday to be
dipped in this well, at which also, on Midsummer Eve, there was a great
resort of neighbouring people, with bonfires, musick, etc."

No. 6 is a bad omen, because it suggests careless handling of the cards
on account of lack of interest, and not watching the progress of the
game; and No. 7 is even stronger in this respect. No. 9 belongs to the
same category, only in this case the player is giving an excited
attention to the game, and loses his head. No. 8 is apparently a joke
pure and simple.

Every card player has his own or her own private superstitions: a
certain hand always presages good luck or ill-luck; the winning of the
first game means winning the third; to play before 6 p.m. on Fridays is
never fortunate, and so on. But the whole batch of card superstitions
has its source in an attempt to formulate laws for the one thing that
seems to have no law--chance.

THE END
