[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](osc76)  [Next](osc78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (11) HORSESHOE TRIBUTES IN OAKHAM CASTLE.

Evelyn, on August 14, 1654, tells us that he "took a journey in the
Northern parts," and in passing through Oakham he saw some of the
celebrated shoes on the Castle gates. Mr Michael M'Donagh says: "Perhaps
the most singular mediaeval tribute now exacted is the horseshoe
required from every peer who passes through Oakham. Originally the shoe
had to come from the actual horse ridden by a baron; but for a long time
it has been usual to commute the toll by paying for a fancy shoe, and as
a result the tributes in Oakham Hall vary greatly in shape and size, and
are even made of different metals. They are mostly dated, the most
important exception being a large shoe given by Queen Elizabeth, who
probably sent it about 1556, after her visit to Lord Burghley. Among
them are several from the Royal Family-Queen Victoria (when Princess
Victoria) in 1835; Queen Alexandra (when Princess of Wales) in 1881; and
his Majesty the King (when Prince of Wales) in 1895. In all, there are
nearly 200 shoes which are of all sizes, from seven feet in length down
to one only big enough for the small-hoofed race horse." This tribute
has been demanded for seven centuries, and tradition ascribes its origin
to the truculent Walchelin de Ferreris, to whom Henry II. gave the
Barony of Oakham.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (12) The Duty of not Saving a Drowning Man](osc78.md)
