[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq22)  [Next](sfq24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "Ease after War"

The sun had scarcely risen on the third day, when the watchman on the
walls of the brazen tower saw the death of the dragon. He hastily called
to the captive King and Queen, who, coming forth, ordered the tidings of
peace and joy to be proclaimed through the whole land.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

 

<span id="img_08700"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="img/08700.jpg"><img src="tn/08700.jpg" alt="&#39;&#39;And to the Knight his daughter deare he tyde&lt;BR&gt; With sacred rites and vowed for ever to abyde.&lt;BR&gt;     *    *    *    *    *    *    *&lt;BR&gt; His owne two hands the holy knotts did knitt,&lt;BR&gt; That none but death for ever can divide.&#39;&#39;" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />

''And to the Knight his daughter deare he tyde<br />
With sacred rites and vowed for ever to abyde.<br />
    *    *    *    *    *    *    *<br />
His owne two hands the holy knotts did knitt,<br />
That none but death for ever can divide.''<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Then all the trumpets sounded for victory, and the people came flocking
as to a great feast, rejoicing at the fall of the cruel enemy, from
whose bondage they were now free.

Forth from the castle came the King and Queen, attended by a noble
company. In front marched a goodly band of brave young men, all able to
wield arms, but who now bore laurel branches in sign of victory and
peace. These they threw at the feet of the Red Cross Knight, and hailed
him conqueror.

Then came beautiful maidens with garlands of flowers and timbrels;
troops of merry children ran in front, dancing and singing to the sound
of sweet music. When they reached the spot where Una stood, they bowed
before her, and crowned her with a garland, so that she looked--as
indeed she was--a queen.

The King gave goodly gifts of gold and ivory to his brave champion, and
thanked him a thousand times for all that he had done. Then the Red
Cross Knight and Una were brought in triumph to the palace; the trumpets
and the clarions sounded, and all the people sang for joy, and strewed
their garments in the way. At the palace everything was splendid and
beautiful, as befitted a prince's court, and here a great feast was
held.

The King and Queen made their guest tell them all the strange adventures
and perils that had befallen him. They listened with much interest and
pity to his story. Then said the King:--

"Dear son, great are the evils which you have borne, so that I know not
whether most to praise or to pity you. Never has living man passed
through a

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

sea of more deadly dangers. But since you have arrived safely at the
shore, now let us think of ease and everlasting rest."

"Ah! dearest sovereign," replied the brave Knight, "I may not yet think
of ease or rest. For by the vow which I made when I first took up arms,
I plighted myself to return to Queen Gloriana, and to serve her in
warlike ways for six years."

The King, when he heard this, was very sorry, but he knew that the vow
must be kept.

"As soon as the six years are over," said he, "you shall return here and
marry my daughter, the Lady Una. I proclaimed through the world that
whoever killed the dragon should have my only daughter to be his wife,
and should be made heir of my kingdom. Since you have won the reward by
noble chivalry, lo! here I yield to you my daughter and my kingdom."

Then Una stepped forward, radiant as the morning star and fair as the
flowers in May. She wore a garment of lily-white, that looked as if it
were woven of silk and silver. The blazing brightness of her beauty and
the glorious light of her sunshiny face can scarcely be told. Even her
dear Knight, who had been with her every day, wondered at the sight.

So the Red Cross Knight and Una were betrothed. Every one, young and
old, rejoiced, and a solemn feast was held through all the land. Now,
indeed, the Knight thought himself happy. Whenever his eye beheld Una,
his heart melted with joy; no wickedness nor envy could ever again harm
their love.

Yet even in the midst of his happiness he remembered

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

the vow he had made to return to Queen Gloriana. His work was not yet
done, and at last the day came when he had to leave Una, and set forth
again on his travels.

We know, however, that whatever new perils Jay before him, he would be
able to overcome them all by the help of his heavenly armour, and that
in the end he would be restored to Una, to dwell happily with her for
ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sir Guyon meets the Magician](sfq24)
