[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq29)  [Next](sfq31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Anger of Fire

The man soon reached Sir Guyon and the Palmer, hot, panting, and
breathless. He was a bold-looking fellow, not in the least abashed by
Sir Guyon, but casting scornful glances at him.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Behind his back he bore a brazen shield, which looked as if it belonged
to some famous knight. On it was drawn the picture of a flaming fire,
round which were the words "*Burnt, I do burn*." In his hand the man
carried two sharp and slender darts, tipped with poison.

When he came near, he said boldly to Guyon, "Sir Knight--if you be a
knight--I advise you to leave this place at once, in case of further
harm. If you choose to stay, you do so at your own peril!"

Sir Guyon wondered at the fellow's boldness, though he scorned his idle
vanity. He asked him mildly why any harm should come to him if he
remained.

"Because," replied the man, "there is now coming, and close at hand, a
knight of wondrous power, who never yet met an enemy without doing him
deadly harm, or frightening him dreadfully. You need not hope for any
better fate, if you choose to stay."

"What is his name?" said Sir Guyon, "and where does he come from?"

"His name is Pyrocles, which means *the Anger of Fire*," was the answer,
"and he is called so from his hot and cruel temper. He is the brother of
Cymocles, which means *the Anger of the Sea-Waves*, for Cymocles is wild
and revengeful. They are the sons of *Malice* and *Intemperance*. I am
*Strife*, the servant of Pyrocles, and I find work for him to do and
stir him up to mischief. Fly, therefore, from this dreadful place, or
your foolhardiness may bring you into danger."

"Never mind about that," said Sir Guyon, "but tell me whither you are
now bound. For it must be some great reason that makes you in such a
hurry."

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

"My master has sent me to seek out Occasion," said Strife. "He is
furious to fight, and woe betide the man who first falls in his way."

"You must be mad," said the Palmer, "to seek out Occasion and cause for
strife. She comes unsought, and follows even when shunned. Happy the man
who can keep away from her."

"Look," said Sir Guyon, "yonder she sits, bound. Take that message to
your master."

At this Strife grew very angry, and seizing one of his darts, he hurled
it at Sir Guyon. The Knight caught it on his shield, whereupon Strife
fled away, and was soon lost to sight.

Not long after, Sir Guyon saw a fierce-looking knight riding swiftly
towards him. His armour sparkled like fire, and his horse was bright
red, and champed and chafed at his bit as his master spurred him roughly
forward. This was Pyrocles.

Not waiting to speak, he furiously attacked Sir Guyon, but after a sharp
battle he was utterly defeated, and obliged to beg for mercy.

This Sir Guyon courteously granted, and asked the reason why Pyrocles
had attacked him so fiercely.

The knight replied it was because he heard that Sir Guyon had taken
captive a poor old woman, and chained her up. He demanded that she and
her son Fury should be set free.

"And is that all that has so sorely displeased you?" said Sir Guyon,
smiling. "There they are; I hand them over to you."

Pyrocles, delighted, rushed to set free the captives,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

 

<span id="img_11900"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="img/11900.jpg"><img src="tn/11900.jpg" alt="&#39;&#39;He boldly spoke, &#39;Sir Knight, if knight thou bee,&lt;BR&gt; Abandon this forestalled place at erst,&lt;BR&gt; For fear of further harme, I counsell thee,&lt;BR&gt; Or bide the chaunce at thine owne jeopardie.&#39;&#39;&#39;" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />

''He boldly spoke, 'Sir Knight, if knight thou bee,<br />
Abandon this forestalled place at erst,<br />
For fear of further harme, I counsell thee,<br />
Or bide the chaunce at thine owne jeopardie.'''<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

but they were scarcely untied before their rage and spite burst forth
with double fury. They did everything they could to make Pyrocles and
Sir Guyon fight again. They not only railed against Sir Guyon for being
the conqueror, but also against Pyrocles for allowing himself to be
conquered.

Sir Guyon stood apart and refused to be drawn into the quarrel; but
Pyrocles could not help getting enraged, and he and Fury were soon in
the midst of a terrible fight.

Seeing that Pyrocles was getting the worst Of it, Sir Guyon would have
gone to his help, but the Palmer held him back, and refused to let him
interfere.

"No," he said firmly, "it is idle for you to pity him. He has brought
this trouble upon himself by his own folly and wilfulness, and he must
now bear the punishment."

So, as there was nothing more to be done, Sir Guyon and the Palmer
started again on their journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Idle Lake](sfq31)
