[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq47)  [Next](sfq49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Britomart rescued a Fair Lady from a Wicked Enchanter

As soon as the strange procession had passed into the inner room, the
door shut tight, driven by the same stormy blast with which it had first
opened. Then the brave maiden, who all this while had remained hidden in
shadow, came forth, and went to the door to enter in, but found it fast
locked. In vain she thought to open it by strength when charms had
closed it, and, finding force of no avail, she determined to use art,
resolving not to leave that room till the next day, when the same
figures would again appear.

At last the morning dawned, calling men to their daily work, and
Britomart, fresh as the morning, came out from her hiding-place. All
that day she spent in wandering and in gazing at the adornment of the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

chamber, till again the second evening spread her black cloak over
everything. Then at midnight the brazen door flew open, and in went bold
Britomart, as she had made up her mind to do, afraid neither of idle
shows nor of false charms.

As soon as she entered, she cast her eyes round to see what had become
of all the persons she had seen in the outside room the night before,
but, lo! they had all vanished. She saw no living mortal of that strange
company except the same hapless lady, whose two hands were bound fast,
and who had an iron chain round her small waist, fastened to a brazen
pillar by which she stood.

In front of her sat the vile Enchanter, drawing in blood strange
characters of his art, to try to make her love him. But who could love
the cause of all her trouble? He had already tried a thousand charms,
but a thousand charms could not alter the lady's steadfast heart.

As soon as the Enchanter saw Britomart, he hastily overthrew his wicked
books, not caring to lose his long labour, and, drawing a knife out of
his pocket, ran fiercely at the lady, thinking, in his villainy, to kill
her. But Britomart, leaping lightly to him, withheld his wicked hand,
and overpowered him.

Then, turning the weapon from the one whom he had first meant it, he
struck at Britomart and wounded her. The hurt was slight, but it so
enraged the maiden that she drew her sword, and smote fiercely at the
tyrant. He fell to the ground half dead, and the next stroke would have
slain him, had not the lady who

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

stood bound called to Britomart not to kill him. If she did so, the
prisoner's pain would be without remedy,

<span id="img_21400"></span>

[![](tn/21400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21400.jpg)

for no one but the Enchanter who had put the spell on her could take it
off again.

Then Britomart unwillingly stayed her hand, for she grudged him his
life, and longed to see him punished.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

"Thou wicked man," she said to him, "whose huge mischief and villainy
merit death or worse than death, be sure that nothing shall save thee,
unless thou immediately restore the lady to health and to her former
condition. This do and live, or else thou shalt undoubtedly die."

The Enchanter, glad to live, for he had expected nothing but death,
yielded willingly, and, rising, began at once to look over the wicked
book, in order to reverse his charms. He read aloud many dreadful
things, so that Britomart's heart was pierced with horror. But all the
time he read, she held her sword high over him, in case he tried to do
further mischief.

Presently the house began to quake, and all the doors to rattle. Yet
this did not dismay her nor make her slacken her threatening hand. But,
with steadfast eye and stout courage, she waited to see what would be
the end. At last the mighty chain which was wound round the lady's waist
fell down, and the great brazen pillar broke into small pieces.
Gradually her look of terrible suffering passed, and she became restored
to perfect health, as if she had never been ill.

When she felt herself unbound, and quite well and strong, she threw
herself at the feet of Britomart.

"Ah, noble Knight!" she said, "what recompense can a wretched lady,
freed from her woeful state, yield you for your gracious deed? Your
virtue shall bring its own reward, even immortal praise and glory, which
I, your vassal, freed by your prowess, shall proclaim throughout the
world."

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

But Britomart, lifting her from the ground, said, "Gentle lady, this I
ween is reward enough for many more labours than I have done, that now I
see you in safety, and that I have been the means of your deliverance.
Henceforth, fair lady, take comfort, and put away remembrance of your
late trouble. Know, instead, that your loving husband has endured no
less grief for your sake."

Amoret, for that was the lady's name, was much cheered to hear this
mention of Sir Scudamour, for she loved him best of all living people.

Then the noble champion laid her strong hand on the Enchanter who had
treated Amoret so cruelly, and, with the great chain with which he had
formerly kept prisoner the hapless lady, she now bound himself, and led
him away captive.

Returning the way she came, Britomart was dismayed to find that the
goodly rooms which she had lately seen so richly and royally adorned had
utterly vanished, and all their glory had decayed. Descending to the
perilous porch, she found also that the dreadful flames, which had
formerly so cruelly scorched all those who tried to enter, were quenched
like a burnt-out torch. It was now much easier to pass out than it had
been to come in. The Enchanter, who had framed this fraud to compel the
love of the fair lady, was deeply vexed to see his work all wasted.

But when Britomart arrived at the place where she had left Sir Scudamour
and her own trusty squire (her old nurse, Glaucé), she found neither of
them there. At this she was sorely astonished, and, above all,

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Amoret, who had looked forward to seeing her own
dear Knight, being deprived of this hope, was filled with fresh alarm.

Sir Scudamour, poor man, had waited long in dread for Britomart's
return, but not seeing her, nor any sign of her success, his expectation
turned to despair, for he felt sure that the flames must have burnt her.
Therefore he took counsel with her old squire, who mourned her loss no
less deeply, and the two departed in search of further aid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Strange Meetings befell on the Way](sfq49)
