[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq63)  [Next](sfq65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How the Good Horse Brigadore knew his own Master

While every one was busied about Florimell, and in hearing the truth
about Braggadochio, Sir Guyon, as it befell, came forward from the
thickest of the crowd to claim his own good steed, which Braggadochio
had stolen long ago. Seizing the golden bit with one hand, he drew his
sword with the other, for he meant to smite the thief heavily, and had
he not been held he would certainly have done so.

Then a great hurly-burly rose in the hall because of that war-horse, for
Braggadochio would not let him pass, and Sir Guyon was quite resolved to
have him, or to put the matter to the proof over his dead body. The
uproar being perceived by Artegall, he drew near to stay the tumult, and
began to ask how the steed had been taken away, whether extorted by
might or stolen by cunning.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Then Sir Guyon told him about the Knight and the Lady, whom he and the
Palmer had found, and to avenge whom he had gone on his quest against
the wicked enchantress, Acrasia. He described how, when he had gone into
the thicket to help the dying lady, his horse had been purloined by
craft, for which he now challenged the thief to fight. But Braggadochio
would by no means consent to this, for he hated such doings, and would
rather lose than make trial of his right by an appeal to arms.

Sir Artegall, hearing this, might then have handed over the horse to Sir
Guyon, for according to knightly custom there was no need to try one's
cause by the law of arms, if a foe refused to meet one in the field. But
wishing to establish Guyon's claim properly, he asked him to describe
any secret token borne by the horse.

"If that will satisfy you," said Sir Guyon, "there is within his mouth a
black spot, shaped like a horse's shoe, for any one who cares to seek
for it."

In order to test this, some one took hold of the horse, to look into his
mouth; but the creature immediately struck at him so savagely with his
heels that he broke his ribs to pieces. Another, who seemed to have a
little more sense, took him by the bright embroidered headstall, but the
horse bit him so sharply on the shoulder that he was quite disabled. Nor
would he open his mouth to a single person until Sir Guyon himself spoke
to him, and called him by his name, "Brigadore."

The instant the horse understood his voice he stood stock-still, and
allowed every one to see the secret mark; and when his master called him
by name he broke all

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

 

<span id="img_30300"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="img/30300.jpg"><img src="tn/30300.jpg" alt="&#39;&#39;And out of court him scourged openly;&lt;BR&gt; So ought all faytours that true knighthood shame,&lt;BR&gt; And armes dishonour with base villanie,&lt;BR&gt; From all brave knights be banisht with defame.&#39;&#39;" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />

''And out of court him scourged openly;<br />
So ought all faytours that true knighthood shame,<br />
And armes dishonour with base villanie,<br />
From all brave knights be banisht with defame.''<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

his fastenings with joy, and gleefully followed him, frisking, and
prancing, and bending his head in submission. Thereupon Sir Artegall
plainly saw to whom he belonged, and said--

"Lo, there, Sir Guyon, take to yourself the steed, arrayed as he is in
his golden saddle, and let that worthless fellow fare hence on foot,
until he has gained a horse."

But the vain braggart began to rate and revile Sir Artegall for giving
such an unjust judgment against him. The Knight was so incensed at his
insolence that he was tempted to punish him, and thrice he laid his hand
on his sword to slay him. But Sir Guyon pacified Sir Artegall, saying it
would only dishonour him to wreak his wrath on a churl like that. It
would be punishment enough that every one saw his disgrace.

Then Talus seized the boaster, and dragging him out of the hall
inflicted this punishment on him, First he shaved off his beard; then he
took his shield, and turned it upside down, and blotted out the device;
and then he broke his sword in two, and scattered all his armour. After
that he openly scourged him out of the court.

So should all traitors who shame true chivalry be banished with infamy
from among brave knights, for their evil doings often bring disgrace on
just merit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventure of the Two Brothers and the Coffer](sfq65)
