[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss08)  [Next](oss10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CATH-LODA

### Duan II

ARGUMENT OF DUAN II.

Fingal, returning with day, devolves the command on Duth-maruno, who
engages the enemy, and drives them over the stream of Turthor. Having
recalled his people, he congratulates Duth-maruno on his success, but
discovers that that hero had been mortally wounded in the
action--Duth-maruno dies. Ullin, the bard in honor of the dead,
introduces the episode of Colgorm and Strina-dona, which concludes this
duan.

"WHERE art thou, son of the king?" said dark-haired Duth-maruno. "Where
hast thou failed, young beam of Selma? He returns not from the bosom of
night! Morning is spread on U-thorno. In his mist is the sun on his
hill. Warriors, lift the shields in my presence. He must not fall like a
fire from heaven, whose place is not marked on the ground. He comes like
an eagle, from the skirt of his squally wind! In

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

his hand are the spoil of foes. King of Selma, our souls were sad!"

"Near us are the foes, Duth-maruno. They come forward, like waves in
mist, when their foamy tops are seen at times above the low-sailing
vapor. The traveller shrinks on his journey; he knows not whither to
fly. No trembling travellers are we! Sons of heroes call forth the
steel. Shall the sword of Fingal arise, or shall a warrior lead?"

The deeds of old, said Duth-maruno, are like paths to our eyes, O
Fingal! Broad-shielded Trenmor is still seen amidst his own dim years.
Nor feeble was the soul of the king. There no dark deed wandered in
secret. From their hundred streams came the tribes, to glassy
Colglan-crona. Their chiefs were before them. Each strove to lead the
war. Their swords were often half unsheathed. Red rolled their eyes of
rage. Separate they stood, and hummed their surly songs. "Why should
they yield to each other? their fathers were equal in war." Trenmor was
there, with his people stately, in youthful locks. He saw the advancing
foe. The grief of his soul arose. He bade the chiefs to lead by turns;
they led, but they were rolled away. From his own mossy hill
blue-shielded Trenmor came down. He led wide-skirted battle, and the
strangers failed. Around him the dark-browed warriors came: they struck
the shield of joy. Like a pleasant gale the words of power rushed forth
from Selma of kings. But the chiefs led by turns, in war, till mighty
danger rose: then was the hour of the king to conquer in the field.

"Not unknown," said Cromma-glas of shields, "are the deeds of our
fathers. But who shall now lead the war before the race of kings? Mist
settles on these four dark hills: within it let each warrior strike his
shield. Spirits may descend in darkness, and mark us for the war."

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

They went each to his hill of mist. Bards marked the sounds of the
shields. Loudest rung thy boss Duth-maruno. Thou must lead in war!

Like the murmurs of waters the race of U-thorno came down. Starno led
the battle, and Swaran of stormy isles. They looked forward from iron
shields like Cruth-loda, fiery-eyed, when he looks from behind the
darkened moon, and strews his signs on night. The foes met by Turthor's
stream. They heaved like ridgy waves. Their echoing strokes are mixed.
Shadowy death flies over the hosts. They were clouds of hail. with
squally winds in their skirts. Their showers are roaring together. Below
them swells the dark-rolling deep.

Strife of gloomy U-thorno, why should I mark thy wounds? Thou art with
the years that are gone; thou fadest on my soul!

Starno brought forward his skirt of war, and Swaran his own dark wing.
Nor a harmless fire is Duth-maruno's sword. Lochlin is rolled over her
streams. The wrathful kings are lost in thought. They roll their silent
eyes over the flight of their land. The horn of Fingal was heard; the
sons of woody Albion returned. But many lay, by Turthor's stream, silent
in their blood.

"Chief of Crathmo," said the king, "Duth-maruno, hunter of boars! not
harmless returns my eagle from the field of foes! For this white-bosomed
Lanul shall brighten at her streams; Candona shall rejoice as he wanders
in Crathmo's fields."

"Colgorm," replied the chief, "was the first of my race in Albion;
Colgorm, the rider of ocean; through Its watery vales. He slew his
brother in I-thorno: <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) he left the
land of his fathers. He chose his place in

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

silence, by rocky Crathmo-craulo. His race came forth in their years;
they came forth to war, but they always fell. The wound of my fathers is
mine, king of echoing isles!

He drew an arrow from his side! He fell pale in a land unknown. His soul
came forth to his fathers, to their stormy isle. There they pursued
boars of mist, along the skirts of winds. The chiefs stood silent
around, as the stones of Loda, on their hill. The traveller sees them,
through the twilight, from his lonely path. He thinks them the ghosts of
the aged, forming future wars.

Night came down on U-thorno. Still stood the chiefs in their grief. The
blast whistled, by turns, through every warrior's hair. Fingal, at
length, broke forth from the thoughts of his soul. He called Ullin of
harps, and bade the song to rise. "No falling fire, that is only seen,
and then retires in night; no departing meteor was he that is laid so
low. He was like the strong-beaming sun, long rejoicing on his hill,
Call the names of his fathers from their dwellings old!'"

I-thorno, said the bard, that risest midst ridgy seas! Why is thy head
so gloomy in the ocean's mist? From thy vales came forth a race,
fearless as thy strong winged eagles: the race of Colgorm of iron
shields, dwellers of Loda's hall.

In Tormoth's resounding isle arose Lurthan, streamy hill. It bent its
woody head over a silent vale. There, at foamy Cruruth's source, dwelt
Rurmar, hunter of boars! His daughter was fair as a sunbeam,
white-bosomed Strina-dona!

Many a king of heroes, and hero of iron shields; many a youth of heavy
locks came to Rurmar's echoing hall. They came to woo the maid, the
stately huntress of Tormoth wild. But thou lookest careless from thy
steps, high-bosomed Strina-dona!

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

If on the heath she moved, her breast was whiter than the down of
cana; <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) If on the sea-beat shore, than
the foam of the rolling ocean. Her eyes were two stars of light. Her
face was heaven's bow in showers. Her dark hair flowed round it, like
the streaming clouds. Thou wert the dweller of souls, white-handed
Strina-dona!

Colgorm came in his ship, and Corcul-suran, king of shells. The brothers
came from I-thorno to woo the sunbeam of Tormoth wild. She saw them in
their echoing steel. Her soul was fixed on blue-eyed Colgorm.
Ul-lochlin's  <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) nightly eye looked in,
and saw the tossing arms of Strina-dona.

Wrathful the brothers frowned. Their flaming eyes in silence met. They
turned away. They struck their shields. Their hands were trembling on
their swords. They rushed into the strife of heroes for long haired
Strina-dona.

Corcul-suran fell in blood. On his isle raged the strength of his
father. He turned Colgorm from I-thorno, to wander on all the winds. In
Crathmocraulo's rocky field he dwelt by a foreign stream. Nor darkened
the king alone, that beam of light was near, the daughter of echoing
Tormoth, white armed Strina-dona.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[196:1](oss09.htm#fr_43) An island of
Scandinavia.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[198:1](oss09.htm#fr_44) The cana is a certain
kind of grass, which grows plentifully in the heathy morasses of the
north.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[198:2](oss09.htm#fr_45) Ul-lochlin "the guide
to Lochlin;" the name of a star.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Duan III](oss10)
