[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss09)  [Next](oss11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

# CATH-LODA

### DUAN III.

ARGUMENT

Ossian, after some general reflections, describes the situation of
Fingal, and the position of the army of Lochlin.--The conversation of
Starno and Swaran.--The episode of Corman-trunar and
Foina-bragal.--Starno, from his own example, recommends to Swaran to
surprise Fingal, who had retired alone to a neighboring hill. Upon
Swaran's refusal, Starno undertakes the enterprise himself, is overcome
and taken prisoner by Fingal. He is dismissed after a severe reprimand
for his cruelty.

WHENCE is the stream of years? Whither do they roll along? Where have
they hid, in mist, their many colored sides.

I look unto the times of old, but they seem dim to Ossian's eyes, like
reflected moonbeams on a distant lake. Here rise the red beams of war!
There, silent dwells a feeble race! They mark no years with their deeds,
as slow they pass along. Dweller between the shields! thou that awakest
the failing soul! descend from thy wall, harp of Cona, with thy voices
three! Come with that which kindles the past: rear the forms of old, on
their own dark-brown years!

U-thorno, hill of storms, I behold my race on thy side. Fingal is
bending in night over Duth-maruno's tomb. Near him are the steps of his
heroes, hunters of the boar. By Turthor's stream the host of Lochlin is
deep in shades. The wrathful kings stood on two hills: they looked
forward on their bossy shields. They looked forward to the stars of
night, red wandering in the west. Cruth-loda bends from high, like
formless meteor in clouds. He sends abroad the winds and marks them with
his signs. Starno foresaw that Morven's king was not to yield in war.

He twice struck the tree in wrath. He rushed before his son. He hummed a
surly song, and heard his air in wind. Turned from one another, they
stood,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

like two oaks, which different winds had bent; each hangs over his own
loud rill, and shakes his boughs in the course of blasts.

"Annir," said Starno of lakes, "was a fire that consumed of old. He
poured death from his eyes along the striving fields. His joy was in the
fall of men. Blood to him was a summer stream, that brings joy to the
withered vales, from its own mossy rock. He came forth to the lake
Luth-cormo, to meet the tall Corman-trunar, he from Urlor of streams,
dweller of battle's wing."

The chief of Urlor had come to Gormal with his dark-bosomed ships. He
saw the daughter of Annir, white-armed Foina-bragal. He saw her! Nor
careless rolled her eyes on the rider of stormy waves. She fled to his
ship in darkness, like a moonbeam through a nightly veil. Annir pursued
along the deep; he called the winds of heaven. Nor alone was the king!
Starno was by his side. Like U-thorno's young eagle, I turned my eyes on
my father.

We rushed into roaring Urlor. With his people came tall Corman-trunar.
We fought; but the foe prevailed. In his wrath my father stood. He
lopped the young trees with his sword. His eyes rolled red in his rage.
I marked the soul of the king, and I retired in night. From the field I
took a broken helmet; a shield that was pierced with steel; pointless
was the spear in my hand. I went to find the foe.

On a rock sat tall Corman-trunar beside his burning oak; and near him
beneath a tree, sat deep-bosomed Foina-bragal. I threw my broken shield
before her! I spoke the words of peace. "Beside his rolling sea lies
Annir of many lakes. The king was pierced in battle; and Starno is to
raise his tomb. Me, a son of Loda, he sends to white-handed Foina, to
bid her send a lock from her hair, to rest with her father in earth.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And thou, king of roaring Urlor, let the battle
cease, till Annir receive the shell from fiery-eyed Cruth-loda."

Bursting into tears, she rose, and tore a lock from her hair; a lock,
which wandered in the blast, along her heaving breast. Corman-trunar
gave the shell, and bade me rejoice before him. I rested in the shade of
night, and hid my face in my helmet deep. Sleep descended on the foe. I
rose, like a stalking ghost. I pierced the side of Corman-trunar. Nor
did Foina-bragal escape. She rolled her white bosom in blood.

Why, then, daughter of heroes, didst thou wake my rage?

Morning rose. The foe were fled, like the departure of mist. Annir
struck his bossy shield. He called his dark-haired son. I came, streaked
with wandering blood: thrice rose the shout of the king, like the
bursting forth of a squall of wind from a cloud by night. We rejoiced
three days above the dead, and called the hawks of heaven. They came
from all their winds to feast on Annir's foes. Swaran, Fingal is alone
in his hill of night. Let thy spear pierce the king in secret; like
Annir, my soul shall rejoice.

"O Son of Annir," said Swaran, "I shall not slay in shades: I move forth
in light: the hawks rush from all their winds. They are wont to trace my
course: it is not harmless through war."

Burning rose the rage of the king. He thrice raised his gleaming spear.
But, starting, he spared his son, and rushed into the night. By
Turthor's stream, a cave is dark, the dwelling of Conban-carglas. There
he laid the helmet of kings, and called the maid of Lulan; but she was
distant far in Loda's resounding hall.

Swelling in his rage, he strode to where Fingal lay alone. The king was
laid on his shield, on his own secret hill.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Stern hunter of shaggy boars! no feeble maid is laid before thee. No boy
on his ferny bed, by Turthor's murmuring stream. Here is spread the
couch of the mighty, from which they rise to deeds of death! Hunter of
shaggy boars, awaken not the terrible!

Starno came murmuring on. Fingal arose in arms. "Who art thou, son of
night!" Silent he threw the spear. They mixed their gloomy strife. The
shield of Starno fell, cleft in twain. He is bound to an oak. The early
beam arose. It was then Fingal beheld the king. He rolled awhile his
silent eyes. He thought of other days, when white-bosomed Agandecca
moved like the music of songs. He loosed the thong from his hands. Son
of Annir, he said, retire. Retire to Gormal of shells; a beam that was
set returns. I remember thy white-bosomed daughter; dreadful king, away!
Go to thy troubled dwelling, cloudy foe of the lovely Let the stranger
shun thee, thou gloomy in the hall"

A tale of the times of old!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Comala, A Dramatic Poem](oss11)
