[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss20)  [Next](oss22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

# SUL-MALLA OF LUMON.

### ARGUMENT.

This poem, which, properly speaking, is a continuation of the last,
opens with an address to Sul-malla, the daughter of the king of
Inis-huna, whom Ossian met at the chase, as he returned from the battle
of Rath-col. Sul-malla invites Ossian and Oscar to a feast, at the
residence of her father, who was then absent on the wars. Upon hearing
their names and family, she relates an expedition of Fingal into
Inis-huna. She casually mentioning Cathmor, chief of Atha, (who then
assisted her father against his enemies,) Ossian introduces the episode
of Culgorm and Suran-dronlo, two Scandinavian kings, in whose wars
Ossian himself and Cathmor were engaged on opposite sides. The story is
imperfect, a part of the original being lost. Ossian, warned in a dream
by the ghost of Trenmor, sets sail from Inis-huna.

WHO moves so stately on Lumon, at the roar of the foamy waters? Her hair
falls upon her heaving breast. White is her arm behind, as slow she
bends the bow. Why dost thou wander in deserts, like a light through a
cloudy field? The young roes are panting by their secret rocks. Return,
thou daughter of kings! the cloudy night is near! It was the young
branch of green Inis-huna, Sul-malla of blue eyes. She sent the bard
from her rock to bid us to her feast. Amidst the song we sat down in
Cluba's echoing hall. White moved the hands of Sul-malla on the
trembling strings. Half-heard amidst the sound, was the name of Atha's
king: he that was absent in battle for her own green land. Nor absent
from her soul was he: he came 'midst her thoughts by night. Ton-thena
looked in from the sky, and saw her tossing arms.

The sound of shells had ceased. Amidst long locks Sul-malla rose. She
spoke with bended eyes, and asked of our course through seas; "for of
the kings

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

of men are ye, tall riders of the wave." "Not unknown," I said, "at his
streams is he, the father of our race. Fingal has been heard of at
Cluba, blue-eyed daughter of kings. Not only at Crona's stream is Ossian
and Oscar known. Foes tremble at our voice and shrink in other lands."

"Not unmarked," said the maid, "by Sul-malla, is the shield of Morven's
king. It hangs high in my father's hall, in memory of the past, when
Fingal came to Cluba, in the days of other years. Loud roared the boar
of Culdarnu, in the midst of his rocks and woods. Inis-huna sent her
youths; but they failed, and virgins wept over tombs. Careless went
Fingal to Culdarnu. On his spear rolled the strength of the woods. He
was bright, they said, in his locks, the first of mortal men. Nor at the
feast were heard his words. His deeds passed from his soul of fire, like
the rolling of vapors from the face of the wandering sun. Not careless
looked the blue eyes of Cluba on his stately steps. In white bosoms rose
the king of Selma, in the midst of their thoughts by night. But the
winds bore the stranger to the echoing vales of his roes. Nor lost to
other lands was he, like a meteor, that sinks in a cloud. He came forth,
at times in his brightness, to the distant dwelling of foes. His fame
came, like the sound of winds, to Cluba's woody vale.

"Darkness dwells in Cluba of harps! the race of kings is distant far: in
battle is my father Conmor; and Lormar, my brother, king of streams. Nor
darkening alone are they; a beam from other lands is nigh; the friend of
strangers  <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) in Atha, the troubler of
the field. High from their misty hills looks forth the blue eyes of
Erin, for he is far away, young dweller of their souls! Nor harmless,
white hands of Erin! is Cathmor

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

in the skirts of war; he rolls ten thousand before him in his distant
field."

"Not unseen by Ossian," I said, "rushed Cathmor from his streams, when
he poured his strength on I-thorno, isle of many waves! In strife met
two kings in I-thorno, Culgorm and Suran-dronlo: each from his echoing
isle, stern hunters of the boar!

"They met a boar at a foamy stream; each pierced him with his spear.
They strove for the fame of the deed, and gloomy battle rose. From isle
to isle they sent a spear broken and stained with blood, to call the
friends of their fathers in their sounding arms. Cathmor came from Erin
to Colgorm, red-eyed king; I aided Suran-dronlo in his land of boars.

"We rushed on either side of a stream, which roared through a blasted
heath. High broken rocks were round with all their bending trees. Near
were two circles of Loda, with the stone of power, where spirits
descended by night in dark-red streams of fire. There, mixed with the
murmur of waters, rose the voice of aged men; they called the forms of
night to aid them in their war.

"Heedless I stood with my people, where fell the foamy stream from
rocks. The moon moved red from the mountain. My song at times arose.
Dark, on the other side, young Cathmor heard my voice, for he lay
beneath the oak in all his gleaming arms. Morning came: we rushed to the
fight; from wing to wing is the rolling of strife. They fell like the
thistle's head beneath autumnal winds.

"In armor came a stately form: I mixed my strokes with the chief. By
turns our shields are pierced: loud rung our steely mail. His helmet
fell to the ground. In brightness shone the foe. His eyes, two pleasant
flames, rolled between his wandering locks. I knew Cathmor of Atha, and
threw my spear on earth.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Dark we turned, and silent passed to mix with
other foes.

"Not so passed the striving kings. They mixed in echoing fray, like the
meeting of ghosts in the dark wing of winds. Through either breast
rushed the spears, nor yet lay the foes on earth! A rock received their
fall; half-reclined they lay in death. Each held the lock of his foe:
each grimly seemed to roll his eyes. The stream of the rock leapt on
their shields, and mixed below with blood.

"The battle ceased in I-thorno. The strangers met in peace: Cathmor from
Atha of streams, and Ossian king of harps. We placed the dead in earth.
Our steps were by Runar's bay. With the bounding boat afar advanced a
ridgy wave. Dark was the rider of seas, but a beam of light was there
like the ray of the sun in Stromlo's rolling smoke. It was the daughter
of Suran-dronlo, wild in brightened looks. Her eyes were wandering
flames amidst disordered locks. Forward is her white arm with the spear;
her high-heaving breast is seen, white as foamy waves that rise, by
turns, amidst rocks. They are beautiful, but terrible, and mariners call
the winds!

"Come, ye dwellers of Loda!" she said: "come, Carchar, pale in the midst
of clouds! Sluthmor that stridest in airy halls! Corchtur, terrible in
winds! Receive from his daughter's spear the foes of Suran-dronlo. No
shadow at his roaring streams, no mildly looking form, was he! When he
took up his spear, the hawks shook their sounding wings: for blood was
poured a round the steps of dark-eyed Suran-dronlo. He lighted me no
harmless beam to glitter on his streams. Like meteors I was bright, but
I blasted the foes of Suran-dronlo."

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

Nor unconcerned heard Sul-malla the praise of

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Cathmor of shields. He was within her soul, like
a fire in secret heath, which awakes at the voice of the blast, and
sends its beam abroad. Amidst the song removed the daughter of kings,
like the voice of a summer breeze, when it lifts the heads of flowers,
and curls the lakes and streams. The rustling Sound gently spreads o'er
the vale, softly-pleasing as it saddens the soul.

By night came a dream to Ossian; formless stood the shadow of Trenmor.
He seemed to strike the dim shield on Selma's streamy rock. I rose in my
rattling steel: I knew that war was near; before the winds our sails
were spread, when Lumon showed its streams to the morn.

Come from the watching night Malvina, lonely beam!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[276:1](oss21.htm#fr_60) The friend of
strangers: Cathmor, the son of Borbar-duthol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The War of Inis-thona](oss22)
