[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss23)  [Next](oss25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

FINGAL:

AN ANCIENT EPIC POEM

BOOK I.

ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin (general of the Irish tribes, in the minority of Cormac, king
of Ireland) sitting alone beneath a tree, at the gate of Tura, a castle
of Ulster (the other chiefs having gone on a hunting party to Cromla, a
neighboring hill,) is informed of the landing of Swaran, king of
Lochlin, by Moran, the son of Fithil, one of his scouts. He convenes the
chiefs; a council is held, and disputes run high about giving battle to
the enemy. Connal, the petty king of Togorma, and an intimate friend of
Cuthullin, was for retreating, till Fingal, king of those Caledonians
who inhabited the north-west coast of Scotland, whose aid had been
previously solicited, should arrive; but Calmar, the son of Matha, lord
of Lara, a country in Connaught, was for engaging the enemy immediately.
Cuthullin, of himself willing to fight, went into the opinion of Calmar.
Marching towards the enemy, he missed three of his bravest heroes,
Fergus, Duchômar, and Câthba. Fergus arriving, tells Cuthullin of the
death of the two other chiefs: which introduces the affecting episode of
Morna, the daughter of Cormac. The army of Cuthullin is descried at a
distance by Swaran, who sent the son of Arno to observe the motions of
the enemy, while he himself ranged his forces in order of battle. The
son of Arno returning to Swaran, describes to him Cuthullin's chariot,
and the terrible appearance of that hero. The armies engage, but night
coming on, leaves the victory undecided. Cuthullin, according to the
hospitality of the times, sends to Swaran a formal invitation to a
feast, by his bard Carril, the son of Kinfena. Swaran refuses to come.
Carril relates to Cuthullin the story of Grudar and Brassolis. A party,
by Connal's advice, is sent to observe the enemy; which closes the
action of the first day.

CUTHULLIN sat by Tura's wall; by the tree of the rustling sound. His
spear leaned against the rock. His shield lay on the grass by his side.
Amid his thoughts of mighty Cairbar, a hero slain by the chief

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

in war; the scout of ocean comes, Moran the son of Fithil!

"Arise," said the youth, "Cuthullin, arise. I see the ships of the
north! Many, chief of men, are the foe. Many the heroes of the sea-borne
Swaran!"--"Moran!" replied the blue-eyed chief "thou ever tremblest, son
of Fithil! Thy fears have increased the foe. It is Fingal, king of
deserts, with aid to green Erin of streams."--"I beheld their chief,"
says Moran, "tall as a glittering rock. His spear is a blasted pine. His
shield the rising moon! He sat on the shore! like a cloud of mist on the
silent hill! Many, chief of heroes! I said, many are our hands of war.
Well art thou named, the mighty man; but many mighty men are seen from
Tura's windy walls.

"He spoke, like a wave on a rock, 'Who in this land appears like me?
Heroes stand not in my presence: they fall to earth from my hand. Who
can meet Swaran in fight? Who but Fingal, king of Selma of storms? Once
we wrestled on Malmor; our heels overturned the woods. Rocks fell from
their place; rivulets, changing their course, fled murmuring from our
side. Three days we renewed the strife; heroes stood at a distance and
trembled. On the fourth, Fingal says, that the king of the ocean fell!
but Swaran says he stood! Let dark Cuthullin yield to him, that is
strong as the storms of his land!'

"No!" replied the blue-eyed chief, "I never yield to mortal man! Dark
Cuthullin shall be great or dead! Go, son of Fithil, take my spear.
Strike the sounding shield of Semo. It hangs at Tura's rustling gale.
The sound of peace is not its voice! My heroes shall hear and obey." He
went. He struck the bossy shield. The hills, the rocks reply. The sound
spreads along the wood: deer start by the lake of roes. Curach leaps
from the sounding rock! and Connal of

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

the bloody spear! Crugal's breast of snow beats high. The son of Favi
leaves the dark-brown hind. It is the shield of war, said Ronnart; the
spear of Cuthullin, said Lugar! Son of the sea, put on thy arms! Calmar,
lift thy sounding steel! Puno! dreadful hero, arise! Cairbar, from thy
red tree of Cromla! Bend thy knee, O Eth! descend from the streams of
Lena. Caolt, stretch thy side as thou movest along the whistling heath
of Mora: thy side that is white as the foam of the troubled sea, when
the dark winds pour it on rocky Cuthon.

Now I behold the chiefs, in the pride of their former deeds! Their souls
are kindled at the battles of old; at the actions of other times. Their
eyes are flames of fire. They roll in search of the foes of the land.
Their mighty hands are on their swords. Lightning pours from their sides
of steel. They come like streams from the mountains; each rushes roaring
from the hill. Bright are the chiefs of battle, in the armor of their
fathers. Gloomy and dark, their heroes follow like the gathering of the
rainy clouds behind the red meteors of heaven. The sounds of crashing
arms ascend. The gray dogs howl between. Unequal bursts the song of
battle. Rocking Cromla echoes round. On Lena's dusky heath they stand,
like mist that shades the hills of autumn; when broken and dark it
settles high, and lifts its head to heaven.

"Hail," said Cuthullin, "Sons of the narrow vales! hail, hunters of the
deer! Another sport is drawing near: it is like the dark rolling of that
wave on the coast! Or shall we fight, ye sons of war! or yield green
Erin to Lochlin? O Connal! speak, thou first of men! thou breaker of the
shields! thou hast often fought with Lochlin: wilt thou lift thy
father's spear?"

"Cuthullin!" calm the chief replied, "the spear of Connal is keen. it
delights to shine in battle, to mix

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

with the blood of thousands. But though my hand is bent on fight, my
heart is for the peace of Erin.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)
Behold, thou first in Cormac's war, the sable fleet of Swaran. His masts
are many on our coasts, like reeds on the lake of Lego. His ships are
forests clothed with mists, when the trees yield by turns to the squally
wind. Many are his chiefs in battle. Connal is for peace! Fingal would
shun his arm, the first of mortal men! Fingal who scatters the mighty,
as stormy winds the echoing Cona; and night settles with all her clouds
on the hill!"

"Fly, thou man of peace!" said Colmar, "fly," said the son of Matha;
"go, Connal, to thy silent hills, where the spear never brightens in
war! Pursue the dark-brown deer of Cromla: stop with thine arrows the
bounding roes of Lena. But blue-eyed son of Semo, Cuthullin, ruler of
the field, scatter thou the Sons of Lochlin!  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) roar through the ranks of their pride. Let
no vessel of the kingdom of snow bound on the dark-rolling waves of
Inistore.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70) Rise, ye dark winds of
Erin, rise! roar, whirlwinds of Lara of hinds! Amid the tempest let me
die, torn, in a cloud, by angry ghosts of men; amid the tempest let
Calmar die, if ever chase was sport to him, so much as the battle of
shields!

"Calmar!" Connal slow replied, "I never fled, young son of Matha! I was
swift with my friends in fight; but small is the fame of Connal! The
battle was won in my presence! the valiant overcame! But, son of Semo,
hear my voice, regard the ancient throne of Cormac. Give wealth and half
the land for peace, till Fingal shall arrive on our coast. Or, if war be
thy

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

choice, I lift the sword and spear. My joy shall be in midst of
thousands; my soul shall alighten through the gloom of the fight!"

"To me," Cuthullin replies, "pleasant is the noise of arms! pleasant as
the thunder of heaven, before the shower of spring! But gather all the
shining tribes, that I may view the sons of war! Let then pass along the
heath, bright as the sunshine before a storm; when the west wind
collects the clouds, and Morven echoes over all her oaks! But where are
my friends in battle? the supporters of my arm in danger? Where art
thou, white-bosomed Câthba? Where is that cloud in war, Duchômar? Hast
thou left me, O Fergus! in the day of the storm? Fergus, first in our
joy at the feast! son of Rossa! arm of death! comest thou like a roe
from Malmor? like a hart from thy echoing hills? Hall, thou son of
Rossa! what shades the soul of war?"

"Four stones,"  <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) replied the chief,
"rise on the grave of Câthba. These hands have laid in earth Duchômar,
that cloud in war! Câthba, son of Torman! thou wert a sunbeam in Erin.
And thou, O valiant Duchômar! a mist of the marshy Lano; when it moves
on the plains of autumn, bearing the death of thousands along. Morna!
fairest of maids! calm is thy sleep in the cave of the rock! Thou hast
fallen in darkness, like a star, that shoots across the desert; when the
traveller is alone, and mourns the transient beam!"

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

"Say," said Semo's blue-eyed son, "say how fell the chiefs of Erin. Fell
they by the sons of Lochlin, striving in the battle of heroes? Or what
confines the strong in arms to the dark and narrow house?"

"Câthba," replied the hero, "fell by the sword of Duchômar at the oak of
the noisy streams. Duchômar came to Tura's cave; he spoke to the lovely
Morna. 'Morna, fairest among women, lovely daughter of strong-armed
Cormac! Why in the circle of stones: in the cave of the rock alone? The
stream murmurs along. The old tree groans in the wind. The lake is
troubled before thee: dark are the clouds of the sky! But thou art snow
on the heath; thy hair is the mist of Cromla; when it curls on the hill,
when it shines to the beam of the west! Thy breasts are two smooth rocks
seen from Branno of streams. Thy arms, like two white pillars in the
halls of the great Fingal.'

"'From whence,' the fair-haired maid replied, 'from whence Duchômar,
most gloomy of men? Dark are thy brows and terrible! Red are thy rolling
eyes! Does Swaran appear on the sea? What of the foe, Duchômar?' 'From
the hill I return, O Morna, from the hill of the dark-brown hinds. Three
have I slain with my bended yew. Three with my long-bounding dogs of the
chase. Lovely daughter of Cormac, I love thee as my soul: I have slain
one stately deer for thee. High was his branchy head-and fleet his feet
of wind.' 'Duchômar!' calm the maid replied, 'I love thee not, thou
gloomy man! hard is thy heart of rock; dark is thy terrible brow. But
Câthba, young son of Torman, thou art the love of Morna. Thou art a
sunbeam, in the day of the gloomy storm. Sawest thou the son of Torman,
lovely on the hill of his hinds? Here the daughter of Cormac waits the
coming of Câthba!"

"'Long shall Morna wait,' Duchômar said, 'long shall Morna wait for
Câthba! Behold this sword unsheathed!

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Here wanders the blood of Câthba. Long shall
Morna wait. He fell by the stream of Branno. On Croma I will raise his
tomb, daughter of blue-shielded Cormac! Turn on Duchômar thine eyes; his
arm is strong as a storm.' 'Is the son of Torman fallen?' said the
wildly-bursting voice of the maid; 'is he fallen on his echoing hills,
the youth with the breast of snow? the first in the chase of hinds! the
foe of the strangers of ocean! Thou art dark  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) to me, Duchômar; cruel is thine arm to
Morna! Give me that sword, my foe! I loved the wandering blood of
Câthba!'

"He gave the sword to her tears. She pierced his manly breast! He fell,
like the bank of a mountain stream, and stretching forth his hand, he
spoke: 'Daughter of blue-shielded Cormac! Thou hast slain me in youth!
the sword is cold in my breast! Morna; I feel it cold. Give me to Moina
the maid. Duchômar was the dream of her night! She will raise my tomb;
the hunter shall raise my fame. But draw the sword from my breast,
Morna, the steel is cold!' She came, in all her tears she came; she drew
the sword from his breast. He pierced her white side! He spread her fair
locks on the ground! Her bursting blood sounds from her side: her white
arm is stained with red. Rolling in death she lay. The cave re-echoed to
her sighs."

"Peace," said Cuthullin, "to the souls of the heroes! their deeds were
great in fight. Let them ride around me on clouds. Let them show their
features of war. My soul shall then be firm in danger; mine arm like the
thunder of heaven! But be thou on a moonbeam, O Morna! near the window
of my rest; when my thoughts are of peace; when the din of arms is past.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gather the strength of the tribes! Move to the
wars of Erin! Attend the car of my battles! Rejoice in the noise of my
course! Place three spears by my side: follow the bounding of my steeds!
that my soul may be strong in my friends, when battle darken around the
beams of my steel!

As rushes a stream of foam from the dark shady deep of Cromla, when the
thunder is traveling above, and dark-brown night sits on half the hill.
Through the breaches of the tempest look forth the dim faces of ghosts.
So fierce, so vast, so terrible rushed on the sons of Erin. The chief,
like a whale of ocean, whom all his billows pursue, poured valor forth,
as a stream, rolling his might along the shore. The sons of Lochlin
heard the noise, as the sound of a winter storm. Swaran struck his bossy
shield: he called the son of Arno. "What murmur rolls along the hill,
like the gathered flies of the eve? The sons of Erin descend, or
rustling winds roar in the distant wood! Such is the noise of Gormal,
before the white tops of my waves arise. O son of Arno! ascend the hill;
view the dark face of the heath!"

He went. He trembling swift returned. His eyes rolled wildly round. His
heart beat high against his side. His words were faltering, broken,
slow. "Arise, son of ocean, arise, chief of the dark-brown shields! I
see the dark, the mountain-stream of battle! the deep. moving strength
of the sons of Erin! the car of war comes on, like the flame of death!
the rapid car of Cuthullin, the noble son of Semo! It bends behind like
a wave near a rock; like a sun-streaked mist of the heath. Its sides are
embossed with stones, and sparkle like the sea round the boat of night.
Of polished yew is its beam; its seat of the smoothest bone. The sides
are replenished with spears; the bottom is the foot-stool of heroes!
Before the right side of the

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

car is seen the snorting horse! the high-maned, broad-breasted, proud,
wide-leaping strong steed of the hill. Loud and resounding is his hoof:
the spreading of his mane above is like a stream of smoke on a ridge of
rocks. Bright are the sides of his steed! his name Sulin-Sifadda!

"Before the left side of the car is seen the snorting horse! The
thin-maned, high-headed, strong-hoofed fleet-bounding son of the hill:
His name is Dusronnal, among the stormy sons of the sword! A thousand
thongs bind the car on high. Hard polished bits shine in wreath of foam.
Thin thongs, bright studded with gems, bend on the stately necks of the
steeds. The steeds, that like wreaths of mist fly over the streamy
vales! The wildness of deer is in their course, the strength of eagles
descending on the prey. Their noise is like the blast of winter, on the
sides of the snow-headed Gormal.

"Within the car is seen the chief; the strong-armed son of the sword.
The hero's name is Cuthullin, son of Semo, king of shells. His red cheek
is like my polished yew. The look of his blue-rolling eye is wide,
beneath the dark arch of his brow. His hair flies from his head like a
flame, as bending forward he wields the spear. Fly, king of ocean, fly!
He comes, like a storm along the streamy vale!

"When did I fly?" replied the king; "when fled Swaran from the battle of
spears? When did I shrink from danger, chief of the little soul? I met
the storm of Gormal when the foam of my waves beat high. I met the storm
of the clouds; shall Swaran fly from a hero? Were Fingal himself before
me, my soul should not darken with fear. Arise to battle, my thousands!
pour round me like the echoing main, gather round the bright steel of
your king; strong as the rocks

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

of my land; that meet the storm with joys and stretch their dark pines
to the wind!"

Like autumn's dark storms pouring from two echoing hills, towards each
other approached the heroes. Like two deep streams from high rocks
meeting, mixing roaring on the plain; loud, rough, and dark in battle
meet Lochlin and Ins-fail. Chief mixes his strokes with chief, and man
with man: steel, clanging, sounds on steel. Helmets are cleft on high.
Blood bursts and smokes around. Strings murmur on the polished yews.
Darts rush along the sky. Spears fall like the circles of light, which
gild the face of night: as the noise of the troubled ocean, when roll
the waves on high. As the last peal of thunder in heaven, such is the
din of war! Though Cormac's hundred bards were there to give the fight
to song; feeble was the voice of a hundred bards to send the deaths to
future times! For many were the deaths of heroes; wide poured the blood
of the brave!

Mourn, ye sons of song, mourn the death of the noble Sithàllin. Let the
sons of Fiona rise, on the lone plains of her lovely Ardan. They fell,
like two hinds of the desert, by the hands of the mighty Swaran; when,
in the midst of thousands, he roared like the shrill spirit of a storm.
He sits dim on the clouds of the north, and enjoys the death of the
mariner. Nor slept thy hand by thy side, chief of the isle of mist!
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) Many were the deaths of thine arm,
Cuthullin, thou son of Semo! His sword was like the beam of heaven when
it pierces the sons of the vale: when the people are blasted and fall,
and all the hills are burning around. Dusronnal snorted over the bodies
of heroes. Sifadda bathed his hoof in blood. The battle lay behind

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

them, as groves overturned on the desert of Cromla; when the blast has
passed the heath, laden with the spirits of night!

Weep on the rocks of roaring winds, O maid of Inistore! Bend thy fair
head over the waves, thou lovelier than the ghost of the hills, when it
moves on the sun-beam, at noon, over the silence of Morven. He is
fallen: thy youth is low! pale beneath the sword of Cuthullin! No more
shall valor raise thy love to match the blood of kings. Trenar, graceful
Trenar died, O maid of Inistore! His gray dogs are howling at home: they
see his passing ghost. His bow is in the hall unstrung. No sound is in
the hall of his hinds!

As roll a thousand waves to the rocks, so Swaran's host came on. As
meets a rock a thousand waves, so Erin met Swaran of spears. Death
raises all his voices around, and mixes with the sounds of shields. Each
hero is a pillar of darkness; the sword abeam of fire in his hand. The
field echoes from wing to wing, as a hundred hammers, that rise, by
turns, on the red son of the furnace. Who are these on Lena's heath,
these so gloomy and dark? Who are these like two clouds, and their
swords like lightning. above them? The little hills are troubled around;
the rocks tremble with all their moss. Who is it but ocean's son and the
car-borne chief of Erin? Many are the anxious eyes of their friends, as
they see them dim on the heath. But night conceals the chiefs in clouds,
and ends the dreadful fight!

It was on Cromla's shaggy side that Dorglas had placed the deer; the
early fortune of the chase, before the heroes left the hill. A hundred
youths collect the heath; ten warriors make the fire; three hundred
choose the polished stones. The feast is smoking wide! Cuthullin, chief
of Erin's war, resumed his mighty soul. He stood upon his beamy spear,
and

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

spoke to the son of songs; to Carril of other times, the gray-headed son
of Kinfena. "Is this feast spread for me alone, and the king of Lochlin
on Erin's shore, far from the deer of his hills, and sounding halls of
his feasts? Rise, Carril of other times, carry my words to Swaran. Tell
him from the roaring of waters, that Cuthullin gives his feast. Here let
him listen to the sound of my groves, amidst the clouds of night, for
cold and bleak the blustering winds rush over the foam of his seas. Here
let him praise the trembling harp, and hear the songs of heroes!"

Old Carril went with softest voice. He called the king of dark-brown
shields! Rise, from the skins of thy chase; rise, Swaran, king of
groves! Cuthullin gives the joy of shells. Partake the feast of Erin's
blue-eyed chief! He answered like the sullen sound of Cromla before a
storm. Though all thy daughters, Inis-fail, should stretch their arms of
snow, should raise the heavings of their breasts, softly roll their eyes
of love, yet fixed as Lochlin's thousand rocks here Swaran should
remain, till morn, with the young beams of the east, shall light me to
the death of Cuthullin. Pleasant to my ear is Lochlin's wind! It rushes
over my seas! It speaks aloft in all my shrouds, and brings my green
forests to my mind: the green forests of Gormal, which often echoed to
my winds when my spear was red in the chase of the boar. Let dark
Cuthullin yield to me the ancient throne of Cormac, or Erin's torrents
shall show from their hills the red foam of the blood of his pride!

"Sad is the sound of Swaran's voice," said Carril other times! "Sad to
himself alone," said the blue-eyed son of Semo. "But, Carril, raise the
voice on high; tell the deeds of other times. Send thou the night away
in song, and give the joy of grief. For many heroes and maids of love
have moved on Inis-fail,

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

and lovely are the songs of wo that are heard on Albion's rocks, when
the noise of the chase is past, and the streams of Cona  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) answer to the voice of Ossian.

"In other days," Carril replies, "came the sons of ocean to Erin; a
thousand vessels bounded on waves to Ullin's lovely plains. The sons of
Inis-fail arose to meet the race of dark-brown shields. Cairbar, first
of men, was there, and Grudar, stately youth! Long had they strove for
the spotted bull that towed on Golbun's echoing heath. Each claimed him
as his own. Death was often at the point of their steel. Side by side
the heroes fought: the strangers of ocean fled. Whose name was fairer on
the hill than the name of Cairbar and Grudar? But, ah! why ever lowed
the bull on Golbun's echoing heath? they saw him leaping like snow. The
wrath of the chiefs returned.

"On Lubar's  <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) grassy banks they
fought; Grudar fell in his blood. Fierce Cairbar came to the vale, where
Brassolis, fairest of his sisters, all alone, raised the song of grief.
She sung of the actions of Grudar, the youth of her secret soul. She
mourned him in the field of blood, but still she hoped for his return.
Her white bosom is seen from her robe, as the moon from the clouds of
night, when its edge heaves white on the view from the darkness which
covers its orb). Her voice was softer than the harp to raise the song of
grief. Her soul was fixed on Grudar. The secret look of her eye was his.
'When shalt thou come in thine arms, thou mighty in the war?'

"'Take, Brassolis,' Cairbar came and said; 'take, Brassolis, this shield
of blood. Fix it on high within my hall, the armor of my foe!' Her soft
heart beat

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

against her side. Distracted, pale, she flew. She found her youth in all
his blood; she died on Cromla's heath. Here rests their dust, Cuthullin!
these lonely yews sprung from their tombs, and shade them from the
storm. Fair was Brassolis on the plain! Stately was Grudar on the hill!
The bard shall preserve their names, and send them down to future
times!"

"Pleasant is thy voice, O Carril," said the blue-eyed chief of Erin.
Pleasant are the words of other times. They are like the calm shower of
spring, when the sun looks on the field, and the light cloud flies over
the hills. O strike the harp in praise of my love, the lonely sunbeam of
Dunscaith! Strike the harp in the praise of Bragéla, she that I left in
the isle of mist, the spouse of Semo's son! Dost thou raise thy fair
face from the rock to find the sails of Cuthullin? The sea is rolling
distant far: its white foam deceives thee for my sails. Retire, for it
is night, my love; the dark winds sigh in thy hair. Retire to the halls
of my feasts, think of the times that are past. I will not return till
the storm of war is ceased. O Connal! speak of war and arms, and send
her from my mind. Lovely with her flowing hair is the white-bosomed
daughter of Sorglan."

Connal, slow to speak, replied, "Guard against the race of ocean. Send
thy troop of night abroad, and watch the strength of Swaran. Cuthullin,
I am for peace till the race of Selma come, till Fingal come, the first
of men, and beam, like the sun on our fields!" The hero struck the
shield of alarms, the warriors of the night moved on. The rest lay in
the heath of the deer, and slept beneath the dusky wind. The ghosts
 <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) of the lately dead were near, and
swam on

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

the gloomy clouds; and far distant in the dark silence of Lena, the
feeble voices of death were faintly heard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[296:1](oss24.htm#fr_68) Erin, a name of
Ireland; for "ear," or "iar," west, and "in", an island.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[296:2](oss24.htm#fr_69) Lochlin: The Gaelic
name of a Scandinavian general.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[296:3](oss24.htm#fr_70) The Orkney islands.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[297:1](oss24.htm#fr_71) This passage alludes to
the manner of burial among the ancient Scots. They opened a grave six or
eight feet deep; the bottom was lined with fine clay; and on this they
laid the body of the deceased, and, if a warrior, his sword, and the
heads of twelve arrows by his side. Above they laid another stratum of
clay, in which they placed the horn of a deer, the symbol of hunting.
The whole was covered with a fine mould, and four stones placed on end
to mark the extent of the grave. These are the four stones alluded to
here.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[299:1](oss24.htm#fr_72) She alludes to his name
the "dark man."

<span id="fn_73"></span>[302:1](oss24.htm#fr_73) The isle of Sky; not
improperly called the "isle of mist," as its high hills, which catch the
clouds from the Western Ocean, occasion almost continual rains.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[305:1](oss24.htm#fr_74) The Cona here mentioned
is the small river that runs through Glenco in Argyleshire.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[305:2](oss24.htm#fr_75) Lubar, a river in
Ulster; "Labhar," loud, noisy.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[306:1](oss24.htm#fr_76) It was long the opinion
of the ancient Scots, that a ghost was heard shrieking near the place
where a death was to happen soon after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](oss25)
