[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss41)  [Next](oss43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

# CONLATH AND CUTHONA.

### ARGUMENT.

Conlath was the youngest of Morni's sons, and brother to the celebrated
Gaul. He was in love with Cuthona, the daughter of Rumar, when Toscar,
the son of Kenfena, accompanied by Fercuth his friend, arrived from
Ireland, at Mora, where Conlath dwelt. He was hospitably received, and
according to the custom of the times, feasted three days with Conlath.
On the fourth he set sail, and coasting the *island of waves*, one of
the Hebrides, he saw Cuthona hunting, fell in love with her, and carried
her away, by force, in his ship. He was forced, by stress of weather,
into I-thona, a desert isle. In the mean time Conlath hearing of the
rape, sailed after him, and found him on the point of sailing for the
coast of Ireland. They fought: and they and their followers fell by
mutual wounds. Cuthona did not long survive: for she died of grief the
third day after. Fingal hearing of their unfortunate death, sent Stormal
the son of Moran to bury them, but forgot to send a bard to sing the
funeral song over their tombs. The ghost of Conlath comes long after to
Ossian, to entreat him to transmit to posterity, his and Cuthona's fame.
For it was the opinion of the times, that the souls of the deceased were
not happy, till their elegies were composed by a bard.

Did not Ossian hear a voice? or is it the sound of days that are no
more? Often does the memory of former times come, like the evening sun,
on my soul. The noise of the chase is renewed. In thought, I lift the
spear. But Ossian did hear a voice! Who art thou, son of night? The
children of the feeble are asleep. The midnight wind is in my hall.
Perhaps it is the shield of Fingal that echoes to the blast. It hangs in
Ossian's hall. He feels it sometimes with his hands. Yes, I hear thee,
my friend! Long has thy voice been absent from mine ear! What brings
thee, on thy cloud, to Ossian, son of generous Morni! Are the friends of
the aged near thee? Where is Oscar, son of fame? He was often near thee,
O Conlath, when the sound of battle arose.

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

Ghost of Conlath. Sleeps the sweet voice of Cona, in the midst of his
rustling hall? Sleeps Ossian in his hall, and his friends without their
fame? The sea rolls round dark I-thona. Our tombs are not seen in our
isle. How long shall our fame be unheard, son of resounding Selma?

Ossian. O that mine eyes could behold thee! Thou sittest, dim on thy
cloud! Art thou like the mist of Lano? An half-extinguished meteor of
fire? Of what are the skirts of thy robe? Of what is thine airy bow? He
is gone on his blast like the shade of a wandering cloud. Come from thy
wall, O harp! Let me hear thy sound. Let the light of memory rise on
I-thona! Let me behold again my, friends! And Ossian does behold his
friends, on the dark-blue isle. The cave of Thona appears, with its
mossy rocks and bending trees. A stream roars at its mouth. Toscar bends
over its course. Fercuth is sad by his side. Cuthona sits at a distance
and weeps. Does the wind of the waves deceive me? Or do I hear them
speak?

Toscar. The night was stormy. From their hills the groaning oaks came
down. The sea darkly tumbled beneath the blast. The roaring waves
climbed against our rocks. The lightning came often and showed the
blasted fern. Fercuth! I saw the ghost who embroiled the night. Silent
he stood, on that bank. His robe of mist flew on the wind. I could
behold his tears. An aged man he seemed, and full of thought!

Fercuth. It was thy father, O Toscar. He foresees some death among his
race. Such was his appearance on Cromla before the great Maronnan fell.
Erin of hills of grass! how pleasant are thy vales! Silence is near thy
blue streams. The sun is on thy fields. Soft is the sound of the harp in
Seláma. Lovely

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

the cry of th hunter on Cromla. But we are in dark I-thona, surrounded
by the storm. The billows lift their white heads above our rocks. We
tremble amidst the night.

Toscar. Whither is the soul of battle fled, Fercuth, with locks of age?
I have seen thee undaunted in danger: thine eyes burning with joy in the
light. Whither is the soul of battle fled? Our fathers never feared. Go;
view the settling sea: the stormy wind is laid. The billows still
tremble on the deep. They seem to fear the blast. Go; view the settling
sea. Morning is gray on our rocks. The sun will look soon from his east;
in all his pride of light! I lifted up my sails with joy before the
halls of generous Conlath. My course was by a desert isle: where Cuthona
pursued the deer. I saw her, like that beam of the sun that issues from
the cloud. Her hair was on her heaving breast. She, bending forward,
drew the bow. Her white arm seemed, behind her, like the snow of Cromla.
Come to my soul, I said, huntress of the desert isle! But she wastes her
time in tears. She thinks of the generous Conlath. Where can I find thy
peace, Cuthona, lovely maid?

Cuthona. A distant steep bends over the sea, with aged trees and mossy
rocks. The billow rolls at its feet. On its side is the dwelling of
roes. The people call it Mora. There the towers of my love arise. There
Conlath looks over the sea for his only love. The daughters of the chase
returned. He beheld their downcast eyes. "Where is the daughter of
Rumar?" But they answered not. My peace dwells on Mora, son of the
distant land!

Toscar. Cuthona shall return to her peace: to the towers of generous
Conlath. He is the friend of Toscar! I have feasted in his halls! Rise,
ye gentle breezes of Erin. Stretch my sails towards Mora's

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

shores. Cuthona shall rest on Mora; but the days of Toscar must be sad.
I shall sit in my cave in the field of the sun. The blast will rustle in
my trees, I shall think it is Cuthona's voice. But she is distant far,
in the halls of the mighty Conlath!

Cuthona. Ha! what cloud is that? It carries the ghost of my fathers. I
see the skirts of their robes, like gray and watery mist. When shall I
fall, O Rumar? Sad Cuthona foresees her death. Will not Conlath behold
me, before I enter the narrow house?

Ossian. He shall behold thee, O maid! He comes along the heaving sea.
The death of Toscar is dark on his spear. A wound is in his side! He is
pale at the cave of Thona. He shows his ghastly wound. Where art thou
with thy tears, Cuthona? The chief of Mora dies. The vision grows dim on
my mind. I behold the chiefs no more! But, O ye bards of future times,
remember the fall of Conlath with tears. He fell before his day. Sadness
darkened in his hall. His mother looked to his shield on the wall, and
it was bloody. She knew that her hero fell. Her sorrow was heard on
Mora. Art thou pale on thy rock, Cuthona, beside the fallen chiefs?
Night comes, and day returns, but none appears to raise their tomb. Thou
frightenest the screaming fowls away. Thy tears for ever flow. Thou art
pale as a watery cloud, that rises from a lake.

The sons of green Selma came. They found Cuthona cold. They raised a
tomb over the heroes. She rests at the side of Conlath! Come not to my
dreams, O Conlath! Thou hast received thy fame. Be thy voice far distant
from my hail; that sleep may descend at night. O that I could forget my
friends; till my footsteps should cease to be seen; till I come among
them with joy! and lay my aged limbs in the narrow house!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Berrathon](oss43)
