[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cair02)  [Next](cair04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0404604161/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Confucianism and Its Rivals*, by Herbert A. Giles, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CONFUCIANISM AND ITS RIVALS

### LECTURE I

#### B.C. 3000-1200

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Chinese are not, and, so far as we
can judge from their history, never have been, what we understand by the
term "a religious people." Consequently, we find in their biographical
records extraordinarily few instances of religious fanaticism, bigotry,
and persecution; still fewer, if any, examples of men and women who have
suffered for their faith, when mere verbal recantation would have saved
them from a dreaded fate. With a highly practical nation like the
Chinese, the acts of human beings have always been reckoned as of
infinitely greater importance than their opinions. The value of morality
has completely overshadowed any claims of belief; duty towards one's
neighbour has mostly taken precedence of duty towards God.

The word "God" has been familiar in China from time immemorial; but
before we can deal with the conception implied thereby, it will be
necessary to turn our attention to the visible universe as it appeared

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

to the primeval Chinese man. Above him was a round sky, later on to be
symbolized as the male element in creation; below him was a square
earth, also to be symbolized later on as the mother of all things—the
*feme covert* in "the bridal of the earth and sky."

In the Canon of Changes, usually admitted to be the oldest extant
Chinese book, we read: "The sky one, the earth two, the sky three, the
earth four, the sky five, the earth six, the sky seven, the earth eight,
the sky nine, the earth ten." This is explained to mean that, in a
cosmogonical sense, and also for purposes of divination, odd numbers are
male, even numbers female.

We must pause a moment to consider what the Canon of Changes precisely
is. Broadly speaking, it is the most venerated as well as the most
ancient volume of a collection of sacred books now known as the
Confucian Canon, and it is said to have come into existence as follows.
Three thousand years before Christ—the furthest point reached even by
the most enthusiastic chronologers—China was ruled by her first,
somewhat legendary monarch, the Emperor Fu Hsi. Prior to this date, we
hear of a Chinese Prometheus, the discoverer of fire, and of a still
earlier hero, who taught mankind to make nest-habitations in trees, as a
safeguard against such attacks from animals as people would be more
exposed to on the ground.

The Emperor Fu Hsi is said to have been miraculously conceived by his
mother, and to have been

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

born after a gestation of twelve years; but in spite of this, and of
other legendary accretions, it is most probable that he had a real
existence. He taught his people to hunt, to fish, and to keep flocks. He
showed them how to split the wood of a certain tree (*Pawlonia
imperialis*, S. and Z.), and then how to twist threads and stretch them
across so as to form rude musical instruments. He invented some kind of
calendar, placed the marriage-contract upon a proper basis, and
introduced cooked as opposed to raw food. From certain markings,
divinely revealed to him on the back of a tortoise—some say a dragon
(hence the Imperial Dragon)—he is said to have constructed the Eight
Diagrams, or series of lines from which was to be ultimately developed a
scheme of divination, as embodied many centuries later in the Canon of
Changes.

Put in the fewest words, these Diagrams are the eight possible
combinations or arrangements of a line and a broken line in groups of
three, so that either one or the other is repeated twice, and in two
cases three times, in the same combination. Thus, there may be a broken
line above or below two unbroken lines, two broken lines above or below
one unbroken line, a broken line between two unbroken lines, an unbroken
line between two broken lines, and finally, a diagram of three unbroken
lines, and another of three broken lines. Of these last two, the former,
three unbroken lines, was held to represent the sky; the latter, three
broken lines, stood for the earth. The remaining six figures were
identified as symbols

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

of mist, fire, thunder, wind, water, and hills; and on the ground that
the sky and earth, the male and female principles in nature, produce, as
it were, the other six elements, an attempt has been made to trace a
connexion between the Eight Diagrams and the company assembled in the
Ark.

<span id="img_00400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Trigram
diagram](tn/00400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00400.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

The Emperor Fu Hsi is said by some to have subsequently increased these
combinations, as above, to sixty-four, by the simple process of doubling
the number of lines employed; and on this groundwork was first of all
constructed, according to tradition—for no definite traces remain in
literature—a system of divination, of which we know next to nothing.
However, in the twelfth century B.C., King Wên, the virtual founder of
the great Chow dynasty, called

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "King" although he
never really occupied the throne, was cast into prison for sedition by
the reigning tyrant, whom King Wên's son afterwards overthrew. There he
passed two years, occupying himself with the Diagrams, which others say
he, and not the Emperor Fu Hsi, increased to sixty-four, finally
producing sixty-four short essays, enigmatically and symbolically
expressed, on important themes, mostly of a moral, social, or political
character. This text is followed by certain commentaries, called by the
Chinese the "Ten Wings," admittedly of a later date, and usually
attributed, but without foundation, to Confucius, who has left it on
record that had a number of years been added to his life, he would have
devoted fifty of them to a further study of the Canon of Changes, and
could then have claimed to be without great faults. It is indeed
recorded by China's most famous historian, Ssŭ-ma Ch‘ien (d. *circa*
B.C. 80), that Confucius perused and reperused this work so often that
the leather strings on which the wooden tablets in use at that date were
strung, gave way, first and last, three times, from sheer wear and tear.

The foreign student is disappointed when he comes to a study of the
Canon of Changes; partly because of the exaggerated value set upon its
contents by native scholars of all ages, and partly from an inability to
penetrate its labyrinthine mysteries and seize the hidden spirit of the
book. It has been alleged by Chinese enthusiasts that, if you have only
the wit to seek, you will find in the Canon of Changes

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the germs of all the great scientific discoveries; on the other hand, it
was reserved for two foreign students (Sir R. Douglas and Terrien de
Lacouperie) to put their heads together and publicly announce that this
work, regarded in China as based on a divine revelation, is nothing more
than a vocabulary of an obscure Central Asian tribe—so obscure indeed
that to this day it remains unlocated and unknown.

A translation of the Canon of Changes was made by Dr Legge, the greatest
Chinese scholar of modern times at the day of his death. Dr Legge
thought that he had "found the key," but it is doubtful if anyone else
has ever shared with him that opinion. Let us take the first Diagram,
which originally consisted of three horizontal lines, afterwards
doubled, and supposed to represent the sky. King Wên tells us that the
whole Diagram symbolizes "what is great and originating, penetrating,
advantageous, correct, and firm." King Wên's fourth son, the Duke of
Chow, one of China's best-loved figures in history, added, or is said to
have added, an analysis of the Diagram, taking it line by line. Thus, in
the first line he discovers a dragon lying hidden in the abyss; upon
which he declares that "it is not time for active doing." In the second
line we have the dragon again, but in this case "appearing in the open."
"It will be advantageous," says the Duke, "to meet with a great man."
And so on—for those who can understand how one straight line can yield a
certain meaning, and another similar straight line another and quite a
different meaning. Take a still

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

further exasperating specimen of what we read in this relic of
antiquity, on which more numerous and more voluminous commentaries have
been written than on the Old and New Testaments combined.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Text*.—The first line, divided, shows a man moving his great toes.

*Wing*.—He moves his great toes;—his mind is set on what is beyond
himself.

*Text*.—The fifth line, undivided, shows a man moving the flesh along
the spine, above the heart. There will be no occasion for repentance.

*Wing*.—He moves the flesh along the spine, above the heart;—his aim is
trivial.

</div>

Just on eight hundred years after the revelation of the Eight Diagrams
to the Emperor Fu Hsi, came another revelation, which was subsequently
recognized as complementary of the first, and is now closely associated
with it in the philosophical speculations of the scholars of the Sung
dynasty, who flourished some seven to eight hundred years ago, and will
be referred to later on. In B.C. 2205 the Great Yü, as he was afterwards
called, ascended the throne of China. His birth, like that of most of
China's heroes, had been miraculous; and it is recorded that four days
after his marriage he started forth to drain the empire of the waters of
a disastrous flood, which some have tried to identify with the Noachian
Deluge. Another divinely sent tortoise appears to have risen from the
waters and to have presented him—some say the recipient was really the
Emperor Fu Hsi of old—with a numerical scheme, or arrangement of groups
of the cardinal numbers 1 to 9, known as the River

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Plan, by means of
which divination was raised to the position of a science, as it is found
at the present day.

The final arrangement of the River Plan, after many modifications, was
as follows:—

<span id="img_00800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The River
Plan](tn/00800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00800.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These groups,
added up vertically, horizontally, or diagonally, always yield a total
of fifteen.

Other methods were employed, especially one, as we shall see by and by,
in which a certain magic grass, or reed, played the chief part; but it
is now time, after this long digression, to return to the sky and earth.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

At a very remote period, long before the Canon of Changes had received
its first impress from the hands of King Wên, the Chinese people had
already come to regard the sky as the home or habitat of a powerful
Being who took a marked interest in human affairs. This Being may have
been suggested, according to Buckle's theory, by lightning, thunder,
earthquakes, the revolutions of the sun and moon, and similar phenomena.
The name given to the Being—it is still in use—was *T‘ien*, a word
which, for reasons to be presently brought forward, we are unable to
render adequately by any other term than "God." The first of these
reasons is that so soon as the Chinese began to express thought through
the medium of a script, the symbol set down for *T‘ien* was a rude
picture, such as a child or savage might draw, of a human being: <span
id="img_00900"></span> ![](img/00900.jpg). This anthropomorphic
character occurs in inscriptions on sacrificial cauldrons which date
back to B.C. 1100, when the written language had already become a
vehicle of considerable precision. It is often found, for instance, in
conjunction with the word "son," meaning "Son of God," a title which has
always been applied to the Emperors of China, but which association and
convention compel us to render by the less startling "Son of Heaven."
Translators of Chinese texts have indeed generally tried to shirk the
use of the word God " as an equivalent for *T‘ien*, and have adopted the
vaguer word "Heaven"; against which it may be urged that this latter
term rather tends to

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

obscure the idea of a personal Deity, and is better reserved for the
celestial habitation of God and of spirits, in which sense, together
with that of "sky," the word *t‘ien* came also to be used.

Later inscriptions show the character *T‘ien* in process of
modification, <span id="img_01000"></span> ![](img/01000.jpg), towards
the modern sign in use at the present day. The head is flattened to a
straight line, but the remainder is still suggestive of a body with arms
and legs. To-day we write <span id="img_01001"></span>
![](img/01001.jpg), a character which has been accepted by native
scholars, who had failed to pick up the real clue, as a combination of
<span id="img_01002"></span> ![](img/01002.jpg) *one*, and <span
id="img_01003"></span> ![](img/01003.jpg) *great*—the one great
thing. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

Such, indeed, is the etymological analysis given in the *Shuo Wên*, a
dictionary which was produced about one hundred years after the
Christian era, and has been the recognized authority ever since. Whether
by "the one great thing" the author may have meant the sky only, or
heaven as used by us in two senses, namely, the sky and God, it is
impossible to say for certain; the analysis, which ignores altogether
the picture element, certainly points in the direction of the former
view. There is, in fact, little doubt that even before the date of the
Christian era the idea of an anthropomorphic God had somewhat weakened
in its hold upon the Chinese mind, and that the word *T‘ien* had become
more closely associated with the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

material heavens, the sky. Thus, the philosopher Hsün Tzŭ, of the third
century B.C., says, "*T‘ien* has no concrete form; all the void expanse
above the earth is *t‘ien*." Here, of course, he is speaking only of
Lien, the sky; in a future lecture we shall see what he has to say about
*T‘ien*, God. It is rather to the older works of the Confucian Canon
that we must turn for the ancient Chinese belief in an anthropomorphic,
and therefore personal, God. In the so-called Canon of History, which is
a collection of miscellaneous documents of an historical character,
extending over a period from the twenty-fourth to the eighth century
B.C., and said to have been edited under its present form by Confucius
himself, we find the word *T‘ien* largely used in the sense of "God,"
and very sparsely used in the sense of "sky."

There is a single instance of the word *T‘ien* used in the restricted
sense of heaven, the abode of the Deity. It occurs in a prayer,
patriotically offered up, in B.C. 1120, to the immediate canonized
ancestors of the first king of the Chow dynasty, who was dangerously
ill, and runs as follows: "If you three kings have charge in *t‘ien*,
heaven, of your great descendant, let my life be a substitute for his."

Almost, however, at the beginning of the Canon of History, and before
there is any mention of *T‘ien*, we are faced by another term which has
been widely adopted by Christian missionaries, under the skilled
leadership of Dr Legge, as the one and only correct equivalent for
"God." This is *Shang Ti*, meaning Supreme Ruler. I freely confess that
for many years

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I regarded Dr
Legge's position as unassailable, and I am still on his side as regards
the impropriety of another term, *Shin* or *Shên*, "spirit," which found
favour chiefly with American missionaries under the guidance of
distinguished colleagues, among whom was also the British missionary and
lexicographer, Dr Morrison. The view of Dr Morrison need not be
seriously considered, based as it was, by his own admission, upon a
desire to convince the Chinese that "their ideas of *Shin* were
erroneous."

A longer and closer acquaintance with the Confucian Canon has satisfied
me that the proper equivalent of our word "God" is *T‘ien*; and that
*Shang Ti*, "Supreme Ruler," was originally a mere epithet of *T‘ien*,
but gradually came to be employed almost in the sense of another Being,
yet not another Being; thus forming, as I hope to show in my next
lecture, a Godhead of two Persons. It is perhaps but a minor advantage
that to express in Chinese our own monosyllabic term, we need use no
more than a single word; but we cannot overlook the fact that *T‘ien*
was the very term suggested by the learned Manchu Emperor, K‘ang Hsi, as
a settlement of the question in the seventeenth century. But I am
anticipating, and 1 will now return to the Canon of History.

Here we find that *T‘ien* is used in the sense of "God" more than one
hundred and fifty times, whereas *Shang Ti* occurs only about twenty
times; and, in the words of Dr Legge, this "supreme, governing Power is
understood to be omniscient, omnipotent, and righteous." To these
characteristics,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

notwithstanding the anthropomorphism of which I have already spoken, it
will be necessary to add that of omnipresence, unless it be conceded
that from a given point in the universe God can practically see and hear
all men—which amounts to the same thing. Old proverbial literature,
still of everyday application, tells us that "the whispers of men sound
like thunder to God," that "the eye of God sees clearly, and rewards
promptly," that "you may deceive man, but not God," with many other
sayings of similar import. All these are formed with the word *T‘ien*;
there is not a single saying of the kind, known to me, which is based
upon the use of *Shang Ti*.

A few examples from the Canon of History may be noted, to enable us to
form an idea of the Deity as conceived of in China twenty centuries or
so before the Christian era. In a brief account of the Great Yü and his
engineering labours, one of his ministers says to him, "O Emperor,
Almighty God regarded you with favour, so that the Four Seas became
yours, and you yourself the lord of all beneath the canopy of heaven."
This passage contains *T‘ien* under both of its received senses, God and
the sky; it further illustrates the relation which, up to two years ago,
had always been felt to exist between the Emperor and his people. To
realize this latter point to the full, we may be allowed once more to
anticipate and turn to the works of Mencius, fourth and third centuries
B.C., where allusion is made to the ancient Emperors, Yao and Shun, the
immediate predecessors of the Great Yü, the former of whom, Yao,
abdicated

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

in favour of Shun, a virtuous peasant. "Did Yao really give the empire
to Shun?" asked a disciple. Mencius said, "No. The Emperor (literally
the Son of God) cannot give the empire to another." "Yes," replied the
disciple, "but Shun got it. Who gave it to him?" "God gave it to him,"
was the answer. "When God gave it," pursued the disciple, "did He
explain to Shun what his duties would be?" Mencius said, "No. God does
not speak. God made manifest His will through Shun's own behaviour."
"How was this effected?" asked the disciple. "The Emperor," replied
Mencius, "can present a man to God, but he cannot make God give that man
the empire. Yao presented Shun to God, and God accepted him; he
exhibited Shun to the people, and the people accepted him." To the
disciple, who pleaded for further enlightenment, Mencius said, "Yao
caused Shun to preside over the sacrifices, and the spirits were well
pleased; therefore God accepted him. Yao also caused him to preside over
the conduct of affairs, and affairs were well administered and a general
well-being prevailed; therefore the people accepted him. Thus, it was
God and the people who gave Shun the empire; an Emperor cannot give the
empire to another."

Let us take one more passage from the Canon of History, which deals with
a period at the close of the eighteenth century B.C. The Hsia dynasty,
founded by the Great Yü in 2205, had passed away amid scenes of
rebellion and bloodshed; such scenes indeed as have since been witnessed
at the fall of every

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

dynasty which, by corruption and misrule, has forfeited the mandate and
protection of God. The last ruler of this house had for many years
indulged in cruel brutality and lust almost unparalleled in history. His
utter wickedness was even said to have caused two rivers to dry up, so
prone were the Chinese always to attribute unpropitious natural
phenomena to manifestations of divine displeasure with the occupant of
the throne. To one of his ministers who remonstrated with him, he
replied, "I am to the empire what the sun is to the sky; when the sun
goes, I shall." He then caused the minister to be put to death.
Thereupon the prince of Shang, a virtuous hero, took up arms against
him. The Imperial forces were overwhelmed, and the Emperor was sent into
banishment, where three years later he died. His son fled northwards,
and is said to have founded the tribe of Hun-yü, which we are now able
to identify with the Huns. The prince of Shang, known in history as
Ch‘êng T‘ang, or T‘ang the Completer, was raised to the throne, and led
a blameless life; but his successor, a grandson, fell away from virtue,
and incurred the respectful remonstrances of his grandfather's trusted
minister, as follows: "His late Majesty kept his eye fixed upon the
clear commands of God, reverently serving the spirits of heaven and the
lower world, of the land and grain, and of deceased ancestors. God took
note of his virtuous conduct, and conferred upon him the great office,
that he might give peace to all parts of the empire." Again, the same
minister said, "Ah! God has no

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

partialities; only to those who are reverent does He show favour. The
people are not constant in their affections, except to those (rulers)
who have charity of heart. The spirits do not necessarily enjoy
sacrifices; what they enjoy is the sincerity." And then he urges the new
ruler to emulate the virtues of his grandfather, who, he declared, had
become "fit to take his place by God."

We are not here interested in the historical fact that the above
remonstrances were successful; our object in bringing forward these
quotations is to establish the theory, if possible, beyond question,
that the ancient Chinese believed in an anthropomorphic, personal God,
whose dwelling was in the heavens above. Incidentally, we have to
consider allusions to spirits and to sacrifices, both of which will be
found to have an important bearing on the subject.

So far back as twenty-two centuries and more before the birth of Christ,
we have a record of the Emperor Shun sacrificing, not only with a burnt
offering to God, but also to the spirits of hills and rivers, and under
a collective term to spirits in general. Later, we find the Great Yü
sacrificing to certain mountains, Ch‘êng T‘ang taking into account the
colour of a victim, and sacrifices offered to the spirit of a deceased
ruler. Warnings are given that there should be moderation even in these
solemn religious exercises; and one monarch is advised to devote less
attention to the spirit of his father and more to the spirits of his
predecessors on the throne. The use of incense, which has been dated by
some

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

writers from the introduction of Buddhism, appears to have been
practised by the Chinese in the very earliest ages, and the fat for the
burnt offering has been shown to survive in the candles still to be seen
in the ceremonies of the Confucian temple. Worship seems to have been
mostly associated with buildings, though open-air altars were not
uncommon; as, for instance, in the case we have already dealt with, of
prayer offered up for a sick king, when three altars were set up for
that purpose. "Temple" is perhaps too majestic a term for remote
antiquity; what is intended may be often better expressed by some such
word as "shrine." As to the worship of ancestors, on which great stress
is laid in these early records, I may point out, not for the first,
though I trust it will be for the last time, that those who compare the
offerings of meat and wine by Confucian mourners with the tribute of
flowers placed upon graves by Christian mourners, "do greatly err."
Ancestral worship, deeply ingrained as it is in the Chinese mind, is one
of the great obstacles to the Christianization of China; and many worthy
and well-meaning missionaries, going so far back even as the Jesuits of
the seventeenth century, have pleaded for the admission of this
apparently harmless rite among the devotional duties of the Christian
convert. Other missionaries, however, have set their faces against such
a concession, correctly feeling that the main object of ancestral
worship in China is to secure from the spirits of dead ancestors, in
return for offerings of food and fruit at graves, protection

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

and advancement of worldly interests, which would be incompatible with
the teachings of Christianity.

The "Do ut des" principle does not lift prayer to a very elevated plane,
but it must be admitted that this principle looms large in the
sacrifices which the Chinese have been in the habit of offering to the
Deity, as well as to their deceased ancestors. There is a story, which
properly belongs to the fourth century B.C., that when one of the feudal
States was about to attack another State, the ruling prince of the
latter instructed his son-in-law, whose nickname was Grease-pot, because
of his oily tongue, to proceed to a third State and ask for military
assistance, taking with him one hundred pounds’ weight of silver and ten
chariots as a bribe to that end. On hearing this order, the son-in-law
laughed so immoderately that he snapped the lash which fastened his cap
under his chin; and when the prince asked him to explain, he said, "As I
was coming along this morning, I saw a husbandman offering up in
sacrifice a pig's foot and a small cup of wine; after which he prayed,
saying, O God, make my upper terraces fill baskets, and my lower
terraces fill carts; make my fields bloom with crops, and my barns burst
with grain! And I could not help laughing at the thought of a man who
offered so little and wanted so much." The prince took the hint, and
obtained the assistance required.

We shall have occasion again to deal with both prayer and sacrifice; and
we will now leave the Canon of History and proceed to an examination

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

of the Canon of Poetry, the next in order among the sacred books of
Confucianism. It may here be mentioned that the term "Confucianism" must
be taken to cover the old moral and religious teachings of pre-Confucian
as well as of post-Confucian days. In a well-worn sentence, Confucius
expressly disclaimed any credit for his work, declaring that he was
merely handing on those lessons of antiquity which he believed in and
loved so well.

The scope of the Canon of Poetry may be described in a few words. In
addition to the literary labours already mentioned, and others to which
we shall come in due course, Confucius, clearly recognizing that if he
could have a hand in merely editing the people's ballads, anyone might
make their laws, set himself to the task of examining his country's
poetry with that special object in view. It seems that at his date,
roughly five hundred years before Christ, there existed a collection of
some three thousand ancient pieces. Of these, Confucius selected three
hundred and eleven, of six of which only the titles remained, rejecting
many of the others as being mere repetitions, and many more as
containing, in modern parlance, "words and expressions which cannot with
propriety be read aloud in a family," thus anticipating Dr Bowdler by
something like twenty-two centuries. Whatever people may think of Dr
Bowdler and his belated efforts to expurgate Shakespeare, China
certainly owes a deep debt to Confucius for having initiated a decency
of thought and expression which has placed Chinese literature,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

in that respect if in no other, above every literature in the world.

These three hundred and five "Odes," to use the title under which they
are popularly known, are, like all Chinese poetry, in rhyme, and were
originally sung to music and accompanied by dancing. They are subdivided
under three heads, namely, National Ballads, Lamentations and
Panegyrics, and Sacrificial Poems. There is a great deal more to be said
about this wonderful collection of old-world Odes, but we are concerned
at the moment rather with what we may find in them germane to our
present subject.

As may well be imagined, the National Ballads, the first of the three
subdivisions, do not yield much to the searcher after traces of
religious thought. These deal chiefly with love, marriage, and the
chase. Only on rare occasions is there a sudden appeal to the Deity—in
all cases *T‘ien*; usually nothing more than "O God!"; in two or three
instances, "O Thou distant God in the blue!" reminding one of the Indian
ryot's cry, "God is great, but He is too far off."

From the Panegyrics we may glean several more definite allusions. There
is one ode which was evidently sung at a banquet given by the king, and
addressed to the king. The first three verses each begin:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God protects and establishes thee,</span>

</div>

and one verse continues:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">So that in everything thou dost prosper.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

The most important lines are:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">With happy auspices and purifications thou bringest
the sacrifices,  
And dost filially present them,  
In spring, summer, autumn, and winter,  
To former rulers,  
Who say, We give to thee  
Myriads of years of life unending.  
Their spirits come  
And confer on thee many blessings.</span>

</div>

Hereafter we light frequently upon the favourite term for "Emperor,"
always to be rendered Son of Heaven, it being awkward for us, as already
stated, to translate by "Son of God." There is a further reason for not
adopting this latter nomenclature, namely, that the Emperor has been
uniformly regarded as the son of God by adoption only, and liable to be
displaced from that position as a punishment for the offence of misrule.
There is no pretence of any such relationship between Father and Son as
is recognized by orthodox Christians. So long as the ruler was accepted
by God and the people, he may be said to have occupied the throne by
divine right, and by common consent was hedged in by the same divinity
as that accorded to kings in western nations. But if the ruler failed in
his duties, the obligation of the people was at an end, and his divine
right disappeared simultaneously. Of this we have an example in a
portion of the Canon to be examined by and by. Under the year 558 B.C.
we find the following narrative. One of the feudal princes asked an
official, saying,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Have not the
people of the Wei State done very wrong in expelling their ruler?"
"Perhaps the ruler himself," was the reply, "may have done very wrong. A
good ruler will reward the virtuous and punish the vicious; he will
nourish his people as his children, covering them as the sky and
supporting them as the earth. Then the people will honour the ruler,
love him as a parent, look up to him as the sun and moon, revere him as
they do spiritual beings, and stand in awe of him as of thunder. But if
the life of the people is impoverished, and if the spirits are deprived
of their sacrifices, of what use is the ruler, and what can the people
do but get rid of him?"

In one of the Lamentations we find the Deity charged with want of pity
and with injustice:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Almighty God, unjust,  
Is sending down these exhausting disorders;  
Almighty God, unkind,  
Is sending down these great miseries.  
O Almighty God, without pity,  
There is no end to the disorder!</span>

</div>

The next passage I shall quote contains within the space of six lines
both terms for God, *T‘ien* and *Shang Ti*, in the order just given. The
translation may be varied thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The people, now amid their perils,  
Look up to *T‘ien*, God, who is inscrutable;  
But if His determination has once been fixed,  
There is no one whom He will not overcome.  
This mighty *Shang Ti*, Supreme Ruler,  
Does He hate anyone?</span>

</div>

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

As another instance of the familiar way in which protests are addressed
to the Deity, we have:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O great God Almighty,  
Why has Thy mercy been withheld?  
Why send down death and famine,  
Destroying all throughout the kingdom?</span>

</div>

With one more example we will leave the Lamentations:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O Thou far-off, Almighty God,  
Who art called our Father and Mother!</span>

</div>

We now revert to the Panegyrics, the first of which is in honour of King
Wên, the real founder, as before stated, of the Chow dynasty, in 1122
B.C.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">King Wên is up on high,  
Sharing in the glory of God.  
Although Chow was an old country,  
Its mandate has but just come.  
Was not Chow illustrious?  
And was not the ruler's mandate opportune?  
King Wên now ascends and descends,  
Moving about the person of God.</span>

</div>

Here, in the first case, the Chinese word for God is *T‘ien*; in the
second case, it is *Ti*, Ruler, the latter half of *Shang Ti*, Supreme
Ruler. Another verse, in which *Shang Ti* is employed, runs thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Ever think of your forefather (King Wên),  
Cultivating your virtue,  
Striving to do the will of God;  
So shall you obtain much happiness.  
Before the late rulers lost their following,  
They could sit alongside of *Shang Ti*, God;  
Look on them as you look on a mirror,  
For God's will is not easily carried out.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

The next verse contains two singular lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The doings of Almighty God (here *T‘ien*)  
Have neither sound nor smell;</span>

</div>

meaning, of course, that His ways are inscrutable to man, who is
dependent upon the faculties of physical perception.

The next panegyric is noteworthy, not only for itself, but because its
first verse was completely misunderstood by Dr Legge, who, like Homer,
sometimes, but very rarely, nods. It refers, as indeed do all the first
eight panegyrics of this section, to King Wên, the remaining two
celebrating the glories of his great warrior son, King Wu. If my new
rendering proves to be intelligible, that will be a great point gained;
for intelligibility is, *cæteris paribus*, the touchstone of correct
translation from the Chinese.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">A man must show himself brightly virtuous on
earth,  
Then comes the exercise of majestic power from above.  
God has difficulty in trusting anyone,  
For it is not easy to be a king;  
The rightful heir of the last dynasty  
Was not permitted to possess the kingdom.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Instead of

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God has difficulty in trusting anyone,</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dr Legge has

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Heaven is not readily to be relied upon,</span>

</div>

which is quite out of keeping with the context, though abuse of God—Dr
Legge generally tried to avoid the ineffable Name—is quite in keeping,
as will be seen further on, with the ordinary Chinese attitude

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

towards the Deity. This ode goes on to describe King Wên's birth, and
then his marriage.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God chose for him a mate,  
A lady from a powerful kingdom,  
Like unto a younger sister of God Himself.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then comes the
birth of his son, King Wu, followed by the rebellion in which both
father and son took part; and finally, the great battle in which,
thirteen years after his father's death, King Wu overthrew the reigning
dynasty, and mounted the throne as first suzerain under the feudal
system of the House of Chow. "God is on your side," was the cry which
rang in King Wu's ears; "have no doubts in your heart!"

There seems to have been an early chieftain of these Chow people, before
their rise to power, who taught his tribesmen to make cave-dwellings and
kiln-shaped huts; and who afterwards led them on the great trek by which
they reached the beautiful and rich plain whereon, as the panegyric
tells us, grew violets and the edible sowthistle in abundance. It was
apparently an ideal spot; but before deciding to make it his final
resting-place, the leader of the host had recourse, as usual, to
divination.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">He singed (some say "pierced") the tortoise-shell,  
And the response was to stay;  
Whereupon they set to building houses.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We do not know for
certain the process by which the omens were obtained from the
tortoise-shell, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) or

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

from grain, which was also used for this purpose; it is easier perhaps
to understand the use of the reeds. In a case of a young man suggesting
elopement to a girl, the latter replies,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">You say that you have consulted the tortoise-shell
and the reeds,  
And that there is nothing unfavourable in their responses;  
Therefore come, with your carriage,  
And I will pack up and go with you.</span>

</div>

The tortoise-shell, when pierced and burnt in a particular way, seems to
have developed certain shapes or signs which were read by the augurs;
while the reeds, on being thrown down, arranged themselves in the form
of one or more of the sixty-four diagrams, and the response was
interpreted accordingly. Several good examples of this form of
divination have been left on record; here is a specimen. One of the
feudal princes was visited (B.C. 689) by an augur from the suzerain
court of Chow, who carried with him the instrumental paraphernalia of
his office, in the shape of the Canon of Changes and the necessary
reeds. On being invited by the prince to foretell the fortunes of the
latter's heir, the augur proceeded to throw down the reeds, in
accordance with custom, and found that they arranged themselves on the
ground in the form (1) of the diagram *kuan* (the literal meaning of
which is "to see," and which is made up of two lines and one divided
line over three divided lines), and (2) in the form of the diagram
*p‘ei* (literally "great," and made up of three lines over three divided
lines). The augur then referred to the Canon of Changes, under

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the headings *kuan* and *p‘ei*, and discovered from the interpretations
given there that the boy would become ruler of his father's State, or,
alternatively, of another State; also, that if he did not become ruler
himself in either of the two cases just mentioned, then it was to be
anticipated that at least one of his descendants would do so. The two
diagrams were further analysed into their component parts, earth and
sun, sky and wind. From the former pair it was gathered that the boy
would have all the treasures hidden in mountains and be shone upon by
the bright sun; in other words, rise to high position. Whereas the
presence of wind in the second pair—an essentially moving and unstable
element—introduced the possibility of his rise to power in another State
than his own.

Sometimes, however, the augur was precluded by the very nature of the
question from taking refuge in an ambiguous response. For instance, on
one occasion an augur was consulted as to the sex of an unborn child. He
divined by the tortoise-shell, and found that the child would be a boy
and that his name would be Yu, "friend." He was right. A boy was born,
who bore on the palm of his hand a mark, which on examination turned out
to be the common character for "friend."

In another case, the advice of an augur, who had been called upon to
predict the upshot of a campaign, was altogether set aside, with
disastrous results to the commander, who thus ventured to disregard what
was considered to be the voice of God.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

The following, too, is not without interest. In 642 B.C. five large
stones fell from the sky, and six fish-hawks were seen to fly backwards.
The reigning prince of the Sung State, where these events took place,
inquired of an augur, who was visiting that State, what might be the
meaning of these phenomena; and he was told that there would be during
that year many deaths in the State of Lu; also that he himself would
obtain, for a time, the hegemony of all the States. On leaving the
presence, however, the augur said, "The prince had no business to ask me
that question. Natural phenomena do not bring with them either good
fortune or bad; these are brought about by men themselves. But I did not
dare to affront the prince."

As to divination with grain, we are still more in doubt as to the actual
process. The ode in which this method is mentioned refers to a time of
political trouble from misgovernment, and records the words of one who
advises caution and strict adherence to virtuous conduct:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Men who are grave and wise  
Are temperate in their use of wine;  
But those who are benighted and ignorant,  
Daily give way more and more to drink.  
Be careful, each of you, of your conduct,  
For the grace of God is not conferred twice.  
With a handful of grain I go out and divine  
How I may be able to become good.</span>

</div>

Sir J. G. Frazer, in *The Golden Bough*, likens the course of human
thought to a web woven of three different threads—the black thread of
magic,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the red thread of religion, and the white thread of science, the term
science standing here for those simple truths drawn from observation of
nature, of which men in all ages have possessed a store. He says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Could we then survey the web of thought from the beginning, we should
probably perceive it to be at first a chequer of black and white, a
patchwork of true and false notions, hardly tinged as yet by the red
thread of religion. But carry your eye further along the fabric and you
will remark that, while the black and white chequer still runs through
it, there rests on the middle portion of the web, where religion has
entered most deeply into its texture, a dark crimson stain which shades
off insensibly into a lighter tint as the white thread of science is
woven more and more into the tissue.

</div>

It does not appear, from the sources of information available to us,
that magic, under which head we may include divination, preceded the
early religious notions of the Chinese people, though of course this may
be due either to the inadequacy of the sources or to inability to
interpret them rightly; on the other hand, it may be asserted without
fear of contradiction that the ultimate weakening of the religious tint
in China was not due to the admixture of science, but to quite another
cause, to which I shall hope to come in due time.

Of all the Panegyrics, perhaps the most interesting is that one which
relates how the early rulers of the Chow people commended themselves to
God by their righteous deeds in the administration of government,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and how the divine favour ultimately raised King Wu to the leadership of
the federated States.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">How great is God,  
Manifesting His majesty upon earth!  
He surveyed the four quarters of the empire,  
Seeking for someone to give peace to the people.  
The Hsia and the Shang dynasties of old  
Had failed to satisfy Him with their government;  
So [throughout](errata.htm#0.md) the various States  
There was searching and considering  
Until God fixed on the man.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This man was a
vigorous chieftain who made clearances for the settlers and enabled them
to defeat and scatter the wild tribes around them. The next chieftain
was one of his younger sons.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Gifted by God with the power of judgment,  
So that the fame of his virtue silently grew,  
Able to lead, able to rule—  
To rule over this great country.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He was the father
of King Wên—to call the latter by his posthumous title; for, as already
stated, he never actually reigned, but like Genghis Khan and the three
next Emperors of the Mongol dynasty, he was canonized by a filial
descendant. We are now told that, as to King Wên, while ruler over the
Chow people in their tribal days,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">His virtue left nothing to be desired,</span>

</div>

and that

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">He received the blessing of God.</span>

</div>

So far, we are on conventional lines, but a new departure is taken in
this ode when we are told that

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God actually held
personal conversations with King Wên, addressing him as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God said to King Wên,  
Do not be like those who reject this and cling to that;  
Be not like those who are ruled by their desires.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The first result
of this injunction was that a mere display of force proved sufficient to
win over an unfriendly and aggressive tribe, without recourse to actual
hostilities and bloodshed. Then

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God said to King Wên,  
I am pleased with your intelligent virtue,  
Not loudly proclaimed nor obtrusively displayed,  
Without extravagance or vacillation,  
Without consciousness of effort,  
In accordance with My regulations.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again God said to
King Wên:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Take measures for opposing your enemies,  
Uniting with brother rulers of other States.  
Get ready your scaling-ladders,  
And your storeyed towers (*turres*),  
To attack the walls of Ch‘ung.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The narrative
continues:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The storeyed towers were quietly advanced  
Against the lofty and massive walls of Ch‘ung;  
Captives were brought in one after another,  
Together with the left ears of the slain.  
At starting, King Wên had sacrificed to God and to the heroes of old,  
Thus seeking to induce submission;  
And throughout the four quarters no one dared to insult him.</span>

</div>

Here we have touches which to my mind are distinctly reminiscent of the
God of the Old Testament,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

as seen leading on His chosen people to battle, stimulating their
enthusiasm and so achieving victory, not necessarily, as the French
cynic would have it, because on the side of the bigger battalions. But
we are left entirely in the dark as to how and when and where King Wên
received these communications from God; whether he saw Him in person, or
whether, as in the case of Moses, he hid his face, afraid to look upon
the divine glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[10:1](cair03.htm#fr_0.md) This development was
first pointed out by Mr L. C. Hopkins, I.S.O.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[25:1](cair03.htm#fr_1.md) See *La Divination par
l’Ecaille de Tortue*, by Professor E. Chavannes (*Journal Asiatique*,
Janvier-Février, 1911).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture II. B.C. 1200-500](cair04.md)
