[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bow01)  [Next](bow03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B54F2G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Were-Wolves*, by Sabine Baring-Gould, \[1865\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE BOOK OF WERE-WOLVES.

## CHAPTER I.

### INTRODUCTORY.

I SHALL never forget the walk I took one night in Vienne, after having
accomplished the examination of an unknown Druidical relic, the Pierre
labie, at La Rondelle, near Champigni. I had learned of the existence of
this cromlech only on my arrival at Champigni in the afternoon, and I
had started to visit the curiosity without calculating the time it would
take me to reach it and to return. Suffice it to say that I discovered
the venerable pile of grey stones as the sun set, and that I expended
the last lights of evening in planning and sketching. I then turned my
face homeward. My

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

walk of about ten miles had wearied me, coming at the end of a long
day's posting, and I had lamed myself in scrambling over some stones to
the Gaulish relic.

A small hamlet was at no great distance, and I betook myself thither, in
the hopes of hiring a trap to convey me to the posthouse, but I was
disappointed. Few in the place could speak French, and the priest, when
I applied to him, assured me that he believed there was no better
conveyance in the place than a common charrue with its solid wooden
wheels; nor was a riding horse to be procured. The good man offered to
house me for the night; but I was obliged to decline, as my family
intended starting early on the following morning.

Out spake then the mayor--"Monsieur can never go back to-night across
the flats, because of the--the--" and his voice dropped; "the
loups-garoux."

"He says that he must return!" replied the priest in patois. "But who
will go with him?"

"Ah, ha,! M. le Curé. It is all very well for one of us to accompany
him, but think of the coming back alone!"

"Then two must go with him," said the priest, and you can take care of
each other as you return."

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

"Picou tells me that he saw the were-wolf only this day se'nnight," said
a peasant; "he was down by the hedge of his buckwheat field, and the sun
had set, and he was thinking of coming home, when he heard a rustle on
the far side of the hedge. He looked over, and there stood the wolf as
big as a calf against the horizon, its tongue out, and its eyes glaring
like marsh-fires. Mon Dieu! catch me going over the marais to-night.
Why, what could two men do if they were attacked by that wolf-fiend?"

"It is tempting Providence," said one of the elders of the village;" no
man must expect the help of God if he throws himself wilfully in the way
of danger. Is it not so, M. le Curé? I heard you say as much from the
pulpit on the first Sunday in Lent, preaching from the Gospel."

"That is true," observed several, shaking their heads.

"His tongue hanging out, and his eyes glaring like marsh-fires!" said
the confidant of Picou.

"Mon Dieu! if I met the monster, I should run," quoth another.

"I quite believe you, Cortrez; I can answer for it that you would," said
the mayor.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

"As big as a calf," threw in Picou's friend.

"If the loup-garou were *only* a natural wolf, why then, you see"--the
mayor cleared his throat--"you see we should think nothing of it; but,
M. le Curé, it is a fiend, a worse than fiend, a man-fiend,--a worse
than man-fiend, a man-wolf-fiend."

"But what is the young monsieur to do?" asked the priest, looking from
one to another.

"Never mind," said I, who had been quietly listening to their patois,
which I understood. "Never mind; I will walk back by myself, and if I
meet the loup-garou I will crop his ears and tail, and send them to M.
le Maire with my compliments."

A sigh of relief from the assembly, as they found themselves clear of
the difficulty.

"Il est Anglais," said the mayor, shaking his head, as though he meant
that an Englishman might face the devil with impunity.

A melancholy flat was the marais, looking desolate enough by day, but
now, in the gloaming, tenfold as desolate. The sky was perfectly clear,
and of a soft, blue-grey tinge; illumined by the new moon, a curve of
light approaching its western bed. To the horizon reached a fen, blacked
with pools of stagnant water,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

from which the frogs kept up an incessant trill through the summer
night. Heath and fern covered the ground, but near the water grew dense
masses of flag and bulrush, amongst which the light wind sighed wearily.
Here and there stood a sandy knoll, capped with firs, looking like black
splashes against the grey sky; not a sign of habitation anywhere; the
only trace of men being the white, straight road extending for miles
across the fen.

That this district harboured wolves is not improbable, and I confess
that I armed myself with a strong stick at the first clump of trees
through which the road dived.

This was my first introduction to were-wolves, and the circumstance of
finding the superstition still so prevalent, first gave me the idea of
investigating the history and the habits of these mythical creatures.

I must acknowledge that I have been quite unsuccessful in obtaining a
specimen of the animal, but I have found its traces in all directions.
And just as the palæontologist has constructed the labyrinthodon out of
its foot-prints in marl, and one splinter of bone, so may this monograph
be complete and accurate, although I have no chained were-wolf before me
which I may sketch and describe from the life.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

The traces left are indeed numerous enough, and though perhaps like the
dodo or the dinormis, the werewolf may have become extinct in our age,
yet he has left his stamp on classic antiquity, he has trodden deep in
Northern snows. has ridden rough-shod over the mediævals, and has howled
amongst Oriental sepulchres. He belonged to a bad breed, and we are
quite content to be freed from him and his kindred, the vampire and the
ghoul. Yet who knows! We may be a little too hasty in concluding that he
is extinct. He may still prowl in Abyssinian forests, range still over
Asiatic steppes, and be found howling dismally in some padded room of a
Hanwell or a Bedlam.

In the following pages I design to investigate the notices of
were-wolves to be found in the ancient writers of classic antiquity,
those contained in the Northern Sagas, and, lastly, the numerous details
afforded by the mediæval authors. In connection with this I shall give a
sketch of modern folklore relating to Lycanthropy.

It will then be seen that under the veil of mythology lies a solid
reality, that a floating superstition holds in solution a positive
truth.

This I shall show to be an innate craving for blood implanted in certain
natures, restrained under ordinary

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

circumstances, but breaking forth occasionally, accompanied with
hallucination, leading in most cases to cannibalism. I shall then give
instances of persons thus afflicted, who were believed by others, and
who believed themselves, to be transformed into beasts, and who, in the
paroxysms of their madness, committed numerous murders, and devoured
their victims.

I shall next give instances of persons suffering from the same passion
for blood, who murdered for the mere gratification of their natural
cruelty, but who were not subject to hallucinations, nor were addicted
to cannibalism.

I shall also give instances of persons filled with the same propensities
who murdered and ate their victims, but who were perfectly free from
hallucination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Lycanthropy Among the Ancients](bow03.md)
