[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bow12)  [Next](bow14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B54F2G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Were-Wolves*, by Sabine Baring-Gould, \[1865\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

# CHAPTER XII.

### THE MARÉCHAL DE RETZ.--II. THE TRIAL.

The Appearance of the Marshal--Pierre de l'Hospital--The
Requisition--The Trial adjourned--Meeting of the Marshal and his
Servants--The Confession of Henriet--Pontou persuaded to confess
all--The adjourned Trial not hurried on--The hesitation of the Duke of
Brittany.

ON the 10th October, Nicolas Chateau, notary of the duke, went to the
Château of Bouffay, to read to the prisoner the summons to appear in
person on the morrow before Messire de l'Hospital, President of
Brittany, Seneschal of Rennes, and Chief Justice of the Duchy of
Brittany.

The Sire de Retz, who believed himself already a novice in the Carmelite
order, had dressed in white, and was engaged in singing litanies. When
the summons had been read, he ordered a page to give the notary wine and
cake, and then he returned to his prayers with every appearance of
compunction and piety.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

On the morrow Jean Labbé and four soldiers conducted him to the hall of
justice. He asked for Pontou and Henriet to accompany him, but this was
not permitted.

He was adorned with all his military insignia, as though to impose on
his judges; he had around his neck massive chains of gold, and several
collars of knightly orders. His costume, with the exception of his
purpoint, was white, in token of his repentance. His purpoint was of
pearl-grey silk, studded with gold stars, and girded around his waist by
a scarlet belt, from which dangled a poignard in scarlet velvet sheath.
His collar, cufs, and the edging of his purpoint were of white ermine,
his little round cap or *chapel* was white, surrounded with a belt of
ermine--a fur which only the great feudal lords of Brittany had a right
to wear. All the rest of his dress, to the shoes which were long and
pointed, was white.

No one at a first glance would have thought the Sire do Retz to be by
nature so cruel and vicious as he was supposed to be. On the contrary,
his physiognomy was calm and phlegmatic, somewhat pale, and expressive
of melancholy. His hair and moustache were light brown, and his beard
was clipped to a point. This

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

beard, which resembled no other beard, was black, but under certain
lights it assumed a blue hue, and it was this peculiarity which obtained
for the Sire do Retz the surname of Blue-beard, a name which has
attached to him in popular romance, at the same time that his story has
undergone strange metamorphoses.

But on closer examination of the countenance of Gilles de Retz,
contraction in the muscles of the face, nervous quivering of the mouth,
spasmodic twitchings of the brows, and above all, the sinister
expression of the eyes, showed that there was something strange and
frightful in the man. At intervals he ground his teeth like a wild beast
preparing to dash upon his prey, and then his lips became so contracted,
as they were drawn in and glued, as it were, to his teeth, that their
very colour was indiscernible.

At times also his eyes became fixed, and the pupils dilated to such an
extent, with a sombre fire quivering in them, that the iris seemed to
fill the whole orbit, which became circular, and sank back into the
head. At these moments his complexion became livid and cadaverous; his
brow, especially just over the nose, was covered with deep wrinkles, and
his beard appeared to bristle, and to assume its bluish hues. But, after
a few

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

moments, his features became again serene, with a sweet smile reposing
upon them, and his expression relaxed into a vague and tender
melancholy.

"Messires," said he, saluting his judges, "I pray you to expedite my
matter, and despatch as speedily as possible my unfortunate case; for I
am peculiarly anxious to consecrate myself to the service of God, who
has pardoned my great sins. I shall not fail, I assure you, to endow
several of the churches in Nantes, and I shall distribute the greater
portion of my goods among the poor, to secure the salvation of my soul."

"Monseigneur," replied gravely Pierre de l'Hospital: "It is always well
to think of the salvation of one's soul; but, if you please, think now
that we are concerned with the salvation of your body."

"I have confessed to the father superior of the Carmelites," replied the
marshal, with tranquillity; "and through his absolution I have been able
to communicate: I am, therefore, guiltless and purified."

"Men's justice is not in common with that of God, monseigneur, and I
cannot tell you what will be your sentence. Be ready to make your
defence, and listen to the charges brought against you, which M. le
lieutenant du Procureur de Nantes will read."

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

The officer rose, and read the following paper of charges, which I shall
condense:--

"Having heard the bitter complaints of several of the inhabitants of the
diocese of Nantes, whose names follow hereinafter (here follow the names
of the parents of the lost children), we, Philippe do Livron, lieutenant
assesseur of Messire le Procureur de Nantes, have invited, and do
invite, the very noble and very wise Messire Pierre de l'Hospital,
President of Brittany, &c., to bring to trial the very high and very
powerful lord, Gilles de Laval, Sire de Retz, Machecoul, Ingrande and
other places, Councillor of his Majesty the King, and Marshal of France:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire de Retz has seized and caused to be seized
several little children, not only ten or twenty, but thirty, forty,
fifty, sixty, one hundred, two hundred, and more, and has murdered and
slain them inhumanly, and then burned their bodies to convert them to
ashes:

"Forasmuch as persevering in evil, the said Sire, notwithstanding that
the powers that be are ordained of God, and that every one should be an
obedient subject to his prince, . . . has assaulted Jean Leferon,
subject of the Duke of Brittany, the said Jean Leferon being

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

guardian of the fortress of Malemort, in the name of Geoffrey Leferon,
his brother, to whom the said lord had made over the possession of the
said place:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire forced Jean Leferon to give up to him the
said place, and moreover retook the lordship of Malemort in despite of
the order of the duke and of justice:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire arrested Master Jean Rousseau, sergeant of
the duke, who was sent to him with injunctions from the said duke, and
beat his men with their own staves, although their persons were under
the protection of his grace:

"We conclude that the said Sire de Retz, homicide in fact and in intent
according to the first count, rebel and felon according to the second,
should be condemned to suffer corporal punishment, and to pay a fine of
his possessions in lands and goods held in fief to the said nobleman,
and that these should be confiscated and remitted to the crown of
Brittany."

This requisition was evidently drawn up with the view of saving the life
of the Sire de Retz; for the crime of homicide was presented without
aggravating circumstances, in such a manner that it could be denied or
shelved, whilst the crimes of felony and rebellion

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

against the Duke of Brittany were brought into exaggerated prominence.

Gilles de Retz had undoubtedly been forewarned of the course which was
to be pursued, and he was prepared to deny totally the charges made in
the first count.

"Monseigneur," said Pierre de l'Hospital, whom the form of the
requisition had visibly astonished: "What justification have you to
make? Take an oath on the Gospels to declare the truth."

"No, messire!" answered the marshal. "The witnesses are bound to declare
what they know upon oath, but the accused is never put on his oath."

"Quite so," replied the judge. "Because the accused may be put on the
rack and constrained to speak the truth, an' please you."

Gilles de Retz turned pale, bit his lips, and cast a glance of malignant
hate at Pierre de l'Hospital; then, composing his countenance, he spoke
with an appearance of calm:--

"Messires, I shall not deny that I behaved wrongfully in the case of
Jean Rousseau; but, in excuse, let me say that the said Rousseau was
full of wine, and he behaved with such indecorum towards me in the
presence of my servants, that it was quite intolerable. Nor

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

will I deny my revenge on the brothers Leferon: Jean had declared that
the said Grace of Brittany had confiscated my fortress of Malemort,
which I had sold to him, and for which I have not yet received payment;
and Geoffrey Leferon had announced far and wide that I was about to be
expelled Brittany as a traitor and a rebel. To punish them I re-entered
my fortress of Malemort.--As for the other charges, I shall say nothing
about them, they are simply false and calumnious."

"Indeed exclaimed Pierre de l'Hospital, whose blood boiled with
indignation against the wretch who stood before him with such
effrontery. "All these witnesses who complain of having lost their
children, lied under oath!"

"Undoubtedly, if they accuse me of having anything to do with their
loss. What am I to know about them, am I their keeper?"

"The answer of Cain!" exclaimed Pierre de l'Hospital, rising from his
seat in the vehemence of his emotion. "However, as you solemnly deny
these charges, we must question Henriet and Pontou."

"Henriet, Pontou!" cried the marshal, trembling; "they accuse me of
nothing, surely!"

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

"Not as yet, they have not been questioned, but they are about to be
brought into court, and I do not expect that they will lie in the face
of justice."

"I demand that my servants be not brought forward as witnesses against
their master," said the marshal, his eyes dilating, his brow wrinkling,
and his beard bristling blue upon his chin: "a master is above the
gossiping tales and charges of his servants."

"Do you think then, messire, that your servants will accuse you?"

"I demand that I, a marshal of France, a baron of the duchy, should be
sheltered from the slanders of small folk, whom I disown as my servants
if they are untrue to their master."

"Messire, I see we must put you on the rack, or nothing will be got from
you."

"Hola! I appeal to his grace the Duke of Brittany, and ask an
adjournment, that I may take advice on the charges brought against me,
which I have denied, and which I deny still."

"Well, I shall adjourn the case till the 25th of this month, that you
may be well prepared to meet the accusations."

On his way back to prison, the marshal passed

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

Henriet and Pontou as they were being conducted to the court. Henriet
pretended not to see his master, but Pontou burst into tears on meeting
him. The marshal held out his hand, and Pontou kissed it affectionately.

"Remember what I have done for you, and be faithful servants," said
Gilles de Retz. Henriet recoiled from him with a shudder, and the
marshal passed on.

"I shall speak," whispered Henriet; "for we have another master beside
our poor master of Retz, and we shall soon be with the heavenly one."

The president ordered the clerk to read again the requisition of the
lieutenant, that the two presumed accomplices of Gilles de Retz might be
informed of the charges brought against their master. Henriet burst into
tears, trembled violently, and cried out that he would tell all. Pontou,
alarmed, tried to hinder his companion, and said that Henriet was
touched in his head, and that what he was about to say would be the
ravings of insanity.

Silence was imposed upon him.

"I will speak out," continued Henriet and yet I dare not speak of the
horrors which I know have taken place, before that image of my Lord
Christ; "and he

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

pointed tremblingly to a large crucifix above the seat of the judge.

"Henriet." moaned Pontou, squeezing his hand, "you will destroy yourself
as well as your master."

Pierre de l'Hospital rose, and the figure of our Redeemer was solemnly
veiled.

Henriet, who had great difficulty in overcoming his agitation, than
began his revelations.

The following is the substance of them:--

On leaving the university of Angers, he had taken the situation of
reader in the house of Gilles de Retz. The marshal took a liking to him,
and made him his chamberlain and confidant.

On the occasion of the Sire de la Suze, brother of the Sire de Retz,
taking possession of the castle of Chantoncé, Charles de Soenne, who had
arrived at Chantoncé, assured Henriet that he had found in the
oubliettes of a tower a number of dead children, some headless, others
frightfully mutilated. Henriet then thought that this was but a calumny
invented by the Sire de la Suze.

But when, some while after, the Sire de Retz retook the castle of
Chantoncé and had ceded it to the Duke of Brittany, he one evening
summoned Henriet,

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

Pontou, and a certain Petit Robin to his room; the two latter were
already deep in the secrets of their master. But before confiding
anything to Henriet, De Retz made him take a solemn oath never to reveal
what he was about to tell him. The oath taken, the Sire de Retz,
addressing the three, said that on the morrow an officer of the duke
would take possession of the castle in the name of the duke, and that it
was necessary, before this took place, that a certain well should be
emptied of children's corpses, and that their bodies should be put into
boxes and transported to Machecoul.

Henriet, Pontou, and Petit Robin went together, furnished with ropes and
hooks, to the tower where were the corpses. They toiled all night in
removing the half-decayed bodies, and with them they filled three large
cases, which they sent by a boat down the Loire to Machecoul, where they
were reduced to ashes.

Henriet counted thirty-six children's heads, but there were more bodies
than heads. This night's work, he said, bad produced a profound
impression on his imagination, and he was constantly haunted with a
vision of these heads rolling as in a game of skittles, and clashing
with a mournful wail.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

Henriet soon began to collect children for his master, and was present
whilst he massacred them. They were murdered invariably in one room at
Machecoul. The marshal used to bathe in their blood; he was fond of
making Gilles do Sillé, Pontou, or Henriet torture them, and he
experienced intense pleasure in seeing them in their agonies. But his
great passion was to welter in their blood. His servants would stab a
child in the jugular vein, and let the blood squirt over him. The room
was often steeped in blood. When the horrible deed was done, and the
child was dead, the marshal would be filled with grief for what he had
done, and would toss weeping and praying on a bed, or recite fervent
prayers and litanies on his knees, whilst his servants washed the floor,
and burned in the huge fireplace the bodies of the murdered children.
With the bodies were burned the clothes and everything that had belonged
to the little victims.

An insupportable odour filled the room, but the Maréchal do Retz inhaled
it with delight.

Henriet acknowledged that he had seen forty children put to death in
this manner, and he was able to give an account of several, so that it
was possible to identify them with the children reported to be lost.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

"It is quite impossible," said the lieutenant, who had been given the
cue to do all that was possible to save the marshal--"It is impossible
that bodies could be burned in a chamber fireplace."

"It was done, for all that, messire," replied Henriet. "The fireplace
was very large, both at the hotel Suze, and also at Machecoul; we piled
up great faggots and logs, and laid the dead children among them. In a
few hours the operation was complete, and we flung the ashes out of the
window into the moat."

Henriet remembered the case of the two sons of Hamelin; he said that,
whilst the one child was being tortured, the other was on its knees
sobbing and praying to God, till its own turn came.

"What you have said concerning the excesses of Messire de Retz,"
exclaimed the lieutenant du procureur, "seems to be pure invention, and
destitute of all probability. The greatest monsters of iniquity never
committed such crimes, except perhaps some Cæsars of old Rome."

"Messire, it was the acts of these Cæsars that my Lord of Retz desired
to imitate. I used to read to him the chronicles of Suetonius, and
Tacitus, in which their cruelties are recorded. He used to delight in
hearing

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of them, and he said that it gave him greater pleasure to hack off a
child's head than to assist at a banquet. Sometimes he would seat
himself on the breast of a little one, and with a knife sever the head
from the body at a single blow; sometimes he cut the throat half through
very gently, that the child might languish, and he would wash his hands
and his beard in its blood. Sometimes he had all the limbs chopped off
at once from the trunk; at other times he ordered us to hang the infants
till they were nearly dead, and then take them down and cut their
throats. I remember having brought to him three little girls who were
asking charity at the castle gates. He bade me cut their throats whilst
he looked on. André Bricket found another little girl crying on the
steps of the house at Vannes because she had lost her mother. He brought
the little thing--it was but a babe--in his arms to my lord, and it was
killed before him. Pontou and I had to make away with the body. We threw
it down a privy in one of the towers, but the corpse caught on a nail in
the outer wall, so that it would be visible to all who passed. Pontou
was let down by a rope, and he disengaged it with great difficulty."

"How many children do you estimate that the Sire de Retz and his
servants have killed?"

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

"The reckoning is long. I, for my part, confess to having killed twelve
with my own hand, by my master's orders, and I have brought him about
sixty. I knew that things of the kind went on before I was admitted to
the secret; for the castle of Machecoul had been occupied a short while
by the Sire do la Sage. My lord recovered it speedily, for he knew that
there were many children's corpses hidden in a hayloft. There were forty
there quite dry and black as coal, because they had been charred. One of
the women of Madame de Retz came by chance into the loft and saw the
corpses. Roger de Briqueville wanted to kill her, but the maréchal would
not let him."

"Have you nothing more to declare?

"Nothing. I ask Pontou, my friend, to corroborate what I have said."

This deposition, so circumstantial and detailed, produced on the judges
a profound impression of horror. Human imagination at this time had not
penetrated such mysteries of refined cruelty. Several times, as Henriet
spake, the president had shown his astonishment and indignation by
signing himself with the cross. Several times his face had become
scarlet, and his eyes had fallen; he had pressed his hand to his brow,
to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

assure himself that he was not labouring under a hideous dream, and a
quiver of horror had run through his whole frame.

Pontou had taken no part in the revelation of Henriet; but when the
latter appealed to him he raised his head, looked sadly round the court,
and sighed.

"Etienne Cornillant, alias Pontou, I command you in the name of God and
of justice, to declare what you know."

This injunction of Pierre do l'Hospital remained unresponded to, and
Pontou seemed to strengthen himself in his resolution not to accuse his
master.

But Henriet, flinging himself into the arms of his accomplice, implored
him, as he valued his soul, no longer to harden his heart to the calls
of God; but to bring to light the crimes he had committed along with the
Sire do Retz.

The lieutenant du procureur, who hitherto had endeavoured to extenuate
or discredit the charges brought against Gilles do Retz, tried a last
expedient to counterbalance the damaging confessions of Henriet, and to
withhold Pontou from giving way.

"You have heard, monseigneur," said he to the president, "the atrocities
which have been acknowledged

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

by Henriet, and you, as I do, consider them to be pure inventions of the
aforesaid, made out of bitter hatred and envy with the purpose of
ruining his master. I therefore demand that Henriet should be put on the
rack, that he may be brought to give the lie to his former statements."

"You forget," replied de l'Hospital, "that the rack is for those who do
*not* confess, and not for those who freely acknowledge their crimes.
Therefore I order the second accused, Etienne Cornillant, alias Pontou,
to be placed on the rack if he continues silent. Pontou! will you speak
or will you not?"

"Monseigneur, he will speak!" exclaimed Henriet. Oh, Pontou, dear
friend, resist not God any more."

"Well then, messeigneurs," said Pontou, with emotion; "I will satisfy
you; I cannot defend my poor lord against the allegations of Henriet,
who has confessed all through dread of eternal damnation."

He then fully substantiated all the statements of the other, adding
other facts of the same character, known only to himself.

Notwithstanding the avowal of Pontou and Henriet, the adjourned trial
was not hurried on. It would have been easy to have captured some of the
accomplices of

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the wretched man; but the duke, who was informed of the whole of the
proceedings, did not wish to augment the scandal by increasing the
number of the accused. He even forbade researches to be made in the
castles and mansions of the Sire de Retz, fearing lest proofs of fresh
crimes, more mysterious and more horrible than those already divulged,
should come to light.

The dismay spread through the country by the revelations already made,
demanded that religion and morality, which had been so grossly outraged,
should be speedily avenged. People wondered at the delay in pronouncing
sentence, and it was loudly proclaimed in Nantes that the Sire de Retz
was rich enough to purchase his life. It is true that Madame de Retz
solicited the king and the duke again to give pardon to her husband; but
the duke, counselled by the bishop, refused to extend his authority to
interfere with the course of justice; and the king, after having sent
one of his councillors to Nantes to investigate the case, determined not
to stir in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Maréchal de Retz.--III. The Sentence and
Execution.](bow14)
