[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu09)  [Next](cwiu11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

### VII. Absolute Space, Absolute Time and Their Relations to God

*Malebranche, Newton & Bentley*

Henry More's conception of space, which makes it an attribute of God, is
by no means—I have said it already, but I should like to insist upon
it—an aberrant, odd and curious invention, a "fancy," of a Neoplatonic
mystic lost in the world of the new science. Quite the contrary. It is,
in its fundamental features, shared by a number of the great thinkers of
his time, precisely those who identified themselves with the new
scientific world-view.

I need not insist on Spinoza who, though he denied the existence of void
space and maintained the Cartesian identification of extension and
matter, carefully distinguishes between extension, as given to the
senses and represented by the imagination, and extension as perceived by
the understanding—the former, being divisible and movable (and
corresponding to the Cartesian indefinitely extended world),
constituting the sempiternal many-fold of ever-changing and finite
*modi*, the latter, truly and fully infinite and therefore indivisible,
constituting

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the eternal and essential attribute of the *a se* and *per se* existing
Being, that is, of God.

Infinity belongs unavoidably to God, not only to the very dubious God of
Spinoza, but also to the God of the Christian religion. Thus, not only
Spinoza, the by no means pious Dutch philosopher, but also the very
pious Father Malebranche, having grasped the essential infinity of
geometrical space, is obliged to connect it with God. The space of
geometers or, as Malebranche calls it, the "intelligible extension," is,
according to Christ Himself, who appears as one of the interlocutors of
the *Christian Meditations* of Malebranche,[1](cwiu16.htm#an_7_1)

<div class="iq">

. . . eternal, immense, necessary. It is the immensity of the Divine
Being, as infinitely participable by the corporeal creature, as
representative of an immense matter; it is, in a word, the intelligible
idea of possible worlds. It is what your mind contemplates when you
think about the infinite. It is by means of this intelligible extension
that you know the visible world.

</div>

Malebranche, of course, does not want to put matter into God and to
spatialize God in the manner in which Henry More or Spinoza did it. He
distinguishes therefore the *idea* of space, or "intelligible
extension," which he places in God, from the gross material extension of
the world created by God.[2](cwiu16.htm#an_7_2)

<div class="iq">

But you have to distinguish two kinds of extension, the one
intelligible, and the other material.

</div>

The intelligible extension is "eternal, necessary, infinite," whereas
the[3](cwiu16.htm#an_7_3)

<div class="iq">

. . . other kind of extension is that which is created; it is

</div>

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<div class="iq">

the matter out of which the world is built. . . . This world began and
can cease to be. It has certain limits that it cannot lack. . . .
Intelligible extension appears to you eternal, necessary, infinite;
believe what you see; but do not believe that the world is eternal, or
that the matter that composes it is immense, necessary, eternal. Do not
attribute to the creature what pertains only to the Creator, and do not
confuse My \[Christ's\] substance which God engenders by the necessity
of His Being with My work which I produce with the Father and the Holy
Spirit by an entirely free operation.

</div>

It is just the confusion between the intelligible extension and the
created one that induces some people to assert the eternity of the world
and to deny its creation by God. For,[4](cwiu16.htm#an_7_4)

<div class="iq">

there is another reason which leads men to believe that matter is
untreated; indeed, when they think about extension they cannot prevent
themselves from regarding it as a necessary being. For they conceive
that the world has been created in immense spaces, that these spaces
never had a beginning, and that God Himself cannot destroy them. Thus,
confusing matter with these spaces, as matter effectively is nothing
else but space or extension, they regard matter as an Eternal being.

</div>

This is, as a matter of fact, a rather natural error as Malebranche
himself does not fail to point out to his Divine Master; he recognizes,
of course, that his doubts are removed, and that he now sees the
distinction that formerly escaped him. Still[5](cwiu16.htm#an_7_5)

<div class="iq">

I beg you, had I not some reason to believe that extension is eternal?
Must one not judge things according to one's ideas, and is it even
possible to judge otherwise? And,

</div>

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<div class="iq">

as I cannot prevent myself from regarding intelligible extension as
immense, eternal, necessary, had I not grounds for thinking that
material extension has the same attributes?

</div>

By no means. In spite of the Cartesian axiom hinted at by Malebranche
(in the role of the *discipulus* of the dialogue), according to which we
are entitled to assert of the thing what we clearly perceive to belong
to its idea, the reasoning attributing infinity and eternity to material
extension was illegitimate; thus the Divine Master
replies:[6](cwiu16.htm#an_7_6)

<div class="iq">

We must, my dear Disciple, judge things according to their ideas; it is
only thus that we have to judge them. But that concerns their essential
attributes, and not the circumstances of their existence. The idea you
have of extension represents it to you as divisible, mobile,
impenetrable: judge without fear that it has essentially these
properties. But do not judge that it is immense, or that it is eternal.
It may not exist at all, or possess very narrow limits. \[The
contemplation of the idea of extension\] gives you no reason to believe
that there is \[in existence\] even one foot of material extension,
though you have present in your mind an infinite immensity of
intelligible extension; and much less are you entitled to judge that the
world is infinite as some philosophers assert. Do not judge either that
the world is eternal because you regard intelligible extension as a
necessary being of which the duration has no beginning and cannot have
an end. For, though you must judge the essence of things according to
the ideas which represent them, you must never judge by them of their
existence.

</div>

The Disciple of Malebranche's dialogue is fully convinced—who, indeed,
would not be by such a Master? Nobody else, alas, shared his conviction.

Antoine Arnauld considered the Malebranchian distinction

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

between "intelligible" and "created" extension as perfectly spurious and
corresponding only and solely to the Cartesian distinction between
(real) extension given to the senses and the same real extension as
object of pure understanding. According to him Malebranche's
"intelligible extension" was simply the infinite extension of the
material universe. Thirty years later, Dortous de Mairan made
fundamentally the same reproach, though he formulated it in a somewhat
different and much nastier manner: according to him Malebranche's
"intelligible extension" was indistinguishable from that of Spinoza. . .
.[7](cwiu16.htm#an_7_7)

 

But not only philosophers shared, more or less, Henry More's conception
of space: it was shared by Newton, and this, because of the unrivaled
influence of Newton on the whole subsequent development, is, indeed, of
overwhelming importance.

It may seem strange, at first glance, to link together Henry More and
Isaac Newton. . . . And yet, this link is perfectly
established.[8](cwiu16.htm#an_7_8) Moreover, as we shall see, More's
explicit teaching will throw some light on the implicit premises of
Newtonian thinking, a light all the more necessary as Isaac Newton, in
contradistinction not only to Henry More but also to René Descartes, is
neither a professional metaphysician like the former, nor, like the
latter, at once a great philosopher and a great scientist: he is a
professional scientist, and though science, at that time, had not yet
accomplished its disastrous divorce from philosophy, and though physics
was still not only designated, but also thought of, as "natural
philosophy," it is nevertheless true that his primary interests are in
the field of "science," and not of "philosophy." He deals,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

therefore, with metaphysics not *ex professo*, but only insofar as he
needs it to establish the foundations of his intentionally empirical and
allegedly positivistic mathematical investigation of nature. Thus the
metaphysical pronouncements of Newton are not very numerous and, Newton
being a very cautious and secretive person as well as a very careful
writer, they are rather reticent and reserved. And yet they are
sufficiently clear so as not to be misunderstood by his contemporaries.

Newton's physics, or, it would be better to say, Newton's natural
philosophy, stands or falls with the concepts of absolute time and
absolute space, the selfsame concepts for which Henry More fought his
long-drawn-out and relentless battle against Descartes. Curiously
enough, the Cartesian conception of the only relative, or relational,
character of these and connected notions is branded by Newton as being
"vulgar" and as based upon "prejudices."

Thus in the famous *scholium* which follows the *Definitions* that are
placed at the very beginning of the *Principia*, Newton
writes:[9](cwiu16.htm#an_7_9)

<div class="iq">

Hitherto I have laid down the definitions of such words as are less
known, and explain the sense in which I would have them to be understood
in the following discourse. I do not define time, space, place, and
motion as being well known to all. Only I must observe that the vulgar
conceive those quantities under no other notions but from the relations
they bear to sensible objects. And thence arise certain prejudices, for
the removing of which, it will be convenient to distinguish them into
absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical and common.

</div>

Absolute, true and mathematical time and space—for Newton these
qualifications are equivalent and determine

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the nature both of the concepts in question and of the entities
corresponding to them—are thus, in a manner of which we have already
seen some examples, *opposed* to the merely common-sense time and space.
As a matter of fact, they could just as well be called "intelligible"
time and space in contradistinction to "sensible." Indeed, according to
the "empiricist" Newton,[10](cwiu16.htm#an_7_10) "in philosophical
disquisitions we ought to abstract from our senses and consider things
themselves, distinct from what are only sensible measures of them."
Thus:[11](cwiu16.htm#an_7_11)

<div class="iq">

It may be that there is no such thing as an equable motion whereby time
may be accurately measured. All motion may be accelerated and retarded,
but the flowing of absolute time is liable to no change. The duration or
perseverance of the existence of things remains the same; whether the
motions are swift or slow, or none at all: and therefore it ought to be
distinguished from what are only sensible measures thereof.

</div>

Time is not only not linked with motion—like Henry More before him,
Newton takes up against Aristotle the Neoplatonic position—it is a
reality in its own right:[12](cwiu16.htm#an_7_12)

<div class="iq">

Absolute, true and mathematical time, of itself and from its own nature,
flows equably without regard to anything external,

</div>

that is, it is *not*, as Descartes wants us to believe, something which
pertains only to the external, material world and which would not exist
if there were no such world, but something which has its *own nature* (a
rather equivocal and dangerous assertion which Newton later had to
correct by relating time, as well as space, to God), "and by another
name is called duration"; that is, once more, time *is not*, as
Descartes wants us to believe, something

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

subjective and distinct from the duration which he, Descartes,
identifies with the amount of reality of the created being. Time and
duration are only two names for the same objective and absolute entity.

But, of course,[13](cwiu16.htm#an_7_13)

<div class="iq">

. . . relative, apparent and common time, is some sensible and external
(whether accurate or unequable) measure of duration by the means of
motion, which is commonly used instead of true time: such as an hour, a
day, a month, a year.

</div>

It is just the same concerning space:[14](cwiu16.htm#an_7_14)

<div class="iq">

Absolute space, in its own nature, without regard to anything external,
remains always similar and immovable,

</div>

that is, space is *not* Cartesian extension which moves around, and
which by Descartes is identified with, bodies. This is, at most,
*relative* space, which is mistaken for the absolute space that subtends
it by both Cartesians and Aristotelians.[15](cwiu16.htm#an_7_15)

<div class="iq">

Relative space is some movable dimension or measure of the absolute
spaces; which our senses determine by its position to bodies, and which
is vulgarly taken for immovable space; such is the dimension of a
subterraneous, an aereal, or celestial space, determined by its position
in respect of the earth. Absolute and relative space are the same in
figure and magnitude; but they do not remain always numerically the
same,

</div>

because relative space, which is, so to speak, attached to the body,
moves with that body through absolute space[16](cwiu16.htm#an_7_16)

<div class="iq">

For if the earth, for instance, moves, a space of our air, which
relatively and in respect of the earth always remains

</div>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<div class="iq">

the same, will at one time be one part of the absolute space into which
the air passes; and another time will be another part of the same and
so, absolutely understood, it will be perpetually mutable.

</div>

Just as we have distinguished absolute, immovable space from the
relative spaces that are and move in it, so we have to make a
distinction between absolute and relative *places* which bodies occupy
in space. Thus, elaborating More's analysis of this concept and his
criticism of the traditional as well as the Cartesian conceptions,
Newton states:[17](cwiu16.htm#an_7_17)

<div class="iq">

Place is a part of space which a body takes up and is, according to the
space, either absolute or relative. I say, a part of space; not the
situation nor the external surface of the body. For the places of equal
solids are always equal; but their surfaces, by reason of their
dissimilar figures, are often unequal. Positions properly have no
quantity; nor are they so much the places themselves as the properties
of places. The motion of the whole is the same with the sum of the
motions of the parts; that is, the translation of the whole, out of its
place, is the same thing with the sum of the translations of the parts
out of their places; and therefore the place of the whole is the same as
the sum of the places of the parts, and for that reason it is internal
and in the whole body.

</div>

Place—*locus*—is thus something which is in the bodies, and *in which*
bodies are in their turn. And as motion is a process in which bodies
change their places, not taking them along with them but relinquishing
them for others, the distinction between absolute and relative spaces
implies necessarily that of absolute and relative motion, and *vice
versa*, is implied by it:[18](cwiu16.htm#an_7_18)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<div class="iq">

Absolute motion is the translation of a body from one absolute place
into another, and relative motion the translation from one relative
place into another. Thus in a ship under sail the relative place of a
body is that part of the ship which the body possesses, or that part of
the cavity which the body fills and which therefore moves together with
the ship, and relative rest is the continuance of the body in the same
part of the ship or of its cavity. But real, absolute rest is the
continuance of the body in the same part of that immovable space in
which the ship itself, its cavity, and all that it contains is moved.
Wherefore, if the ship is really at rest, the body, which relatively
rests in the ship, will really and absolutely move with the same
velocity which the ship has on the earth. But if the earth also moves,
the true and absolute motion of the body will arise, partly from the
true motion of the earth in immovable space, partly from the relative
motion of the ship on the earth; and if the body moves also relatively
in the ship, its true motion will arise, partly from the true motion of
the earth in immovable space and partly from the relative motions as
well of the ship on the earth as of the body in the ship; and from these
relative motions will arise the relative motion of the body on the
earth. As if that part of the earth where the ship is was truly moved
toward the east with a velocity of 10,000 parts, while the ship itself,
with a fresh gale and full sails, is carried toward the west with a
velocity expressed by 10 of those parts, but a sailor walks in the ship
toward the east with 1 part of the said velocity; then the sailor will
be moved truly in immovable space toward the east, with a velocity of
10,001 parts, and relatively on the earth toward the west, with a
velocity of 9 of those parts.

</div>

As for the inner structure of space, it is characterized by Newton in
terms that strongly remind us of the analysis made by Henry
More:[19](cwiu16.htm#an_7_19)

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<div class="iq">

As the order of the parts of time is immutable, so also is the order of
the parts of space. Suppose those parts to be moved out of their places,
and they will be moved (if the expression may be allowed) out of
themselves. For times and spaces are, as it were, the places as well of
themselves as of all other things. All things are placed in time as to
order of succession and in space as to order of situation. It is from
their essence or nature that they are places, and that the primary
places of things should be movable is absurd. These are therefore the
absolute places, and translations out of those places are the only
absolute motions.

</div>

Newton, it is true, does not tell us that space is "indivisible" or
"indiscerpible";[20](cwiu16.htm#an_7_20) yet it is obvious that to
"divide" Newton's space, that is, actually and really to separate its
"parts," is just as impossible as it is impossible to do so with More's,
an impossibility that does not preclude the making of "abstract" or
"logical" distinctions and divisions, or prevent us from distinguishing
inseparable "parts" in absolute space and from asserting its indefinite,
or even infinite "divisibility." Indeed, for Henry More, as well as for
Newton, the infinity and the continuity of absolute space imply the one
as well as the other.

Absolute motion is motion in respect to absolute space, and all relative
motions imply absolute ones:[21](cwiu16.htm#an_7_21)

<div class="iq">

. . . all motions, from places in motion, are no other than parts of
entire and absolute motions; and every entire motion is composed of the
motion of the body out of its first place and the motion of this place
out of its place; and so on, until we come to some immovable place, as
in the before-mentioned example of the sailor. Wherefore entire and
absolute motions cannot be otherwise determined than

</div>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<div class="iq">

by immovable places; and for that reason I did before refer those
absolute motions to immovable places, but relative ones to movable
places. Now no other places are immovable but those that, from infinity
to infinity, do all retain the same given position one to another, and
upon this account must ever remain unmoved and do thereby constitute
immovable space.

</div>

"*From infinity to infinity* retain the same position. . . ." What does
*infinity* mean in this place? Obviously not only the spatial, but also
the temporal: absolute places retain from *eternity to eternity* their
positions in the absolute, that is, *infinite* and *eternal* space, and
it is in respect to this space that the motion of a body is defined as
being absolute.

Alas, absolute motion is very difficult, or even impossible, to
determine. We do not perceive space—it is, as we know, inaccessible to
our senses. We perceive things in space, their motions in respect to
other things, that is, their relative motions, not their absolute
motions in respect to space itself. Moreover, motion itself, or in
itself, the *status* of motion, though utterly opposed to the *status*
of rest, is nevertheless (as we see it clearly in the fundamental case
of uniform, rectilinear, *inertial* motion) absolutely indistinguishable
from the latter.

It is only by their causes and effects that absolute and relative
motions can be distinguished and determined:[22](cwiu16.htm#an_7_22)

<div class="iq">

The causes by which true and relative motions are distinguished, one
from the other, are the forces impressed upon bodies to generate motion.
True motion is neither generated nor altered but by some force impressed
upon the body moved, but relative motion may be generated or altered
without any force impressed upon the body. For it

</div>

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<div class="iq">

is sufficient only to impress some force on other bodies with which the
former is compared that, by their giving way, that relation may be
changed in which the relative rest or motion of this other body did
consist. Again, true motion suffers always some change from any force
impressed upon the moving body, but relative motion does not necessarily
undergo any change by such forces. For if the same forces are likewise
impressed on those other bodies with which the comparison is made, that
the relative position may be preserved, then that condition will be
preserved in which the relative motion consists. And therefore any
relative motion may be changed when the true motion remains unaltered,
and the relative may be preserved when the true suffers some change.
Thus, true motion by no means consists in such relations.

</div>

Thus it is only in the cases where our determination of the forces
acting upon the bodies is not based upon the perception of the change of
the mutual relations of the bodies in question that we are actually able
to distinguish absolute motions from relative ones, or even from rest.
Rectilinear motion, as we know, does not offer us this possibility. But
circular or rotational motion does.[23](cwiu16.htm#an_7_23)

<div class="iq">

The effects which distinguish absolute from relative motion are the
forces of receding from the axis of circular motion. For there are no
such forces in a circular motion purely relative, but in a true and
absolute circular motion they are greater or less, according to the
quantity of the motion.

</div>

Rotational or circular motion, everywhere on the earth as in the skies,
gives birth to centrifugal forces, the determination of which enables us
to recognize its existence in a given body, and even to measure its
speed, without taking into account the positions or behavior of any

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

other body outside the gyrating one. The purely relative conception
finds its limit—and its refutation—in the case of circular motion and,
at the same time, the Cartesian endeavor to extend this conception to
celestial motions appears as it really is: a clumsy attempt to disregard
the facts, a gross misinterpretation or misrepresentation of the
structure of the universe.[24](cwiu16.htm#an_7_24)

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is only one
real circular motion of any one revolving body, corresponding to only
one power of endeavoring to recede from its axis of motion, as its
proper and adequate effect; but relative motions, in one and the same
body, are innumerable, according to the various relations it bears to
external bodies, and, like other relations, are altogether destitute of
any real effect, any otherwise than they may perhaps partake of that one
only true motion. And therefore in their system who suppose that our
heavens, revolving below the sphere of the fixed stars, carry the
planets along with them, the several parts of those heavens and the
planets, which are indeed relatively at rest in their heavens, do yet
really move. For they change their position one to another (which never
happens to bodies truly at rest) and, being carried together with their
heavens, partake of their motions and, as parts of revolving wholes,
endeavour to recede from the axis of their motions.

</div>

The Newtonian discovery of the absolute character of rotation—in
contradistinction to rectilinear translation—constitutes a decisive
confirmation of his conception of space; it makes it accessible to our
empirical knowledge and, without depriving it of its metaphysical
function and *status*, it ensures its role and its place as a
fundamental concept of science.

The Newtonian interpretation of circular motion as

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

motion "relative" to absolute space, and, of course, the very idea of
absolute space with its physico-metaphysical implications, met, as we
know, with rather strong opposition. For two hundred years, from the
times of Huygens and Leibniz to those of Mach and Duhem, it was
subjected to searching and vigorous criticism.[24a](cwiu16.htm#an_7_24a)
It has, in my opinion, withstood victoriously all the assaults, which
is, by the way, not so very surprising: it is indeed the necessary and
inevitable consequence of the "bursting of the sphere," the "breaking of
the circle," the geometrization of space, of the discovery or assertion
of the law of inertia as the first and foremost law or axiom of motion.
Indeed, if it is the inertial, that is, the rectilinear uniform motion
that becomes—just like rest—the "natural" *status* of a body, then the
circular one, which at any point of its trajectory *changes* its
direction though maintaining constant its angular velocity, appears,
from the point of view of the law of inertia, not as a *uniform*, but as
a *constantly accelerated* motion. But acceleration, in
contradistinction to mere translation, has always been something
absolute, and it remained so until 1915, when, for the first time in the
history of physics, the general relativity theory of Einstein deprived
it of its absoluteness. Yet as, in so doing, it reclosed the universe
and denied the Euclidean structure of space, it has, by this very fact,
confirmed the correctness of the Newtonian conception.

Newton thus was perfectly right in stating that we are able to determine
the absolute rotational or circular motion of bodies without needing,
for that purpose, a term of reference represented by a body at absolute
rest; though he was wrong, of course, in his pious hope of being able,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

finally, to achieve the determination of all "true" motions. The
difficulties that stood in his path were not merely—as he believed them
to be—very great. They were insurmountable.[25](cwiu16.htm#an_7_25)

<div class="iq">

It is indeed a matter of great difficulty to discover and effectively to
distinguish the true motions of particular bodies from the apparent,
because the parts of that immovable space in which those motions are
performed do by no means come under the observation of our senses. Yet
the thing is not altogether desperate; for we have some arguments to
guide us, partly from the apparent motions, which are the differences of
the true motions; partly from the forces, which are the causes and
effects of the true motions. For instance, if two globes, kept at a
given distance one from the other by means of a cord that connects them,
were revolved about their common center of gravity, we might, from the
tension of the cord, discover the endeavor of the globes to recede from
the axis of their motion, and from thence we might compute the quantity
of their circular motions. And then if any equal forces should be
impressed at once on the alternate faces of the globe to augment or
diminish their circular motions, from the increase or decrease of the
tension of the cord we might infer the increment or decrement of their
motions, and thence would be found on what faces those forces ought to
be impressed that the motions of the globes might be most augmented;
that is, we might discover their hindmost faces, or those which, in the
circular motion, do follow. But the faces which follow being known, and
consequently the opposite ones that precede, we should likewise know the
determination of their motions. And thus we might find the quantity and
the determination of this circular motion, even in an immense vacuum,
where there was nothing external or

</div>

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<div class="iq">

sensible with which the globes could be compared. But now, if in that
space some remote bodies were placed that kept always a given position
one to another, as the fixed stars do in our regions, we could not
indeed determine from the relative translation of the globes among those
bodies whether the motion did belong to the globes or to the bodies. But
if we observed the cord and found that its tension was that very tension
which the motion of the globes required, we might conclude the motion to
be in the globes and the bodies to be at rest; and then, lastly, from
the translation of the globes among the bodies, we should find the
determination of their motions. But how we are to obtain the true
motions from their causes, effects, and apparent differences, and the
converse, shall be explained at large in the following treatise. For to
this end it was that I composed it.

</div>

The real distinction between space and matter, though it involves the
rejection of the Cartesian identification of the essence of matter with
extension, does not, as we know, necessarily imply the acceptance of the
existence of an actual vacuum: we have seen Bruno, and Kepler too,
assert that space is everywhere full of "ether." As for Newton, though
he, too, believes in an ether that fills at least the space of our
"world" (solar system), his ether is only a very thin and very elastic
substance, a kind of exceedingly rare gas, and it does not completely
fill the world space. It does not extend itself to infinity as is
sufficiently clear from the motion of comets:[26](cwiu16.htm#an_7_26)

<div class="iq">

. . . for though they are carried in oblique paths and sometimes
contrary to the course of the planets, yet they move every way with the
greatest freedom, and preserve their motion for an exceeding long time,
even when contrary

</div>

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<div class="iq">

to the course of the planets. Hence also it is evident that the
celestial spaces are void of resistance,

</div>

and as unresisting matter, that is, matter deprived of the *vis
inertiae*, is unthinkable, it is obvious that the celestial spaces are
void also of matter. Moreover, even where it is present, Newtonian ether
does not possess a continuous structure. It is composed of exceedingly
small particles between which, of course, there is vacuum. Elasticity,
indeed, implies vacuum. In a Cartesian world, that is, in a world
constituted by a continuously-spread uniform matter, elasticity would be
impossible. Nay, if all spaces were equally full (as they must be
according to Descartes) even motion would not be
possible.[27](cwiu16.htm#an_7_27)

<div class="iq">

All spaces are not equally full; for if all spaces were equally full,
then the specific gravity of the fluid which fills the region of the
air, on account of the extreme density of the matter, would fall nothing
short of the specific gravity of quicksilver, or gold, or any other the
most dense body; and, therefore, neither gold nor any other body could
descend in air; for bodies do not descend in fluids, unless they are
specifically heavier than the fluids. And if the quantity of matter in a
given space can, by any rarefaction, be diminished, what should hinder a
diminution to infinity?

</div>

Matter, according to Newton, who shares the atomic conceptions of his
contemporaries (and even improves upon them in a very interesting
manner), has an essentially granular structure. It is composed of small,
solid, particles and therefore[28](cwiu16.htm#an_7_28)

<div class="iq">

if all the solid particles of all bodies are of the same density and
cannot be rarefied without pores, then a void space, or vacuum, must be
granted.

</div>

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

As for matter itself, the essential properties that Newton ascribes to
it are nearly the same as those that have been listed by Henry
More,[28](cwiu16.htm#an_7_28) by the old atomists and the modern
partisans of corpuscular philosophy: extension, hardness,
impenetrability, mobility, to which is added—a most important
addition—inertia, in the precise, new meaning of this word. In a curious
combination of anti-Cartesian empiricism and ontological rationalism,
Newton wants to admit as *essential* properties of matter only those
that are (a) empirically given to us, and (b) can be neither increased
nor diminished. Thus he writes in the third of his *Rules of Reasoning
in Philosophy*, by which he replaced the third fundamental *Hypothesis*
of the first edition of the *Principia*:[30](cwiu16.htm#an_7_30)

<div class="iq">

*The qualities of bodies, which admit neither intensification nor
remission of degrees, and which are found to belong to all bodies within
the reach of our experiments, are to be esteemed the universal qualities
of all bodies whatsoever*.

For since the qualities of bodies are only known to us by experiments,
we are to hold for universal all such as universally agree with
experiments, and such as are not liable to diminution can never be quite
taken away. We are certainly not to relinquish the evidence of
experiments for the sake of dreams and vain fictions of our own
devising; nor are we to recede from the analogy of Nature, which is wont
to be simple and always consonant to itself. We in no other way know the
extension of bodies than by our senses, nor do these reach it in all
bodies; but because we perceive extension in all that are sensible,
therefore we ascribe it universally to all others also. That abundance
of bodies are hard we learn by experience; and because the hardness of
the whole arises from the hardness of the parts, we therefore justly
infer the hardness of the undivided

</div>

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<div class="iq">

particles, not only of the bodies we feel, but of all others. That all
bodies are impenetrable, we gather not from reason, but from sensation.
The bodies which we handle we find impenetrable, and -hence conclude
impenetrability to be a universal property of all bodies whatsoever.
That all bodies are movable and endowed with certain powers (which we
call the inertia) of persevering in their motion, or in their rest, we
only infer from the like properties observed in the bodies which we have
seen. The extension, hardness, impenetrability, mobility, and inertia of
the whole result from the extension, hardness, impenetrability,
mobility, and inertia of the parts and hence we conclude the least
particles of all bodies to be also all extended, and hard and
impenetrable, and movable, and endowed with their proper inertia. And
this is the foundation of all philosophy. Moreover, that the divided but
contiguous particles of bodies may be separated from one another is a
matter of observation; and, in the particles that remain undivided, our
minds are able to distinguish yet lesser parts, as is mathematically
demonstrated. But whether the parts so distinguished and not yet divided
may, by the powers of Nature, be actually divided and separated from one
another we cannot certainly determine. Yet had we the proof of but one
experiment that any undivided particle, in breaking a hard and solid
body, suffered a division, we might by virtue of this rule conclude that
the undivided as well as the divided particles may be divided and
actually separated to infinity.

Lastly, if it universally appears, by experiments and astronomical
observations, that all bodies about the earth gravitate toward the
earth, and that in proportion to the quantity of matter which they
severally contain; that the moon likewise, according to the quantity of
its matter, gravitates toward the earth; that, on the other hand, our
sea gravitates toward the moon; and all the planets one

</div>

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<div class="iq">

toward another; and the comets in like manner toward the sun: we must,
in consequence of this rule, universally allow that all bodies
whatsoever are endowed with a principle of mutual gravitation. For the
argument from the appearances concludes with more force for the
universal gravitation of all bodies than for their impenetrability, of
which, among those in the celestial regions, we have no experiments nor
any manner of observation. Not that I affirm gravity to be essential to
bodies; by their *vis insita* I mean nothing but their inertia. This is
immutable. Their gravity is diminished as they recede from the earth.

</div>

We see, therefore, that Newton, no more than Galileo or even Descartes,
includes gravity, or mutual attraction, in the essential properties of
bodies in spite of the fact that its empirical foundations are much
stronger than those of such a fundamental property as impenetrability.
Newton seems to suggest that the reason for this exclusion consists in
the variability of gravitation as opposed to the immutability of the
inertia. But this is by no means the case. The *weight* of a body
"gravitating" toward the earth is indeed diminished as it recedes from
it: but the attractive force of the earth—or any other body—is constant,
and, just as in the case of inertia, proportional to its mass, and it is
as such that it appears in the famous inverse square formula of
universal gravitation. This is so because[31](cwiu16.htm#an_7_31)

<div class="iq">

. . . it is reasonable to suppose that forces which are directed to
bodies should depend upon the nature and quantity of those bodies, as we
see they do in magnetical experiments. And when such cases occur, we are
to compute the attractions of the bodies by assigning to each of their
particles its proper force, and then finding the sum of them all.

</div>

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

Thus the attraction of a body is a function, or sum, of the attractions
of its (atomic) particles, just as its mass is the sum of the masses of
the selfsame particles. And yet it is not an "essential property" of the
body, or of its particles. As a matter of fact it is not even an
adventitious property of them; it is in no sense their property. It is
an effect of some extraneous force acting upon them according to a fixed
rule.

It is—or should be—a well-known fact that Newton did not believe in
attraction as a real, physical force. No more than Descartes, Huygens or
Henry More could he admit that matter is able to act at a distance, or
be animated by a spontaneous tendency. The empirical corroboration of
the fact could not prevail against the rational impossibility of the
process. Thus, just like Descartes or Huygens, he tried at first to
explain attraction—or to explain it away—by reducing it to some kind of
effect of purely mechanical occurrences and forces. But in
contradistinction to the former, who believed that they were able to
devise a mechanical theory of gravity, Newton seems to have become
convinced of the utter futility of such an attempt. He discovered, for
example, that he could indeed explain attraction, but that in order to
do so he had to postulate repulsion, which, perhaps, was somewhat
better, but not very much so.

Fortunately, as Newton knew full well, we need not have a clear
conception of the way in which certain effects are produced in order to
be able to study the phenomena and to treat them mathematically. Galileo
was not obliged to develop a theory of gravity—he even claimed his right
to ignore completely its nature—in order to establish a mathematical
dynamics and to determine the laws of fall.[32](cwiu16.htm#an_7_32)

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

Thus nothing prevented Newton from studying the *laws* of "attraction"
or "gravitation" without being obliged to give an account of the real
forces that produced the centripetal motion of the bodies. It was
perfectly sufficient to assume only that these forces—whether physical
or metaphysical—were acting according to strict mathematical laws (an
assumption fully confirmed by the observation of astronomical phenomena
and also by well-interpreted experiments) and to treat these "forces" as
mathematical forces, and not as real ones. Although only part of the
task, it is a very necessary part; only when this preliminary stage is
accomplished can we proceed to the investigation of the real causes of
the phenomena.

This is precisely what Newton does in the book so significantly called
not *Principia Philosophiae*, that is, *Principles of Philosophy* (like
Descartes’), but *Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica*, that
is, <span class="smallcaps">Mathematical</span> *Principles of* <span
class="smallcaps">Natural</span> *Philosophy*. He warns us
that:[33](cwiu16.htm#an_7_33)

<div class="iq">

I here use the word "attraction" in general for any endeavor whatever
made by bodies to approach each other, whether that endeavor arise from
the action of the bodies themselves, as tending to each other or
agitating each other by spirits emitted; or whether it arises from the
action of the ether or of the air, or of any medium whatever, whether
corporeal or incorporeal, in any manner impelling bodies placed therein
toward each other. In the same general sense I use the word impulse, not
defining in this treatise the species or physical qualities of forces,
but investigating the quantities and mathematical proportions of them,
as I observed before in the definitions. In mathematics we are to
investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions consequent
upon any conditions supposed; then, when we

</div>

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<div class="iq">

enter upon physics, we compare these proportions with the phenomena of
Nature, that we may know what conditions of these forces answer to the
several kinds of attractive bodies. And this preparation being made, we
argue more safely concerning the physical species, causes, and
proportion of the forces.

</div>

In his *Letters* (written five years after the publication of the
*Principia*) to Richard Bentley who, like nearly everybody else, missed
the warning just quoted and interpreted Newton in the way that became
common in the eighteenth century, namely as asserting the *physical*
reality of attraction and of attractive force as inherent to matter,
Newton is somewhat less reserved. He first tells Bentley (in his second
letter):[34](cwiu16.htm#an_7_34)

<div class="iq">

You sometimes speak of gravity as essential and inherent to matter. Pray
do not ascribe that notion to me, for the cause of gravity is what I do
not pretend to know and therefore would take more time to consider of
it.

</div>

In the third one, he practically comes into the open. Though he does not
tell Bentley what he, Newton, believes the force of attraction to be *in
rerum*, he tells him that:[35](cwiu16.htm#an_7_35)

<div class="iq">

It is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter should, without
mediation of something else which is not material, operate upon and
affect other matter without mutual contact, as it must be if
gravitation, in the sense of Epicurus, be essential and inherent in it.
And this is one reason why I desired you would not ascribe innate
gravity to me. That gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to
matter, so that one body may act upon another at a distance through a
vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, by and through which
their action and force may be conveyed

</div>

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<div class="iq">

from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no
man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking can
ever fall into it. Gravity must be caused by an agent acting constantly
according to certain laws, but whether this agent be material or
immaterial I have left to the consideration of my readers.

</div>

As we see, Newton does *not* pretend any longer not to *know* the cause
of gravity; he only informs us that he left this question unanswered,
leaving it to his readers to find out themselves the solution, namely
that the "agent" which "causes" gravity cannot be material, but must be
a spirit, that is, either the spirit of nature of his colleague Henry
More, or, more simply, God—a solution that, rightly or wrongly, Newton
was too cautious to announce himself. But that Dr. Bentley could not—and
did not—fail to understand.

As for Dr. Bentley (or more exactly Mr. Richard Bentley, M. A.—he became
DD. in 1696), who did not know much physics—he was by training a
classicist—and obviously did not grasp the ultimate implications of
Newton's natural philosophy, he espouses it wholeheartedly, as far, at
least, as he understands it, and turns it into a weapon for the
*Confutation of Atheism* in the Boyle Lectures which he gave in 1692.

Richard Bentley follows so closely, and even so servilely, Newton's
teaching, or lessons—he copied nearly *verbatim* the letters he received
from him, adding, of course, some references to the Scriptures and a
good deal of rhetoric—that the views he expresses can be considered as
representing, in a large measure, those of Newton himself.

The atheists Mr. Bentley deals with are essentially the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

materialists, more precisely those of the Epicurean brand, and it is
rather amusing to see that Bentley accepts the fundamentals of their
conception, that is, the corpuscular theory of matter, the reduction of
material being to atoms and void, not only without the apparent
hesitations and cautious reserve of Newton, but even as something that
goes without saying and without discussion. He only objects, as it has
always been done, that it is not enough, and that they cannot explain
the orderly structure of our universe without superadding to matter and
motion some purposeful action of a non-material cause: the fortuitous
and disorderly motion of atoms cannot transform chaos into a cosmos.

Yet, if the pattern of his reasoning is quite traditional—but we must
not blame Mr. Bentley for that: it is also the Newtonian pattern and,
moreover, did not Kant himself tell us a century later that the
physico-teleological proof of the existence of God is the only one that
has any value?—the contents of the demonstration are adapted to the
present-day (Bentley's present day) level of scientific philosophy.

Thus, for instance, he accepts without the slightest criticism the
contemporary version of Giordano Bruno's conception of the universe: an
infinite space with an immense number of star-suns. Bentley maintains,
of course, that the stars are finite in number—he thinks he can prove
it—and would even like them to be arranged in space so as to build a
"firmament." But if this cannot be done, he will accept their dispersion
in the boundless void. Bentley, indeed, insists upon the void. He needs
it, of course, as we shall see in a moment, in order to be able to
demonstrate the existence and the action, in the world,

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

of non-material, non-mechanical forces—first and foremost of the
Newtonian universal attraction—but he is also somehow elated and
ravished by the idea that this our world is chiefly composed of void
spaces, and he indulges in calculations that show that the amount of
matter in the universe is so small as practically not to be worth
speaking of:[36](cwiu16.htm#an_7_36)

<div class="iq">

Let us allow, then, that all the matter of the system of our sun may be
50,000 times as much as the whole mass of the earth; and we appeal to
astronomy, if we are not liberal enough and even prodigal in this
concession. And let us suppose further, that the whole globe of the
earth is entirely solid and compact, without any void interstices;
notwithstanding what hath been shewed before, as to the texture of gold
itself. Now, though we have made such ample allowances, we shall find,
notwithstanding, that the void space of our system is immensely bigger
than all its corporeal mass. For, to proceed upon supposition, that all
the matter within the firmament is 50,000 times bigger than the solid
globe of the earth; if we assume the diameter of the *orbis magnus*
(wherein the earth moves about the sun) to be only 7,000 times as big as
the diameter of the earth, (though the latest and most accurate
observations make it thrice 7,000), and the diameter of the firmament to
be only 100,000 times as long as the diameter of the *orbis magnus*
(though it cannot possibly be less than that, but may be vastly and
unspeakably bigger), we must pronounce, after such large concessions on
that side, and such great abatements on ours, that the sum of empty
spaces within the concave of the firmament is
6,860 million million million times bigger than all the matter contained
in it.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

And first, because every fixed star is supposed by astronomers

</div>

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<div class="iq">

to be of the same nature with our sun, and each may very possibly have
planets about them, though, by reason of their vast distance, they may
be invisible to us; we will assume this reasonable supposition, that the
same proportion of void space to matter, which is found in our sun's
region within the sphere of the fixed stars, may competently well hold
in the whole mundane space. I am aware that in this computation we must
not assign the whole capacity of that sphere for the region of our sun,
but allow half of its diameter for the radii of the several regions of
the next fixed stars; so that, diminishing our former number, as this
last consideration requires, we may safely affirm, from certain and
demonstrated principles, that the empty space of our solar region
(comprehending half of the diameter of the firmament) is
8,575 hundred thousand million million times more ample than all the
corporeal substance in it. And we may fairly suppose, that the same
proportion may hold through the whole extent of the universe.

</div>

It is clear that with this immense void at their
disposal:[37](cwiu16.htm#an_7_37)

<div class="iq">

. . . every single particle would have a sphere of void space around it
8,575 hundred thousand million million times bigger than the dimension
of that particle.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Accordingly,
Democritian atoms, whatever their initial disposition in space, would
pretty soon be completely dispersed and would be unable to form even the
most simple bodies, and much less, of course, such an artful and
well-ordered system as, for instance, our solar world. Fortunately for
its—and for our—existence, atoms are not free and independent of each
other but are bound together by mutual gravitation.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

Now this is already a refutation of atheism—Bentley, as we have seen,
has learnt from Newton that gravitation cannot be attributed to
matter—as it is clear[38](cwiu16.htm#an_7_38)

<div class="iq">

that such a mutual gravitation or spontaneous attraction can neither be
inherent and essential to matter, nor ever supervene to it, unless
impressed and infused into it by a divine power,

</div>

just because action at a distance[39](cwiu16.htm#an_7_39)

<div class="iq">

. . . is repugnant to common sense and reason. ’Tis utterly
inconceivable, that inanimate brute matter, without the mediation of
some immaterial being, should operate upon and affect other matter
without mutual contact; that distant bodies should act upon each other
through a vacuum, without the intervention of something else, by and
through which the action may be conveyed from one to the other. We will
not obscure and perplex with multitude of words what is so clear and
evident by its own light, and must needs be allowed by all that have
competent use of thinking, and are initiated into, I do not say the
mysteries, but the plainest principles of philosophy. Now, mutual
gravitation or attraction, in our present acceptation of the words, is
the same thing with this, ’tis an operation, or virtue, or influence of
distant bodies upon each other through an empty interval, without any
*effluvia*, or exhalations, or other corporeal medium to convey and
transmit it. This power, therefore, cannot be innate and essential to
matter: and if it be not essential, it is consequently most manifest,
since it doth not depend upon motion or rest, or figure or position of
parts, which are all the ways that matter can diversify itself, that it
could never supervene to it, unless impressed and infused into it by an
immaterial and divine power.

</div>

Now, if we admit, as we must do, that this mutual

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

attraction cannot be explained by any "material and mechanical agent,"
the indubitable reality of this power of mutual
gravitation.[40](cwiu16.htm#an_7_40)

<div class="iq">

. . . would be a new and invincible argument for the being of God, being
a direct and positive proof that an immaterial living mind doth inform
and actuate the dead matter and support the frame of the world.

</div>

Moreover, even if reciprocal attraction were essential to matter, or if
it were simply a blind law of action of some immaterial agent, it would
not suffice to explain the actual fabric of our world, or even the
existence of any world whatever. Indeed, under the unhampered influence
of mutual gravitation, would not all matter convene together into the
middle of the world?

Bentley seems to have been rather proud of having found that God not
only pulled or pushed bodies towards each other, but also counteracted
His action—or, more simply, suspended it—in the case of the fixed stars,
at least of the outermost ones, which He prevented in this manner from
leaving their places and maintained at rest.

Alas, Newton explained to him that his reasoning implied a finite world
and that there was no reason to deny its possible infinity, that the
difficulties Bentley found in the concept of an infinite sum or series
were not contradictions, and that his refutation of the infinity (or
eternity) of the world was a paralogism. Newton confirmed, however, that
even in the case of an infinite world the mere and pure action of
gravity could not explain its structure, and that choice and purpose
were clearly apparent in the actual distribution of the heavenly bodies
in space, as well as in the mutual adjustment of their masses,
velocities and so on:[41](cwiu16.htm#an_7_41)

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<div class="iq">

As to your first query, it seems to me that if the matter of our sun and
planets, and all the matter of the universe, were evenly scattered
throughout all the heavens, and every particle had an innate gravity
towards all the rest, and the whole space throughout which this matter
was scattered was but finite; the matter on the outside of this space
would, by its gravity, tend towards all the matter on the inside, and,
by consequence, fall down into the middle of the whole space, and there
compose one great spherical mass. But if the matter was evenly disposed
throughout an infinite space, it could never convene into one mass; but
some of it would convene into one mass, and some into another, so as to
make an infinite number of great masses, scattered at great distances
from one to another throughout all that infinite space. And thus might
the sun and fixed stars be formed, supposing the matter were of a lucid
nature. But how the matter should divide itself into two sorts, and that
part of it which is fit to compose a shining body should fall down into
one mass and make a sun, and the rest which is fit to compose an opaque
body should coalesce, not into one great body, like the shining matter,
but into many little ones; or if the sun at first were an opaque body
like the planets, or the planets lucid bodies like the sun, how he alone
should be changed into a shining body, whilst all they continue opaque,
or all they be changed into opaque ones, whilst he remains unchanged; I
do not think explicable by mere natural causes, but am forced to ascribe
it to the counsel and contrivance of a voluntary Agent.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

To your second query, I answer, that the motions which the planets now
have could not spring from any natural cause alone, but were impressed
by an intelligent Agent. For since comets descend into the region of our
planets,

</div>

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<div class="iq">

and here move all manner of ways, going sometimes the same way with the
planets, sometimes the contrary way, and sometimes in cross ways, in
planes inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, and at all kinds of
angles, ’tis plain that there is no natural cause which could determine
all the planets, both primary and secondary, to move the same way and in
the same plane, without any considerable variation: this must have been
the effect of counsel. Nor is there any natural cause which could give
the planets those just degrees of velocity, in proportion to their
distances from the sun and other central bodies, which were requisite to
make them move in such concentric orbs about those bodies.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

To make this system, therefore, with all its motions, required a cause
which understood and compared together the quantities of matter in the
several bodies of the sun and planets, and the gravitating powers
resulting from thence; the several distances of the primary planets from
the sun, and of the secondary ones from Saturn, Jupiter, and the earth;
and the velocities with which these planets could revolve about those
quantities of matter in the central bodies; and to compare and adjust
all these things together, in so great a variety of bodies, argues that
cause to be, not blind and fortuitous, but very well skilled in
mechanics and geometry.

</div>

Having learnt his lesson, Bentley writes
therefore:[42](cwiu16.htm#an_7_42)

<div class="iq">

. . . we affirm, that though we should allow that reciprocal attraction
is essential to matter, yet the atoms of a chaos could never so convene
by it as to form the present system; or, if they could form it, yet it
could neither acquire these revolutions, nor subsist in the present
condition, without the conservation and providence of a divine Being.

I. For, first, if the matter of the universe, and consequently the space
through which it's diffused, be supposed

</div>

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<div class="iq">

to be *finite*, (and I think it might be demonstrated to be so, but that
we have already exceeded the just measures of a sermon,) then, since
every single particle hath an innate gravitation toward all others,
proportioned by matter and distance; it evidently appears, that the
outward atoms of the chaos would necessarily tend inwards, and descend
from all quarters toward the middle of the whole space. For, in respect
to every atom, there would lie through the middle the greatest quantity
of matter and the most vigorous attraction; and those atoms would there
form and constitute one huge spherical mass, which would be the only
body in the universe. It is plain, therefore, that upon this supposition
the matter of the chaos could never compose such divided and different
masses as the stars and planets of the present world.

</div>

Furthermore, even if the matter of the chaos could build the separate
bodies of the planets, they "could not possibly acquire such revolutions
in circular orbs, or in ellipses very little eccentric," as they
actually perform, by the mere action of the forces of inertia and
gravity, and finally, "if we should grant . . . that these circular
revolutions could be naturally attained," it still requires a divine
power and providence to preserve them, and, generally speaking, to
preserve the fabric of the world. For, even if we admitted that the
combination of inertia and gravity would suffice for the maintaining of
the orbital motion of the planets, what about the fixed stars? What
prevents them from coming together? "If the fixed stars . . . are
supposed to have no power of gravitation, ’tis plain proof of divine
Being" as it shows the non-natural character of gravitation. "And ’tis
as plain a proof of a divine Being if they have the power of
gravitation." For,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

in that case, only a divine power can compel them to remain in their
assigned places. But what if the world were not finite, but infinite?
According to Bentley it does not make a very great
difference:[43](cwiu16.htm#an_7_43)

<div class="iq">

. . . in the supposition of an *infinite* chaos, ’tis hard indeed to
determine what would follow in this imaginary case from an innate
principle of gravity. But, to hasten to a conclusion, we will grant for
the present, that the diffused matter might convene into an infinite
number of great masses, at great distances from one another, like the
stars and planets of this visible part of the world. But then it is
impossible that the planets should naturally attain these circular
revolutions, either by principle of gravitation, or by impulse of
ambient bodies. It is plain there is no difference as to this, whether
the world be infinite or finite; so that the same arguments that we have
used before may be equally urged in this supposition.

</div>

In spite of these clear proofs of God's purposeful action in the world,
there are, as we know, people who refuse to be convinced by them and who
argue that an infinite world can have no purpose. What indeed can be the
usefulness of these innumerable stars that are not even seen by us,
either by the unassisted eye or through the strongest telescope? But,
replies Bentley, embracing the pattern of reasoning based on the
principle of plenitude, "We must not confine and determine the purposes
in creating all mundane bodies merely to human ends and uses." For,
though, as it is evident, they are not created for our sakes, they are
certainly not made for their own:[44](cwiu16.htm#an_7_44)

<div class="iq">

For matter hath no life nor perception, is not conscious of its own
existence, not capable of happiness, nor gives the

</div>

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<div class="iq">

sacrifice of praise and worship to the Author of its being. It remains,
therefore, that all bodies were formed for the sake of intelligent
minds: and as the earth was principally designed for the being and
service and contemplation of men, why may not all other planets be
created for the like uses, each for their own inhabitants which have
life and understanding? If any man will indulge himself in this
speculation, he need not quarrel with revealed religion upon such
account. The holy Scriptures do not forbid him to suppose as great a
multitude of systems, and as much inhabited as he pleases. . . . God
Almighty, by the [inexhausted](errata.htm#2) fecundity of his creative
power, may have made innumerable orders and classes of rational minds;
some in their natural perfections higher than human souls, others
inferior.

</div>

An indefinitely extended and populated world, immersed in an infinite
space, a world governed by the wisdom and moved by the power of an
Almighty and Omnipresent God, such is, finally, the universe of the very
orthodox Richard Bentley, future Bishop of Worcester and Master of
Trinity College. Such is, doubtlessly too, the universe of the very
heretical Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, Isaac Newton, Fellow of the
Royal Society and of the same Trinity College[41](cwiu16.htm#an_7_41)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Divinization of Space](cwiu11)
