[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu07)  [Next](cwiu09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### V. Indefinite Extension or Infinite Space

*Descartes & Henry More*

Henry More was one of the first partisans of Descartes in England even
though, as a matter of fact, he never was a Cartesian and later in life
turned against Descartes and even accused the Cartesians of being
promoters of atheism.[1](cwiu16.htm#an_5_1) More exchanged with the
French philosopher a series of extremely interesting letters which
throws a vivid light on the respective positions of the two
thinkers.[2](cwiu16.htm#an_5_2)

More starts, naturally, by expressing his admiration for the great man
who has done so much to establish truth and dissipate error, continues
by complaining about the difficulty he has in understanding some of his
teachings, and ends by presenting some doubts, and even some objections.

Thus, it seems to him difficult to understand or to admit the radical
opposition established by Descartes between body and soul. How indeed
can a purely spiritual soul, that is, something which, according to
Descartes, has no extension whatever, be joined to a purely material

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

body, that is, to something which is only and solely extension? Is it
not better to assume that the soul, though immaterial, is also extended;
that everything, even God, is extended? How could He otherwise be
present in the world?

Thus More writes:[3](cwiu16.htm#an_5_3)

<div class="iq">

First, you establish a definition of matter, or of body, which is much
too wide. It seems, indeed, that God is an extended thing (*res*), as
well as the Angel; and in general everything that subsists by itself, so
that it appears that extension is enclosed by the same limits as the
absolute essence of things, which however can vary according to the
variety of these very essences. As for myself, I believe it to be clear
that God is extended in His manner just because He is omnipresent and
occupies intimately the whole machine of the world as well as its
singular particles. How indeed could He communicate motion to matter,
which He did once, and which, according to you, He does even now, if He
did not touch the matter of the universe in practically the closest
manner, or at least had not touched it at a certain time? Which
certainly He would never be able to do if He were not present everywhere
and did not occupy all the spaces. God, therefore, extends and expands
in this manner; and is, therefore, an extended thing (*res*).

</div>

Having thus established that the concept of extension cannot be used for
the definition of matter since it is too wide and embraces *both* body
and spirit which *both* are extended, though in a different manner (the
Cartesian demonstration of the contrary appears to More to be not only
false but even pure sophistry), More suggests *secondly* that matter,
being necessarily sensible, should be defined only by its relation to
sense, that is, by tangibility.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But if Descartes
insists on avoiding all reference to sense-perception, then matter
should be defined by the ability of bodies to be in mutual contact, and
by the impenetrability which matter possesses in contradistinction to
spirit. The latter, though extended, is freely penetrable and cannot be
touched. Thus spirit and body can co-exist in the same place, and, of
course, two—or any number of—spirits can have the same identical
location and "penetrate" each other, whereas for bodies this is
impossible.

The rejection of the Cartesian identification of extension and matter
leads naturally to the rejection by Henry More of Descartes’ denial of
the possibility of vacuum. Why should not God be able to destroy all
matter contained in a certain vessel without—as Descartes asserts—its
walls being obliged to come together? Descartes, indeed, explains that
to be separated by "nothing" is contradictory and that to attribute
dimensions to "void" space is exactly the same as to attribute
properties to nothing; yet More is not convinced, all the more so as
"learned Antiquity"—that is Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius—was of quite
a different opinion. It is possible, of course, that the walls of the
vessel will be brought together by the pressure of matter outside them.
But if that happens, it will be because of a natural necessity and not
because of a logical one. Moreover, this void space will not be
absolutely void, for it will continue to be filled with God's extension.
It will only be void of matter, or body, properly speaking.

In the *third* place Henry More does not understand the "singular
subtlety" of Descartes’ negation of the existence of atoms, of his
assertion of the indefinite divisibility

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of matter, combined with the use of corpuscular conceptions in his own
physics. To say that the admission of atoms is limiting God's
omnipotence, and that we cannot deny that God could, if He wanted to,
divide the atoms into parts, is of no avail: the indivisibility of atoms
means their indivisibility by any created power, and that is something
that is perfectly compatible with God's own power to divide them, *if*
He wanted to do so. There are a great many things that He could have
done, but did not, or even those that He can do but does not. Indeed, if
God wanted to preserve his omnipotence in its absolute, status, He would
never create matter at all: for, as matter is always divisible into
parts that are themselves divisible, it is clear that God will never be
able to bring this division to its end and that there will always be
something which evades His omnipotence.

Henry More is obviously right and Descartes himself, though insisting on
God's omnipotence and refusing to have it limited and bounded even by
the rules of logic and mathematics, cannot avoid declaring that there
are a great many things that God cannot do, either because to do them
would be, or imply, an imperfection (thus, for instance, God cannot lie
and deceive), or because it would make no sense. It is just because of
that, Descartes asserts, that even God cannot make a void, or an atom.
True, according to Descartes, God could have created quite a different
world and could have made twice two equal to five, and not to four. On
the other hand, it is equally true that He did not do it and that *in
this world* even God cannot make twice two equal to anything but four.

From the general trend of his objections it is clear that the Platonist,
or rather Neoplatonist, More was deeply

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

influenced by the tradition of Greek atomism, which is not surprising in
view of the fact that one of his earliest works bears the revealing
title, *Democritus Platonissans*. . .[4](cwiu16.htm#an_5_4)

What he wants is just to avoid the Cartesian geometrization of being,
and to maintain the old distinction between *space* and the things that
are *in space*; that are moving *in space* and not only relatively to
each other; that *occupy* space in virtue of a special and proper
quality or force—impenetrability—by which they resist each other and
exclude each other from their "places."

*Grosso modo*, these are Democritian conceptions and that explains the
far-reaching similarity of Henry More's objections to Descartes to those
of Gassendi, the chief representative of atomism in the XVIIth
century.[5](cwiu16.htm#an_5_5) Yet Henry More is by no means a pure
Democritian. He does not reduce being to matter. And his space is not
the infinite void of Lucretius: it is full, and not full of "ether" like
the infinite space of Bruno. It is full of God, and in a certain sense
it is God Himself as we shall see more clearly hereafter.

Let us now come to More's *fourth* and most important objection to
Descartes:[6](cwiu16.htm#an_5_6)

<div class="iq">

*Fourth*, I do not understand your indefinite extension of the world.
Indeed this indefinite extension is either *simpliciter* infinite, or
only in respect to us. If you understand extension to be infinite
*simpliciter*, why do you obscure your thought by too low and too modest
words? If it is infinite only in respect to us, extension, in reality,
will be finite; for our mind is the measure neither of the things nor of
truth. And therefore, as there is another *simpliciter* infinite
expansion, that of the divine essence, the matter of your

</div>

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<div class="iq">

vortices will recede from their centers and the whole fabric of the
world will be dissipated into atoms and grains of
dust.[7](cwiu16.htm#an_5_7)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having thus
impaled Descartes on the horns of the dilemma, More
continues:[8](cwiu16.htm#an_5_8)

<div class="iq">

I admire all the more your modesty and your fear of admitting the
infinity of matter as you recognize, on the other hand, that matter is
divided into an actually infinite number of particles. And if you did
not, you could be compelled to do so,

</div>

by arguments that Descartes would be bound to
accept.[9](cwiu16.htm#an_5_9)

 

To the perplexity and objections of his English admirer and critic
Descartes replies[10](cwiu16.htm#an_5_10)—and his answer is surprisingly
mild and courteous—that it is an error to define matter by its relation
to senses, because by doing so we are in danger of missing its true
essence, which does not depend on the existence of men and which would
be the same if there were no men in the world; that, moreover, if
divided into sufficiently small parts, all matter becomes utterly
insensible; that his proof of the identity of extension and matter is by
no means a sophism but is as clear and demonstrative as it could be; and
that it is perfectly unnecessary to postulate a special property of
impenetrability in order to define matter because it is a mere
consequence of its extension.

Turning then to More's concept of immaterial or spiritual extension,
Descartes writes:[11](cwiu16.htm#an_5_11)

<div class="iq">

I am not in the habit of disputing about words, and therefore if
somebody wants to say that God is, in some sense, extended because He is
everywhere, I shall not

</div>

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<div class="iq">

object. But I deny that there is in God, in an Angel, in our soul, and
in any substance that is not a body, a true extension, such as is
usually conceived by everybody. For by an extended thing everybody
understands something \[which is\] imaginable (be it an *ens rations* or
a real thing), and in which, by imagination, can be distinguished
different parts of a determined magnitude and figure, of which the one
is in no way the other; so that it is possible, by imagination, to
transfer any one of them to the place of another, but not to imagine two
of them in the same place.

</div>

Nothing of that kind applies to God, or to our souls, which are not
objects of imagination, but of pure understanding, and have no separable
parts, especially no parts of determinate size and figure. Lack of
extension is precisely the reason why God, the human soul, and any
number of angels can be all together in the same place. As for atoms and
void, it is certain that, our intelligence being finite and God's power
infinite, it is not proper for us to impose limits upon it. Thus we must
boldly assert "that God can do all that we conceive to be possible, but
not that He cannot do what is repugnant to our concept." Nevertheless,
we can judge only according to our concepts, and, as it is repugnant to
our manner of thinking to conceive that, if all matter were removed from
a vessel, extension, distance, etc., would still remain, or that parts
of matter be indivisible, we say simply that all that implies
contradiction.

Descartes’ attempt to save God's omnipotence and, nevertheless, to deny
the possibility of void space as incompatible with our manner of
thinking, is, to say the truth, by no means convincing. The Cartesian
God is a *Deus verax* and He guarantees the truth of our clear and

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

distinct ideas. Thus it is not only repugnant to our thought, but
impossible that something of which we clearly see that it implies
contradiction be real. There are no contradictory objects in this world,
though there could have been in another.

Coming now to More's criticism of his distinction between " infinite "
and " indefinite," Descartes assures him that it is not because
of[12](cwiu16.htm#an_5_12)

<div class="iq">

. . . an affectation of modesty, but as a precaution, and, in my opinion
a necessary one, that I call certain things indefinite rather than
infinite. For it is God alone whom I understand positively to be
infinite; as for the others, such as the extension of the world, the
number of parts into which matter is divisible, and so on, whether they
are simpliciter infinite or not, I confess not to know. I only know that
I do not discern in them any end, and therefore, in respect to me, I say
they are indefinite. And though our mind is not the measure of things or
of truth, it must, assuredly, be the measure of things that we affirm or
deny. What indeed is more absurd or more inconsiderate than to wish to
make a judgment about things which we confess to be unable to perceive
with our mind?

Thus I am surprised that you not only seem to want to do so, as when you
say that *if* extension is *infinite only in respect to us then
extension in truth will be finite*, etc., but that you imagine beyond
this one a certain divine extension, which would stretch farther than
the extension of bodies, and thus suppose that God has *partes extra
partes*, and that He is divisible, and, in short, attribute to Him all
the essence of a corporeal being.

</div>

Descartes, indeed, is perfectly justified in pointing out that More has
somewhat misunderstood him: a space

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

*beyond* the world of extension has never been admitted by him as
possible or imaginable, and even if the world *had* these limits which
we are unable to find, there certainly would be nothing beyond them, or,
better to say, there would be no *beyond*. Thus, in order to dispel
completely More's doubts, he declares:[13](cwiu16.htm#an_5_13)

<div class="iq">

When I say that the extension of matter is indefinite, I believe it to
be sufficient to prevent any one imagining a place outside it, into
which the small particles of my vortices could escape; because wherever
this place be conceived, it would already, in my opinion, contain some
matter; for, when I say that it is indefinitely extended, I am saying
that it extends farther than all that can be conceived by man.

But I think, nevertheless, that there is a very great difference between
the amplitude of this corporeal extension and the amplitude of the
divine, I shall not say, extension, because properly speaking there is
none, but substance or essence; and therefore I call this one
*simpliciter* infinite, and the other, indefinite.

</div>

Descartes is certainly right in wanting to maintain the distinction
between the "intensive" infinity of God, which not only excludes all
limit, but also precludes all multiplicity, division and number, from
the mere endlessness, indefiniteness, of space, or of the series of
numbers, which necessarily include and presuppose them. This
distinction, moreover, is quite traditional, and we have seen it
asserted not only by Nicholas of Cusa, but even by Bruno.

Henry More does not deny this distinction; at least not completely. In
his own conception it expresses itself in the opposition between the
material and the divine extension. Yet, as he states it in his second
letter to

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Descartes,[14](cwiu16.htm#an_5_14) it has nothing to do with Descartes’
assertion that there may be limits to space and with his attempt to
build a concept intermediate between the finite and the infinite; the
world is finite or infinite, *tertium non dater*. And if we admit, as we
must, that God is infinite and everywhere present, this "everywhere" can
only mean infinite space. In this case, pursues More, re-editing an
argument already used by Bruno, there must also be matter everywhere,
that is, the world must be infinite.[15](cwiu16.htm#an_5_15)

<div class="iq">

You can hardly ignore that it is either *simpliciter* infinite or, in
point of fact, finite, though you cannot as easily decide whether it is
the one or the other. That, however, your vortices are not disrupted and
do not come apart seems to be a rather clear sign that the world is
really infinite. For my part, I confess freely that though I can boldly
give my approval to this axiom: *The world is finite, or not finite*,
or, what is here the same thing, *infinite*, I cannot, nevertheless,
fully understand the infinity of any thing whatsoever. But here there
comes to my imagination what Julius Scaliger wrote somewhere about the
contraction and the dilatation of the Angels: namely, that they cannot
extend themselves *in infinitum*, or contract themselves to an
imperceptible (οὐδενότητα) point. Yet if one recognizes God to be
positively infinite (that is, existing everywhere), as you yourself
rightly do, I do not see whether it is permitted to the unbiassed reason
to hesitate to admit forthwith also that He is nowhere idle, and that
with the same right, and with the same facility with which \[He
created\] this matter in which we live, or that to which our eyes and
our mind can reach, He produced matter everywhere.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nor is it absurd
or inconsiderate to say that, if the extension is infinite only *quoad
nos*, it will, in truth and in reality, be
finite:[16](cwiu16.htm#an_5_16)

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<div class="iq">

I will add that this consequence is perfectly manifest, because the
particle "only" (*tantum*) clearly excludes all real infinity of the
thing which is said to be infinite only in respect to us, and therefore
in reality the extension will be finite; moreover my mind does perceive
these things of which I judge, as it is perfectly clear to me that the
world is either finite or infinite, as I have just mentioned.

</div>

As for Descartes’ contention that the impossibility of the void already
results from the fact that "nothing" can have no properties or
dimensions and therefore cannot be measured, More replies by denying
this very premise:[17](cwiu16.htm#an_5_17)

<div class="iq">

. . . for, if God annihilated this universe and then, after a certain
time, created from nothing another one, this *intermundium* or this
absence of the world would have its duration which would be measured by
a certain number of days, years or centuries. There is thus a duration
of something that does not exist, which duration is a kind of extension.
Consequently, the amplitude of nothing, that is of void, can be measured
by ells or leagues, just as the duration of what does not exist can be
measured in its inexistence by hours, days and months.

</div>

We have seen Henry More defend, against Descartes, the infinity of the
world, and even tell the latter that his own physics necessarily implies
this infinity. Yet it seems that, at times, he feels himself assailed by
doubt. He is perfectly sure that space, that is, God's extension, is
infinite. On the other hand, the material world may, perhaps, be finite.
After all, nearly everybody believes it; spatial infinity and temporal
eternity are strictly parallel, and so both seem to be absurd. Moreover
Cartesian cosmology can be put in agreement with a finite world. Could

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Descartes not tell
what would happen, in this case, if somebody sitting at the extremity of
the world pushed his sword through the limiting wall? On the one hand,
indeed, this seems easy, as there would be nothing to resist it; on the
other, impossible, as there would be no place where it could be
pushed.[18](cwiu16.htm#an_5_18)

Descartes’ answer to this second letter of More[19](cwiu16.htm#an_5_19)
is much shorter, terser, less cordial than to the first one. One feels
that Descartes is a bit disappointed in his correspondent who obviously
does not understand his, Descartes’, great discovery, that of the
essential opposition between mind and extension, and who persists in
attributing extension to souls, angels, and even to God. He
restates[20](cwiu16.htm#an_5_20)

<div class="iq">

. . . that he does not conceive any extension of substance in God, in
the angels, or in our mind, but only an extension of power, so that an
angel can proportionate this power to a greater or smaller part of
corporeal substance; for if there were no body at all, this power of God
or of an angel would not correspond to any extension whatever. To
attribute to substance what pertains only to power is an effect of the
same prejudice which makes us suppose all substance, even that of God,
to be something that can be imagined.

</div>

If there were no world, there would be no time either. To More's
contention that the *intermundium* would last a certain time, Descartes
replies:[21](cwiu16.htm#an_5_21)

<div class="iq">

I believe that it implies a contradiction to conceive a duration between
the destruction of the first world and the creation of the second one;
for, if we refer this duration or something similar to the succession of
God's ideas, this will be an error of our intellect and not a true
perception of something.

</div>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Indeed, it would mean introducing time into God, and thus making God a
temporal, changing being. It would mean denying His eternity, replacing
it by mere sempiternity—an error no less grave than the error of making
Him an extended thing. For in both cases God is menaced with losing His
transcendence, with becoming immanent to the world.

Now Descartes’ God is perhaps not the Christian God, but a philosophical
one.[22](cwiu16.htm#an_5_22) He is, nevertheless, God, not the soul of
the world that penetrates, vivifies and moves it. Therefore he
maintains, in accordance with mediaeval tradition, that, in spite of the
fact that in God power and essence are one—an identity pointed out by
More in favour of God's actual extension—God has nothing in common with
the material world. He is a pure mind, an infinite mind, whose very
infinity is of a unique and incomparable non-quantitative and
non-dimensional kind, of which spatial extension is neither an image nor
even a symbol. The world therefore, must not be called infinite; though
of course we must not enclose it in limits:[23](cwiu16.htm#an_5_23)

<div class="iq">

It is repugnant to my concept to attribute any limit to the world, and I
have no other measure than my perception for what I have to assert or to
deny. I say, therefore, that the world is indeterminate or indefinite,
because I do not recognize in it any limits. But I dare not call it
infinite as I perceive that God is greater than the world, not in
respect to His extension, because, as I have already said, I do not
acknowledge in God any proper \[extension\], but in respect to His
perfection.

</div>

Once more Descartes asserts that God's presence in the world does not
imply His extension. As for the world

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

itself which More wants to be either *simpliciter* finite, or
*simpliciter* infinite, Descartes still refuses to call it infinite. And
yet, either because he is somewhat angry with More, or because he is in
a hurry and therefore less careful, he practically abandons his former
assertion about the possibility of the world's having limits (though we
cannot find them) and treats this conception in the same manner in which
he treated that of the void, that is, as nonsensical and even
contradictory; thus, rejecting as meaningless the question about the
possibility of pushing a sword through the boundary of the world, he
says:[24](cwiu16.htm#an_5_24)

<div class="iq">

It is repugnant to my mind, or what amounts to the same thing, it
implies a contradiction, that the world be finite or limited, because I
cannot but conceive a space outside the boundaries of the world wherever
I presuppose them. But, for me, this space is a true body. I do not care
if it is called by others imaginary, and that therefore the world is
believed to be finite; indeed, I know from what prejudices this error
takes its origin.

</div>

Henry More, needless to say, was not convinced—one philosopher seldom
convinces another. He persisted, therefore, in believing "with all the
ancient Platonists" that all substance, souls, angels and God are
extended, and that the world, in the most literal sense of this word, is
in God just as God is in the world. More accordingly sent Descartes a
third letter,[25](cwiu16.htm#an_5_25) which he
answered,[26](cwiu16.htm#an_5_26) and a fourth,[27](cwiu16.htm#an_5_27)
which he did not.[28](cwiu16.htm#an_5_28) I shall not attempt to examine
them here as they bear chiefly on questions which, though interesting in
themselves—for example, the discussion about motion and rest—are outside
our subject.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

Summing up, we can say that we have seen Descartes, under More's
pressure, move somewhat from the position he had taken at first: to
assert the indefiniteness of the world, or of space, does not mean,
negatively, that perhaps it has limits that we are unable to ascertain;
it means, quite positively, that it has none because it would be
contradictory to posit them. But he cannot go farther. He has to
maintain his distinction, as he has to maintain the identification of
extension and matter, if he is to maintain his contention that the
physical world is an object of pure intellection and, at the same time,
of imagination—the precondition of Cartesian science—and that the world,
in spite of its lack of limits, refers us to God as its creator and
cause.

Infinity, indeed, has always been the essential character, or attribute,
of God; especially since Duns Scotus, who could accept the famous
Anselmian *a priori* proof of the existence of God (a proof revived by
Descartes) only after he had "colored" it by substituting the concept of
the infinite being (*ens infinitum*) for the Anselmian concept of a
being than which we cannot think of a greater (*ens quo maius cogitari
nequit*). Infinity thus—and it is particularly true of Descartes whose
God exists in virtue of the infinite "superabundance of His essence"
which enables Him to be His own cause (*causa sui*) and to give Himself
His own existence[29](cwiu16.htm#an_5_29)—means or implies being, even
necessary being. Therefore it cannot be attributed to creature. The
distinction, or opposition, between God and creature is parallel and
exactly equivalent to that of infinite and of finite being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. God and Space, Spirit and Matter](cwiu09)
