[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu00)  [Next](cwiu02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__003"></span>

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### Preface

Time and again, when studying the history of scientific and
philosophical thought in the sixteenth and the seventeenth
centuries—they are, indeed, so closely interrelated and linked together
that, separated, they become ununderstandable—I have been forced to
recognize, as many others have before me, that during this period human,
or at least European, minds underwent a deep revolution which changed
the very framework and patterns of our thinking and of which modern
science and modern philosophy are, at the same time, the root and the
fruit.

This revolution or, as it has been called, this "crisis of European
consciousness," has been described and explained in many different ways.
Thus, whereas it is generally admitted that the development of the new
cosmology, which replaced the geo- or even anthropocentric world of
Greek and medieval astronomy by the heliocentric, and, later, by the
centerless universe of modern astronomy, played a paramount role in this
process, some historians, interested chiefly in the social implications
of spiritual changes, have stressed the alleged conversion of the human
mind from *theoria* to *praxis*, from the *scientia contemplativa* to
the *scientia activa* et *operativa*, which transformed man from a
spectator into an owner and master of nature; some others have stressed
the replacement of the teleological and organismic pattern of thinking
and explanation by the mechanical and causal pattern, leading,
ultimately, to the "mechanisation of the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

world-view" so prominent in modern times, especially in the eighteenth
century: still others have simply described the despair and confusion
brought by the "new philosophy" into a world from which all coherence
was gone and in which the skies no longer announced the glory of God.

As for myself, I have endeavored in my Galilean Studies to define the
structural patterns of the old and the new world-views and to determine
the changes brought forth by the revolution of the seventeenth century.
They seemed to me to be reducible to two fundamental and closely
connected actions that I characterised as the destruction of the cosmos
and the geometrization of space, that is the substitution for the
conception o he world as a finite and well-ordered whole, in which the
spatial structure embodied a hierarchy of perfection and value, that of
an indefinite or even infinite universe no longer united by natural
subordination, but unified only by the identity of its ultimate and
basic components and laws; and the replacement of the Aristotelian
conception of space—a differentiated set of innerworldly places—by that
of Euclidean geometry—an essentially infinite and homogenous
extension—from now on considered as identical with the real space of the
world. The spiritual change that I describe did not occur, of course, in
a sudden mutation. Revolutions, too, need time for their accomplishment;
revolutions, too, have a history. Thus the heavenly spheres that
encompassed the world and held it together did not disappear at once in
a mighty explosion; the world-bubble grew and swelled before bursting
and merging with the space that surrounded it.

The path which led from the closed world of the ancients to the open one
of the moderns was, as a matter

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of fact, not very long: barely a hundred years separate the *De
revolutionibus orbium coelestium* of Copernicus (1543) from the
*Principia philosophiae* of Descartes (1644); barely forty years these
*Principiae* from the *Philosophia naturalis principia mathematica*
(1687). On the other hand, it was rather difficult, full of obstacles
and dangerous road blocks. Or, to put it in simpler language, the
problems involved in the infinitization of the universe are too deep,
the implications of the solutions too far-reaching and too important to
allow an unimpeded progress. Science, philosophy, even theology, are,
all of them, legitimately interested in questions about the nature of
space, structure of matter, patterns of action and, last but not least,
about the nature, structure, and value of human thinking and of human
science. Thus it is science, philosophy, and theology, represented as
often as not by the very same men—Kepler and Newton, Descartes and
Leibniz—that join and take part in the great debate that starts with
Bruno and Kepler and ends—provisionally, to be sure—with Newton and
Leibniz.

I did not deal with these problems in my *Galilean Studies*, where I had
to describe only the steps that led to the great revolution and formed,
so to speak, its prehistory. But in my lectures at The Johns Hopkins
University—"The Origins of Modern Science," in 1951, and "Science and
Philosophy in the Age of Newton," in 1952—in which I studied the history
of this revolution itself, I had the opportunity to treat as they
deserved the questions that were paramount in the minds of its great
protagonists. It is this history that, under the title *From the Closed
World to the Infinite Universe*, I have endeavored to tell in the
Noguchi Lecture that I had the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

honour of giving in 1953; and it is the self-same story that, taking the
history of cosmology, as Ariadne's thread I am retelling in this volume:
it is, indeed, only an expanded version of my Noguchi Lecture.

I would like to express my gratitude to the Noguchi Committee for its
kind permission to expand my lecture to its present dimensions, and to
thank Mrs. Jean Jacquot, Mrs. Janet Koudelka, and Mrs. Willard King for
assistance in preparing the manuscript.

I am also indebted to Abelard-Schuman, publishers, for the permission to
quote Mrs. Dorothea Waley Singer's translation of Giordano Bruno's *De
l’infinito universo et mondi* (New York, 1950).

*Alexandre Koyré*

<span class="small">PRINCETON  
JANUARY, 1957</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](cwiu02)
