[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu04)  [Next](cwiu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### II. The New Astronomy and the New Metaphysics

*N. Copernicus, Th. Digges, G. Bruno & W. Gilbert*

Palingenius and Copernicus are practically contemporaries. Indeed, the
*Zodiacus vitae* and the *De revolutionibus orbium cœlestium* must have
been written at about the same time. Yet they have nothing, or nearly
nothing, in common. They are as far away from each other as if they were
separated by centuries.

As a matter of fact, they are, indeed, separated by centuries, by all
those centuries during which Aristotelian cosmology and Ptolemaic
astronomy dominated Western thought. Copernicus, of course, makes full
use of the mathematical technics elaborated by Ptolemy—one of the
greatest achievements of the human mind[1](cwiu16.htm#an_2_1)—and yet,
for his inspiration he goes back beyond him, and beyond Aristotle, to
the golden age of Pythagoras and of Plato. He quotes Heraclides,
Ecphantus and Hiketas, Philolaos and Aristarchus of Samos; and according
to Rheticus, his pupil and mouthpiece, it is[2](cwiu16.htm#an_2_2)

<div class="iq">

. . . following Plato and the Pythagoreans, the greatest

</div>

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<div class="iq">

mathematicians of that divine age, that \[he\] thought that in order to
determine the cause of the phenomena, circular motions have to be
ascribed to the spherical earth.

</div>

I need not insist on the overwhelming scientific and philosophical
importance of Copernican astronomy, which, by removing the earth from
the center of the world and placing it among the planets, undermined the
very foundations of the traditional cosmic world-order with its
hierarchical structure and qualitative opposition of the celestial realm
of immutable being to the terrestrial or sublunar region of change and
decay. Compared to the deep criticism of its metaphysical basis by
Nicholas of Cusa, the Copernican revolution may appear rather
half-hearted and not very radical. It was, on the other hand, much more
effective, at least in the long run; for, as we know, the immediate
effect of the Copernican revolution was to spread skepticism and
bewilderment[3](cwiu16.htm#an_2_3) of which the famous verses of John
Donne give such a striking, though somewhat belated, expression, telling
us that the[4](cwiu16.htm#an_2_4)

<div class="iq">

. . . new Philosophy calls all in doubt,  
The Element of fire is quite put out;  
The Sun is lost, and th’earth, and no mans wit  
Can well direct him where to looke for it.  
And freely men confesse that this world's spent,  
When in the Planets, and the Firmament  
They seeke so many new; then see that this  
Is crumbled out againe to his Atomies.  
’Tis all in peeces, all cohaerence gone;  
All just supply, and all Relation.

</div>

To tell the truth, the world of Copernicus is by no means devoid of
hierarchical features. Thus, if he asserts

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that it is not the skies which move, but the earth, it is not only
because it seems irrational to move a tremendously big body instead of a
relatively small one, "that which contains and locates and not that
which is contained and located," but also because "the condition of
*being at rest* is considered as nobler and more divine than that of
*change* and *inconsistency;* the latter therefore, is more suited to
the earth than to the universe."[5](cwiu16.htm#an_2_5) And it is on
account of its supreme perfection and value—source of light and of
life—that the place it occupies in the world is assigned to the sun; the
central place which, following the Pythagorean tradition and thus
reversing completely the Aristotelian and mediaeval scale, Copernicus
believes to be the best and the most important
one.[6](cwiu16.htm#an_2_6)

Thus, though the Copernican world is no more hierarchically structured
(at least not fully; it has, so to say, two poles of perfection, the sun
and the sphere of the fixed stars, with the planets in between), it is
still a well-ordered world. Moreover, it is still a finite one.

This finiteness of the Copernican world may appear illogical. Indeed,
the only reason for assuming the existence of the sphere of the fixed
stars being their common motion, the negation of that motion should lead
immediately to the negation of the very existence of that sphere;
moreover, since, in the Copernican world, the fixed stars must be
exceedingly big[7](cwiu16.htm#an_2_7)—the smallest being larger than the
whole *Orbis magnus*—the sphere of the fixed stars must be rather thick;
it seems only reasonable to extend its volume indefinitely "upwards."

It is rather natural to interpret Copernicus this way, that is, as an
advocate of the infinity of the world, all the more so as he actually
raises the question of the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

possibility of an indefinite spatial extension beyond the stellar
sphere, though refusing to treat that problem as not scientific and
turning it over to the philosophers. As a matter of fact, it is in this
way that the Copernican doctrine was interpreted by Gianbattista
Riccioli, by Huygens, and more recently by Mr.
McColley.[8](cwiu16.htm#an_2_8)

Though it seems reasonable and natural, I do not believe this
interpretation to represent the actual views of Copernicus. Human
thought, even that of the greatest geniuses, is never completely
consequent and logical. We must not be astonished, therefore, that
Copernicus, who believed in the existence of material planetary spheres
because he needed them in order to explain the motion of the planets,
believed also in that of a sphere of the fixed stars which he no longer
needed. Moreover, though its existence did not explain anything, it
still had some usefulness; the stellar sphere, which "embraced and
contained everything and itself," held the world together and, besides,
enabled Copernicus to assign a determined position to the sun.

In any case, Copernicus tells us quite clearly
that[9](cwiu16.htm#an_2_9)

<div class="iq">

. . . the universe is spherical; partly because this form, being a
complete whole, needing no joints, is the most perfect of all; partly
because it constitutes the most spacious form which is thus best suited
to contain and retain all things; or also because all discrete parts of
the world, I mean the sun, the moon and the planets, appear as spheres.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> True, he rejects
the Aristotelian doctrine according to which "outside the world there is
no body, nor place, nor empty space, in fact that nothing at all exists"
because

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

it seems to him " really strange that something could be enclosed by
nothing" and believes that, if we admitted that "the heavens were
infinite and bounded only by their inner concavity," then we should have
better reason to assert "that there is nothing outside the heavens,
because everything, whatever its size, is within
them,"[10](cwiu16.htm#an_2_10) in which case, of course, the heavens
would have to be motionless: the infinite, indeed, cannot be moved or
traversed.

Yet he never tells us that the *visible world*, the world of the fixed
stars, is infinite, but only that it is immeasurable (*immensum*), that
it is so large that not only the earth compared to the skies is "as a
point" (this, by the way, had already been asserted by Ptolemy), but
also the whole orb of the earth's annual circuit around the sun; and
that we do not and cannot know the limit, the dimension of the world.
Moreover, when dealing with the famous objection of Ptolemy according to
which "the earth and all earthly things if set in rotation would be
dissolved by the action of nature," that is, by the centrifugal forces
produced by the very great speed of its revolution, Copernicus replies
that this disruptive effect would be so much stronger upon the heavens
as their motion is more rapid than that of the earth, and that, "if this
argument were true, the extent of the heavens would become infinite." In
which case, of course, they would have to stand still, which, though
finite, they do.

Thus we have to admit that, even if outside the world there were not
nothing but space and even matter, nevertheless the *world* of
Copernicus would remain a finite one, encompassed by a material sphere
or orb, the sphere of the fixed stars—a sphere that has a centrum, a
centrum

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

occupied by the sun. It seems to me that there is no other way of
interpreting the teaching of Copernicus. Does he not tell us
that[11](cwiu16.htm#an_2_11)

<div class="iq">

. . . the first and the supreme of all \[spheres\] is the sphere of the
fixed stars which contains everything and itself and which, therefore,
is at rest. Indeed, it is the place of the world to which are referred
the motion and the position of all other stars. Some \[astronomers\]
indeed, have thought that, in a certain manner, this sphere is also
subjected to change: but in our deduction of the terrestrial motion we
have determined another cause why it appears so. \[After the sphere of
the fixed stars\] comes Saturn, which performs its circuit in thirty
years. After him, Jupiter, which moves in a duodecennial revolution.
Then Mars which circumgirates in two years. The fourth place in this
order is occupied by the annual revolution, which, as we have said,
contains the Earth with the orb of the Moon as an epicycle. In the fifth
place Venus revolves in nine months. Finally, the sixth place is held by
Mercury, which goes around in the space of eighty days.

But in the center of all resides the Sun. Who, indeed, in this most
magnificent temple would put the light in another, or in a better place
than that one wherefrom it could at the same time illuminate the whole
of it? Therefore it is not improperly that some people call it the lamp
of the world, others its mind, others its ruler. Trismegistus \[calls
it\] the visible God, Sophocles’ Electra, the All-Seeing. Thus,
assuredly, as residing in the royal see the Sun governs the surrounding
family of the stars.

</div>

We have to admit the evidence: the world of Copernicus is finite.
Moreover, it seems to be psychologically quite normal that the man who
took the first step, that of arresting the motion of the sphere of the
fixed stars,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

hesitated before taking the second, that of dissolving it in boundless
space; it was enough for one man to move the earth and to enlarge the
world so as to make it immeasurable—*immensum*; to ask him to make it
infinite is obviously asking too much.

 

Great importance has been attributed to the enlargement of the
Copernican world as compared to the mediaeval one—its diameter is at
least 2000 times greater. Yet, we must not forget, as Professor Lovejoy
has already pointed out,[12](cwiu16.htm#an_2_12) that even the
Aristotelian or Ptolemaic world was by no means that snug little thing
that we see represented on the miniatures adorning the manuscripts of
the Middle Ages and of which Sir Walter Raleigh gave us such an
enchanting description.[13](cwiu16.htm#an_2_13) Though rather small by
our astronomical standards, and even by those of Copernicus, it was in
itself sufficiently big not to be felt as built to man's measure: about
20,000 terrestrial radii, such was the accepted figure, that is, about
125,000,000 miles.

Let us not forget, moreover, that, by comparison with the infinite, the
world of Copernicus is by no means greater than that of mediaeval
astronomy; they are both as nothing, because *inter finitum et infinitum
non est proportio*. We do not approach the infinite universe by
increasing the dimensions of our world. We may make it as large as we
want: that does *not* bring us any nearer to it.[14](cwiu16.htm#an_2_14)

Notwithstanding this, it remains clear that it is somewhat easier,
psychologically if not logically, to pass from a very large,
immeasurable and ever-growing world to an infinite one than to make this
jump starting with a

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

rather big, but still determinably limited sphere: the world-bubble has
to swell before bursting. It is also clear that by his reform, or
revolution, of astronomy Copernicus removed one of the most valid
scientific objections against the infinity of the universe, based,
precisely, upon the empirical, common-sense fact of the motion of the
celestial spheres.

The infinite cannot be traversed, argued Aristotle; now the stars turn
around, therefore . . . But the stars do not turn around; they stand
still, therefore . . . It is thus not surprising that in a rather short
time after Copernicus some bold minds made the step that Copernicus
refused to make, and asserted that the celestial sphere, that is the
sphere of the fixed stars of Copernican astronomy, does not exist, and
that the starry heavens, in which the stars are placed at different
distances from the earth, "extendeth itself infinitely up."

It has been commonly assumed until recent times that it was Giordano
Bruno who, drawing on Lucretius and creatively misunderstanding both him
and Nicholas of Cusa,[15](cwiu16.htm#an_2_15) first made this decisive
step. Today, after the discovery by Professor Johnson and Dr.
Larkey[16](cwiu16.htm#an_2_16)—in 1934—of the *Perfit Description of the
Caelestiall Orbes according to the most aunciene doctrine of the
Pythagoreans lately revived by Copernicus and by Geometricall
Demonstrations approued*, which Thomas Digges, in 1576, added to the
Prognostication everlasting of his father Leonard Digges, this honor, at
least partially, must be ascribed to him. Indeed, though different
interpretations may be given of the text of Thomas Digges—and my own
differs somewhat from that of Professor Johnson and Dr. Larkey—it is
certain, in any case, that Thomas

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Digges was the
first Copernican to replace his master's conception, that of a closed
world, by that of an open one, and that in his Description, where he
gives a fairly good, though rather free, translation of the cosmological
part of the *De revolutionibus orbium cœlestium*, he makes some rather
striking additions. First, in his description of the orb of Saturn he
inserts the clause that this orb is "of all others next vnto that
infinite Orbe immouable, garnished with lights innumerable"; then he
substitutes for the well-known Copernican diagram of the world another
one, in which the stars are placed on the whole page, above as well as
below the line by which Copernicus represented the *ultima sphaera
mundi*. The text that Thomas Digges adds to his diagram is very curious.
In my opinion, it expresses the hesitation and the uncertainty of a
mind—a very bold mind—which on the one hand not only accepted the
Copernican world-view, but even went beyond it, and which, on the other
hand, was still dominated by the religious conception—or image—of a
heaven located in space. Thomas Digges begins by telling us that:

<div class="iq">

The orbe of the starres fixed infinitely up extendeth hit self in
altitude sphericallye, and therefore immouable.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet he adds that
this orbe is

<div class="iq">

the pallace of felicitye garnished with perpetuall shininge glorious
lightes innumerable, farr excelling our sonne both in quantity and
qualitye.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And that it is

<div class="iq">

the Court of the great God, the habitacle of the elect, and of the
coelestiall angelles.

</div>

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span id="img_03700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE 2&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Thomas Digges's diagram of the infinite Copernican
universe&lt;/i&gt;&lt;br&gt; (from &lt;i&gt;A Perfit Description of the
Caelestiall Orbes&lt;/i&gt;, 1576)](tn/03700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03700.jpg)  
FIGURE 2  
*Thomas Digges's diagram of the infinite Copernican universe*  
(from *A Perfit Description of the Caelestiall Orbes*, 1576)  
</span>

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

The text accompanying the diagram develops this
idea:[18](cwiu16.htm#an_2_18)

<div class="iq">

Heerein can wee never sufficiently admire thys wonderfull and
incomprehensible huge frame of goddes woorke proponed to our senses,
seinge first the baull of ye earth wherein we moue, to the common sorte
seemeth greate, and yet in respecte of the Moones Orbe is very small,
but compared with the *Orbis magnus* wherein it is carried, it scarcely
retayneth any sensible proportion, so merueillously is that Orbe of
Annuall motion greater than this little darke starre wherein we liue.
But that *Orbis magnus* beinge as is before declared but as a poynct in
respect of the immensity of that immoueable heaven, we may easily
consider what little portion of gods frame, our Elementare corruptible
worlde is, but neuer sufficiently be able to admire the immensity of the
Rest. Especially of that fixed Orbe garnished with lightes innumerable
and reachinge vp in *Sphaericall altitude* without ende. Of which
lightes Celestiall it is to bee thoughte that we only behoulde sutch as
are in the inferioure partes of the same Orbe, and as they are hygher,
so seeme they of lesse and lesser quantity, even tyll our syghte beinge
not able farder to reache or conceyve, the greatest part rest by reason
of their wonderfull distance inuisible vnto vs. And this may well be
thought of vs to be the gloriouse court of ye great god, whose
vnsercheable works inuisible we may partly by these his visible
conjecture, to whose infinit power and maiesty such an infinit place
surmountinge all other both in quantity and quality only is conueniente.
But because the world hath so longe a time bin carried with an opinion
of the earths stabilitye, as the contrary cannot but be nowe very
imperswasible.

</div>

Thus, as we see, Thomas Digges puts his stars into a theological heaven;
not into an astronomical sky. As a matter of fact, we are not very far
from the conception

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of Palingenius—whom Digges knows and quotes—and, perhaps, nearer to him
than to Copernicus. Palingenius, it is true, places his heaven above the
stars, whereas Thomas Digges puts them into it. Yet he maintains the
separation between our world—the world of the sun and the planets—and
the heavenly sphere, the dwelling-place of God, the celestial angels,
and the saints. Needless to say, there is no place for Paradise in the
astronomical world of Copernicus.

That is the reason why, in spite of the very able defence of the
priority rights of Digges made by Professor Johnson in his excellent
book, *Astronomical Thought in Renaissance England*, I still believe
that it was Bruno who, for the first time, presented to us the sketch,
or the outline, of the cosmology that became dominant in the last two
centuries, and I cannot but agree with Professor Lovejoy, who in his
classical *Great Chain of Being* tells us that,[19](cwiu16.htm#an_2_19)

<div class="iq">

Though the elements of the new cosmography had, then, found earlier
expression in several quarters, it is Giordano Bruno who must be
regarded as the principal representative of the doctrine of the
decentralised, infinite and infinitely populous universe; for he not
only preached it throughout western Europe with the fervour of an
evangelist, but also first gave a thorough statement of the grounds on
which it was to gain acceptance from the general public.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indeed, never
before has the essential infinitude of space been asserted in such an
outright, definite and conscious manner.

Thus, already in the *La Cena de le Ceneri*,[20](cwiu16.htm#an_2_20)
where, by the way, Bruno gives the best discussion, and refutation, of
the classical—Aristotelian and Ptolemaic—objections

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

against the motion of the earth that were ever written before
Galileo,[21](cwiu16.htm#an_2_21) he proclaims
that[22](cwiu16.htm#an_2_22) "the world is infinite and that, therefore,
there is no body in it to which it would pertain *simpliciter* to be in
the center, or on the center, or on the periphery, or between these two
extremes" of the world (which, moreover, do not exist), but only to be
among other bodies. As for the world which has its cause and its origin
in an infinite cause and an infinite principle, it must be infinitely
infinite according to its corporeal necessity and its mode of being. And
Bruno adds:[23](cwiu16.htm#an_2_23)

<div class="iq">

It is certain that . . . it will never be possible to find an even
half-probable reason, why there should be a limit to this corporeal
universe, and, consequently, why the stars, which are contained in its
space, should be finite in number.

</div>

But we find the clearest, and most forceful, presentation of the new
gospel of the unity and the infinity of the world in his vernacular
dialogues *De l’infinito universo e mondi* and in his Latin poem *De
immenso et innumerabilibus*.[24](cwiu16.htm#an_2_24)

<div class="iq">

There is a single general space, a single vast immensity which we may
freely call Void: in it are innumerable globes like this on which we
live and grow; this space we declare to be infinite, since neither
reason, convenience, sense-perception nor nature assign to it a limit.
For there is no reason, nor defect of nature's gifts, either of active
or passive power, to hinder the existence of other worlds throughout
space, which is identical in natural character with our own space, that
is everywhere filled with matter or at least
ether.[25](cwiu16.htm#an_2_25)

</div>

We have, of course, heard nearly similar things from

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nicholas of Cusa.
And yet we cannot but recognize the difference of accent. Where Nicholas
of Cusa simply states the impossibility of assigning limits to the
world, Giordano Bruno asserts, and rejoices in, its infinity: the
superior determination and clarity of the pupil as compared to his
master is striking.[26](cwiu16.htm#an_2_26)

<div class="iq">

To a body of infinite size there can be ascribed neither center nor
boundary. For he who speaketh of emptiness, the void or the infinite
ether, ascribeth to it neither weight nor lightness, nor motion, nor
upper, nor lower, nor intermediate regions; assuming moreover that there
are in this space those countless bodies such as our earth and other
earths, our sun and other suns, which all revolve within this infinite
space, through finite and determined spaces or around their own centres.
Thus we on the earth say that the earth is in the centre; and all the
philosophers ancient and modern of whatever sect will proclaim without
prejudice to their own principles that here is indeed the centre.

</div>

Yet,

<div class="iq">

Just as we say that we are at the centre of that \[universally\]
equidistant circle, which is the great horizon and the limit of our own
encircling ethereal region, so doubtlessly the inhabitants of the moon
believe themselves at the centre \[of a great horizon\] that embraces
the earth, the sun and the other stars, and is the boundary of the radii
of their own horizon. Thus the earth no more than any other world is at
the centre; moreover, no points constitute determined celestial poles
for our earth, just as she herself is not a definite and determined pole
to any other point of the ether, or of the world-space; and the same is
true of all other bodies. From various points of view these may all be
regarded either as centres, or as points on the circumference, as poles,
or zeniths and so forth.

</div>

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus the earth is
not in the centre of the Universe; it is central only to our surrounding
space.

</div>

Professor Lovejoy, in his treatment of Bruno, insists on the importance
for the latter of the principle of plenitude, which governs his thought
and dominates his metaphysics.[27](cwiu16.htm#an_2_27) Professor Lovejoy
is perfectly right, of course: Bruno uses the principle of plenitude in
an utterly ruthless manner, rejecting all the restrictions by which
mediaeval thinkers tried to limit its applicability and boldly drawing
from it all the consequences that it implies. Thus to the old and famous
*questio disputata*: why did not God create an infinite world?—a
question to which the mediaeval scholastics gave so good an answer,
namely, denying the very possibility of an infinite creature—Bruno
simply replies, and he is the first to do it: God did. And even: God
could not do otherwise.

Indeed, Bruno's God, the somewhat misunderstood *infinitas complicata*
of Nicholas of Cusa, could not but explicate and express himself in an
infinite, infinitely rich, and infinitely extended
world.[28](cwiu16.htm#an_2_28)

<div class="iq">

Thus is the excellence of God magnified and the greatness of his kingdom
made manifest; he is glorified not in one, but in countless suns; not in
a single earth, but in a thousand, I say, in an infinity of worlds.

Thus not in vain the power of the intellect which ever seeketh, yea, and
achieveth the addition of space to space, mass to mass, unity to unity,
number to number, by the science that dischargeth us from the fetters of
a most narrow kingdom and promoteth us to the freedom of a truly august
realm, which freeth us from an imagined poverty and straineth to the
possession of the myriad riches of so vast a space, of so worthy a field
of so many cultivated

</div>

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<div class="iq">

worlds. This science does not permit that the arch of the horizon that
our deluded vision imagineth over the Earth and that by our phantasy is
feigned in the spacious ether, shall imprison our spirit under the
custody of a Pluto or at the mercy of a Jove. We are spared the thought
of so wealthy an owner and subsequently of so miserly, sordid and
avaricious a donor.

</div>

It has often been pointed out—and rightly, of course—that the
destruction of the cosmos, the loss, by the earth, of its central and
thus unique (though by no means privileged) situation, led inevitably to
the loss, by man, of his unique and privileged position in the
theo-cosmic drama of the creation, of which man was, until then, both
the central figure and the stake. At the end of the development we find
the mute and terrifying world of Pascal's
"libertin,"[29](cwiu16.htm#an_2_29) the senseless world of modern
scientific philosophy. At the end we find nihilism and despair.

Yet this was not so in the beginning. The displacement of the earth from
the centrum of the world was not felt to be a demotion. Quite the
contrary: it is with satisfaction that Nicholas of Cusa asserts its
promotion to the rank of the noble stars; and, as for Giordano Bruno, it
is with a burning enthusiasm—that of a prisoner who sees the walls of
his jail crumble—that he announces the bursting of the spheres that
separated us from the wide open spaces and inexhaustible treasures of
the ever-changing, eternal and infinite universe. Ever-changing! We are,
once more, reminded of Nicholas of Cusa, and, once more, we have to
state the difference of their fundamental world views—or world feelings.
Nicholas of Cusa *states* that immutability can nowhere be found in the
whole universe; Giordano Bruno goes far beyond this

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

mere statement; for him motion and change are signs of perfection and
not of a lack of it. An immutable universe would be a dead universe; a
living one must be able to move and to change.[30](cwiu16.htm#an_2_30)

<div class="iq">

There are no ends, boundaries, limits or walls which can defraud or
deprive us of the infinite multitude of things. Therefore the earth and
the ocean thereof are fecund; therefore the sun's blaze is everlasting,
so that eternally fuel is provided for the voracious fires, and moisture
replenishes the attenuated seas. For from infinity is born an ever fresh
abundance of matter.

Thus Democritus and Epicurus, who maintained that everything throughout
infinity suffereth renewal and restoration, understood these matters
more truly than those who at all costs maintain a belief in the
immutability of the Universe, alleging a constant and unchanging number
of particles of identical material that perpetually undergo
transformation, one into another.

</div>

The importance for Bruno's thought of the principle of plenitude cannot
be overvalued. Yet there are in it two other features that seem to me to
be of as great an importance as this principle. They are: (a) the use of
a principle that a century later Leibniz—who certainly knew Bruno and
was influenced by him—was to call *the principle of sufficient reason*,
which supplements the principle of plenitude and, in due time,
superseded it; and (b) the decisive shift (adumbrated indeed by Nicholas
of Cusa) from sensual to intellectual cognition in its relation to
thought (intellect). Thus, at the very beginning of his Dialogue on the
*Infinite Universe and the Worlds*, Bruno (Philotheo) asserts that
sense-perception, as such,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

is confused and erroneous and cannot be made the basis of scientific and
philosophical knowledge. Later on he explains that whereas for
sense-perception and imagination infinity is inaccessible and
unrepresentable, for the intellect, on the contrary, it is its primary
and most certain concept.[31](cwiu16.htm#an_2_31)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Philotheo</span>—No corporeal sense can perceive
the infinite. None of our senses can be expected to furnish this
conclusion; for the infinite cannot be the object of sense-perception;
therefore he who demandeth to obtain this knowledge through the senses
is like unto one who would desire to see with his eyes both substance
and essence. And he who would deny the existence of a thing merely
because it cannot be apprehended by the senses, nor is visible, would
presently be led to the denial of his own substance and being. Wherefore
there must be some measure in the demand for evidence from our
sense-perception, for this we can accept only in regard to sensible
objects, and even there it is not above all suspicion unless it cometh
before the court aided by good judgment. It is the part of the intellect
to judge yielding due weight to factors absent and separated by distance
of time and by space intervals. And in this matter our sense-perception
doth suffice us and doth yield us adequate testimony, since it is unable
to gainsay us; moreover it advertiseth and confesseth its own feebleness
and inadequacy by the impression it giveth us of a finite horizon, an
impression moreover which is ever changing. Since then we have
experience that sense-perception deceiveth us concerning the surface of
this globe on which we live, much more should we hold suspect the
impression it giveth us of a limit to the starry sphere.

<span class="smallcaps">Elpino</span>—Of what use are the senses to us?
tell me that.

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—Solely to stimulate our reason, to
accuse, to indicate,

</div>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<div class="iq">

to testify in part . . . truth is in but a very small degree derived
from the senses as from a frail origin, and doth by no means reside in
the senses.

<span class="smallcaps">Elp</span>.—Where then?

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—In the sensible object as in a
mirror; in reason, by process of argument and discussion. In the
intellect, either through origin or by conclusion. In the mind, in its
proper and vital form.

</div>

As for the principle of sufficient reason, Bruno applies it in his
discussion of space and of the spatially extended universe. Bruno's
space, the space of an infinite universe and at the same time the
(somewhat misunderstood) infinite "void" of Lucretius, is perfectly
homogeneous and similar to itself everywhere: indeed, how could the
"void" space be anything but uniform—or *vice versa*, how could the
uniform "void" be anything but unlimited and infinite? Accordingly, from
Bruno's point of view, the Aristotelian conception of a closed
innerworldly space is not only false, it is
absurd.[32](cwiu16.htm#an_2_32)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Philotheo</span>—If the world is finite and if
nothing is beyond, I ask you *where* is the world? *Where* is the
universe? Aristotle replieth: it is in itself. The convex surface of the
primal heaven is universal space, which being the primal container is by
nought contained.

<span class="smallcaps">Fracastoro</span>—The world then will be
nowhere. Everything will be in nothing.

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—If thou wilt excuse thyself by
asserting that where nought is, and nothing existeth, there can be no
question of position in space, nor of beyond, nor outside, yet I shall
in no wise be satisfied. For these are mere words and excuses which
cannot form part of our thought. For it is wholly impossible that in any
sense or fantasy (even

</div>

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<div class="iq">

though there may be various senses and various fantasies), it is, I say,
impossible that I can with any true meaning assert that there existeth
such a surface, boundary or limit, beyond which is neither body, nor
empty space, even though God be there.

</div>

We can pretend, as Aristotle does, that this world encloses all being,
and that outside this world there is nothing; *nec plenum nec vacuum*.
But nobody can think, or even imagine it. "Outside" the world will be
space. And this space, just as ours, will not be "void"; it will be
filled with "ether."

Bruno's criticism of Aristotle (like that of Nicholas of Cusa) is, of
course, wrong. He does not understand him and substitutes a geometrical
"space" for the place-continuum of the Greek philosopher. Thus he
repeats the classical objection: what would happen if somebody stretched
his hand through the surface of the heaven?[33](cwiu16.htm#an_2_33) And
though he gives to this question a nearly correct answer (from the point
of view of Aristotle),[34](cwiu16.htm#an_2_34)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Burchio</span>—Certainly I think that one must
reply to this fellow that if a person would stretch out his hand beyond
the convex sphere of heaven, the hand would occupy no position in space,
nor any place, and in consequence would not exist.

</div>

he rejects it on the perfectly fallacious ground that this "inner
surface," being a purely mathematical conception, cannot oppose a
resistance to the motion of a real body. Furthermore, even if it did,
the problem of what is beyond it would remain
unanswered:[35](cwiu16.htm#an_2_35)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Philotheo</span>—Thus, let the surface be what
it will, I must always put the question: what is beyond? If the reply

</div>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<div class="iq">

is: nothing, then I call that the void, or empty-ness. And such a Void
or Emptiness hath no measure nor outer limit, though it hath an inner;
and this is harder to imagine than is an infinite or immense universe.
For if we insist on a finite universe, we cannot escape the void. And
let us now see whether there can be such a space, in which is nought. In
this infinite space is placed our universe (whether by chance, by
necessity or by providence I do not now consider). I ask now whether
this space which indeed containeth the world is better fitted to do so
than is another space beyond?

<span class="smallcaps">Fracastoro</span>—It certainly appeareth to me
not so. For where there is nothing there can be no differentiation;
where there is no differentiation there is no
[destruction](errata.htm#1) of quality and perhaps there is even less of
quality where there is nought whatsoever.

</div>

Thus the space occupied by our world, and the space outside it, will be
the same. And if they are the same, it is impossible that "outside"
space should be treated by God in any different way from that which is
"inside." We are therefore bound to admit that not only space, but also
being in space is everywhere constituted in the same way, and that if in
our part of the infinite space there is a world, a sun-star surrounded
by planets, it is the same everywhere in the universe. Our world is not
the universe, but only this *machina*, surrounded by an infinite number
of other similar or analogous "worlds"—the worlds of star-suns scattered
in the etheric ocean of the sky.[36](cwiu16.htm#an_2_36)

Indeed, if it was, and is, possible for God to create a world in this
our space, it is, and it was, just as possible for Him to create it
elsewhere. But the uniformity of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

space—pure receptacle of being—deprives God of any reason to create it
here, and not elsewhere. Accordingly, the limitation of God's creative
action is unthinkable. In this case, the possibility implies actuality.
The infinite world can be; therefore it must be; therefore it
is.[37](cwiu16.htm#an_2_37)

<div class="iq">

For just as it would be ill that this our space were not filled, that is
our world were not to exist, then, since the spaces are
indistinguishable, it would be no less ill if the whole of space were
not filled. Thus we see that the universe is of indefinite size and the
worlds therein without number.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or, as the
Aristotelian adversary of Bruno, Elpino, now converted to his views,
formulates it:[33](cwiu16.htm#an_2_33)

<div class="iq">

I declare that which I cannot deny, namely, that within infinite space
either there may be an infinity of worlds similar to our own; or that
this universe may have extended its capacity in order to contain many
bodies such as those we name stars; or again that whether these worlds
be similar or dissimilar to one another, it may with no less reason be
well that one, than that another should exist. For the existence of one
is no less reasonable than that of another; and the existence of many no
less so than of one or of the other; and the existence of an infinity of
them no less so than the existence of a large number. Wherefore, even as
the abolition and non-existence of this world would be an evil, so would
it be of innumerable others.

</div>

More concretely:[39](cwiu16.htm#an_2_39)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Elp</span>.—There are then innumerable suns, and
an infinite number of earths revolve around these suns, just as the
seven we can observe revolve around this sun which is close to us.

</div>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—So it is.

<span class="smallcaps">Elp</span>.—Why then do we not see the other
bright bodies which are the earths circling around the bright bodies
which are suns? For beyond these we can detect no motion whatsoever; and
why do all the other mundane bodies appear always (except those known as
comets) in the same order and at the same distance?

</div>

Elpino's question is rather good. And the answer given to it by Bruno is
rather good, too, in spite of an optical error of believing that, in
order to be seen, the planets must be formed on the pattern of spherical
mirrors and possess a polished, smooth, "watery" surface, for which,
moreover, he is not responsible as it was common belief until
Galileo:[40](cwiu16.htm#an_2_40)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—The reason is that we discern only
the largest suns, immense bodies. But we do not discern the earths
because, being much smaller they are invisible to us. Similarly, it is
not impossible that other earths revolve around our sun and are
invisible to us either on account of greater distance or smaller size,
or because they have but little watery surface, or because such watery
surface is not turned toward us and opposed to the sun, whereby it would
be made visible as a crystal mirror which receiveth luminous rays;
whence we perceive that it is not marvellous or contrary to nature that
often we hear that the sun has been partially eclipsed though the moon
hath not been interpolated between him and our sight. There may be
innumerable watery luminous bodies—that is earths consisting in part of
water circulating around the sun, besides those visible to us; but the
difference in their orbits is indiscernible by us on account of their
great distance, wherefore we perceive no difference in the very slow
motion

</div>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<div class="iq">

discernible of those visible above or beyond Saturn; still less doth
there appear any order in the motion of all around the centre, whether
we place our earth or our sun as that centre.

</div>

The question then arises whether the fixed stars of the heavens are
really suns, and centers of worlds comparable to
ours.[41](cwiu16.htm#an_2_41)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Elp</span>.—Therefore you consider that if the
stars beyond Saturn are really motionless as they appear, then they are
those innumerable suns or fires more or less visible to us around which
travel their own neighbouring earths which are not discernible by us.

</div>

One would expect a positive answer. But for once Bruno is
prudent:[42](cwiu16.htm#an_2_42)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—Not so for I do not know whether
all or whether the majority is without motion, or whether some circle
around others, since none hath observed them. Moreover they are not easy
to observe, for it is not easy to detect the motion and progress of a
remote object, since at a great distance change of position cannot
easily be detected, as happeneth when we would observe ships in a high
sea. But however that may be, the universe being infinite, there must be
ultimately other suns. For it is impossible that heat and light from one
single body should be diffused throughout immensity, as was supposed by
Epicurus if we may credit what others relate of him. Therefore it
followeth that there must be innumerable suns, of which many appear to
us as small bodies; but that star will appear smaller which is in fact
much larger than that which appeareth much greater.

</div>

The infinity of the universe thus seems to be perfectly

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

assured. But what about the old objection that the concept of infinity
can be applied only to God, that is, to a purely spiritual, incorporeal
Being, an objection which led Nicholas of Cusa—and later Descartes—to
avoid calling their worlds "infinite," but only "interminate," or
"indefinite"? Bruno replies that he does not deny, of course, the utter
difference of the intensive and perfectly simple infinity of God from
the extensive and multiple infinity of the world. Compared to God, the
world is as a mere point, as a nothing.[43](cwiu16.htm#an_2_43)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—We are then at one concerning the
incorporeal infinite; but what preventeth the similar acceptability of
the good, corporeal and infinite being? And why should not that infinite
which is implicit in the utterly simple and indivisible Prime Origin
rather become explicit in his own infinite and boundless image able to
contain innumerable worlds, than become explicit within such narrow
bounds? So that it appeareth indeed shameful to refuse to credit that
this world which seemeth to us so vast may not in the divine regard
appear a mere point, even a nullity?

</div>

Yet it is just that "nullity" of the world and of all the bodies that
constitute it that implies its infinity. There is no reason for God to
create one particular kind of beings in preference to another. The
principle of sufficient reason reinforces the principle of plenitude.
God's creation, in order to be perfect and worthy of the Creator, must
therefore contain all that is possible, that is, innumerable individual
beings, innumerable earths, innumerable stars and suns—thus we could say
that God needs an infinite space in order to place in it this infinite
world.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

To sum up:[44](cwiu16.htm#an_2_44)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Phil</span>.—This indeed is what I had to add;
for, having pronounced that the Universe must itself be infinite because
of the capacity and aptness of infinite space; on account also of the
possibility and convenience of accepting the existence of innumerable
worlds like to our own; it remaineth still to prove it. Now both from
the circumstances of this efficient cause which must have produced the
Universe such as it is, or rather, must ever produce it such as it is,
and also from the conditions of our mode of understanding, we may easily
argue that infinite space is similar to this which we see, rather than
argue that it is that which we do not see either by example or by
similitude, or by proportion, or indeed, by any effort of imagination
which doth not finally destroy itself. Now to begin. Why should we, or
could we imagine that divine power were otiose? Divine goodness can
indeed be communicated to infinite things and can be infinitely
diffused; why then should we wish to assert that it would choose to be
scarce and to reduce itself to nought—for every finite thing is as
nought in relation to the infinite? Why do you desire that centre of
divinity which can (if one may so express it) extend indefinitely to an
infinite sphere, why do you desire that it should remain grudgingly
sterile rather than extend itself as a father, fecund, ornate and
beautiful? Why should you prefer that it should be less, or indeed by no
means communicated, rather than that it should fulfil the scheme of its
glorious power and being? Why should infinite amplitude be frustrated,
the possibility of an infinity of worlds be defrauded? Why should be
prejudiced the excellency of the divine image which ought rather to glow
in an unrestricted mirror, infinite, immense, according to the law of
its being? . . . Why wouldst thou that God should in power, in act and
in effect (which in him are

</div>

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<div class="iq">

identical) be determined as the limit of the convexity of a sphere
rather than that he should be, as we may say, the undetermined limit of
the boundless?

</div>

Let us not, adds Bruno, be embarrassed by the old objection that the
infinite is neither accessible, nor understandable. It is the opposite
that is true: the infinite is necessary, and is even the first thing
that naturally *cadit sub intellectus*.

 

Giordano Bruno, I regret to say, is not a very good philosopher. The
blending together of Lucretius and Nicholas of Cusa does not produce a
very consistent mixture; and though, as I have already said, his
treatment of the traditional objections against the motion of the earth
is rather good, the best given to them before Galileo, he is a very poor
scientist, he does not understand mathematics, and his conception of the
celestial motions is rather strange. My sketch of his cosmology is,
indeed, somewhat unilateral and not quite complete. As a matter of fact,
Bruno's world-view is vitalistic, magical; his planets are animated
beings that move freely through space of their own accord like those of
Plato or of Pattrizzi. Bruno's is not a modern mind by any means. Yet
his conception is so powerful and so prophetic, so reasonable and so
poetic that we cannot but admire it and him. And it has—at least in its
formal features—so deeply influenced modern science and modern
philosophy, that we cannot but assign to Bruno a very important place in
the history of the human mind.

 

I do not know whether Bruno had a great influence on his immediate
contemporaries, or even whether he

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

influenced them at all. Personally, I doubt it very much. He was, in his
teaching, far ahead of his time.[45](cwiu16.htm#an_2_45) Thus his
influence seems to me to have been a delayed one. It was only *after*
the great telescopic discoveries of Galileo that it was accepted and
became a factor, and an important one, of the seventeenth century
world-view.

Kepler, as a matter of fact, links Bruno with Gilbert and seems to
suggest that it was from the former that the great British scientist
received his belief in the infinity of the universe.

This is, of course, quite possible: the thorough criticism of the
Aristotelian cosmology may have impressed Gilbert. Yet it would be the
only point where the teaching of the Italian philosopher was accepted by
him. There is, indeed, not much similarity (besides the animism, common
to both) between the "magnetic philosophy" of William Gilbert and the
metaphysics of Giordano Bruno. Professor Johnson believes that Gilbert
was influenced by Digges, and that, having asserted the indefinite
extension of the world "of which the limit is not known, and cannot be
known," Gilbert, "to enforce his point, adopted without qualification
Digges' idea that the stars were infinite in number, and located at
varying and infinite distances from the center of the
Universe."[46](cwiu16.htm#an_2_46)

This is quite possible, too. Yet, if he adopted *this* idea of Digges,
he completely rejected his predecessor's immersion of the celestial
bodies into the theological heavens: he has nothing to tell us about the
angels and the saints.

On the other hand, neither Bruno nor Digges succeeded in persuading
Gilbert to accept, in its entirety, the astronomical theory of
Copernicus of which he seems to have admitted only the least important
part, that is, the diurnal

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

motion of the earth, and not the much more important annual one.
Gilbert, it is true, does not reject this latter: he simply ignores it,
whereas he devotes a number of very eloquent pages to the defence and
explanation (on the basis of his magnetic philosophy) of the daily
rotation of the earth on its axis and to the refutation of the
Aristotelian and Ptolemaic conception of the motion of the celestial
sphere, and also to the denial of its very existence.

As to this latter point, we must not forget, however, that the solid
orbs of classical—and Copernican—astronomy had, in the meantime, been
"destroyed" by Tycho Brahe. Gilbert, therefore, in contradistinction to
Copernicus himself, can so much more easily dispense with the perfectly
useless sphere of the fixed stars, as he does not have to admit the
existence of the potentially useful planetary ones. Thus he tells us:

<div class="iq">

But in the first place, it is not likely that the highest heaven and all
these visible splendours of the fixed stars are impelled along that most
rapid and useless course. Besides, who is the Master who has ever made
out that the stars which we call fixed are in one and the same sphere,
or has established by any reasoning that there are any real, and, as it
were, adamantine spheres? No one has ever proved this as a fact; nor is
there a doubt but that just as the planets are at unequal distances from
the earth, so are those vast and multitudinous lights separated from the
earth by varying and very remote altitudes; they are not set in any
sphaerick frame of firmament (as is feigned), nor in any vaulted body;
accordingly the intervals of some are, from their unfathomable distance,
matter of opinion rather than of verification; others do much exceed
them and

</div>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<div class="iq">

are very far remote, and these being located in the heaven at varying
distances, either in the thinnest aether, or in that most subtle
quintessence, or in the void; how are they to remain in their position
during such a mighty swirl of the vast orbe of such uncertain substance
. . .

Astronomers have observed 1022 stars; besides these innumerable other
stars appear minute to our senses; as regards still others, our sight
grows dim, and they are hardly discernible save by the keenest eye; nor
is there any possessing the best power of vision that will not, while
the moon is below the horizon and the atmosphere is clear, feel that
there are many more, indeterminable and vacillating by reason of their
faint light, obscured because of the distance.

How immeasurable then must be the space which stretches to those
remotest of the fixed stars! How vast and immense the depth of that
imaginary sphere! How far removed from the earth must the most widely
separated stars be and at a distance transcending all sight, all skill
and thought! How monstrous then such a motion would be!

It is evident then that all the heavenly bodies, set as if in a destined
place, are there formed unto spheres, that they tend to their own
centres and that round them there is a confluence of all their parts.
And if they have motion that motion will rather be that of each round
its own centre, as that of the earth is, or a forward movement of the
centre in an orbit as that of the Moon.

But there can be no movement of infinity and of an infinite body, and
therefore no diurnal revolution of the *Primum
Mobile*.[47](cwiu16.htm#an_2_47)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The New Astronomy Against the New Metaphysics](cwiu06)
