[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050008)  [Next](2050010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—<span class="c22"><span
id="vii.iii-p1.2"></span>His Origenism</span>.</span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.iii-p2.1"></span>A true</span> estimate of the position and
value of Gregory as a Church teacher cannot be formed until the question
of his ‘Origenism,’ its causes and its quality, is cleared up. It is
well known that this charge began to be brought against his orthodoxy at
all events after the time of Justinian: nor could Germanus, the
Patriarch of Constantinople in the next century, remove it by the device
of supposed interpolations of partizans in the interests of the Eastern
as against the Western Church: for such a theory, to be true, would
still require some hints at all events in this Father to give a colour
to such interpolations. Moreover, as will be seen, the points in which
Gregory is most like Origen are portions of the very groundwork of his
own theology. The question, then, remains why, and how far, is he a
follower of Origen?

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>I. When we consider the character of his
great forerunner, and the kind of task which Gregory himself undertook,
the first part of this question is easily answered. When Christian
doctrine had to be set forth philosophically, so as to be intelligible
to any cultivated mind of that time (to reconcile Greek philosophy with
Christian doctrine was a task which Gregory never dreamed of
attempting), the example and leader in such an attempt was Origen; he
<span id="page_XV">p. XV</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_XV"></span>occupied as it were the whole horizon. He
was the founder of theology; the very vocabulary of it, which is in use
now, is of his devising. So that Gregory’s language must have had,
necessarily, a close connexion with that of the great interpreter and
apologist, who had explained to his century the same truths which
Gregory had to explain to his: this must have been the case even if his
mind had not been as spiritual and idealizing as Origen’s. But in some
respects it will be seen Gregory is even more an idealist than Origen
himself. Alike, then, from purpose and tradition as from sympathy he
would look back to Origen. Though a gulf was between them, and, since
the Council of Nicæa, there were some things that could come no more
into controversy, Gregory saw, where the Church had not spoken, with the
same eyes as Origen: he uses the same keys as he did for the problems
which Scripture has not solved; he uses the same great weapon of
allegory in making the letter of Scripture give up the spiritual
treasures. It could not have been otherwise when the whole Christian
religion, which Gregory was called on to defend as a philosophy, had
never before been systematically so defended but by Origen; and this
task, the same for both, was presented to the same type of mind, in the
same intellectual atmosphere. It would have been strange indeed if
Gregory had not been a pupil at least (though he was no blind follower)
of Origen.

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span>If we take for illustration of this the
most vital point in the vast system, if system it can be called, of
Origen, we shall see that he had traced fundamental lines of thought,
which could not in that age be easily left. He asserts the virtual
freedom of the human will, in every stage and condition of human
existence. The Greek philosophy of the third century, and the semi-pagan
Gnosticism, in their emanational view of the world, denied this freedom.
With them the mind of man, as one of the emanations of Deity itself,
was, as much as the matter of which the world was made, regulated and
governed directly from the Source whence they both flowed. Indeed every
system of thought, not excepting Stoicism, was struck with the blight of
this fatalism. There was no freedom for man at all but in the system
which Origen was drawing from, or rather reading into, the Scriptures.
No Christian philosopher who lived amongst the same counter-influences
as Origen could overlook this starting-point of his system; he must have
adopted it, even if the danger of Pelagianism had been foreseen in it;
which could not have been the case.

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>Gregory adopted it, with the other great
doctrine which in the mind of Origen accompanied it; i.e., that evil is
caused, not by matter, but by the act of this free will of man; in other
words, by sin. Again the fatalism of all the emanationists had to be
combated as to the nature and necessity of evil. With them evil was some
inevitable result of the Divine processes; it abode at all events in
matter, and human responsibility was at an end. Greek philosophy from
first to last had shewed, even at its best, a tendency to connect evil
with the lower <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>φύσις</span>. But now, in the light of
revelation, a new truth was set forth, and repeated again and again by
the very men who were inclined to adopt Plato’s rather Dualistic
division of the world into the intelligible and sensible. ‘Evil was due
to an act of the will of man.’ Moreover it could no longer be regarded
*per se*: it was relative, being a ‘default,’ or ‘failure,’ or ‘turning
away from the true good’ of the will, which, however, was always free to
rectify this failure. It was a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p5.2"></span>στέρησις</span>,—loss of the good; but it did
not stand over against the good as an independent power. Origen
contemplated the time when evil would cease to exist; ‘the non-existent
cannot exist for ever:’ and Gregory did the same.

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>This brings us to yet another consequence
of this enthusiasm for human freedom and responsibility, which possessed
Origen, and carried Gregory away. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>ποκατάστασις τῶν πάντων</span> has been
thought <span id="fr_20"></span>[22](#fn_20.md) , in certain periods of the
Church, to have been the only piece of Origenism with which Gregory can
be charged. \[This of course shows ignorance of the kind of influence
which Gregory allowed Origen to have over him; and which did not require
him to <span id="page_XVI">p. XVI</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_XVI"></span>select even one *isolated* doctrine of his
master.\] It has also brought him into more suspicion than any other
portion of his teaching. Yet it is a direct consequence of the view of
evil, which he shares with Origen. If evil is the non-existent, as his
master says, a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>στέρησις</span>, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[23](#fn_21.md) as he says, then it must pass away. It
was not made by God; neither is it self-subsisting.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span>But when it has passed away, what follows?
That God will be “all in all.” Gregory accepts the whole of Origen’s
explanation of this great text. Both insist on the impossibility of God
being in ‘everything,’ if evil still remains. But this is equivalent to
the restoration to their primitive state of all created spirits. Still
it must be remembered that Origen required many future stages of
existence before all could arrive at such a consummation: with him there
is to be more than one ‘next world;’ and even when the primitive
perfection is reached, his peculiar view of the freedom of the will, as
an absolute balance between good and evil, would admit the possibility
of another fall. ‘All *may* be saved; and all *may* fall.’ How the final
Sabbath shall come in which all wills shall rest at last is but dimly
hinted at in his writings. With Gregory, on the other hand, there are to
be but two worlds: the present and the next; and in the next the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p9.2"></span>ποκατάστασις τῶν
πάντων</span> must be effected. Then, after the Resurrection, the fire
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p9.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p9.4"></span>κοίμητος, αἰωνιος</span>,
as he continually calls it, will have to do its work. ‘The avenging
flame will be the more ardent the more it has to consume’ (*De Animâ et
Resurr*., p. 227). ‘But at last the evil will be annihilated, and the
bad saved by nearness to the good.’ There is to rise a giving of thanks
from all nature. Nevertheless <span id="fr_22"></span>[24](#fn_22.md)
passages have been adduced from Gregory’s writings in which the language
of Scripture as to future punishment is used without any modification,
or hint of this universal salvation. In the treatise, *De Pauperibus
Amandis*, II. p. 240, he says of the last judgment that God will give to
each his due; repose eternal to those who have exercised pity and a holy
life; but the eternal punishment of fire for the harsh and unmerciful:
and addressing the rich who have made a bad use of their riches, he
says, ‘Who will extinguish the flames ready to devour you and engulf
you? Who will stop the gnawings of a worm that never dies?’ Cf. also
*Orat.* 3, *de Beatitudinibus,* I. p. 788: *contra Usuarios,* II. p.
233: though the hortatory character of these treatises makes them less
important as witnesses.

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span>A single doctrine or group of doctrines,
however, may be unduly pressed in accounting for the influence of Origen
upon a kindred spirit like Gregory. Doubtless fragments of Origen’s
teaching, mere details very often, were seized upon and appropriated by
others; they were erected into dogmas and made to do duty for the whole
living fabric; and even those details were sometimes misunderstood.
‘ <span id="fr_23"></span>[25](#fn_23.md) What he had said with a mind full
of thought, others took in the very letter.’ Hence arose the evil of
‘Origenism,’ so prevalent in the century in which Gregory lived.
Different ways of following him were found, bad and good. Even the
Arians could find in his language now and then something they could
claim as their own. But as Rupp well says, ‘Origen is not great by
virtue of those particular doctrines, which are usually exhibited to the
world as heretical by weak heads who think to take the measure of
everything with the mere formulæ of orthodoxy. He is great by virtue of
one single thought, i.e. that of bringing philosophy into union with
religion, and thereby creating a theology. With Clement of Alexandria
this thought was a mere instinct: Origen gave it consciousness: and so
Christendom began to have a science of its own.’ It was this single
purpose, visible in all Origen wrote, that impressed itself so deeply
upon Gregory. He, too, would vindicate the Scriptures as a philosophy.
Texts, thanks to the labours of Origen as well as to the councils of the
Church, had now acquired a fixed meaning and an importance that all
could acknowledge. The new spiritual philosophy lay within them; he
would make them speak its language. Allegory was with him, just as with
Origen, necessary, in order to find the Spirit which inspires them. The
letter must not impose itself upon us and stand for more than it is
worth; just as the practical experience of evil in the world must not
blind us to the fact that <span id="page_XVII">p. XVII</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_XVII"></span>it is only a passing dispensation. If only
the animus and intention is regarded, we may say that all that Gregory
wrote was Origenistic.

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span>II. But nevertheless much had happened in
the interval of 130 years that divides them and this leads us to
consider the limits which the state of the Church, as well as Gregory’s
own originality and more extended physical knowledge, placed upon the
complete filling in of the outlines sketched by the master. First and
chiefly, Origen’s doctrine of the pre-existence of the soul could not be
retained; and we know that Gregory not only abandoned it, but attacked
it with all his powers of logic in his treatise, *De Animâ et
Resurrectione*: for which he receives the applause of the Emperor
Justinian. Souls, according to Origen, had pre-existed from eternity:
they were created certainly, but there never was a time when they did
not exist: so that the procession even of the Holy Spirit could in
thought only be prior to their existence. Then a failure of their free
wills to grasp the true good, and a consequent cooling of the fire of
love within them, plunged them in this material bodily existence, which
their own sin made a suffering one. This view had certainly great
merits: it absolved the Deity from being the author of evil, and so was
a ‘théodicée;’ it entirely got rid of the two rival principles, good and
evil, of the Gnostics; and it avoided the seeming incongruity of what
was to last for ever in the future being not eternal in the past. Why
then was it rejected? Not only because of the objection urged by
Methodius, that the addition of a body would be no remedy but rather an
increase of the sin; or that urged amongst many others by Gregory, that
a vice cannot be regarded as the precursor of the birth of each human
soul into this or into other worlds; but more than that and chiefly,
because such a doctrine contravened the more distinct views now growing
up as to what the Christian creation was, and the more careful
definitions also of the Trinity now embodied in the creeds. In fact the
pre-existence of the soul was wrapped up in a cosmogony that could no
longer approve itself to the Christian consciousness. In asserting the
freedom of the will, and placing in the will the cause of evil, Origen
had so far banished emanationism; but in his view of the eternity of the
world, and in that of the eternal pre-existence of souls which
accompanied it, he had not altogether stamped it out. He connects
rational natures so closely with the Deity that each individual <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p13.1"></span>λόγος</span> seems almost,
in a Platonic way, to lie in the Divine which <span
id="fr_24"></span>[26](#fn_24.md) he styles <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>οὐσία οὐσιῶν, ἰδέα ἰδεῶν</span>. They are
‘partial brightnesses (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p14.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p14.3"></span>παυγάσμαπα</span>) of the glory of God.’
He <span id="fr_25"></span>[27](#fn_25.md) allows them, of course, to have
been created in the Scriptural sense of that word, which is certainly an
advance upon Justin; but his creation is not that distinct event in time
which Christianity requires and the exacter treatment of the nature of
the Divine Persons had now developed. His creation, both the
intelligible and visible world, receives from him an eternity which is
unnatural and incongruous in relation to his other speculations and
beliefs: it lingers, Tithonus-like, in the presence of the Divine
Persons, without any meaning and purpose for its life; it is the last
relic of Paganism, as it were, in a system which is otherwise Christian
to the very core. His strenuous effort to banish all ideas of time, at
all events from the intelligible world, ended in this eternal creation
of that world; which seemed to join the eternally generated Son too
closely to it, and gave occasion to the Arians to say that He too was a
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>κτίσμα</span>. This
eternal pre-existence in fact almost destroyed the idea of creation, and
made the Deity in a way dependent on His own world. Athanasius,
therefore, and his followers were roused to separate the divinity of the
Son from everything created. The relation of the world to God could no
longer be explained in the same terms as those which they employed to
illustrate the relations between the Divine Persons; and when once the
doctrine of the consubstantiality of the Father and Son had been
accepted and firmly established there could be no more favour shown by
the defenders of that doctrine to the merely Platonic view of the nature
and origin of souls and of matter.

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span>Amongst the defenders of the Creed of
Nicæa, Gregory, we know, stands well-nigh foremost. <span
id="page_XVIII">p. XVIII</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_XVIII"></span>In
his long and numerous treatises on the Trinity he employs every possible
argument and illustration to show the contents of the substance of the
Deity as transcendent, incommunicable to creation *per se*. Souls cannot
have the attributes of Deity. Created spirits cannot claim immediate
kindred with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>Λόγος</span>. So instead of the Platonic
antithesis of the intelligible and sensible world, which Origen adopted,
making *all equal* in the intelligible world, he brings forward the
antithesis of God and the world. He felt too that that antithesis
answers more fully not only to the needs of the Faith in the Trinity
daily growing more exact and clear, but also to the facts of the
Creation, i.e. its variety and differences. He gives up the preexistence
of the rational soul; it will not explain the infinite variety
observable in souls. The variety, again, of the material world, full as
it is of the miracles of divine power, cannot have been the result of
the chance acts of created natures embodying themselves therein, which
the theory of pre-existence supposes. God and the created world (of
spirits and matter) are now to be the factors in theology; although
Gregory does now and then, for mere purposes of illustration, divide the
Universe still into the intelligible and the sensible.

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>When once pre-existence was given up, the
parts of the soul could be more closely united to each other, because
the lower and higher were in their beginning no longer separated by a
gulf of ages. Accordingly Gregory, reducing the three parts of man which
Origen had used to the simpler division into visible and invisible
(sensible and intelligible), dwells much upon the intimate relation
between the two and the mutual action of one upon the other. Origen had
retained the trichotomy of Plato which other Greek Fathers also, with
the sanction, as they supposed, of S. Paul (<span
id="vii.iii-p17.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="vii.iii-p17.2"></span>.md),
had adopted. ‘Body,’ ‘soul,’ and ‘spirit,’ or Plato’s ‘body,’
‘unreasoning’ and ‘reasoning soul,’ had helped Origen to explain how the
last, the pre-existent soul (the spirit, or the conscience <span
id="fr_26"></span>[28](#fn_26) , as he sometimes calls it.md) could ever
have come to live in the flesh. The second, the soul proper, is as it
were a mediating ground on which the spirit can meet the flesh. The
celestial mind, ‘the real man fallen from on high,’ rules by the power
of conscience or of will over this soul, where the merely animal
functions and the natural appetites reside; and through this soul over
the body. How the celestial mind can act at all upon this purely animal
soul which lies between it and the body, Origen leaves unexplained. But
this division was necessary for him, in order to represent the spirit as
remaining itself unchanged in its heavenly nature, though weakened by
its long captivity in the body. The middle soul (in which he sometimes
places the will) is the scene of contamination and disorder; the spirit
is free, it can always rejoice at what is well done in the soul, and yet
is not touched by the evil in it; it chooses, convicts, and punishes.
Such was Origen’s psychology. But an intimate connexion both in birth
and growth between *all* the faculties of man is one of Gregory’s most
characteristic thoughts, and he gave up this trichotomy, which was
still, however, retained by some Greek fathers, and adopted the simpler
division mentioned above in order more clearly and concisely to show the
mutual play of spirit and body upon each other. There was soon, too,
another reason why this trichotomy should be suspected. It was a second
time made the vehicle of error. Apollinaris adopted it, in order to
expound that the Divine <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p18.1"></span>Λόγος</span> took the place, in the tripartite
soul of Christ, of the ‘reasonable soul’ or spirit of other men.
Gregory, in pressing for a simpler treatment of man’s nature, thus
snatched a vantage-ground from a sagacious enemy. His own psychology is
only one instance of a tendency which runs through the whole of his
system, and which may indeed be called the dominating thought with which
he approached every question; he views each in the light of form and
matter; spirit penetrating and controlling body, body answering to
spirit and yet at the same time supplying the nutriment upon which the
vigour and efficacy of spirit, in this world at least, depends. This
thought underlies his view of the material universe and of Holy
Scripture, as well as of man’s nature. With <span id="page_XIX">p.
XIX</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_XIX"></span>regard to the last he
says, ‘the intelligible cannot be realized in body at all, except it be
commingled with sensation;’ and again, ‘as there can be no sensation
without a material substance, so there can be no exercise of the power
of thought without sensation <span id="fr_27"></span>[29](#fn_27.md) .’ The
spiritual or intelligent part of man (which he calls by various names,
such as ‘the inner man,’ the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>ψυχὴ λογικὴ, νοῦς</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p19.2"></span>διάνοια</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p19.3"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p19.4"></span>τὸ ζωοποιὸν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p19.5"></span>αἴτιον</span>, or simply
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p19.6"></span>ψυχὴ</span> as
throughout the treatise *On the Soul*), however alien in its essence
from the bodily and sentient part, yet no sooner is united with this
earthly part than it at once exerts power over it. In fact it requires
this instrument before it can reach its perfection. ‘Seeing, then, man
is a reasoning animal of a certain kind, it was necessary that the body
should be prepared as an instrument appropriate to the needs of his
reason <span id="fr_28"></span>[30](#fn_28.md) .’ So closely has this
reason been united with the senses and the flesh that it performs itself
the functions of the animal part; it is the ‘mind’ or ‘reason’ itself
that sees, hears, &c.; in fact the exercise of mind depends on a sound
state of the senses and other organs of the body; for a sick body cannot
receive the ‘artistic’ impressions of the mind and, so, the mind remains
inoperative. This is enough to show how far Gregory had got from
pre-existence and the ‘fall into the prison of the flesh.’

<span id="vii.iii-p21"></span>His own theory of the origin of the soul,
or at least that to which he visibly inclines, is stated in the
treatise, *De Animâ et Resurrectione*, p. 241. It is that of Tertullian
and some Greek Fathers also: and goes by the name of ‘traducianism.’ The
soul is transmitted in the generating seed. This of course is the
opposite pole to Origen’s teaching, and is inconsistent with Gregory’s
own spiritualism. The other alternative, Creationism, which a number of
the orthodox adopted, namely that souls are created by God at the moment
of conception, or when the body of the fœtus is already formed, was not
open to him to adopt; because, according to him, in idea the world of
spirits was made, and in a determinate number, along with the world of
unformed matter by the one creative act ‘in the beginning.’ In the plan
of the universe, though not in reality as with Origen, all souls are
already created. So the life of humanity contains them: when the
occasion comes they take their beginning along with the body which
enshrines them, but are not created then any more than that body. Such
was the compromise between spiritualism and materialism to which Gregory
was driven by the difficulties of the subject. Origen with his eye
unfalteringly fixed upon the ideal world, and unconscious of the
practical consequences that might be drawn from his teaching, cut the
knot with his eternal pre-existence of souls, which avoided at once the
alleged absurdity of creationism and the grossness of traducianism. But
the Church, for higher interests still than those of pure idealism, had
to reject that doctrine; and Gregory, with his extended knowledge in
physic and his close observation of the intercommunion of mind and body,
had to devise or rather select a theory which, though a makeshift, would
not contradict either his knowledge or his faith.

<span id="vii.iii-p22"></span>Yet after admitting that soul and body are
born together and attaching such importance to the ‘physical basis’ of
life and thought, the influence of his master, or else his own
uncontrollable idealism, carries him away again in the opposite
direction. After reading words in his treatise which Locke might have
written we come upon others which are exactly the teaching of Berkeley.
There is a passage in the *De Animâ et Resurrectione* where he deals
with the question how an intelligent Being could have created matter,
which is neither intelligent or intelligible. But what if matter is only
a concourse of qualities, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p22.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p22.2"></span>ννοιαι</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p22.3"></span>ψιλὰ νοήματα</span> as he elsewhere calls
them? Then there would be no difficulty in understanding the manner of
creation. But even about this we can say so much, i.e. that not one of
those things which we attribute to body is itself body: neither figure,
nor colour, nor weight, nor extension, nor quantity, nor any other
qualifying notion whatever: but every one of them is a *thought:* it is
the combination of them all into a single whole that constitutes body.
Seeing, then, that these <span id="page_XX">p. XX</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_XX"></span>several qualifications which complete the
particular body are grasped by thought alone, and not by sense, and that
the Deity is a thinking being, what trouble can it be to such a thinking
agent to produce the thoughts whose mutual combination generate *for us*
the substance of that body? and in the treatise, *De Hom. Opif*., c. 24,
the intelligible <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p22.4"></span>φύσις</span> is said to produce the
intelligible <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p22.5"></span>δυνάμεις</span>, and the concourse of these
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p22.6"></span>δυνάμεις</span>
brings into being the material nature. The body itself, he repeats
(*contra Fatum*, p. 67), is not a real substance; it is a soulless,
unsubstantial thing. The only real creation is that of spirits. Even
Origen did not go so far as that Matter with him, though it exists by
concomitance and not by itself, nevertheless *really* exists. He avoided
a rock upon which Gregory runs; for with Gregory not only matter but
created spirit as well vanish in idealism. There remain with him only
the νοούμενα and God.

<span id="vii.iii-p23"></span>This transcendent idealism embarrasses him
in many ways, and makes his theory of the soul full of inconsistency.
(1) He will not say unhesitatingly whether that pure humanity in the
beginning created in the image of God had a body or not like ours.
Origen at all events says that the eternally pre-existing spirits were
invested with a body, even before falling into the sensible world. But
Gregory, while denying the pre-existence of souls in the sense of
Origen, yet in many of his treatises, especially in the *De Hom.
Opificio*, seems to point to a primitive humanity, a predeterminate
number of souls destined to live in the body though they had not yet
lived, which goes far beyond Origen’s in its ideal character. “When
Moses,” Gregory says, “speaks of the soul as the image of God, he shows
that all that is alien to God must be excluded from our definition of
the soul; and a corporal nature is alien to God.” He points out that God
first ‘made man in His own image,’ and *after that* made them male and
female; so that there was a double fashioning of our nature, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p23.1"></span>ἥ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p23.2"></span>τε πρὸς τὸ θεῖον
ὁμοιωμένη, ἥ τε πρὸς τὴν διαφορὰν ταύτην</span> (i.e. male and female)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p23.3"></span>διηρημένη</span>. On
the other hand, in the *Oratio Catechetica*, which contains certainly
his more dogmatic statement on every point, this ideal and passionless
humanity is regarded as still in the future: and it is represented that
man’s double-nature is actually the very centre of the Divine Councils,
and not the result of any mistake or sin; man’s soul from the very first
was commingled (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p23.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p23.5"></span>νάκρασις</span> is Gregory’s favourite word)
with a body, in order that in him, as representing every stage of living
things, the whole creation, even in its lowest part, might share in the
divine. Man, as the paragon of animals, was necessary, in order that the
union might be effected between two otherwise irreconcilable worlds, the
intelligible and the sensible. Though, therefore, there was a Fall at
last, it was not the occasion of man’s receiving a body similar to
animals; that body was given him at the very first, and was only
preparatory to the Fall, which was foreseen in the Divine Councils and
provided for. Both the body and the Fall were necessary in order that
the Divine plan might be carried out, and the Divine glory manifested in
creation. In this view the “coats of skins” which Gregory inherits from
the allegorical treasures of Origen are no longer merely the human body
itself, as with Origen, but all the passions, actions, and habits of
that body after the Fall, which he sums up in the generic term <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p23.6"></span>πάθη</span>. If, then,
there is to be any reconciliation between this and the former view of
his in which the pure unstained humanity, the ‘image of God,’ is
differentiated by a second act of creation as it were into male and
female, we must suppose him to teach that immediately upon the creation
in God’s image there was added all that in human nature is akin to the
merely animal world. In that man was God’s image, his will was free, but
in that he was created, he was able to fall from his high estate; and
God, foreseeing the Fall, at once added the distinction of sex, and with
it the other features of the animal which would befit the fall; but with
the purpose of raising thereby the whole creation. But two great
counter-influences seem always to be acting upon Gregory; the one
sympathy with the speculations of Origen, the other a tendency to see
even with a modern insight into the closeness of the intercommunion
between soul and body. The results of these two influences cannot be
altogether reconciled. His ideal and his actual man, each sketched with
<span id="page_XXI">p. XXI</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_XXI"></span>a
skilful and discriminating hand, represent the interval that divides his
aspirations from his observations: yet both are present to his mind when
he writes about the soul. (2) He does not alter, as Origen does, the
traditional belief in the resurrection of the body, and yet his
idealism, in spite of his actual and strenuous defence of it in the
carefully argued treatise *On the Soul and Resurrection*, renders it
unnecessary, if not impossible. We know that his faith impelled Origen,
too, to <span id="fr_29"></span>[31](#fn_29.md) contend for the
resurrection of the flesh: yet it is an almost forced importation into
the rest of his system. Our bodies, he teaches, will rise again: but
that which will make us the same persons we were before is not the
sameness of our bodies (for they will be ethereal, angelic, uncarnal,
&c.) but the sameness of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p24.1"></span>λόγος</span> within them which never dies
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p24.2"></span>λόγος τις ἔγκειται
τῷ σώματι, ἀφ᾽ οὗ μὴ φθειρομένου ἐγείρεται τὸ σῶμα ἐν ἀφθαρσί&
139·</span>, c. Cels. v. 23). Here we have the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p24.3"></span>λόγοι σπερματικοὶ</span>; which Gregory
objected to as somehow connected in his mind with the infinite plurality
of worlds. Yet his own account of the Resurrection of the flesh is
nothing but Origenism, mitigated by the suppression of these <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p24.4"></span>λόγοι</span>. With him,
too, matter is nothing, it is a negative thing that can make and effect
nothing: the soul, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p24.5"></span>ζωτικὴ δύναμις</span> does everything; it is
gifted by him with a sort of ubiquity after death. ‘Nothing can break
its sympathetic union with the particles of the body.’ It is not a long
and difficult study for it to discern in the mass of elements that which
is its own from that which is not its own. ‘It watches over its
property, as it were, until the Resurrection, when it will clothe itself
in them anew <span id="fr_30"></span>[32](#fn_30.md) .’ It is only a change
of names: the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p25.1"></span>λόγος</span> has become this <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p25.2"></span>ζωτικὴ δύναμις</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p25.3"></span>ψυχὴ</span>, which
seems itself, almost unaided, to effect the whole Resurrection. Though
he teaches as against Origen that the ‘elements’ are the same
‘elements,’ the body the same body as before, yet the strange importance
both in activity and in substance which he attaches to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p25.4"></span>ψυχὴ</span> even in the
disembodied state seems to render a Resurrection of the flesh
unnecessary. Here, too, his view of the plan of Redemption is at
variance with his idealistic leanings. While Origen regarded the body,
as it now is, as part of that ‘vanity’ placed upon the creature which
was to be laid aside at last, Gregory’s view of the design of God in
creating man at all absolutely required the Resurrection of the
flesh <span id="fr_31"></span>[33](#fn_31.md) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p26.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p26.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p26.3"></span>ἂν συνεπαρθείη τῷ θεί& 251· τὸ γή&
187·νον</span>). Creation was to be saved by man’s carrying his created
body into a higher world: and this could only be done by a resurrection
of the flesh such as the Church had already set forth in her creed.

<span id="vii.iii-p27"></span>Again, however, after parting with Origen
upon this point, he meets him in the ultimate contemplation of Christ’s
glorified humanity and of all glorified bodies. Both steadily refuse at
last ‘to know Christ according to the flesh.’ They depict His humanity
as so absorbed in deity that all traces of His bodily nature vanish; and
as with Christ, so finally with His true followers. This is far indeed
from the Lamb that was slain, and the vision of S. John. In this heaven
of theirs all individual or generic differences between rational
creatures necessarily cease.

<span id="vii.iii-p28"></span>Great, then, as are their divergences,
especially in cosmogony, their agreements are maintained throughout.
Gregory in the main accepts Origen’s teaching, as far as he can
accommodate it to the now more outspoken faith of the Church. What <span
id="fr_32"></span>[34](#fn_32.md) Redepenning summarises as the groundplan
of Origen’s whole way of thinking, Gregory has, with the necessary
changes, appropriated. Both regard the history of the world as a
movement between a beginning and an end in which are united every single
spiritual or truly human nature in the world, and the Divine nature.
This interval of movement is caused by the falling away of the free will
of the creature from the divine: but it will come to an end, in order
that the former union may be restored. In this summary they would differ
only as to the closeness of the original union. Both, too, according to
this, would regard ‘man’ as the final cause, and the explanation, and
the centre of God’s plan in creation.

<span id="vii.iii-p30"></span><span id="page_XXII">p. XXII</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_XXII"></span>Even in the special sphere of theology
which the later needs of the Church forced into prominence, and which
Gregory has made peculiarly his own, that of the doctrine of the
Trinity, Gregory employs sometimes a method which he has caught from
Origen. Origen supposes, not so much, as Plato did, that things below
are images of things above, as that they have certain secret analogies
or affinities with them. This is perhaps after all only a peculiar
application for his own purpose of Plato’s theory of ideas. There are
mysterious sympathies between the earth and heaven. We must therefore
read within ourselves the reflection of truths which are too much beyond
our reach to know in themselves. With regard to the attributes of God
this is more especially the case. But Origen never had the occasion to
employ this language in explaining the mystery of the Trinity. Gregory
is the first Father who has done so. He finds a key to it in the <span
id="fr_33"></span>[35](#fn_33.md) triple nature of our soul. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p31.1"></span>νοῦς</span>, the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.iii-p31.2"></span>λόγος</span>, and the
soul, form within us a unity such as that of the Divine hypostases.
Gregory himself confesses that such thoughts about God are inadequate,
and immeasurably below their object: but he cannot be blamed for
employing this method, as if it was entirely superficial. Not only does
this instance illustrate trinity in unity, but we should have no
contents for our thought about the Father, Son, and Spirit, if we found
no outlines at all of their nature within ourselves. Denis <span
id="fr_34"></span>[36](#fn_34.md) well says that the history of the
doctrine of the Trinity confirms this: for the advanced development of
the theory of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p32.1"></span>λόγος</span>, a purely human attribute in the
ancient philosophy, was the cause of the doctrine of the Son being so
soon and so widely treated: and the doctrine of the Holy Spirit came
into prominence only when He began to be regarded as the principle of
the purely human or moral life, as Love, that is, or Charity. Gregory,
then, had reason in recommending even a more systematic use of the
method which he had received from Origen: ‘Learn from the things within
thee to know the secret of God; recognise from the Triad within thee the
Triad by means of these matters which you realise: it is a testimony
above and more sure than that of the Law and the Gospel <span
id="fr_35"></span>[37](#fn_35.md) .’

<span id="vii.iii-p34"></span>He carries out elsewhere also more
thoroughly than Origen this method of reading parables. He is an actual
Mystic in this. The mysterious but real correspondences between earth
and heaven, upon which, Origen had taught, and not upon mere thoughts or
the artifices of language, the truth of a parable rests, Gregory
employed, in order to penetrate the meaning of the whole of external
nature. He finds in its facts and appearances analogies with the
energies, and through them with the essence, of God. They are not to him
merely indications of the wisdom which caused them and ordered them, but
actual symptoms of the various energies which reside in the essence of
the Supreme Being; as though that essence, having first been translated
into the energies, was through them translated into the material
creation; which was thus an earthly language saying the same thing as
the heavenly language, word for word. The whole world thus became one
vast allegory <span id="fr_36"></span>[38](#fn_36.md) : and existed only to
manifest the qualities of the Unseen. Akin to this peculiar development
of the parable is another characteristic of his, which is alien to the
spirit of Origen; his delight in natural scenery, his appreciation of
it, and power of describing it.

<span id="vii.iii-p36"></span>With regard to the question, so much
agitated, of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p36.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p36.2"></span>Αποκατάστασις</span>, it may be said that not
Gregory only but Basil and Gregory Nazianzen also have felt the
influence of their master in theology, Origen. But it is due to the
latter to say that though he dwells much on the “all in all” and insists
much more on the sanctifying power of punishment than on the
satisfaction owed to Divine justice, yet no one could justly attribute
to him, as a doctrine, the view of a Universal Salvation. Still these
Greek Fathers, Origen and ‘the three great Cappadocians,’ equally showed
a disposition of mind that left little room for the discussions that
were soon to agitate the West. Their infinite hopes, their absolute
confidence in the goodness of God, <span id="page_XXIII">p. XXIII</span>
<span id="vii.iii-Page_XXIII"></span>who owes it to Himself to make His
work perfect, their profound faith in the promises and sacrifice of
Christ, as well as in the vivifying action of the Holy Spirit, make the
question of Predestination and Grace a very simple one with them. The
word Grace occurs as often in them as in Augustine: but they do not make
original sin a monstrous innovation requiring a remedy of a peculiar and
overwhelming intensity. Passion indeed seems to Gregory of Nyssa himself
one of the essential elements of the human soul. He borrows from the
naturalists many principles of distinction between classes of souls and
lives: he insists incessantly on the intimate connexion between the
physical growth and the development of the reason, and on the
correlation between the one and the other: and we arrive at the
conclusion that man in his eyes, as in Clement’s, was not originally
perfect, except in possibility; that being at once reasoning and
sentient he must perforce feel within himself the struggle of reason and
passion, and that it was inevitable that sin should enter into the
world: it was a consequence of his mixed nature. This mixed nature of
the first man was transmitted to his descendants. Here, though he stands
apart from Origen on the question of man’s original perfection, he could
not have accepted the whole Augustinian scheme of original sin: and
Grace as the remedy with him consists rather in the purging this mixed
nature, than in the introduction into it of something absolutely
foreign. The result, as with all the Greek Fathers, will depend on the
co-operation of the free agent in this remedial work. Predestination and
the ‘bad will’ are excluded by the Possibility and the ‘free will’ of
Origen and Gregory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[XV:22](2050009.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span> Cf. Dallæus, *de pœnis et
satisfactionibus,* I. IV. c. 7, p. 368.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[XVI:23](2050009.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span> Cf. *De An. et Resurr.*, 227 C.D.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[XVI:24](2050009.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span> Collected by Ceillier in his Introduction
(Paris, 1860).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[XVI:25](2050009.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span> Bunsen.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[XVII:26](2050009.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span> *c. Cels.* VI. 64.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[XVII:27](2050009.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span> *In Joann.*, tom. 32, 18.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[XVIII:28](2050009.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span> *Comment. in Rom*. ii. 9, p. 486.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[XIX:29](2050009.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span> *De Hom. Op.* c. viii.; *De An. et
Resurr.* 205.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[XIX:30](2050009.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p19.7"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p20"></span> *De Hom. Op.* c. viii.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[XXI:31](2050009.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p23.7"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p24"></span> He does so *De Principiis* I. præf. 5.
*C. Cels.* II. 77, VIII. 49 sq.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[XXI:32](2050009.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p24.6"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p25"></span> *De Anim. et Resurrectione*, p. 198, 199,
213 sq.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[XXI:33](2050009.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p25.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p26"></span> *Oratio Cat*. 55 A.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[XXI:34](2050009.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p29"></span> Orig. II. 314 sq.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[XXII:35](2050009.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p31"></span> This is an independent division to that
mentioned above.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[XXII:36](2050009.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p32"></span> *De la Philosophie D’Origéne* (Paris,
1884).

<span id="fn_35"></span>[XXII:37](2050009.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p33"></span> *De eo quod immut.,* p. 30.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[XXII:38](2050009.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p35"></span> See *De iis qui præmature abripiuntur*,
p. 231, quoted above, p. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Teaching on the Holy Trinity.](2050010.md)
