[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050069)  [Next](2050071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p1"></span> §11. *After expounding the high
estate of the Almighty, the Eternity of the Son, and the phrase “being
made obedient,” he shows the folly of Eunomius in his assertion that the
Son did not acquire His sonship by obedience.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p2"></span>What, moreover, is the high estate of
the Almighty in which Eunomius affirms that the Son has no share? Let
those, then, who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight <span id="fr_387"></span>[389](#fn_387) , utter their groundling
opinions—they who, as the prophet says, “speak out of the ground <span
id="fr_388"></span>[390](#fn_388) .” But let us who reverence the Word
and are disciples of the Truth, or rather who profess to be so, not
leave even this assertion unsifted. We know that of all the names by
which Deity is indicated some are expressive of the Divine majesty,
employed and understood absolutely, and some are assigned with reference
to the operations over us and all creation. For when the Apostle says
“Now to the immortal, invisible, only wise God <span
id="fr_389"></span>[391](#fn_389) ,” and the like, by these titles he
suggests conceptions which represent to us the transcendent power, but
when God is spoken of in the Scriptures as gracious, merciful, full of
pity, true, good, Lord, Physician, Shepherd, Way, Bread, Fountain, King,
Creator, Artificer, Protector, Who is over all and through all, Who is
all in all, these and similar titles contain the declaration of the
operations of the Divine loving-kindness in the creation. Those then who
enquire precisely into the meaning of the term “Almighty” will find that
it declares nothing <span id="page_CXX">p. CXX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-Page_CXX"></span>else concerning the Divine power than
that operation which controls created things and is indicated by the
word “Almighty,” stands in a certain relation to something. For as He
would not be called a Physician, save on account of the sick, nor
merciful and gracious, and the like, save by reason of one who stood in
need of grace and mercy, so neither would He be styled Almighty, did not
all creation stand in need of one to regulate it and keep it in being.
As, then, He presents Himself as a Physician to those who are in need of
healing, so He is Almighty over one who has need of being ruled: and
just as “they that are whole have no need of a physician <span
id="fr_390"></span>[392](#fn_390) ,” so it follows that we may well say
that He Whose nature contains in it the principle of unerring and
unwavering rectitude does not, like others, need a ruler over Him.
Accordingly, when we hear the name “Almighty,” our conception is this,
that God sustains in being all intelligible things as well as all things
of a material nature. For this cause He sitteth upon the circle of the
earth, for this cause He holdeth the ends of the earth in His hand, for
this cause He “meteth out leaven with the span, and measureth the waters
in the hollow of His hand <span id="fr_391"></span>[393](#fn_391) ”; for
this cause He comprehendeth in Himself all the intelligible creation,
that all things may remain in existence controlled by His encompassing
power. Let us enquire, then, Who it is that “worketh all in all.” Who is
He Who made all things, and without Whom no existing thing does exist?
Who is He in Whom all things were created, and in Whom all things that
are have their continuance? In Whom do we live and move and have our
being? Who is He Who hath in Himself all that the Father hath? Does what
has been said leave us any longer in ignorance of Him Who is “God over
all <span id="fr_392"></span>[394](#fn_392) ,” Who is so entitled by S.
Paul,—our Lord Jesus Christ, Who, as He Himself says, holding in His
hand “all things that the Father hath <span
id="fr_393"></span>[395](#fn_393) ,” assuredly grasps all things in the
all-containing hollow of His hand and is sovereign over what He has
grasped, and no man taketh from the hand of Him Who in His hand holdeth
all things? If, then, He hath all things, and is sovereign over that
which He hath, why is He Who is thus sovereign over all things something
else and not Almighty? If heresy replies that the Father is sovereign
over both the Son and the Holy Spirit, let them first show that the Son
and the Holy Spirit are of mutable nature, and then over this mutability
let them set its ruler, that by the help implanted from above, that
which is so overruled may continue incapable of turning to evil. If, on
the other hand, the Divine nature is incapable of evil, unchangeable,
unalterable, eternally permanent, to what end does it stand in need of a
ruler, controlling as it does all creation, and itself by reason of its
immutability needing no ruler to control it? For this cause it is that
at the name of Christ “every knee boweth, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth <span
id="fr_394"></span>[396](#fn_394) .” For assuredly every knee would not
thus bow, did it not recognize in Christ Him Who rules it for its own
salvation. But to say that the Son came into being by the goodness of
the Father is nothing else than to put Him on a level with the meanest
objects of creation. For what is there that did not arrive at its birth
by the goodness of Him Who made it? To what is the formation of mankind
ascribed? to the badness of its Maker, or to His goodness? To what do we
ascribe the generation of animals, the production of plants and herbs?
There is nothing that did not take its rise from the goodness of Him Who
made it. A property, then, which reason discerns to be common to all
things, Eunomius is so kind as to allow to the Eternal Son! But that He
did not share His essence or His estate with the Father—these assertions
and the rest of his verbiage I have refuted in anticipation, when
dealing with his statements concerning the Father, and shown that he has
hazarded them at random and without any intelligible meaning. For not
even in the case of us who are born one of another is there any division
of essence. The definition expressive of essence remains in its entirety
in each, in him that begets and in him who is begotten, without
admitting diminution in him who begets, or augmentation in him who is
begotten. But to speak of division of estate or sovereignty in the case
of Him Who hath all things whatsoever that the Father hath, carries with
it no meaning, unless it be a demonstration of the propounder’s impiety.
It would therefore be superfluous to entangle oneself in such
discussions, and so to prolong our treatise to an unreasonable length.
Let us pass on to what follows.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p11"></span>“Glorified,” he says, “by the Father
before the worlds.” The word of truth hath been demonstrated, confirmed
by the testimony of its adversaries. For this is the sum of our faith,
that the Son is from all eternity, being glorified by the Father: for
“before the worlds” is the same in sense as “from all eternity,” seeing
that prophecy uses this phrase to set forth to us God’s eternity, when
it speaks of Him as “He that is from before the worlds <span
id="fr_395"></span>[397](#fn_395) .” If then to exist before the worlds
is beyond all begin<span id="page_CXXI">p. CXXI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-Page_CXXI"></span>ning, he who confers glory on the Son
before the worlds, does thereby assert His existence from eternity
before that glory <span id="fr_396"></span>[398](#fn_396) : for surely
it is not the non-existent, but the existent which is glorified. Then he
proceeds to plant for himself the seeds of blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit; not with a view to glorify the Son, but that he may wantonly
outrage the Holy Ghost. For with the intention of making out the Holy
Spirit to be part of the angelic host, he throws in the phrase
“glorified eternally by the Spirit, and by every rational and generated
being,” so that there is no distinction between the Holy Spirit and all
that comes into being; if, that is, the Holy Spirit glorifies the Lord
in the same sense as all the other existences enumerated by the prophet,
“angels and powers, and the heaven of heavens, and the water above the
heavens, and all the things of earth, dragons, deeps, fire and hail,
snow and vapour, wind of the storm, mountains and all hills, fruitful
trees and all cedars, beasts and all cattle, worms and feathered
fowls <span id="fr_397"></span>[399](#fn_397) .” If, then, he says, that
along with these the Holy Spirit also glorifies the Lord, surely his
God-opposing tongue makes out the Holy Spirit Himself also to be one of
them.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p15"></span>The disjointed incoherencies which
follow next, I think it well to pass over, not because they give no
handle at all to censure, but because their language is such as might be
used by the devout, if detached from its malignant context. If he does
here and there use some expressions favourable to devotion it is just
held out as a bait to simple souls, to the end that the hook of impiety
may be swallowed along with it. For after employing such language as a
member of the Church might use, he subjoins, “Obedient with regard to
the creation and production of all things that are, obedient with regard
to every ministration, not having by His obedience attained Sonship or
Godhead, but, as a consequence of being Son and being generated as the
Only-begotten God, showing Himself obedient in words, obedient in acts.”
Yet who of those who are conversant with the oracles of God does not
know with regard to what point of time it was said of Him by the mighty
Paul, (and that once for all), that He “became obedient <span
id="fr_398"></span>[400](#fn_398) ”? For it was when He came in the form
of a servant to accomplish the mystery of redemption by the cross, Who
had emptied Himself, Who humbled Himself by assuming the likeness and
fashion of a man, being found as man in man’s lowly nature—then, I say,
it was that He became obedient, even He Who “took our infirmities and
bare our sicknesses <span id="fr_399"></span>[401](#fn_399) ,” healing
the disobedience of men by His own obedience, that by His stripes He
might heal our wound, and by His own death do away with the common death
of all men,—then it was that for our sakes He was made obedient, even as
He became “sin <span id="fr_400"></span>[402](#fn_400) ” and “a
curse <span id="fr_401"></span>[403](#fn_401) ” by reason of the
dispensation on our behalf, not being so by nature, but becoming so in
His love for man. But by what sacred utterance was He ever taught His
list of so many obediences? Nay, on the contrary every inspired
Scripture attests His independent and sovereign power, saying, “He spake
the word and they were made: He commanded and they were created <span
id="fr_402"></span>[404](#fn_402) ”:—for it is plain that the Psalmist
says this concerning Him Who upholds “all things by the word of His
power <span id="fr_403"></span>[405](#fn_403) ,” Whose authority, by the
sole impulse of His will, framed every existence and nature, and all
things in the creation apprehended by reason or by sight. Whence, then,
was Eunomius moved to ascribe in such manifold wise to the King of the
universe the attribute of obedience, speaking of Him as “obedient with
regard to all the work of creation, obedient with regard to every
ministration, obedient in words and in acts”? Yet it is plain to every
one, that he alone is obedient to another in acts and words, who has not
yet perfectly achieved in himself the condition of accurate working or
unexceptionable speech, but keeping his eye ever on his teacher and
guide, is trained by his suggestions to exact propriety in deed and
word. But to think that Wisdom needs a master and teacher to guide
aright Its attempts at imitation, is the dream of Eunomius’ fancy, and
of his alone. And concerning the Father he says, that He is faithful in
words and faithful in works, while of the Son he does not assert
faithfulness in word and deed, but only obedience and not faithfulness,
so that his profanity extends impartially through all his statements.
But it is perhaps right to pass in silence over the inconsiderate folly
of the assertion interposed between those last mentioned, lest some
unreflecting persons should laugh at its absurdity when they ought
rather to weep over the perdition of their souls, than laugh at the
folly of their words. For this wise and wary theologian says that He did
not attain to being a Son as the result of His obedience! Mark his
penetration! with what cogent force does he lay it down for us that He
was not first obedient and afterwards a Son, and that we ought not to
think that His obedience was prior to His generation! Now if he had not
added this defining clause, who without it would have been sufficiently
silly and <span id="page_CXXII">p. CXXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-Page_CXXII"></span>idiotic to fancy that His generation
was bestowed on Him by His Father, as a reward of the obedience of Him
Who before His generation had showed due subjection and obedience? But
that no one may too readily extract matter for laughter from these
remarks, let each consider that even the folly of the words has in it
something worthy of tears. For what he intends to establish by these
observations is something of this kind, that His obedience is part of
His nature, so that not even if He willed it would it be possible for
Him not to be obedient.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p22"></span>For he says that He was so
constituted that His nature was adapted to obedience alone <span
id="fr_404"></span>[406](#fn_404) , just as among instruments that which
is fashioned with regard to a certain figure necessarily produces in
that which is subjected to its operation the form which the artificer
implanted in the construction of the instrument, and cannot possibly
trace a straight line upon that which receives its mark, if its own
working is in a curve; nor can the instrument, if fashioned to draw a
straight line, produce a circle by its impress. What need is there of
any words of ours to reveal how great is the profanity of such a notion,
when the heretical utterance of itself proclaims aloud its monstrosity?
For if He was obedient for this reason only that He was so made, then of
course He is not on an equal footing even with humanity, since on this
theory, while our soul is self-determining and independent, choosing as
it will with sovereignty over itself that which is pleasing to it, He on
the contrary exercises, or rather experiences, obedience under the
constraint of a compulsory law of His nature, while His nature suffers
Him not to disobey, even if He would. For it was “as the result of being
Son, and being begotten, that He has thus shown Himself obedient in
words and obedient in acts.” Alas, for the brutish stupidity of this
doctrine! Thou makest the Word obedient to words, and supposest other
words prior to Him Who is truly the Word, and another Word of the
Beginning is mediator between the Beginning and the Word that was in the
Beginning, conveying to Him the decision. And this is not one only:
there are several words, which Eunomius makes so many links of the chain
between the Beginning and the Word, and which abuse His obedience as
they think good. But what need is there to linger over this idle talk?
Any one can see that even at that time with reference to which S. Paul
says that He became obedient (and he tells us that He became obedient in
this wise, namely, by becoming for our sakes flesh, and a servant, and a
curse, and sin),—even then, I say, the Lord of glory, Who despised the
shame and embraced suffering in the flesh, did not abandon His free
will, saying as He does, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will
raise it up <span id="fr_405"></span>[407](#fn_405) ;” and again, “No
man taketh My life from Me; I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again <span id="fr_406"></span>[408](#fn_406) ”; and
when those who were armed with swords and staves drew near to Him on the
night before His Passion, He caused them all to go backward by saying “I
am He <span id="fr_407"></span>[409](#fn_407) ,” and again, when the
dying thief besought Him to remember him, He showed His universal
sovereignty by saying, “To-day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise <span
id="fr_408"></span>[410](#fn_408) .” If then not even in the time of His
Passion He is separated from His authority, where can heresy possibly
discern the subordination to authority of the King of glory?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_387"></span>[CXIX:389](2050070.htm#fr_387) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p3"></span> [Is. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[CXIX:390](2050070.htm#fr_388) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p4"></span> [Is. xxix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[CXIX:391](2050070.htm#fr_389) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p5"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_390"></span>[CXX:392](2050070.htm#fr_390) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p6"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>, and parallel passages.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[CXX:393](2050070.htm#fr_391) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p7"></span> Cf. [Isa.
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>[Is. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p7.2"></span>
and 24. The quotation is not verbally from the LXX.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[CXX:394](2050070.htm#fr_392) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p8"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[CXX:395](2050070.htm#fr_393) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p9"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_394"></span>[CXX:396](2050070.htm#fr_394) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p10"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_395"></span>[CXX:397](2050070.htm#fr_395) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p12"></span> [Ps. lv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p12.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_396"></span>[CXXI:398](2050070.htm#fr_396) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p13"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>αὐτῆς</span>, with Oehler. The general
sense is the same, if <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p13.2"></span>αὐτῷ</span> be read; “does yet more
strongly attest His existence from all eternity.”

<span id="fn_397"></span>[CXXI:399](2050070.htm#fr_397) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p14"></span> Cf. [Ps. cxlviii.
2-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[CXXI:400](2050070.htm#fr_398) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p16"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[CXXI:401](2050070.htm#fr_399) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p17"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[CXXI:402](2050070.htm#fr_400) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p18"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[CXXI:403](2050070.htm#fr_401) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p19"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[CXXI:404](2050070.htm#fr_402) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p20"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p20.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[CXXI:405](2050070.htm#fr_403) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p21"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[CXXII:406](2050070.htm#fr_404) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p23"></span> If this phrase is a direct quotation
from Eunomius, it is probably from some other context: its grammatical
structure does not connect it with what has gone before, nor is it quite
clear where the quotation ends, or whether the illustration of the
instrument is Eunomius’ own, or is Gregory’s exposition of the statement
of Eunomius.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[CXXII:407](2050070.htm#fr_405) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p24"></span> S. [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="fn_406"></span>[CXXII:408](2050070.htm#fr_406) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p25"></span> S. [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_407"></span>[CXXII:409](2050070.htm#fr_407) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p26"></span> S. [John xviii.
5-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[CXXII:410](2050070.htm#fr_408) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xi-p27"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xi-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He thus proceeds to a magnificent discourse of the interpretation
of “Mediator,” “Like,” “Ungenerate,” and “generate,” and of “The
likeness and seal of the energy of the Almighty and of His
Works.”](2050071)
