[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050274)  [Next](2050276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>Letter IX</span>.—*An Invitation*.

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.x-p2.1"></span>It</span> is not the natural wont of spring to
shine forth in its radiant beauty all at once, but there come as
preludes of spring the sunbeam gently warming earth’s frozen surface,
and the bud half hidden beneath the clod, and breezes blowing over the
earth, so that the fertilizing and generative power of the air
penetrates deeply into it. One may see the fresh and tender grass, and
the return of birds which winter had banished, and many such tokens,
which are rather signs of spring, not spring itself. Not but that these
are sweet, because they are indications of what is sweetest. What is the
meaning of all that I have been saying? Why, since the expression of
your kindness which reached us in your letters, as a forerunner of the
treasures contained in you, with a goodly prelude brings the glad
tidings of the blessing which we expect at your hands, we both welcome
the boon which those letters convey, like some first-appearing flower of
spring, and pray that we may soon enjoy in you the full beauty of the
season. For, be well assured, we have been deeply, deeply distressed by
the passions and spite of the people here, and their ways; and just as
ice forms in cottages after the rains that come in—for I will draw my
comparison from the weather of our part of the world <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2191](#fn_2189) ,—and so moisture, when it gets in,
if it spreads over the surface that is already frozen, becomes congealed
about the ice, and an addition is made to the mass already existing,
even so one may notice much the same kind of thing in the character of
most of the people in this neighbourhood, how they are always plotting
and inventing something spiteful, and a fresh mischief is congealed on
the top of that which has been wrought before, and another one on the
top of that, and then again another, and this goes on without
intermission, and there is no limit to their hatred and to the increase
of evils; so that we have great need of many prayers that the grace of
the Spirit may speedily breathe upon them, and thaw the bitterness of
their hatred, and melt the frost that is hardening upon them from their
malice. For this cause the spring, sweet as it is by nature, becomes yet
more to be desired than ever to those <span id="page_533">p. 533</span>
<span id="xiii.x-Page_533"></span>who after such storms look for you.
Let not the boon, then, linger. Especially as our great holiday <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2192](#fn_2190) is approaching, it would be more
reasonable that the land which bare you should exult in her own
treasures than that Pontus should in ours. Come then, dear one, bringing
us a multitude of blessings, even yourself; for this will fill up the
measure of our beatitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[532:2191](2050275.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="xiii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span> For the climate, cf. Sozomen, *H. E.* vi.
34: “I suppose that Galatia, Cappadocia, and the neighbouring provinces
contained many other ecclesiastical philosophers at that time (*i.e.*
reign of Valens). These monks, for the most part, dwelt in communities
in cities and villages, for they did not habituate themselves to the
tradition of their predecessors. The severity of the winter, which is
always a natural feature of that country, would probably make hermit
life impracticable.”

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[533:2192](2050275.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="xiii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span> For such invitations, cf. Greg. Naz.
*Epist.* 99, 100, 102.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Libanius.](2050276)
