[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050156)  [Next](2050158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_352">p. 352</span>
<span id="ix.ii.ii.viii-Page_352"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>An</span> illustration will make our
teaching on this subject clearer. Imagine a stream flowing from a spring
and dividing itself off into a number of accidental channels. As long as
it proceeds so, it will be useless for any purpose of agriculture, the
dissipation of its waters making each particular current small and
feeble, and therefore slow. But if one were to mass these wandering and
widely dispersed rivulets again into one single channel, he would have a
full and collected stream for the supplies which life demands. Just so
the human mind (so it seems to me), as long as its current spreads
itself in all directions over the pleasures of the sense, has no power
that is worth the naming of making its way towards the Real Good; but
once call it back and collect it upon itself, so that it may begin to
move without scattering and wandering towards the activity which is
congenital and natural to it, it will find no obstacle in mounting to
higher things, and in grasping realities. We often see water contained
in a pipe bursting upwards through this constraining force, which will
not let it leak; and this, in spite of its natural gravitation: in the
same way, the mind of man, enclosed in the compact channel of an
habitual continence, and not having any side issues, will be raised by
virtue of its natural powers of motion to an exalted love. In fact, its
Maker ordained that it should always move, and to stop is impossible to
it; when therefore it is prevented employing this power upon trifles, it
cannot be but that it will speed toward the truth, all improper exits
being closed. In the case of many turnings we see travellers can keep to
the direct route, when they have learnt that the other roads are wrong,
and so avoid them; the more they keep out of these wrong directions, the
more they will preserve the straight course; in like manner the mind in
turning from vanities will recognize the truth. The great prophets,
then, whom we have mentioned seem to teach this lesson, viz. to entangle
ourselves with none of the objects of this world’s effort; marriage is
one of these, or rather it is the primal root of all striving after
vanities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](2050158)
