[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050094)  [Next](2050096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p1"></span> §2. *He then explains the phrase of
S. Peter, “Him God made Lord and Christ.” And herein he sets forth the
opposing statement of Eunomius, which he made on account of such phrase
against S. Basil, and his lurking revilings and insults.*

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p2"></span>Now that we have had presented to us
this preliminary view of existences, it may be opportune to examine the
passage before us. It is said, then, by Peter to the Jews, “Him God made
Lord and Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified <span
id="fr_694"></span>[696](#fn_694.md) ,” while on our part it is said that
it is not pious to refer the word “made” to the Divine Nature of the
Only-begotten, but that it is to be referred to that “form of a
servant <span id="fr_695"></span>[697](#fn_695.md) ,” which came into being
by the Incarnation <span id="fr_696"></span>[698](#fn_696.md) , in the due
time of His appearing in the flesh; and, on the other hand, those who
press the phrase the contrary way say that in the word “made” the
Apostle indicates the pretemporal generation of the Son. We shall, <span
id="page_CLXXIV">p. CLXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-Page_CLXXIV"></span>therefore, set forth the passage
in the midst, and after a detailed examination of both the suppositions,
leave the judgment of the truth to our reader. Of our adversaries’ view
Eunomius himself may be a sufficient advocate, for he contends gallantly
on the matter, so that in going through his argument word by word we
shall completely follow out the reasoning of those who strive against
us: and we ourselves will act as champion of the doctrine on our side as
best we may, following so far as we are able the line of the argument
previously set forth by the great Basil. But do you, who by your reading
act as judges in the cause, “execute true judgment,” as one of the
prophets <span id="fr_697"></span>[699](#fn_697.md) says, not awarding the
victory to contentious preconceptions, but to the truth as it is
manifested by examination. And now let the accuser of our doctrines come
forward, and read his indictment, as in a court of law.

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p7"></span>“In addition, moreover, to what we
have mentioned, by his refusal to take the word ‘made’ as referring to
the essence of the Son, and withal by his being ashamed of the Cross, he
ascribes to the Apostles what no one even of those who have done their
best to speak ill of them on the score of stupidity, lays to their
charge; and at the same time he clearly introduces, by his doctrines and
arguments, two Christs and two Lords; for he says that it was not the
Word Who was in the beginning Whom God made Lord and Christ, but He Who
‘emptied Himself to take the form of a servant <span
id="fr_698"></span>[700](#fn_698.md) ,’ and ‘was crucified through
weakness <span id="fr_699"></span>[701](#fn_699.md) .’ At all events the
great Basil writes expressly as follows <span
id="fr_700"></span>[702](#fn_700.md) :—‘Nor, moreover, is it the intention
of the Apostle to present to us that existence of the Only-begotten
which was before the ages (which is now the subject of our argument),
for he clearly speaks, not of the very essence of God the Word, Who was
in the beginning with God, but of Him Who emptied Himself to take the
form of a servant, and became conformable to the body of our
humiliation <span id="fr_701"></span>[703](#fn_701.md) , and was crucified
through weakness.’ And again, ‘This is known to any one who even in a
small degree applies his mind to the meaning of the Apostle’s words,
that he is not setting forth to us the mode of the Divine existence, but
is introducing the terms which belong to the Incarnation; for he says,
*Him* God made Lord and Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified, evidently
laying stress by the demonstrative word on that in Him which was human
and was seen by all <span id="fr_702"></span>[704](#fn_702.md) .’

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p13"></span>“This, then, is what the man has to
say who substitutes,—for we may not speak of it as ‘application,’ lest
any one should blame for such madness men holy and chosen for the
preaching of godliness, so as to reproach their doctrine with a fall
into such extravagance,—who substitutes his own mind <span
id="fr_703"></span>[705](#fn_703.md) for the intention of the Apostles!
With what confusion are they not filled, who refer their own nonsense to
the memory of the saints! With what absurdity do they not abound, who
imagine that the man ‘emptied himself’ to become man, and who maintain
that He Who by obedience ‘humbled himself’ to take the form of a servant
was made conformable to men even before He took that form upon Him! Who,
pray, ye most reckless of men, when he *has* the form of a servant,
takes the form of a servant? and how can any one ‘empty himself’ to
become the very thing which he is? You will find no contrivance to meet
this, bold as you are in saying or thinking things uncontrivable. Are
you not verily of all men most miserable, who suppose that a man has
suffered death for all men, and ascribe your own redemption to him? For
if it is not of the Word Who was in the beginning and was God that the
blessed Peter speaks, but of him who was ‘seen,’ and who ‘emptied
Himself,’ as Basil says, and if the man who was seen ‘emptied Himself’
to take ‘the form of a servant,’ and He Who ‘emptied Himself’ to take
‘the form of a servant,’ emptied Himself to come into being as man, then
the man who was seen emptied himself to come into being as man <span
id="fr_704"></span>[706](#fn_704.md) . The very nature of things is
repugnant to this; and it is expressly contradicted by that writer <span
id="fr_705"></span>[707](#fn_705.md) who celebrates this dispensation in
his discourse concerning the Divine Nature, when he says not that the
man who was seen, but that the Word Who was in the beginning and was God
took upon Him flesh, which is equivalent in other words to taking ‘the
form of a servant.’ If, then, you hold that these things are to be
believed, depart from your error, and cease to believe that the man
‘emptied himself’ to become man. And if you are not able to persuade
those who will not be persuaded, destroy their incredulity by another
saying, a second de<span id="page_CLXXV">p. CLXXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-Page_CLXXV"></span>cision against them. Remember him
who says, ‘Who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be
equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant.’
There is none among men who will appropriate this phrase to himself.
None of the saints that ever lived was the Only-begotten God and became
man:—for that is what it means to ‘take the form of a servant,’ ‘being
in the form of God.’ If, then, the blessed Peter speaks of Him Who
‘emptied Himself’ to ‘take the form of a servant,’ and if He Who was ‘in
the form of God’ did ‘empty Himself’ to ‘take the form of a servant,’
and if He Who in the beginning was God, being the Word and the
Only-begotten God, is He Who was ‘in the form of God,’ then the blessed
Peter speaks to us of Him Who was in the beginning and was God, and
expounds to us that it was He Who became Lord and Christ. This, then, is
the conflict which Basil wages against himself, and he clearly appears
neither to have ‘applied his own mind to the intention of the Apostles’,
nor to be able to preserve the sequence of his own arguments; for,
according to them, he must, if he is conscious of their irreconcilable
character, admit that the Word Who was in the beginning and was God
became Lord; or if he tries to fit together statements that are mutually
conflicting, and contentiously stands by them, he will add to them
others yet more hostile, and maintain that there are two Christs and two
Lords. For if the Word that was in the beginning and was God be one, and
He Who ‘emptied Himself’ and ‘took the form of a servant’ be another,
and if God the Word, by Whom are all things, be Lord, and this Jesus,
Who was crucified after all things had come into being, be Lord also,
there are, according to his view, two Lords and Christs. Our author,
then, cannot by any argument clear himself from this manifest blasphemy.
But if any one were to say in support of him that the Word Who was in
the beginning is indeed the same Who became Lord, but that He became
Lord and Christ in respect of His presence in the flesh, He will surely
be constrained to say that the Son was not Lord before His presence in
the flesh. At all events, even if Basil and his faithless followers
falsely proclaim two Lords and two Christs, for us there is one Lord and
Christ, by Whom all things were made, not becoming Lord by way of
promotion, but existing before all creation and before all ages, the
Lord Jesus, by Whom are all things, while all the saints with one
harmonious voice teach us this truth and proclaim it as the most
excellent of doctrines. Here the blessed John teaches us that God the
Word, by Whom all things were made, has become incarnate, saying, ‘And
the Word was made flesh <span id="fr_706"></span>[708](#fn_706.md) ’; here
the most admirable Paul, urging those who attend to him to humility,
speaks of Christ Jesus, Who was in the form of God, and emptied Himself
to take the form of a servant, and was humbled to death, even the death
of the Cross <span id="fr_707"></span>[709](#fn_707.md) ; and again in
another passage calls Him Who was crucified ‘the Lord of Glory’: ‘for
had they known it,’ he says, ‘they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory <span id="fr_708"></span>[710](#fn_708.md) ’. Indeed, he speaks far
more openly than this of the very essential nature by the name of
‘Lord,’ where he says, ‘Now the Lord is the Spirit <span
id="fr_709"></span>[711](#fn_709.md) ’. If, then, the Word Who was in the
beginning, in that He is Spirit, is Lord, and the Lord of glory, and if
God made Him Lord and Christ, it was the very Spirit and God the Word
that God so made, and not some other Lord Whom Basil dreams about.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_694"></span>[CLXXIII:696](2050095.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p3"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[CLXXIII:697](2050095.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p4"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[CLXXIII:698](2050095.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>οἰκονομικῶς γενομένην</span>

<span id="fn_697"></span>[CLXXIV:699](2050095.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p6"></span> [Zech. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[CLXXIV:700](2050095.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p8"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_699"></span>[CLXXIV:701](2050095.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p9"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[CLXXIV:702](2050095.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p10"></span> The quotations are from S. Basil c.
Eunomius II. 3. (pp. 239–40 in the Benedictine edition.)

<span id="fn_701"></span>[CLXXIV:703](2050095.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p11"></span> Cf. [Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[CLXXIV:704](2050095.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p12"></span> The latter part of the quotation
from S. Basil does not exactly agree with the Benedictine text, but the
variations are not material.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[CLXXIV:705](2050095.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14.2"></span>αυτοῦ</span> for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14.3"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14.4"></span>αυτῶν</span> of
Oehler’s text, for which no authority is alleged by the editor, and
which is probably a mere misprint.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[CLXXIV:706](2050095.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p15"></span> The argument here takes the form of
a *reductio ad absurdum;* assuming that S. Peter’s reference is to the
“visible man,” and bearing in mind S. Basil’s words that S. Peter refers
to Him Who “emptied Himself,” it is said “then it was the ‘visible man’
who ‘emptied himself.’ But the purpose of that ‘emptying’ was the
‘taking the form of a servant,’ which again is the coming into being as
man: therefore the ‘visible man’ ‘emptied himself,’ to come into being
as man, which is absurd.” The wording of S. Basil’s statement makes the
argument in a certain degree plausible;—if he had said that S. Peter
referred to the Son, not in regard to his actual essence, but in regard
to the fact that He “emptied Himself” to become man, and as so having
“emptied Himself” (which is no doubt what he intended his words to
mean), then the *reductio ad absurdum* would not apply; nor would the
later arguments, by which Eunomius proceeds to prove that He Who
“emptied Himself” was no mere man, but the Word Who was in the
beginning, have any force as against S. Basil’s statement.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[CLXXIV:707](2050095.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p16"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p16.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[CLXXV:708](2050095.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p17"></span> S. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_707"></span>[CLXXV:709](2050095.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p18"></span> Cf. [Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[CLXXV:710](2050095.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p19"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[CLXXV:711](2050095.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.ii-p20"></span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.ii-p20.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A remarkable and original reply to these utterances, and a
demonstration of the power of the Crucified, and of the fact that this
subjection was of the Human Nature, not that which the Only-Begotten has
from the Father. Also an explanation of the figure of the Cross, and of
the appellation “Christ,” and an account of the good gifts bestowed on
the Human Nature by the Godhead which was commingled with it.](2050096.md)
