[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050016)  [Next](2050018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_XXXV">p. XXXV</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.i-Page_XXXV"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Book I. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[57](#fn_55.md) </span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p3"></span>§1. *Preface.—It is useless to attempt
to benefit those who will not accept help.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p4"></span>It seems that the wish to benefit all,
and to lavish indiscriminately upon the first comer one’s own gifts, was
not a thing altogether commendable, or even free from reproach in the
eyes of the many; seeing that the gratuitous waste of many prepared
drugs on the incurably-diseased produces no result worth caring about,
either in the way of gain to the recipient, or reputation to the
would-be benefactor. Rather such an attempt becomes in many cases the
occasion of a change for the worse. The hopelessly-diseased and now
dying patient receives only a speedier end from the more active
medicines; the fierce unreasonable temper is only made worse by the
kindness of the lavished pearls, as the Gospel tells us. I think it
best, therefore, in accordance with the Divine command, for any one to
separate the valuable from the worthless when either have to be given
away, and to avoid the pain which a generous giver must receive from one
who ‘treads upon his pearl,’ and insults him by his utter want of
feeling for its beauty.

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p5"></span>This thought suggests itself when I
think of one who freely communicated to others the beauties of his own
soul, I mean that man of God, that mouth of piety, Basil; one who from
the abundance of his spiritual treasures poured his grace of wisdom into
evil souls whom he had never tested, and into one among them, Eunomius,
who was perfectly insensible to all the efforts made for his good.
Pitiable indeed seemed the condition of this poor man, from the extreme
weakness of his soul in the matter of the Faith, to all true members of
the Church; for who is so wanting in feeling as not to pity, at least, a
perishing soul? But Basil alone, from the abiding <span
id="fr_56"></span>[58](#fn_56.md) ardour of his love, was moved to
undertake his cure, and therein to attempt impossibilities; he alone
took so much to heart the man’s desperate condition, as to compose, as
an antidote of deadly poisons, his refutation of this heresy <span
id="fr_57"></span>[59](#fn_57.md) , which aimed at saving its author, and
restoring him to the Church.

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p9"></span>He, on the contrary, like one beside
himself with fury, resists his doctor; he fights and struggles; he
regards as a bitter foe one who only put forth his strength to drag him
from the abyss of misbelief; and he does not indulge in this foolish
anger only before chance hearers now and then; he has raised against
himself a literary monument to record this blackness of his bile; and
when in long years he got the requisite amount of leisure, he was
travailling over his work during all that interval with mightier pangs
than those of the largest and the bulkiest beasts; his threats of what
was coming were dreadful, whilst he was still secretly moulding his
conception: but when at last and with great difficulty he brought it to
the light, it was a poor little abortion, quite <span id="page_XXXVI">p.
XXXVI</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.i-Page_XXXVI"></span>prematurely born.
However, those who share his ruin nurse it and coddle it; while we,
seeking the blessing in the prophet (“Blessed shall he be who shall take
thy children, and shall dash them against the stones <span
id="fr_58"></span>[60](#fn_58) ”.md) are only eager, now that it has got
into our hands, to take this puling manifesto and dash it on the rock,
as if it was one of the children of Babylon; and the rock must be
Christ; in other words, the enunciation of the truth. Only may that
power come upon us which strengthens weakness, through the prayers of
him who made his own strength perfect in bodily weakness <span
id="fr_59"></span>[61](#fn_59.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[XXXV:57](2050017.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p2"></span> This first Book against Eunomius was
not in the 1st Paris Edition of Gregory’s works, 1615; but it was
published three years later from the ‘Bavarian Codex,’ i.e. that of
Munich, by J. Gretser, in an Appendix, along with the Summaries (i.e.
the headings of the sections, which appear to be not Gregory’s) and the
two Introductory Letters. These Summaries and the Letters, and nearly
three quarters of the 1st Book were found in J. Livineius’ transcript
from the Codex Vaticanus made 1579, at Rome. This Appendix was added to
the 2nd Paris Edit. 1638. F. Oehler, whose text has been followed
throughout, has used for the 1st Book the Munich Codex (on paper, xvith
Cent.); the Venetian (on cotton, xiiith Cent.); the Turin (on cotton,
xivth Cent.), and the oldest of all, the Florentine (on parchment, xith
Cent.).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[XXXV:58](2050017.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p6"></span> Reading,—

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.1"></span>τὸ μόνιμον</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.3"></span>πιτολμῶντα</span>.
This is the correction of Oehler for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.4"></span>τὸν μόνον</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.6"></span>πιτολμῶν</span> which the text presents.
The Venetian <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.7"></span>ms.</span> has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.8"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.9"></span>πιτολμῶντι</span>

<span id="fn_57"></span>[XXXV:59](2050017.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p7.10"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p8"></span> *his refutation of this heresy.* This
is Basil’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p8.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p8.2"></span>Ανατρεπτικὸς τοῦ ἀπολογητικοῦ τοῦ
δυοσεβοῦς Εὐνομίου</span>. ‘Basil,’ says Photius, ‘with difficulty got
hold of Eunomius’ book,’ perhaps because it was written originally for a
small circle of readers, and was in a highly scientific form. What
happened next may be told in the words of Claudius Morellius
(Prolegomena to Paris Edition of 1615): ‘When Basil’s first essay
against the fœtus of Eunomius had been published, he raised his bruised
head like a trodden worm, seized his pen, and began to rave more
poisonously still as well against Basil as the orthodox faith.’ This was
Eunomius’ ‘Apologia Apologiæ:’ of it Photius says, ‘His reply to Basil
was composed for many Olympiads while shut up in his cell. This, like
another Saturn, he concealed from the eyes of Basil till it had grown
up, i.e. he concealed it, by devouring it, as long as Basil lived.’ He
then goes on to say that after Basil’s death, Theodore (of Mopsuestia),
Gregory of Nyssa, and Sophronius found it and dealt with it, though even
then Eunomius had only ventured to show it to some of his friends.
Philostorgius, the ardent admirer of Eunomius, makes the amazing
statement that Basil died of despair after reading it.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[XXXVI:60](2050017.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p10"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p10.1"></span>[Psalm cxxxvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[XXXVI:61](2050017.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.i-p11"></span> ‘He asks for the intercession of
Saint Paul’ (Paris Edit. in marg.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: We have been justly provoked to make this Answer, being stung by
Eunomius' accusations of our brother.](2050018.md)
