[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050114)  [Next](2050116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.x.v"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p1"></span> §5. *Then, after showing that the
Person of the Only-begotten and Maker of things has no beginning, as
have the things that were made by Him, as Eunomius says, but that the
Only-begotten is without beginning and eternal, and has no community,
either of essence or of names, with the creation, but is co-existent
with the Father from everlasting, being, as the all-excel*<span
id="page_CCVI">p. CCVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.v-Page_CCVI"></span>*lent Wisdom says, “the beginning and
end and midst of the times,” and after making many observations on the
Godhead and eternity of the Only-begotten, and also concerning souls and
angels, and life and death, he concludes the book.*

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p2"></span>I will now once more subjoin the actual
language of my opponent, word for word. It runs thus:—“While there are,”
he says, “two statements which we have made, the one, that the essence
of the Only-begotten was not before its own generation, the other, that,
being generated, it was before all things—”What kind of generation does
our dogmatist propose to us? Is it one of which we may fittingly think
and speak in regard to God? And who is so godless as to pre-suppose
non-existence in God? But it is clear that he has in view this material
generation of ours, and is making the lower nature the teacher of his
conceptions concerning the Only-begotten God, and since an ox or an ass
or a camel is not before its own generation, he thinks it proper to say
even of the Only-begotten God that which the course of the lower nature
presents to our view in the case of the animals, without thinking,
corporeal theologian that he is, of this fact, that the predicate
“*Only*-begotten”, applied to God, signifies by the very word itself
that which is not in common with all begetting, and is peculiar to Him.
How could the term “Only-begotten” be used of this “generation,” if it
had community and identity of meaning with other generation? That there
is something unique and exceptional to be understood in His case, which
is not to be remarked in other generation, is distinctly and suitably
expressed by the appellation of “Only-begotten”; as, were any element of
the lower generation conceived in it, He Who in respect of any of the
attributes of His generation was placed on a level with other things
that are begotten would no longer be “*Only*-begotten.” For if the same
things are to be said of Him which are said of the other things that
come into being by generation, the definition will transform the sense
of “Only-begotten” to signify a kind of relationship involving
brotherhood. If then the sense of “Only-begotten” points to absence of
mixture and community with the rest of generated things, we shall not
admit that anything which we behold in the lower generation is also to
be conceived in the case of that existence which the Son has from the
Father. But non-existence before generation is proper to all things that
exist by generation: therefore this is foreign to the special character
of the Only-begotten, to which the name “Only-begotten” bears witness
that there attaches nothing belonging to the mode of that form of common
generation which Eunomius misapprehends. Let this materialist and friend
of the senses be persuaded therefore to correct the error of his
conception by the other forms of generation. What will you say when you
hear of the “brightness of glory” or of the “savour of ointment <span
id="fr_879"></span>[881](#fn_879) ?” That the “brightness” was not
before its own generation? But if you answer thus, you will surely admit
that neither did the “glory” exist, nor the “ointment”: for it is not
possible that the “glory” should be conceived as having existed by
itself, dark and lustreless, or the “ointment” without producing its
sweet breath: so that if the “brightness” “was not,” the “glory” also
surely “was not,” and the “savour” being non-existent, there is also
proved the non-existence of the “ointment.” But if these examples taken
from Scripture excite any man’s fear, on the ground that they do not
accurately present to us the majesty of the Only-begotten, because
neither is essentially the same with its substratum—neither the
exhalation with the ointment, nor the beam with the sun—let the true
Word correct his fear, Who was in the Beginning and is all that the
Beginning is, and existent before all; since John so declares in his
preaching, “And the Word was with God, and the Word was God <span
id="fr_880"></span>[882](#fn_880) .” If then the Father is God and the
Son is God, what doubt still remains with regard to the perfect Divinity
of the Only-begotten, when by the sense of the word “Son” is
acknowledged the close relationship of Nature, by “brightness” the
conjunction and inseparability, and by the appellation of “God,” applied
alike to the Father and the Son, their absolute equality, while the
“express image,” contemplated in reference to the whole Person <span
id="fr_881"></span>[883](#fn_881) of the Father, marks the absence of
any defect in the Son’s proper greatness, and the “form of God”
indicates His complete identity by showing in itself all those marks by
which the Godhead is betokened.

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p6"></span>Let us now set forth Eunomius’ statement
once more. “He was not,” he says, “before His own generation.” Who is it
of Whom he says “He was not”? Let him declare the Divine names by which
He Who, according to Eunomius, “once was not,” is called. He will say, I
suppose, “light,” and “blessedness,” “life” and “incorruptibility,” and
“righteousness” and “sanctification,” and “power,” and “truth,” and the
like. He who says, then, that “He was not before His generation,”
absolutely proclaims this,—that when He “was not” there was no truth, no
life, no light, no power, no incorruptibility, no other of those
pre-eminent qualities which are conceived of Him: and, <span
id="page_CCVII">p. CCVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.v-Page_CCVII"></span>what is still more marvellous and
still more difficult for impiety to face, there was no “brightness,” no
“express image.” For in saying that there was no brightness, there is
surely maintained also the non-existence of the radiating power, as one
may see in the illustration afforded by the lamp. For he who speaks of
the ray of the lamp indicates also that the lamp shines, and he who says
that the ray “is not,” signifies also the extinction of that which gives
light: so that when the Son is said not to be, thereby is also
maintained as a necessary consequence the non-existence of the Father.
For if the one is related to the other by way of conjunction, according
to the Apostolic testimony—the “brightness” to the “glory,” the “express
image” to the “Person,” the “Wisdom” to God—he who says that one of the
things so conjoined “is not,” surely by his abolition of the one
abolishes also that which remains; so that if the “brightness” “was
not,” it is acknowledged that neither did the illuminating nature exist,
and if the “express image” had no existence, neither did the Person
imaged exist, and if the wisdom and power of God “was not,” it is surely
acknowledged that He also was not, Who is not conceived by Himself
without wisdom and power. If, then, the Only-begotten God, as Eunomius
says, “was not before His generation,” and Christ is “the power of God
and the wisdom of God <span id="fr_882"></span>[884](#fn_882) ,” and the
“express image” <span id="fr_883"></span>[885](#fn_883) and the
“brightness <span id="fr_884"></span>[886](#fn_884) ,” neither surely
did the Father exist, Whose power and wisdom and express image and
brightness the Son is: for it is not possible to conceive by reason
either a Person without express image, or glory without radiance, or God
without wisdom, or a Maker without hands, or a Beginning without the
Word <span id="fr_885"></span>[887](#fn_885) , or a Father without a
Son; but all such things, alike by those who confess and by those who
deny, are manifestly declared to be in mutual union, and by the
abolition of one the other also disappears with it. Since then they
maintain that the Son (that is, the “brightness of the glory,”) “was
not” before He was begotten, and since logical consequence involves
also, together with the non-existence of the brightness, the abolition
of the glory, and the Father is the glory whence came the brightness of
the Only-begotten Light, let these men who are wise over-much consider
that they are manifestly supporters of the Epicurean doctrines,
preaching atheism under the guise of Christianity. Now since the logical
consequence is shown to be one of two absurdities, either that we should
say that God does not exist at all, or that we should say that His being
was not unoriginate, let them choose which they like of the two courses
before them,—either to be called atheist, or to cease saying that the
essence of the Father is un-originate. They would avoid, I suppose,
being reckoned atheists. It remains, therefore, that they maintain that
God is not eternal. And if the course of what has been proved forces
them to this, what becomes of their varied and irreversible conversions
of names? What becomes of that invincible compulsion of their
syllogisms, which sounded so fine to the ears of old women, with its
opposition of “Generated” and “Ungenerate”?

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p11"></span>Enough, however, of these matters. But
it might be well not to leave his next point unanswered; yet let us pass
over in silence the comic interlude, where our clever orator shows his
youthful conceit, whether in jest or in earnest, under the impression
that he will thereby have an advantage in his argument. For certainly no
one will force us to join either with those whose eyes are set askance
in distorting our sight, or with those who are stricken with strange
disease in being contorted, or in their bodily leaps and plunges. We
shall pity them, but we shall not depart from our settled state of mind.
He says, then, turning his discourse upon the subject to our master, as
if he were really engaging him face to face, “Thou shalt be taken in
thine own snare.” For as Basil had said <span
id="fr_886"></span>[888](#fn_886) that what is good is always present
with God Who is over all, and that it is good to be the Father of such a
Son,—that so what is good was never absent from Him, nor was it the
Father’s will to be without the Son, and when He willed He did not lack
the power, but having the power and the will to be in the mode in which
it seemed good to Him, He also always possessed the Son by reason of His
always willing that which is good (for this is the direction in which
the intention of our father’s remarks tends), Eunomius pulls this in
pieces beforehand, and puts forward to overthrow what has been said some
such argument as this, introduced from his extraneous philosophy:—“What
will become of you,” he says, “if one of those who have had experience
of such arguments should say, ‘If to create is good and agreeable to the
Nature of God, how is it that what is good and agreeable to His Nature
was not present with Him unoriginately, seeing that God is unoriginate?
and that when there was no hindrance of ignorance or impediment of
weakness or of age in the matter of creation,”—and all the rest that he
collects together and pours out upon himself,—for I may not say, upon
God. Well, if it were possible for our master to answer the question in
person, he would have shown Eunomius what would have become of him,
<span id="page_CCVIII">p. CCVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.v-Page_CCVIII"></span>as he asked, by setting forth the
Divine mystery with that tongue that was taught of God, and by scourging
the champion of deceit with his refutations, so that it would have been
made clear to all men what a difference there is between a minister of
the mysteries of Christ and a ridiculous buffoon or a setter-forth of
new and absurd doctrines. But since he, as the Apostle says, “being
dead, speaketh <span id="fr_887"></span>[889](#fn_887) ” to God, while
the other puts forth such a challenge as though there were no one to
answer him, even though an answer from us may not have equal force when
compared with the words of the great Basil, we shall yet boldly say this
in answer to the questioner:—Your own argument, put forth to overthrow
our statement, is a testimony that in the charges we make against your
impious doctrine we speak truly. For there is no other point we blame so
much as this, that you <span id="fr_888"></span>[890](#fn_888) think
there is no difference between the Lord of creation and the general body
of creation, and what you now allege is a maintaining of the very things
which we find fault with. For if you are bound to attach exactly what
you see in creation also to the Only-begotten God, our contention has
gained its end: your own statements proclaim the absurdity of the
doctrine, and it is manifest to all, both that we keep our argument in
the straight way of truth, and that your conception of the Only-begotten
God is such as you have of the rest of the creation.

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p15"></span>Concerning whom was the controversy?
Was it not concerning the Only-begotten God, the Maker of all the
creation, whether He always was, or whether He came into being
afterwards as an addition to His Father? What then do our master’s words
say on this matter? That it is irreverent to believe that what is
naturally good was not in God: for that he saw no cause by which it was
probable that the good was not always present with Him Who is good,
either for lack of power or for weakness of will. What does he who
contends against these statements say? “If you allow that God the Word
is to be believed eternal, you must allow the same of the things that
have been created”—(How well he knows how to distinguish in his argument
the nature of the creatures and the majesty of God! How well he knows
about each, what befits it, what he may piously think concerning God,
what concerning the creation!)—“if the Maker,” he says, “begins from the
time of His making: for there is nothing else by which we can mark the
beginning of things that have been made, if time does not define by its
own interval the beginnings and the endings of the things that come into
being.”

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p16"></span>On this ground he says that the Maker
of time must commence His existence from a like beginning. Well, the
creation has the ages for its beginning, but what beginning can you
conceive of the Maker of the ages? If any one should say, “The
‘beginning’ which is mentioned in the Gospel”—it is the Father Who is
there signified, and the confession of the Son together with Him is
there pointed to, nor can it be that He Who is in the Father <span
id="fr_889"></span>[891](#fn_889) , as the Lord says, can begin His
being in Him from any particular point. And if any one speaks of another
beginning besides this, let him tell us the name by which he marks this
beginning, as none can be apprehended before the establishment of the
ages. Such a statement, therefore, will not move us a whit from the
orthodox conception concerning the Only-begotten, even if old women do
applaud the proposition as a sound one. For we abide by what has been
determined from the beginning, having our doctrine firmly based on
truth, to wit, that all things which the orthodox doctrine assumes that
we assert concerning the Only-begotten God have no kindred with the
creation, but the marks which distinguish the Maker of all and His works
are separated by a wide interval. If indeed the Son had in any other
respect communion with the creation, we surely ought to say that He did
not diverge from it even in the manner of His existence. But if the
creation has no share in such things as are all those which we learn
concerning the Son, we must surely of necessity say that in this matter
also He has no communion with it. For the creation was not in the
beginning, and was not with God, and was not, God, nor life, nor light,
nor resurrection, nor the rest of the Divine names, as truth,
righteousness, sanctification, Judge, just, Maker of all things,
existing before the ages, for ever and ever; the creation is not the
brightness of the glory, nor the express image of the Person, nor the
likeness of goodness, nor grace, nor power, nor truth, nor salvation,
nor redemption; nor do we find any one at all of those names which are
employed by Scripture for the glory of the Only-begotten, either
belonging to the creation or employed concerning it,—not to speak of
those more exalted words, “I am in the Father, and the Father in
Me <span id="fr_890"></span>[892](#fn_890) ,” and, “He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father <span id="fr_891"></span>[893](#fn_891) ,” and,
“None hath seen the Son, save the Father <span
id="fr_892"></span>[894](#fn_892) .” If indeed our doctrine allowed us
to claim for the creation things so many and so great as these, he might
have been right in thinking that we ought to attach what we observe in
it to our conceptions of the Only-begotten also, <span id="page_CCIX">p.
CCIX</span> <span id="viii.i.x.v-Page_CCIX"></span>since the transfer
would be from kindred subjects to one nearly allied. But if all these
concepts and names involve communion with the Father, while they
transcend our notions of the creation, does not our clever and
sharp-witted friend slink away in shame at discussing the nature of the
Lord of the Creation by the aid of what he observes in creation, without
being aware that the marks which distinguish the creation are of a
different sort? The ultimate division of all that exists is made by the
line between “created” and “uncreated,” the one being regarded as a
cause of what has come into being, the other as coming into being
thereby. Now the created nature and the Divine essence being thus
divided, and admitting no intermixture in respect of their
distinguishing properties, we must by no means conceive both by means of
similar terms, nor seek in the idea of their nature for the same
distinguishing marks in things that are thus separated. Accordingly, as
the nature that is in the creation, as the phrase of the most excellent
Wisdom somewhere tells us, exhibits “the beginning, ending, and midst of
the times <span id="fr_893"></span>[895](#fn_893) ” in itself, and
extends concurrently with all temporal intervals, we take as a sort of
characteristic of the subject this property, that in it we see some
beginning of its formation, look on its midst, and extend our
expectations to its end. For we have learnt that the heaven and the
earth were not from eternity, and will not last to eternity, and thus it
is hence clear that those things are both started from some beginning,
and will surely cease at some end. But the Divine Nature, being limited
in no respect, but passing all limitations on every side in its
infinity, is far removed from those marks which we find in creation. For
that power which is without interval, without quantity, without
circumscription, having in itself all the ages and all the creation that
has taken place in them, and over-passing at all points, by virtue of
the infinity of its own nature, the unmeasured extent of the ages,
either has no mark which indicates its nature, or has one of an entirely
different sort, and not that which the creation has. Since, then, it
belongs to the creation to have a beginning, that will be alien from the
uncreated nature which belongs to the creation. For if any one should
venture to suppose the existence of the Only-begotten Son to be, like
the creation, from any beginning comprehensible by us, he must certainly
append to his statement concerning the Son the rest also of the
sequence <span id="fr_894"></span>[896](#fn_894) ; for it is not
possible to avoid acknowledging, together with the beginning, that also
which follows from it. For just as if one were to admit some person to
be a man in all <span id="fr_895"></span>[897](#fn_895) the properties
of his nature, he would observe that in this confession he declared him
to be an animal and rational, and whatever else is conceived of man, so
by the same reasoning, if we should understand any of the properties of
creation to be present in the Divine essence, it will no longer be open
to us to refrain from attaching to that pure Nature the rest of the list
of the attributes contemplated therein. For the “beginning” will demand
by force and compulsion that which follows it; for the “beginning,” thus
conceived, is a beginning of what comes after it, in such a sense, that
if they are, it is, and if the things connected with it are removed, the
antecedent also would not remain <span id="fr_896"></span>[898](#fn_896)
. Now as the book of Wisdom speaks of “midst” and “end” as well as of
“beginning,” if we assume in the Nature of the Only-begotten, according
to the heretical dogma, some beginning of existence defined by a certain
mark of time, the book of Wisdom will by no means allow us to refrain
from subjoining to the “beginning” a “midst” and an “end” also. If this
should be done we shall find, as the result of our arguments, that the
Divine word shows us that the Deity is mortal. For if, according to the
book of Wisdom, the “end” is a necessary consequence of the “beginning,”
and the idea of “midst” is involved in that of extremes, he who allows
one of these also potentially maintains the others, and lays down bounds
of measure and limitation for the infinite Nature. And if this is
impious and absurd, the giving a beginning to that argument which ends
in impiety deserves equal, or even greater censure; and the beginning of
this absurd doctrine was seen to be the supposition that the life of the
Son was circumscribed by some beginning. Thus one of two courses is
before them: either they must revert to sound doctrine under the
compulsion of the foregoing arguments, and contemplate Him Who is of the
Father in union with the Father’s eternity, or if they do not like this,
they must limit the eternity of the Son in both ways, and reduce the
limitless character of His life to non-existence by a beginning and an
end. And, granted that the nature both of souls and of the angels has no
end, and is no way hindered from going on to eternity, by the fact of
its being created, and having the begin<span id="page_CCX">p. CCX</span>
<span id="viii.i.x.v-Page_CCX"></span>ning of its existence from some
point of time, so that our adversaries can use this fact to assert a
parallel in the case of Christ, in the sense that He is not from
eternity, and yet endures everlastingly,—let any one who advances this
argument also consider the following point, how widely the Godhead
differs from the creation in its special attributes. For to the Godhead
it properly belongs to lack no conceivable thing which is regarded as
good, while the creation attains excellence by partaking in something
better than itself; and further, not only had a beginning of its being,
but also is found to be constantly in a state of beginning to be in
excellence, by its continual advance in improvement, since it never
halts at what it has reached, but all that it has acquired <span
id="fr_897"></span>[899](#fn_897) becomes by participation a beginning
of its ascent to something still greater, and it never ceases, in Paul’s
phrase, “reaching forth to the things that are before,” and “forgetting
the things that are behind <span id="fr_898"></span>[900](#fn_898) .”
Since, then, the Godhead is very life, and the Only-begotten God is God,
and life, and truth, and every conceivable thing that is lofty and
Divine, while the creation draws from Him its supply of good, it may
hence be evident that if it is in life by partaking of life, it will
surely, if it ceases from this participation, cease from life also. If
they dare, then, to say also of the Only-begotten God those things which
it is true to say of the creation, let them say this too, along with the
rest, that He has a beginning of His being like the creation, and abides
in life after the likeness of souls. But if He is the very life, and
needs not to have life in Himself *ab extra,* while all other things are
not life, but are merely participants in life, what constrains us to
cancel, by reason of what we see in creation, the eternity of the Son?
For that which is always unchanged as regards its nature, admits of no
contrary, and is incapable of change to any other condition: while
things whose nature is on the boundary line have a tendency that shifts
either way, inclining at will to what they find attractive <span
id="fr_899"></span>[901](#fn_899) . If, then, that which is truly life
is contemplated in the Divine and transcendent nature, the decadence
thereof will surely, as it seems, end in the opposite state <span
id="fr_900"></span>[902](#fn_900) .

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p29"></span>Now the meaning of “life” and “death”
is manifold, and not always understood in the same way. For as regards
the flesh, the energy and motion of the bodily senses is called “life,”
and their extinction and dissolution is named “death.” But in the case
of the intellectual nature, approximation to the Divine is the true
life, and decadence therefrom is named “death”: for which reason the
original evil, the devil, is called both “death,” and the inventor of
death: and he is also said by the Apostle to have the power of
death <span id="fr_901"></span>[903](#fn_901) . As, then, we obtain, as
has been said, from the Scriptures, a twofold conception of death, He
Who is truly unchangeable and immutable “alone hath immortality,” and
dwells in light that cannot be attained or approached by the darkness of
wickedness <span id="fr_902"></span>[904](#fn_902) : but all things that
participate in death, being far removed from immortality by their
contrary tendency, if they fall away from that which is good, would, by
the mutability of their nature, admit community with the worse
condition, which is nothing else than death, having a certain
correspondence with the death of the body. For as in that case the
extinction of the activities of nature is called death, so also, in the
case of the intellectual being, the absence of motion towards the good
is death and departure from life; so that what we perceive in the
bodiless creation <span id="fr_903"></span>[905](#fn_903) does not clash
with our argument, which refutes the doctrine of heresy. For that form
of death which corresponds to the intellectual nature (that is,
separation from God, Whom we call Life) is, potentially, not separated
even from their nature; for their emergence from non-existence shows
mutability of nature; and that to which change is in affinity is
hindered from participation in the contrary state by the grace of Him
Who strengthens it: it does not abide in the good by its own nature: and
such a thing is not eternal. If, then, one really speaks truth in saying
that we ought not to estimate the Divine essence and the created nature
in the same way, nor to circumscribe the being of the Son of God by any
beginning, lest, if this be granted, the other attributes of creation
should enter in together with our acknowledgment of this one, the absurd
character of the teaching of that man, who employs the attributes of
creation to separate the Only-begotten God from the eternity of the
Father, is clearly shown. For as none other of the marks which
characterize the creation appears in the Maker of the creation, so
neither is the fact that the creation has its existence from some
beginning a proof that the Son was not always in the Father,—that Son,
Who is Wisdom, and Power, and Light, and Life, and all that is conceived
of in the bosom of the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_879"></span>[CCVI:881](2050115.htm#fr_879) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p3"></span> [Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003), [Cant.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.x.v-p3.1"></span>[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p3.2"></span>,
and [Cant. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.x.v-p3.3"></span>, referred to above.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[CCVI:882](2050115.htm#fr_880) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p3.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p4"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_881"></span>[CCVI:883](2050115.htm#fr_881) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p5.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p5.2"></span>ποστάσει</span>

<span id="fn_882"></span>[CCVII:884](2050115.htm#fr_882) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p7"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[CCVII:885](2050115.htm#fr_883) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p8"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[CCVII:886](2050115.htm#fr_884) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p9"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[CCVII:887](2050115.htm#fr_885) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p10"></span> Or perhaps “or an irrational first
cause,” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p10.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p10.2"></span>λογον ἀρχήν</span>.)

<span id="fn_886"></span>[CCVII:888](2050115.htm#fr_886) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p12"></span> The reference is to S. Basil adv.
Eunomium II. 12 (p. 247 in Ben. ed.)

<span id="fn_887"></span>[CCVIII:889](2050115.htm#fr_887) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p13"></span> Cf. [Heb. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_888"></span>[CCVIII:890](2050115.htm#fr_888) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p14"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p14.2"></span>μᾶς</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p14.3"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p14.4"></span>μᾶς</span>. If the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p14.5"></span>ἡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p14.6"></span>μᾶς</span>, which
Oehler follows, is retained, the force would seem to be “that you think
we ought not to make any difference,” but the construction of the
sentence in this case is cumbrous.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[CCVIII:891](2050115.htm#fr_889) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p17"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_890"></span>[CCVIII:892](2050115.htm#fr_890) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p18"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_891"></span>[CCVIII:893](2050115.htm#fr_891) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p19"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_892"></span>[CCVIII:894](2050115.htm#fr_892) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p20"></span> Apparently an inexact quotation of S.
[Matt. xi. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.x.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[CCIX:895](2050115.htm#fr_893) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p21"></span> [Wisd. vii.
18](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#018)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[CCIX:896](2050115.htm#fr_894) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p22"></span> That is, he must also acknowledge a
“middle” and an “end” of the existence which has a “beginning.”

<span id="fn_895"></span>[CCIX:897](2050115.htm#fr_895) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p23"></span> Oehler’s emendation, for which he
gives weighty <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> authority, is certainly an
improvement on the earlier text, but in sense it is a little
unsatisfactory. The argument seems to require the hypothesis not of some
one acknowledging a person to be a man in *all,* but in *some*
attributes. The defect, however, may possibly be in S. Gregory’s
argument, not in the text.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[CCIX:898](2050115.htm#fr_896) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p24"></span> *i.e.*“if the ‘middle’ and ‘end’ are
not admitted, at the ‘beginning,’ which is the ‘beginning’ of a
*sequence,* is thereby implicitly denied.” Oehler’s punctuation has been
somewhat altered here, and at several points in the remainder of the
book, where it appears to require emendation.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[CCX:899](2050115.htm#fr_897) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p25"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p25.1"></span>κτηθὲν</span>, with the Paris ed. of 1638.
Oehler’s reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p25.2"></span>κτισθὲν</span> hardly seems to give so good
a sense, and he does not give his authority for it.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[CCX:900](2050115.htm#fr_898) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p25.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p26"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[CCX:901](2050115.htm#fr_899) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p27"></span> Reading with Oehler, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p27.1"></span>τοῖς κατὰ γνώμην
προσκλινομένη</span>. The reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p27.2"></span>προσκινουμένοις</span>, found in the
earlier editions, gives a tolerable sense, but appears to have no <span
class="c22"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p27.3"></span>ms.</span> authority.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[CCX:902](2050115.htm#fr_900) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p27.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p28"></span> Or (if <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p28.1"></span>πάντως</span> be constructed with <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p28.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p28.3"></span>ντικείμενον</span>),
“will end, as it seems, in that state which is absolutely opposed to
life.”

<span id="fn_901"></span>[CCX:903](2050115.htm#fr_901) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p30"></span> Cf. [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="fn_902"></span>[CCX:904](2050115.htm#fr_902) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p31"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="viii.i.x.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[CCX:905](2050115.htm#fr_903) <span
id="viii.i.x.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.v-p32"></span> *i.e.*the order of spiritual beings,
including angels and human souls. Of these S. Gregory argues that they
are capable of an <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p32.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.v-p32.2"></span>κινησία πρὸς τὸ ἀγαθόν</span> which is
death in them, as the absence of motion and sense is *bodily* death: and
that they may therefore be said to have an end, as they had a beginning:
so far as they *are* eternal it is not by their own power, but by their
mutable nature being upheld by grace from this state of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p32.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.v-p32.4"></span>κινησία πρὸς τὸ
ἀγαθόν</span>. On both these grounds therefore—that they *have* an end,
and that such eternity as they possess is not inherent, but given *ab
extra,* and contingent—he says they are not properly eternal, and he
therefore rejects the proposed parallel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX](2050116)
