[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050243)  [Next](2050245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>But</span> possibly one who has given his
attention to the course of the preceding remarks may inquire: “wherein
is the power of the Deity, wherein is the imperishableness of that
Divine power, to be traced in the processes you have described?” In
order, therefore, to make this also clear, let us take a survey of the
sequel of the Gospel mystery, where that Power conjoined with Love is
more especially exhibited. In the first place, then, that the
omnipotence of the Divine nature should have had strength to descend to
the humiliation of humanity, furnishes a clearer proof of that
omnipotence than even the greatness and supernatural character of the
miracles. For that something pre-eminently great should be wrought out
by Divine power is, in a manner, in accordance with, and consequent upon
the Divine nature; nor is it startling to hear it said that the whole of
the created world, and all that is understood to be beyond the range of
visible things, subsists by the power of God, His will giving it
existence according to His good pleasure. But this His descent to the
humility of man is a kind of superabundant exercise of power, which thus
finds no check even in directions which contravene nature. It is the
peculiar property of the essence of fire to tend upwards; no one
therefore, deems it wonderful in the case of flame to see that natural
operation. But should the flame be seen to stream downwards, like heavy
bodies, such a fact would be regarded as a miracle; namely, how fire
still remains fire, and yet, by this change of direction in its motion,
passes out of its nature by being borne downward. In like manner, it is
not the vastness of the heavens, and the bright shining of its
constellations, and the order of the universe and the unbroken
administration over all existence that so manifestly displays the
transcendent power of the Deity, as this condescension to the weakness
of our nature; the way, in fact, in which sublimity, existing in
lowliness, is actually seen in lowliness, and yet descends not from its
height, and in which Deity, entwined as it is with the nature of man,
becomes this, and yet still is that. For since, as has been said before,
it was not in the nature of the opposing power to come in contact with
the undiluted presence of God, and to undergo His unclouded
manifestation, therefore, in order to secure that the ransom in our
behalf might be easily accepted by him who required it, the Deity was
hidden under the veil of our nature, that so, as with ravenous
fish <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2001](#fn_1999) , the hook of the Deity
might be gulped down along with the bait of flesh, and thus, life being
introduced into the house of death, and light shining in darkness, that
which is diametrically opposed to light and life might vanish; for it is
not in the nature of darkness to remain when light is present, or of
death to exist when life is active. Let us, then, by way of summary take
up the train of the arguments for the Gospel mystery, and thus complete
our answer to those who question this Dispensation of God, and show them
on what ground it is that the Deity by a personal intervention works out
the salvation of man. It is certainly most necessary that in every point
the conceptions we entertain of the Deity should be such as befit the
subject, and not that, while one idea worthy of His sublimity should be
retained, another equally belonging to that estimate of Deity should be
dismissed from it; on the contrary, every exalted notion, every devout
thought, must most surely enter into our belief in God, and each must be
made dependent on each in a necessary sequence. Well, then; it has been
pointed out that His goodness, wisdom, justice, power, incapability of
decay, are all of them in evidence in the doctrine of the Dispensation
in which we are. His goodness is caught sight of in His election to save
lost man; His wisdom and justice have been displayed in the method of
our salvation; His power, in that, though born in the likeness and
fashion of a man, on the lowly level of our nature, and in accordance
with that likeness raising the expectation that he could be overmastered
by death, he, after such a birth, nevertheless produced the effects
peculiar and natural to Him. Now it is the peculiar effect of light to
make darkness vanish, and of life to destroy death. Since, then, we have
been led astray from the right path, and diverted from that life which
was ours at the beginning, and brought under the sway of death, what is
there improbable in the lesson we are taught by the Gospel mystery, if
it be this; that cleansing reaches those who are befouled with sin, and
life the dead, and guidance the wanderers, in order that defilement may
be cleansed, error corrected, and what was dead restored to life?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[494:2001](2050244.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="xi.ii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> *as with ravenous fish.* The same
simile is found in John of Damascus (*De Fid.* iii. 27), speaking of
Death. “Therefore Death will advance, and, gulping down the bait of the
Body, be transfixed with the hook of the Divinity: tasting that sinless
and life-giving Body, he is undone, and disgorges all whom he has ever
engulphed: for as darkness vanishes at the letting in of light, so
corruption is chased away by the onset of life, and while there is life
given to all else, there is corruption only for the Corrupter.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2050245)
