[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050021)  [Next](2050023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p1"></span> §6. *A notice of Aetius, Eunomius’
master in heresy, and of Eunomius himself, describing the origin and
avocations of each.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p2"></span>Verily this did great damage to our
declamation-writer, or rather to his patron and guide in life, Aetius;
whose enthusiasm indeed appears to me to have aimed not so much at the
propagation of error as to the securing a competence for life. I do not
say this as a mere surmise of my own, but I have heard it from the lips
of those who knew him well. I have listened to Athanasius, the former
bishop of the Galatians, when he was speaking of the life of Aetius;
Athanasius was a man who valued truth above all things; and he exhibited
also the letter of George of Laodicæa, so that a number might attest the
truth of his words. He told us that originally Aetius did not attempt to
teach his monstrous doctrines, but only after some interval of time put
forth these novelties as a trick to gain his livelihood; that having
escaped from serfdom in the vineyard to which he belonged,—how, I do not
wish to say, lest I should be thought to be entering on his history in a
bad spirit,—he became at first a tinker, and had this grimy trade of a
mechanic quite at his fingers’ end, sitting under a goat’s-hair tent,
with a small hammer, and a diminutive anvil, and so earned a precarious
and laborious livelihood. What income, indeed, of any account could be
made by one who mends the shaky places in coppers, and solders holes up,
and hammers sheets of tin to pieces, and clamps with lead the legs of
pots? We were told that a certain incident which befell him in this
trade necessitated the next change in his life. He had received from a
woman belonging to a regiment a gold ornament, a necklace or a bracelet,
which had been broken by a blow, and which he was to mend: but he
cheated the poor creature, by appropriating her gold trinket, and giving
her instead one of copper, of the same size, and also of the same
appearance, owing to a gold-wash which he had imparted to its surface;
she was deceived by this for a time, for he was clever enough in the
tinker’s, as in other, arts to mislead his customers with the tricks of
trade; but at last she detected the rascality, for the wash got rubbed
off the copper; and, as some of the soldiers of her family and nation
were roused to indignation, she prosecuted the purloiner of her
ornament. After this attempt he of course underwent a cheating thief’s
punishment; and then left the trade, swearing that it was not his
deliberate intention, but that business tempted him to commit this
theft. After this he became assistant to a certain doctor from amongst
the quacks, so as not to be quite destitute of a livelihood; and in this
capacity he made his attack upon the obscurer households and on the most
abject of mankind. Wealth came gradually from his plots against a
certain Armenius, who being a foreigner was easily cheated, and, having
been induced to make him his physician, had advanced him frequent sums
of money; and he began to think that serving under others was beneath
him, and wanted to be styled a physician himself. Henceforth, therefore,
he attended medical congresses, and consorting with the wrangling
controversialists there became one of the ranters, and, just as the
scales were turning, always adding his own weight to the argument, he
got to be in no small request with those who would buy a brazen voice
for their party contests.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p3"></span>But although his bread became thereby
well buttered he thought he ought not to remain in such a profession; so
he gradually gave up the medical, after the tinkering. Arius, the enemy
of God, had already sown those wicked tares which bore the Anomæans as
their fruit, and the schools of medicine resounded then with the
disputes about that question. Accordingly Aetius studied the
controversy, and, having laid a train of syllogisms from what he
remembered of Aristotle, he became notorious for even going beyond
Arius, the father of the heresy, in the novel character of his
speculations; or rather he perceived the consequences of all that Arius
had advanced, and so got this character of a shrewd discoverer of truths
not obvious; revealing as he did that the Created, <span id="page_XL">p.
XL</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.vi-Page_XL"></span>even from things
non-existent, was *unlike* the Creator who drew Him out of nothing.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p4"></span>With such propositions he tickled
ears that itched for these novelties; and the Ethiopian Theophilus <span
id="fr_71"></span>[73](#fn_71) becomes acquainted with them. Aetius had
already been connected with this man on some business of Gallus; and now
by his help creeps into the palace. After Gallus <span
id="fr_72"></span>[74](#fn_72) had perpetrated the tragedy with regard
to Domitian the procurator and Montius, all the other participators in
it naturally shared his ruin; yet this man escapes, being acquitted from
being punished along with them. After this, when the great Athanasius
had been driven by Imperial command from the Church of Alexandria, and
George the Tarbasthenite was tearing his flock, another change takes
place, and Aetius is an Alexandrian, receiving his full share amongst
those who fattened at the Cappadocian’s board; for he had not omitted to
practice his flatteries on George. George was in fact from Chanaan
himself, and therefore felt kindly towards a countryman: indeed he had
been for long so possessed with his perverted opinions as actually to
dote upon him, and was prone to become a godsend for Aetius, whenever he
liked.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p7"></span>All this did not escape the notice of
his sincere admirer, our Eunomius. This latter perceived that his
natural father—an excellent man, except that he had such a son—led a
very honest and respectable life certainly, but one of laborious penury
and full of countless toils. (He was one of those farmers who are always
bent over the plough, and spend a world of trouble over their little
farm; and in the winter, when he was secured from agricultural work, he
used to carve out neatly the letters of the alphabet for boys to form
syllables with, winning his bread with the money these sold for.) Seeing
all this in his father’s life, he said goodbye to the plough and the
mattock and all the paternal instruments, intending never to drudge
himself like that; then he sets himself to learn Prunicus’ skill <span
id="fr_73"></span>[75](#fn_73) of short-hand writing, and having
perfected himself in that he entered at first, I believe, the house of
one of his own family, receiving his board for his services in writing;
then, while tutoring the boys of his host, he rises to the ambition of
becoming an orator. I pass over the next interval, both as to his life
in his native country and as to the things and the company in which he
was discovered at Constantinople.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p10"></span>Busied as he was after this ‘about
the cloke and the purse,’ he saw it was all of little avail, and that
nothing which he could amass by such work was adequate to the demands of
his ambition. Accordingly he threw up all other practices, and devoted
himself solely to the admiration of Aetius; not, perhaps, without some
calculation that this absorbing pursuit which he selected might further
his own devices for living. In fact, from the moment he asked for a
share in a wisdom so profound, he toiled not thenceforward, neither did
he spin; for he is certainly clever in what he takes in hand, and knows
how to gain the more emotional portion of mankind. Seeing that human
nature, as a rule, falls an easy prey to pleasure, and that its natural
inclination in the direction of this weakness is very strong, descending
from the sterner heights of conduct to the smooth level of comfort, he
becomes with a view of making the largest number possible of proselytes
to his pernicious opinions very pleasant indeed to those whom he is
initiating; he gets rid of the toilsome steep of virtue altogether,
because it is not a persuasive to accept his secrets. But should any one
have the leisure to inquire what this secret teaching of theirs is, and
what those who have been duped to accept this blighting curse utter
without any reserve, and what in the mysterious ritual of initiation
they are taught by the reverend hierophant, the manner of baptisms <span
id="fr_74"></span>[76](#fn_74) , and the ‘helps of nature,’ and all
that, let him question those who feel no compunction in letting
indecencies pass their lips; we shall keep silent. For not even though
we are the accusers should we be guiltless in mentioning such things,
and we have been taught to reverence purity in word as well as deed, and
not to soil our pages with equivocal stories, even though there be truth
in what we say.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p13"></span>But we mention what we then heard
(namely that, just as Aristotle’s evil skill supplied <span
id="page_XLI">p. XLI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-Page_XLI"></span>Aetius with his impiety, so the
simplicity of his dupes secured a fat living for the well-trained pupil
as well as for the master) for the purpose of asking some questions.
What after all was the great damage done him by Basil on the Euxine, or
by Eustathius in Armenia, to both of whom that long digression in his
story harks back? How did they mar the aim of his life? Did they not
rather feed up his and his companion’s freshly acquired fame? Whence
came their wide notoriety, if not through the instrumentality of these
men, supposing, that is, that their accuser is speaking the truth? For
the fact that men, themselves illustrious, as our writer owns, deigned
to fight with those who had as yet found no means of being known
naturally gave the actual start to the ambitious thoughts of those who
were to be pitted against these reputed heroes; and a veil was thereby
thrown over their humble antecedents. They in fact owed their subsequent
notoriety to this,—a thing detestable indeed to a reflecting mind which
would never choose to rest fame upon an evil deed, but the acme of bliss
to characters such as these. They tell of one in the province of Asia,
amongst the obscurest and the basest, who longed to make a name in
Ephesus; some great and brilliant achievement being quite beyond his
powers never even entered his mind; and yet, by hitting upon that which
would most deeply injure the Ephesians, he made his mark deeper than the
heroes of the grandest actions; for there was amongst their public
buildings one noticeable for its peculiar magnificence and costliness;
and he burnt this vast structure to the ground, showing, when men came
to inquire after the perpetration of this villany into its mental
causes, that he dearly prized notoriety, and had devised that the
greatness of the disaster should secure the name of its author being
recorded with it. The secret motive <span id="fr_75"></span>[77](#fn_75)
of these two men is the same thirst for publicity; the only difference
is that the amount of mischief is greater in their case. They are
marring, not lifeless architecture, but the living building of the
Church, introducing, for fire, the slow canker of their teaching. But I
will defer the doctrinal question till the proper time comes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[XL:73](2050022.htm#fr_71) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p5"></span> Probably the ‘Indian’ Theophilus,
who afterwards helped to organize the Anomœan schism in the reign of
Jovian.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[XL:74](2050022.htm#fr_72) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p6"></span> Gallus, Cæsar 350–354, brother of
Julian, not a little influenced by Aetius, executed by Constantius at
Flanon in Dalmatia. During his short reign at Antioch, Domitian, who was
sent to bring him to Italy, and his quæstor Montius were dragged to
death through the streets by the guards of the young Cæsar.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[XL:75](2050022.htm#fr_73) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p8"></span> The same phrase occurs again:
Refutation of Eunomius’ Second Essay, p. 844: <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>οἱ τῇ προυνίκου σοφί& 139·
ἐγγυμνασθέντες· ἐξ ἐκείνης γὰρ δοκεῖ μοι τῆς παρασκευῆς τὰ εἰρημένα
προενηνοχέναι·</span> In the last word there is evidently a pun on <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p8.2"></span>προυνίκου</span>;
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p8.3"></span>προφερὴς</span>, in the secondary sense
of ‘precocious,’ is used by Iamblichus and Porphyry, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p8.4"></span>προύνικος</span>
appears to have had the same meaning. We might venture, therefore, to
translate ‘that knowing trick’ of short-hand: but why Prunicus is
personified, if it *is* personified, as in the Gnostic Prunicos Sophia,
does not appear. See Epiphanius *Hæres*. 253 for the feminine Proper
name.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p9"></span>The other possible explanation is
that given in the margin of the Paris Edition, and is based on Suidas,
i.e. Prunici sunt cursores celeres; hic pro *celer scriba.* Hesychius
also says of the word; <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>οἱ μισθοῦ κομίζοντες τὰ ὤνια ἀπὸ τῆς
ἀγορᾶς, οὕς τινες παιδαριωνας καλοῦσιν, δρομεῖς, τραχεῖς, ὀξεῖς,
εὐκίνητοι, γοργοί, μισθωτοί</span>. Here such ‘porter’s’ skill, easy
going and superficial, is opposed to the more laborious task of tilling
the soil.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[XL:76](2050022.htm#fr_74) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p11"></span> For the baptisms of Eunomius,
compare Epiphanius *Hær*. 765. Even Arians who were not Anomœans he
rebaptized. The ‘helps of nature’ may possibly refer to the ‘miracles’
which Philostorgius ascribes both to Aetius and Eunomius.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p12"></span>Sozomen (vi. 26) says, “Eunomius
introduced, *it is said,* a mode of discipline contrary to that of the
Church, and endeavoured to disguise the innovation under the cloak of a
grave and severe deportment.”…His followers “do not applaud a virtuous
course of life…so much as skill in disputation and the power of
triumphing in debates.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[XLI:77](2050022.htm#fr_75) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vi-p14.2"></span>πόθεσις</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eunomius himself proves that the confession of faith which He
made was not impeached.](2050023)
