[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050167)  [Next](2050169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>If</span> any one supposes that <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1459](#fn_1457.md) this want of mutual harmony between
his life and a single one of its circumstances is quite unimportant, let
him be taught the meaning of our maxim by looking at the management of a
house. The master of a private dwelling will not allow any untidiness or
unseemliness to be seen in the house, such as a couch upset, or the
table littered with rubbish, or vessels of price thrown away into dirty
corners, while those which serve ignobler uses are thrust forward for
entering guests to see. He has everything arranged neatly and in the
proper place, where it stands to most advantage; and then he can welcome
his guests, without any misgivings that he need be ashamed of opening
the interior of his house to receive them. The same duty, I take it, is
incumbent on that master of our “tabernacle,” the mind; it has to
arrange everything within us, and to put each particular faculty of the
soul, which the Creator has fashioned to be our implement or our vessel,
to fitting and noble uses. We will now mention in detail the way in
which any one might manage his life, with its present advantages, to his
improvement, hoping that no one will accuse us of trifling <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1460](#fn_1458.md) , or over-minuteness. We advise,
then, that love’s passion be placed in the soul’s purest shrine, as a
thing chosen to be the first fruits of all our gifts, and devoted <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1461](#fn_1459.md) entirely to God; and when once this
has been done, to keep it untouched and unsullied by any secular
defilement. Then indignation, and anger, and hatred must be as
watch-dogs to be roused only against attacking sins; they must follow
their natural impulse only against the thief and the enemy who is
creeping in to plunder the divine treasure-chamber, and who comes only
for that, that he may steal, and mangle, and destroy. Courage and
confidence are to be weapons in our hands to baffle any sudden surprise
and attack of the wicked who advance. Hope and patience are to be the
staffs to lean upon, whenever we are weary with the trials of the world.
As for sorrow, we must have a stock of it ready to apply, if need should
happen to arise for it, in the hour of repentance for our sins;
believing at the same time that it is never useful, except to minister
to that. Righteousness will be our rule of straightforwardness, guarding
us from stumbling either in word or deed, and guiding us in the disposal
of the faculties of our soul, as well as in the due consideration for
every one we meet. The love of gain, which is a large, incalculably
large, element in every soul, when once applied to the desire for God,
will bless the man who has it; for he will be violent <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1462](#fn_1460.md) where it is right to be violent.
Wisdom and prudence will be our advisers as to our best interests; they
will order our lives so as never to suffer from any thoughtless folly.
But suppose a man does not apply the aforesaid faculties of the soul to
their proper use, but reverses their intended purpose; suppose he wastes
his love upon the basest objects, and stores up his hatred only for his
own kinsmen; suppose he welcomes iniquity, plays the man only against
his parents, is bold only in absurdities, fixes his hopes on emptiness,
chases prudence and wisdom from his company, takes gluttony and folly
for his mistresses, and uses all his other opportunities in the same
fashion, he would indeed be a strange and unnatural character to a
degree beyond any one’s power to express. If we could imagine any one
putting his armour on all the wrong way, reversing the helmet so as to
cover his face while the plume nodded backward, putting his feet into
the cuirass, and fitting the greaves on to his <span id="page_364">p.
364</span> <span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-Page_364"></span>breast, changing to
the right side all that ought to go on the left and *vice versa,* and
how such a hoplite would be likely to fare in battle, then we should
have an idea of the fate in life which is sure to await him whose
confused judgment makes him reverse the proper uses of his soul’s
faculties. We must therefore provide this balance in all feeling; the
true sobriety of mind is naturally able to supply it; and if one had to
find an exact definition of this sobriety, one might declare absolutely,
that it amounts to our ordered control, by dint of wisdom and prudence,
over every emotion of the soul. Moreover, such a condition in the soul
will be no longer in need of any laborious method to attain to the high
and heavenly realities; it will accomplish with the greatest ease that
which erewhile seemed so unattainable; it will grasp the object of its
search as a natural consequence of rejecting the opposite attractions. A
man who comes out of darkness is necessarily in the light; a man who is
not dead is necessarily alive. Indeed, if a man is not to have received
his soul to no purpose <span id="fr_1461"></span>[1463](#fn_1461.md) , he
will certainly be upon the path of truth; the prudence and the science
employed to guard against error will be itself a sure guidance along the
right road. Slaves who have been freed and cease to serve their former
masters, the very moment they become their own masters, direct all their
thoughts towards themselves so, I take it, the soul which has been freed
from ministering to the body becomes at once cognizant of its own
inherent energy. But this liberty consists, as we learn from the
Apostle <span id="fr_1462"></span>[1464](#fn_1462.md) , in not again being
held in the yoke of slavery, and in not being bound again, like a
runaway or a criminal, with the fetters of marriage. But I must return
here to what I said at first; that the perfection of this liberty does
not consist only in that one point of abstaining from marriage. Let no
one suppose that the prize of virginity is so insignificant and so
easily won as that; as if one little observance of the flesh could
settle so vital a matter. But we have seen that every man who doeth a
sin is the servant of sin <span id="fr_1463"></span>[1465](#fn_1463.md) ;
so that a declension towards vice in any act, or in any practice
whatever, makes a slave, and still more, a branded slave, of the man,
covering him through sin’s lashes with bruises and seared spots.
Therefore it behoves the man who grasps at the transcendent aim of all
virginity to be true to himself in every respect, and to manifest his
purity equally in every relation of his life. If any of the inspired
words are required to aid our pleading, the Truth <span
id="fr_1464"></span>[1466](#fn_1464.md) Itself will be sufficient to
corroborate the truth when It inculcates this very kind of teaching in
the veiled meaning of a Gospel Parable: the good and eatable fish are
separated by the fishers’ skill from the bad and poisonous fish, so that
the enjoyment of the good should not be spoilt by any of the bad getting
into the “vessels” with them. The work of true sobriety is the same;
from all pursuits and habits to choose that which is pure and improving,
rejecting in every case that which does not seem likely to be useful,
and letting it go back into the universal and secular life, called “the
sea <span id="fr_1465"></span>[1467](#fn_1465.md) ,” in the imagery of the
Parable. The Psalmist <span id="fr_1466"></span>[1468](#fn_1466.md) also,
when expounding the doctrine of a full confession <span
id="fr_1467"></span>[1469](#fn_1467.md) , calls this restless suffering
tumultuous life, “waters coming in even unto the soul,” “depths of
waters,” and a “hurricane”; in which sea indeed every rebellious thought
sinks, as the Egyptian did, with a stone’s weight into the deeps <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[1470](#fn_1468.md) . But all in us that is dear to
God, and has a piercing insight into the truth (called “Israel” in the
narrative), passes, but that alone, over that sea as if it were dry
land, and is never reached by the bitterness and the brine of life’s
billows. Thus, typically, under the leadership of the Law (for Moses was
a type of the Law that was coming) Israel passes unwetted over that sea,
while the Egyptian who crosses in her track is overwhelmed. Each fares
according to the disposition which he carries with him; one walks
lightly enough, the other is dragged into the deep water. For virtue is
a light and buoyant thing, and all who live in her way “fly like
clouds <span id="fr_1469"></span>[1471](#fn_1469.md) ,” as Isaiah says,
“and as doves with their young ones”; but sin is a heavy affair,
“sitting,” as another of the prophets says, “upon a talent of lead <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[1472](#fn_1470.md) .” If, however, this reading of the
history appears to any forced and inapplicable, and the miracle at the
Red Sea does not present itself to him as written for our profit, let
him listen to the Apostle: “Now all these things happened unto them for
types, and they are written for our admonition <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1473](#fn_1471.md) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[363:1459](2050168.htm#fr_1457.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p3.1"></span>τὸ μὴ συνηρμόσθαι τινὶ διὰ τῶν καταλλήλων
τὸν βίον</span>

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[363:1460](2050168.htm#fr_1458.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p4.2"></span>δολεσχίαν τοῦ λόγου τις
καταγινώσκοι</span>

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[363:1461](2050168.htm#fr_1459.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5.1"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5.2"></span>σπερ τι ἀνάθημα</span>; so Gregory calls
the tongue of S. Meletius the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5.4"></span>νάθημα</span> of Truth.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[363:1462](2050168.htm#fr_1460.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p5.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p6"></span> Gregory seems to allude to S. [Matt.
xi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[364:1463](2050168.htm#fr_1461.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p7.2"></span>πὶ ματαί& 251· λάβοι</span>. Gregory
evidently alludes to [Ps. xxiv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p7.3"></span>, and agrees with the Vulgate “in vano
acceperit.”

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[364:1464](2050168.htm#fr_1462.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p8"></span> [Gal. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[364:1465](2050168.htm#fr_1463.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p9"></span> S. [John viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[364:1466](2050168.htm#fr_1464.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p10"></span> S. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[364:1467](2050168.htm#fr_1465.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p11"></span> S. [Matt.
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047.md),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#048.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[364:1468](2050168.htm#fr_1466.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p12"></span> [Ps. lxix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[364:1469](2050168.htm#fr_1467.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p13.1"></span>διδασκαλίαν ἐξομολογήσεως
ὑφηγούμενος</span>

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[364:1470](2050168.htm#fr_1468.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p14"></span> [Exod. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[364:1471](2050168.htm#fr_1469.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p15"></span> [Is. lx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p15.1"></span>. The LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p15.2"></span>περιστερὰν σὺν νεοσσοῖς</span>.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[364:1472](2050168.htm#fr_1470.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p16"></span> [Zech. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#007.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p16.1"></span>. “this is a woman that sitteth in the
midst of the ephah:” <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p16.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p16.3"></span>πὶ μέσον τοῦ μέτρου</span> (LXX.). Origen
and Jerome as well as Gregory make her sit upon the lead itself.
Vatablus explains that the lead was in an amphora.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[364:1473](2050168.htm#fr_1471.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p17"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p17.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p17.2"></span>; [Rom. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xix-p17.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](2050169.md)
