[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050268)  [Next](2050270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>Letter III</span>.—*To Ablabius* <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2175](#fn_2173) .

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord, as was meet and right, brought
us safe through, accompanied as we had been by your prayers, and I will
tell you a manifest token of His loving kindness. For when the sun was
just over the spot which we left behind Earsus <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2176](#fn_2174) , suddenly the clouds gathered
thick, and there was a change from clear sky to deep gloom. Then a
chilly breeze blowing through the clouds, bringing a drizzling with it,
and striking upon us with a very damp feeling, threatened such rain as
had never yet been known, and on the left there were continuous claps of
thunder, and keen flashes of lightning alternated with the thunder,
following one crash and preceding the next, and all the mountains
before, behind, and on each side were shrouded in clouds. And already a
heavy <span id="fr_2175"></span>[2177](#fn_2175) cloud hung over our
heads, caught by a strong wind and big with rain, and yet we, like the
Israelites of old in their miraculous passage of the Red Sea, though
surrounded on all sides by rain, arrived unwetted at Vestena. And when
we had already found shelter there, and our mules had got a rest, then
the signal for the down-pour was given by God to the air. And when we
had spent some three or four hours there, and had rested enough, again
God stayed the down-fall, and our conveyance moved along more briskly
than before, as the wheel easily slid through the mud just moist and on
the surface. Now the road from that point to our little town is all
along the river side, going down stream with the water, and there is a
continuous string of villages along the banks, all close upon the road,
and with very short distances between them. In consequence of this
unbroken line of habitations all the road was full of people, some
coming to meet us, and others escorting us, mingling tears in abundance
with their joy. Now there was a little drizzle, not unpleasant, just
enough to moisten the air; but a little way before we <span
id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span id="xiii.iv-Page_530"></span>got home
the cloud that overhung us was condensed into a more violent shower, so
that our entrance was quite quiet, as no one was aware beforehand of our
coming. But just as we got inside our portico, as the sound of our
carriage wheels along the dry hard ground was heard, the people turned
up in shoals, as though by some mechanical contrivance, I know not
whence nor how, flocking round us so closely that it was not easy to get
down from our conveyance, for there was not a foot of clear space. But
after we had persuaded them with difficulty to allow us to get down, and
to let our mules pass, we were crushed on every side by folks crowding
round, insomuch that their excessive kindness all but made us faint. And
when we were near the inside of the portico, we see a stream of fire
flowing into the church; for the choir of virgins, carrying their wax
torches in their hands, were just marching in file along the entrance of
the church, kindling the whole into splendour with their blaze. And when
I was within and had rejoiced and wept with my people—for I experienced
both emotions from witnessing both in the multitude,—as soon as I had
finished the prayers, I wrote off this letter to your Holiness as fast
as possible, under the pressure of extreme thirst, so that I might when
it was done attend to my bodily wants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[529:2175](2050269.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="xiii.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span> This Letter must have been written, either
(1) After the first journey of Gregory to Constantinople, *i.e.* after
the Council, 381; or (2) On his return from exile at the death of
Valens, 378. The words at the end, “rejoiced and wept with my people,”
are against the first view.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[529:2176](2050269.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="xiii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p4.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p4.2"></span>Εαρσοῦ</span>. The distance prevents us
conjecturing “Tarsus” here, though, Gregory was probably coming from the
sea (and the Holy Land). But “Garsaura” is marked on the maps as about
40 miles south of Nyssa with the “Morimene” mountains (Erjash Dagh)
intervening. (Nyssa lay on a southern tributary of the Halys, N.W. of
Nazianzum.) The Medicean <span class="c22"><span
id="xiii.iv-p4.3"></span>ms.</span> is said by Migue to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p4.4"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p4.5"></span>αυτῶν</span> here—“we left
behind us.” Nothing is known of Vestena below.

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[529:2177](2050269.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="xiii.iv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span> Adopting the conjecture of the Latin
translator <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p5.1"></span>βαρεῖα</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p5.2"></span>βραχεῖα</span>. His translation, however,
though ingenious, would require something different in the Greek. It
runs “jamque nubes, quæ nostro impendebat capiti, postquam acri
vehementique vento abrepta alio delata fuit, hiemem peperit.” As the
text stands <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p5.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p5.4"></span>ποληφθεῖσα</span> cannot bear this translation
(H. C. O.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Cynegius.](2050270)
