[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050107)  [Next](2050109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He says that all things that are
in creation have been named by man, if, as is the case, they are called
differently by every nation, as also the appellation of “Ungenerate” is
conferred by us: but that the proper appellation of the Divine essence
itself which expresses the Divine Nature, either does not exist at all,
or is unknown to us.*

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p2"></span>But Peter and Paul, he says, were
named by men, and hence it comes that it is possible in their case to
change the appellations. Why, what existing thing has *not* been named
by men? I call you to testify on behalf of my argument. For if you make
change of names a sign of things having been named by men, you will
thereby surely allow that every name has been imposed upon things by us,
since the same appellations of objects have not obtained universally.
For as in the case of Paul who was once Saul, and of Peter who was
formerly Simon, so earth and sky and air and sea and all the parts of
the creation have not been named alike by all, but are named in one way
by the Hebrews, and in another way by us, and are denoted by every
nation by different names. If then Eunomius’ argument is valid when he
maintains that it was for this reason, to wit, that their names had been
imposed by men, that Peter and Paul were named afresh, our teaching will
surely be valid also, starting as it does from like premises, which says
that all things are named by us, on the ground that their appellations
vary according to the distinctions of nations. Now if all things are so,
surely the Generate and the Ungenerate are not exceptions, for even they
are among the things that change their name. For when we gather, as it
were, into the form of a name the conception of any subject that arises
in us, we declare our concept by words that vary at different times, not
*making,* but *signifying,* the thing by the name we give it. For the
things remain in themselves as they naturally are, while the mind,
touching on existing things, reveals its thought by such words as are
available. And just as the essence of Peter was not changed with the
change of his name, so neither is any other of the things we contemplate
changed in the process of mutation of names. And for this reason we say
that the term “Ungenerate” was applied by us to the true and first
Father Who is the Cause of all, and that no harm would result as regards
the signifying of the Subject, if we were to acknowledge the same
concept under another name. For it is <span id="page_CXCVIII">p.
CXCVIII</span> <span id="viii.i.ix.iv-Page_CXCVIII"></span>allowable
instead of speaking of Him as “Ungenerate,” to call Him the “First
Cause” or “Father of the Only-begotten,” or to speak of Him as “existing
without cause,” and many such appellations which lead to the same
thought; so that Eunomius confirms our doctrines by the very arguments
in which he makes complaint against us, because we know no name
significant of the Divine Nature. We are taught the fact of Its
existence, while we assert that an appellation of such force as to
include the unspeakable and infinite Nature, either does not exist at
all, or at any rate is unknown to us. Let him then leave his accustomed
language of fable, and show us the names which signify the essences, and
then proceed further to divide the subject by the divergence of their
names. But so long as the saying of the Scripture is true that Abraham
and Moses were not capable of the knowledge of the Name, and that “no
man hath seen God at any time <span id="fr_837"></span>[839](#fn_837) ,”
and that “no man hath seen Him, nor can see <span
id="fr_838"></span>[840](#fn_838) ,” and that the light around Him is
unapproachable <span id="fr_839"></span>[841](#fn_839) , and “there is
no end of His greatness <span id="fr_840"></span>[842](#fn_840) ”;—so
long as we say and believe these things, how like is an argument that
promises any comprehension and expression of the infinite Nature, by
means of the significance of names, to one who thinks that he can
enclose the whole sea in his own hand! for as the hollow of one’s hand
is to the whole deep, so is all the power of language in comparison with
that Nature which is unspeakable and incomprehensible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_837"></span>[CXCVIII:839](2050108.htm#fr_837) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p3"></span> S. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_838"></span>[CXCVIII:840](2050108.htm#fr_838) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p4"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[CXCVIII:841](2050108.htm#fr_839) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p5"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[CXCVIII:842](2050108.htm#fr_840) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p6"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.ix.iv-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After much discourse concerning the actually existent, and
ungenerate and good, and upon the consubstantiality of the heavenly
powers, showing the uncharted character of their essence, yet the
difference of their ranks, he ends the book.](2050109)
