[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050067)  [Next](2050069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p1"></span> §9. *Gregory again discusses the
generation of the Only-Begotten, and other different modes of
generation, material and immaterial, and nobly demonstrates that the Son
is the brightness of the Divine glory, and not a creature.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p2"></span>And now let us return once more to the
precise statement of Eunomius. “We believe also in the Son of God, the
only begotten God, the first-born of all creation, very Son, not
Ungenerate, verily begotten before the worlds.” <span id="page_CXIV">p.
CXIV</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.ix-Page_CXIV"></span>That he transfers,
then, the sense of *generation* to indicate *creation* is plain from his
expressly calling Him created, when he speaks of Him as “coming into
being” and “not uncreate”. But that the inconsiderate rashness and want
of training which shows itself in the doctrines may be made manifest,
let us omit all expressions of indignation at his evident blasphemy, and
employ in the discussion of this matter a scientific division. For it
would be well, I think, to consider in a somewhat careful investigation
the exact meaning of the term “generation.” That this expression conveys
the meaning of existing as the result of some cause is plain to all, and
I suppose there is no need to contend about this point: but since there
are different modes of existing as the result of a cause, this
difference is what I think ought to receive thorough explanation in our
discussion by means of scientific division. Of things which have come
into being as the results of some cause we recognize the following
differences. Some are the result of material and art, as the fabrics of
houses and all other works produced by means of their respective
material, where some art gives direction and conducts its purpose to its
proper aim. Others are the result of material and nature; for nature
orders <span id="fr_348"></span>[350](#fn_348) the generation of animals
one from another, effecting her own work by means of the material
subsistence in the bodies of the parents; others again are by material
efflux. In these the original remains as it was before, and that which
flows from it is contemplated by itself, as in the case of the sun and
its beam, or the lamp and its radiance, or of scents and ointments, and
the quality given off from them. For these, while remaining undiminished
in themselves, have each accompanying them the special and peculiar
effect which they naturally produce, as the sun his ray, the lamp its
brightness, and perfumes the fragrance which they engender in the air.
There is also another kind of generation besides these, where the cause
is immaterial and incorporeal, but the generation is sensible and takes
place through the instrumentality of the body; I mean the generation of
the word by the mind. For the mind being in itself incorporeal begets
the word by means of sensible instruments. So many are the differences
of the term generation, which we discover in a philosophic view of them,
that is itself, so to speak, the result of generation.

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p4"></span>And now that we have thus
distinguished the various modes of generation, it will be time to remark
how the benevolent dispensation of the Holy Spirit, in delivering to us
the Divine mysteries, imparts that instruction which transcends reason
by such methods as we can receive. For the inspired teaching adopts, in
order to set forth the unspeakable power of God, all the forms of
generation that human intelligence recognizes, yet without including the
corporeal senses attaching to the words. For when it speaks of the
creative power, it gives to such an energy the name of generation,
because its expression must stoop to our low capacity; it does not,
however, convey thereby all that we include in creative generation, as
time, place, the furnishing of matter, the fitness of instruments, the
design in the things that come into being, but it leaves these, and
asserts of God in lofty and magnificent language the creation of all
existent things, when it says, “He spake the word and they were
made <span id="fr_349"></span>[351](#fn_349) , He commanded and they
were created.” Again when it interprets to us the unspeakable and
transcendent existence of the Only-begotten from the Father, as the
poverty of human intellect is incapable of receiving doctrines which
surpass all power of speech and thought, there too it borrows our
language and terms Him “Son,”—a name which our usage assigns to those
who are born of matter and nature. But just as Scripture, when speaking
of generation by creation, does not in the case of God imply that such
generation took place by means of any material, affirming that the power
of God’s will served for material substance, place, time and all such
circumstances, even so here too, when using the term Son, it rejects
both all else that human nature remarks in generation here below,—I mean
affections and dispositions and the co-operation of time, and the
necessity of place,—and, above all, matter, without all which natural
generation here below does not take place. But when all such material,
temporal and local <span id="fr_350"></span>[352](#fn_350) existence is
excluded from the sense of the term “Son,” community of nature alone is
left, and for this reason by the title “Son” is declared, concerning the
Only-begotten, the close affinity and genuineness of relationship which
mark His manifestation from the Father. And since such a kind of
generation was not sufficient to implant in us an adequate notion of the
ineffable mode of subsistence of the Only-begotten, Scripture avails
itself also of the third kind of generation to indicate the doctrine of
the Son’s Divinity,—that kind, namely, which is the result of material
efflux, and speaks of Him as the “brightness of glory <span
id="fr_351"></span>[353](#fn_351) ,” the “savour of ointment <span
id="fr_352"></span>[354](#fn_352) ,” the “breath <span id="page_CXV">p.
CXV</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.ix-Page_CXV"></span>of God <span
id="fr_353"></span>[355](#fn_353) ;” illustrations which in the
scientific phraseology we have adopted we ordinarily designate as
material efflux.

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p10"></span>But as in the cases alleged neither
the birth of the creation nor the force of the term “Son” admits time,
matter, place, or affection, so here too the Scripture employing only
the illustration of effulgence and the others that I have mentioned,
apart from all material conception, with regard to the Divine fitness of
such a mode of generation, shows that we must understand by the
significance of this expression, an existence at once derived from and
subsisting with the Father. For neither is the figure of breath intended
to convey to us the notion of dispersion into the air from the material
from which it is formed, nor is the figure of fragrance designed to
express the passing off of the quality of the ointment into the air, nor
the figure of effulgence the efflux which takes place by means of the
rays from the body of the sun: but as has been said in all cases, by
such a mode of generation is indicated this alone, that the Son is of
the Father and is conceived of along with Him, no interval intervening
between the Father and Him Who is of the Father. For since of His
exceeding loving-kindness the grace of the Holy Spirit so ordered that
the divine conceptions concerning the Only-begotten should reach us from
many quarters, and so be implanted in us, He added also the remaining
kind of generation,—that, namely, of the word from the mind. And here
the sublime John uses remarkable foresight. That the reader might not
through inattention and unworthy conceptions sink to the common notion
of “word,” so as to deem the Son to be merely a voice of the Father, he
therefore affirms of the Word that He essentially subsisted in the first
and blessed nature Itself, thus proclaiming aloud, “In the Beginning was
the Word, and with God, and God, and Light, and Life <span
id="fr_354"></span>[356](#fn_354) ,” and all that the Beginning is, the
Word was also.

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p12"></span>Since, then, these kinds of
generation, those, I mean, which arise as the result of some cause, and
are recognized in our every-day experience, are also employed by Holy
Scripture to convey its teaching concerning transcendent mysteries in
such wise as each of them may reasonably be transferred to the
expression of divine conceptions, we may now proceed to examine
Eunomius’ statement also, to find in what sense he accepts the meaning
of “generation.” “Very Son,” he says, “not ungenerate, verily begotten
before the worlds.” One may, I think, pass quickly over the violence
done to logical sequence in his distinction, as being easily
recognizable by all. For who does not know that while the proper
opposition is between Father and Son, between generate and ungenerate,
he thus passes over the term “Father” and sets “ungenerate” in
opposition to “Son,” whereas he ought, if he had any concern for truth,
to have avoided diverting his phrase from the due sequence of
relationship, and to have said, “Very Son, not Father”? And in this way
due regard would have been paid at once to piety and to logical
consistency, as the nature would not have been rent asunder in making
the distinction between the persons. But he has exchanged in his
statement of his faith the true and scriptural use of the term “Father,”
committed to us by the Word Himself, and speaks of the “Ungenerate”
instead of the “Father,” in order that by separating Him from that close
relationship towards the Son which is naturally conceived of in the
title of Father, he may place Him on a common level with all created
objects, which equally stand in opposition to the “ungenerate <span
id="fr_355"></span>[357](#fn_355) .” “Verily begotten,” he says, “before
the worlds.” Let him say of Whom He is begotten. He will answer, of
course, “Of the Father,” unless he is prepared unblushingly to
contradict the truth. But since it is impossible to detach the eternity
of the Son from the eternal Father, seeing that the term “Father” by its
very signification implies the Son, for this reason it is that he
rejects the title Father and shifts his phrase to “ungenerate,” since
the meaning of this latter name has no sort of relation or connection
with the Son, and by thus misleading his readers through the
substitution of one term for the other, into not contemplating the Son
along with the Father, he opens up a path for his sophistry, paving the
way of impiety by slipping in the term “ungenerate.” For they who
according to the ordinance of the Lord believe in the Father, when they
hear the name of the Father, receive the Son along with Him in their
thought, as the mind passes from the Son to the Father, without treading
on an unsubstantial vacuum interposed between them. But those who are
diverted to the title “ungenerate” instead of Father, get a bare notion
of this name, learning only the fact that He did not at any time come
into being, not that He is Father. Still, even with this mode of
conception, the faith of those who read with discernment remains free
from confusion. For the expression “not to come into being” is used in
an identical sense of all uncreated nature: and Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are equally uncreated. For it has ever been believed by <span
id="page_CXVI">p. CXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-Page_CXVI"></span>those who follow the Divine word that
all the creation, sensible and supramundane, derives its existence from
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. He who has heard that “by the
word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of His mouth <span id="fr_356"></span>[358](#fn_356) ,” neither
understands by “word” mere utterance, nor by “breath” mere exhalation,
but by what is there said frames the conception of God the Word and of
the Spirit of God. Now to create and to be created are not equivalent,
but all existent things being divided into that which makes and that
which is made, each is different in nature from the other, so that
neither is that uncreated which is made, nor is that created which
effects the production of the things that are made. By those then who,
according to the exposition of the faith given us by our Lord Himself,
have believed in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, it is acknowledged that each of these Persons is alike
unoriginate <span id="fr_357"></span>[359](#fn_357) , and the meaning
conveyed by “ungenerate” does no harm to their sound belief: but to
those who are dense and indefinite this term serves as a starting-point
for deflection from sound doctrine. For not understanding the true force
of the term, that “ungenerate” signifies nothing more than “not having
come into being,” and that “not coming into being” is a common property
of all that transcends created nature, they drop their faith in the
Father, and substitute for “Father” the phrase “ungenerate:” and since,
as has been said, the Personal existence of the Only-begotten is not
connoted in this name, they determine the existence of the Son to have
commenced from some definite beginning in time, affirming (what Eunomius
here adds to his previous statements) that He is called Son not without
generation preceding His existence.

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p16"></span>What is this vain juggling with
words? Is he aware that it is God of Whom he speaks, Who was in the
beginning and is in the Father, nor was there any time when He was not?
He knows not what he says nor whereof he affirms <span
id="fr_358"></span>[360](#fn_358) , but he endeavours, as though he were
constructing the pedigree of a mere man, to apply to the Lord of all
creation the language which properly belongs to our nature here below.
For, to take an example, Ishmael was not before the generation that
brought him into being, and before his birth there was of course an
interval of time. But with Him Who is “the brightness of glory <span
id="fr_359"></span>[361](#fn_359) ,” “before” and “after” have no place:
for before the brightness, of course neither was there any glory, for
concurrently with the existence of the glory there assuredly beams forth
its brightness; and it is impossible in the nature of things that one
should be severed from the other, nor is it possible to see the glory by
itself before its brightness. For he who says thus will make out the
glory in itself to be darkling and dim, if the brightness from it does
not shine out at the same time. But this is the unfair method of the
heresy, to endeavour, by the notions and terms employed concerning the
Only-begotten God, to displace Him from His oneness with the Father. It
is to this end they say, “Before the generation that brought Him into
being He was not Son:” but the “sons of rams <span
id="fr_360"></span>[362](#fn_360) ,” of whom the prophet speaks,—are not
they too called sons after coming into being? That quality, then, which
reason notices in the “sons of rams,” that they are not “sons of rams”
before the generation which brings them into being,—this our reverend
divine now ascribes to the Maker of the worlds and of all creation, Who
has the Eternal Father in Himself, and is contemplated in the eternity
of the Father, as He Himself says, “I am in the Father, and the Father
in Me <span id="fr_361"></span>[363](#fn_361) .” Those, however, who are
not able to detect the sophistry that lurks in his statement, and are
not trained to any sort of logical perception, follow these inconsequent
statements and receive what comes next as a logical consequence of what
preceded. For he says, “coming into being before all creation,” and as
though this were not enough to prove his impiety, he has a piece of
profanity in reserve in the phrase that follows, when he terms the Son
“not uncreate.” In what sense then does he call Him Who is not uncreate
“very Son”? For if it is meet to call Him Who is not uncreate “very
Son,” then of course the heaven is “very Son;” for it too is “not
uncreate.” So the sun too is “very Son,” and all that the creation
contains, both small and great, are of course entitled to the
appellation of “very Son.” And in what sense does He call Him Who has
come into being “Only-begotten”? For all things that come into being are
unquestionably in brotherhood with each other, so far, I mean, as their
coming into being is concerned. And from whom did He come into being?
For assuredly all things that have ever come into being did so from the
Son. For thus did John testify, saying, “All things were made by
Him <span id="fr_362"></span>[364](#fn_362) .” If then the Son also came
into being, according to Eunomius’ creed, He <span id="page_CXVII">p.
CXVII</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.ix-Page_CXVII"></span>is certainly
ranked in the class of things which have come into being. If then all
things that came into being were made by Him, and the Word is one of the
things that came into being, who is so dull as not to draw from these
premises the absurd conclusion that our new creed-monger makes out the
Lord of creation to have been His own work, in saying in so many words
that the Lord and Maker of all creation is “not uncreate”? Let him tell
us whence he has this boldness of assertion. From what inspired
utterance? What evangelist, what apostle ever uttered such words as
these? What prophet, what lawgiver, what patriarch, what other person of
all who were divinely moved by the Holy Ghost, whose voices are
preserved in writing, ever originated such a statement as this? In the
tradition of the faith delivered by the Truth we are taught to believe
in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. If it were right to believe that the
Son was created, how was it that the Truth in delivering to us this
mystery bade us believe in the Son, and not in the creature? and how is
it that the inspired Apostle, himself adoring Christ, lays it down that
they who worship the creature besides the Creator are guilty of
idolatry <span id="fr_363"></span>[365](#fn_363) ? For, were the Son
created, either he would not have worshipped Him, or he would have
refrained from classing those who worship the creature along with
idolaters, lest he himself should appear to be an idolater, in offering
adoration to the created. But he knew that He Whom he adored was God
over all <span id="fr_364"></span>[366](#fn_364) , for so he terms the
Son in his Epistle to the Romans. Why then do those who divorce the Son
from the essence of the Father, and call Him creature, bestow on Him in
mockery the fictitious title of Deity, idly conferring on one alien from
true Divinity the name of “God,” as they might confer it on Bel or Dagon
or the Dragon? Let those, therefore, who affirm that He is created,
acknowledge that He is not God at all, that they may be seen to be
nothing but Jews in disguise, or, if they confess one who is created to
be God, let them not deny that they are idolaters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_348"></span>[CXIV:350](2050068.htm#fr_348) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p3"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>οἰκονομεῖ</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p3.2"></span>οἰκοδομεῖ</span>

<span id="fn_349"></span>[CXIV:351](2050068.htm#fr_349) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p5"></span> Or “were generated.” The reference is
to <span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[CXIV:352](2050068.htm#fr_350) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p6.1"></span>διαστηματικῆς</span> seems to include the
idea of extension in time as well as in space.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[CXIV:353](2050068.htm#fr_351) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p7"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[CXIV:354](2050068.htm#fr_352) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p8"></span> The reference may be to the [Song of
Solomon i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[CXV:355](2050068.htm#fr_353) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p9"></span> [Wisd. vii.
25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[CXV:356](2050068.htm#fr_354) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>
sqq.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[CXV:357](2050068.htm#fr_355) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p13"></span> That is, by using as the terms of
his antithesis, not “Son” and “Father,” but “Son” and “Ungenerate,” he
avoids suggesting relationship between the two Persons, and does suggest
that the Second Person stands in the same opposition to the First Person
in which all created objects stand as contrasted with Him.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[CXVI:358](2050068.htm#fr_356) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p14"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[CXVI:359](2050068.htm#fr_357) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p15.1"></span>τὀ μὴ γενέσθαι τι τούτων ἐπίσης
ὁμολογεῖται</span>. This may possibly mean “it is acknowledged that each
of those alternatives” (viz. that that which comes into being is
uncreate, and that that which creates should itself be created) “is
equally untrue.” But this view would not be confined to those who held
the Catholic doctrine: the impossibility of the former alternative,
indeed, was insisted upon by the Arians as an argument in their own
favour.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[CXVI:360](2050068.htm#fr_358) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p17"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_359"></span>[CXVI:361](2050068.htm#fr_359) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p18"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_360"></span>[CXVI:362](2050068.htm#fr_360) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p19"></span> [Ps. cxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p19.1"></span>, in Septuagint.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[CXVI:363](2050068.htm#fr_361) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p20"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_362"></span>[CXVI:364](2050068.htm#fr_362) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p21"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_363"></span>[CXVII:365](2050068.htm#fr_363) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p22"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>, where <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p22.2"></span>παρὰ τὸν κτίσαντα</span> may be better
translated “besides the Creator,” or “rather than the Creator,” than as
in the A.V.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[CXVII:366](2050068.htm#fr_364) <span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.ix-p23"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He explains the phrase “The Lord created Me,” and the argument
about the origination of the Son, the deceptive character of Eunomius'
reasoning, and the passage which says, “My glory will I not give to
another,” examining them from different points of view.](2050069)
