[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050159)  [Next](2050161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>What</span> words indeed could possibly
express the greatness of that loss in falling away from the possession
of real goodness? What consummate power of thought would have to be
employed! Who could produce even in outline that which speech cannot
tell, nor the mind grasp? On the one hand, if a man has kept the eye of
his heart so clear that he can in a way behold the promise of our Lord’s
Beatitudes realized, he will condemn all human utterance as powerless to
represent that which he has apprehended. On the other hand, if a man
from the atmosphere of material indulgences has the weakness of passion
spreading like a film over the keen vision of his soul, all force of
expression will be wasted upon him; for it is all one whether you
understate or whether you magnify a miracle to those who have no power
whatever of perceiving it <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1396](#fn_1394) .
Just as, in the case of the sunlight, on one who has never from the day
of his birth seen it, all efforts at translating it into words are quite
thrown away; you cannot make the splendour of the ray shine <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1397](#fn_1395) through his ears; in like manner,
to see the beauty of the true and intellectual light, each man has need
of eyes of his own; and he who by a gift of Divine inspiration can see
it retains his ecstasy unexpressed in the depths of his consciousness;
while he who sees it not cannot be made to know even the greatness of
his loss. How should he? This good escapes his perception, and it cannot
be represented to him; it is unspeakable, and cannot be delineated. We
have not learnt the peculiar language expressive of this beauty. An
example of what we want to say does not exist in the world; a comparison
for it would at least be very difficult to find. Who compares the Sun to
a little spark? or the vast Deep to a drop? And that tiny drop and that
diminutive spark bear the same relation to the Deep and to the Sun, as
any beautiful object of man’s admiration does to that real beauty on the
features of the First Good, of which we catch the glimpse beyond any
other good. What words could be invented to show the greatness of this
loss to him who suffers it? Well does the great David seem to me to
express the impossibility of doing this. He has been lifted by the power
of the Spirit out of himself, and sees in a blessed state of ecstacy the
boundless and incomprehensible Beauty; he sees it as fully as a mortal
can see who has quitted his fleshly envelopments and entered, by the
mere power of thought, upon the contemplation of the spiritual and
intellectual <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-Page_355"></span>world, and in his longing to speak a
word worthy of the spectacle he bursts forth with that cry, which all
re-echo, “Every man a liar <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1398](#fn_1396) !”
I take that to mean that any man who entrusts to language the task of
presenting the ineffable Light is really and truly a liar; not because
of any hatred on his part of the truth, but because of the feebleness of
his instrument for expressing the thing thought of <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1399](#fn_1397) . The visible beauty to be met with
in this life of ours, showing glimpses of itself, whether in inanimate
objects or in animate organisms in a certain choiceness of colour, can
be adequately admired by our power of aesthetic feeling. It can be
illustrated and made known to others by description; it can be seen
drawn in the language as in a picture. Even a perfect type <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1400](#fn_1398) of such beauty does not baffle our
conception. But how can language illustrate when it finds no media for
its sketch, no colour, no contour <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1401](#fn_1399) , no majestic size, no
faultlessness of feature; nor any other commonplace of art? The Beauty
which is invisible and formless, which is destitute of qualities and far
removed from everything which we recognize in bodies by the eye, can
never be made known by the traits which require nothing but the
perceptions of our senses in order to be grasped. Not that we are to
despair of winning this object of our love, though it does seem too high
for our comprehension. The more reason shows the greatness of this thing
which we are seeking, the higher we must lift our thoughts and excite
them with the greatness of that object; and we must fear to lose our
share in that transcendent Good. There is indeed no small amount of
danger lest, as we can base the apprehension of it on no knowable
qualities, we should slip away from it altogether because of its very
height and mystery. We deem it necessary therefore, owing to this
weakness of the thinking faculty, to lead it towards the Unseen by
stages through the cognizances of the senses. Our conception of the case
is as follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[354:1396](2050160.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>ναισθήτως ἐχόντων</span>; Reg. Cod.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[354:1397](2050160.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>αὐγάζειν</span>; intrans. in N.T.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[355:1398](2050160.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p5"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[355:1399](2050160.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>οὐχὶ τῷ μίσει τῆς ἀληθείας ἀλλὰ τῇ ἀσθενεί&
139· τῆς διηγήσεως</span>, the reading of Codd. Vatican & Reg.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[355:1400](2050160.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>οὐδέ τὸ ἀρχέτυπον, κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[355:1401](2050160.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xi-p8"></span> These are evidently the elements of
beauty as *then* recognized by the eye; it is still the Hellenic
standard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2050161)
