[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050194)  [Next](2050196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p1"></span> XIII. *A Rationale of sleep, of
yawning, and of dreams* <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1636](#fn_1634) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p3"></span>1. This life of our bodies, material
and subject to flux, always advancing by way of motion, <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-Page_400"></span>finds
the power of its being in this, that it never rests from its motion: and
as some river, flowing on by its own impulse, keeps the channel in which
it runs well filled, yet is not seen in the same water always at the
same place, but part of it glides away while part comes flowing on, so,
too, the material element of our life here suffers change in the
continuity of its succession of opposites by way of motion and flux, so
that it never can desist from change, but in its inability to rest keeps
up unceasingly its motion alternating by like ways <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1637](#fn_1635) : and if it should ever cease
moving it will assuredly have cessation also of its being.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p5"></span>2. For instance, emptying succeeds
fulness, and on the other hand after emptiness comes in turn a process
of filling: sleep relaxes the strain of waking, and, again, awakening
braces up what had become slack: and neither of these abides
continually, but both give way, each at the other’s coming; nature thus
by their interchange so renewing herself as, while partaking of each in
turn, to pass from the one to the other without break. For that the
living creature should always be exerting itself in its operations
produces a certain rupture and severance of the overstrained part; and
continual quiescence of the body brings about a certain dissolution and
laxity in its frame: but to be in touch with each of these at the proper
times in a moderate degree is a staying-power of nature, which, by
continual transference to the opposed states, gives herself in each of
them rest from the other. Thus she finds the body on the strain through
wakefulness, and devises relaxation for the strain by means of sleep,
giving the perceptive faculties rest for the time from their operations,
loosing them like horses from the chariots after the race.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p6"></span>3. Further, rest at proper times is
necessary for the framework of the body, that the nutriment may be
diffused over the whole body through the passages which it contains,
without any strain to hinder its progress. For just as certain misty
vapours are drawn up from the recesses of the earth when it is soaked
with rain, whenever the sun heats it with rays of any considerable
warmth, so a similar result happens in the earth that is in us, when the
nutriment within is heated up by natural warmth; and the vapours, being
naturally of upward tendency and airy nature, and aspiring to that which
is above them, come to be in the region of the head like smoke
penetrating the joints of a wall: then they are dispersed thence by
exhalation to the passages of the organs of sense, and by them the
senses are of course rendered inactive, giving way to the transit of
these vapours. For the eyes are pressed upon by the eyelids when some
leaden instrument <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1638](#fn_1636) , as it
were (I mean such a weight as that I have spoken of), lets down the
eyelid upon the eyes; and the hearing, being dulled by these same
vapours, as though a door were placed upon the acoustic organs, rests
from its natural operation: and such a condition is sleep, when the
sense is at rest in the body, and altogether ceases from the operation
of its natural motion, so that the digestive processes of nutriment may
have free course for transmission by the vapours through each of the
passages.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p8"></span>4. And for this reason, if the
apparatus of the organs of sense should be closed and sleep hindered by
some occupation, the nervous system, becoming filled with the vapours,
is naturally and spontaneously extended so that the part which has had
its density increased by the vapours is rarefied by the process of
extension, just as those do who squeeze the water out of clothes by
vehement wringing: and, seeing that the parts about the pharynx are
somewhat circular, and nervous tissue abounds there, whenever there is
need for the expulsion from that part of the density of the
vapours—since it is impossible that the part which is circular in shape
should be separated directly, but only by being distended in the outline
of its circumference—for this reason, by checking the breath in a yawn
the chin is moved downwards so as to leave a hollow to the uvula, and
all the interior parts being arranged in the figure of a circle, that
smoky denseness which had been detained in the neighbouring parts is
emitted together with the exit of the breath. And often the like may
happen even after sleep when any portion of those vapours remains in the
region spoken of undigested and unexhaled.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p9"></span>5. Hence the mind of man clearly proves
its claim <span id="fr_1637"></span>[1639](#fn_1637) to connection with
his nature, itself also co-operating and moving with the nature in its
sound and waking state, but remaining unmoved when it is abandoned to
sleep, unless any one supposes that the imagery of dreams is a motion of
the mind exercised in sleep. We for our part say that it is only the
conscious and sound action of the intellect which we ought to refer to
mind; and as to the fantastic nonsense which occurs to us in sleep, we
suppose that some appearances of the operations of the mind are
accidentally moulded in the less rational part of the soul; for the
soul, being <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-Page_401"></span>by sleep dissociated from the senses,
is also of necessity outside the range of the operations of the mind;
for it is through the senses that the union of mind with man takes
place; therefore when the senses are at rest, the intellect also must
needs be inactive; and an evidence of this is the fact that the dreamer
often seems to be in absurd and impossible situations, which would not
happen if the soul were then guided by reason and intellect.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p11"></span>6. It seems to me, however, that when
the soul is at rest so far as concerns its more excellent faculties (so
far, I mean, as concerns the operations of mind and sense), the
nutritive part of it alone is operative during sleep, and that some
shadows and echoes of those things which happen in our waking moments—of
the operations both of sense and of intellect—which are impressed upon
it by that part of the soul which is capable of memory, that these, I
say, are pictured as chance will have it, some echo of memory still
lingering in this division of the soul.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p12"></span>7. With these, then, the man is
beguiled, not led to acquaintance with the things that present
themselves by any train of thought, but wandering among confused and
inconsequent delusions. But just as in his bodily operations, while each
of the parts individually acts in some way according to the power which
naturally resides in it, there arises also in the limb that is at rest a
state sympathetic with that which is in motion, similarly in the case of
the soul, even if one part is at rest and another in motion, the whole
is affected in sympathy with the part; for it is not possible that the
natural unity should be in any way severed, though one of the faculties
included in it is in turn supreme in virtue of its active operation. But
as, when men are awake and busy, the mind is supreme, and sense
ministers to it, yet the faculty which regulates the body is not
dissociated from them (for the mind furnishes the food for its wants,
the sense receives what is furnished, and the nutritive faculty of the
body appropriates to itself that which is given to it), so in sleep the
supremacy of these faculties is in some way reversed in us, and while
the less rational becomes supreme, the operation of the other ceases
indeed, yet is not absolutely extinguished; but while the nutritive
faculty is then busied with digestion during sleep, and keeps all our
nature occupied with itself, the faculty of sense is neither entirely
severed from it (for that cannot be separated which has once been
naturally joined), nor yet can its activity revive, as it is hindered by
the inaction during sleep of the organs of sense; and by the same
reasoning (the mind also being united to the sensitive part of the soul)
it would follow that we should say that the mind moves with the latter
when it is in motion, and rests with it when it is quiescent.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p13"></span>8. As naturally happens with fire when
it is heaped over with chaff, and no breath fans the flame—it neither
consumes what lies beside it, nor is entirely quenched, but instead of
flame it rises to the air through the chaff in the form of smoke; yet if
it should obtain any breath of air, it turns the smoke to flame—in the
same way the mind when hidden by the inaction of the senses in sleep is
neither able to shine out through them, nor yet is quite extinguished,
but has, so to say, a smouldering activity, operating to a certain
extent, but unable to operate farther.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p14"></span>9. Again, as a musician, when he
touches with the plectrum the slackened strings of a lyre, brings out no
orderly melody (for that which is not stretched will not sound), but his
hand frequently moves skilfully, bringing the plectrum to the position
of the notes so far as place is concerned, yet there is no sound, except
that he produces by the vibration of the strings a sort of uncertain and
indistinct hum; so in sleep the mechanism of the senses being relaxed,
the artist is either quite inactive, if the instrument is completely
relaxed by satiety or heaviness; or will act slackly and faintly, if the
instrument of the senses does not fully admit of the exercise of its
art.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p15"></span>10. For this cause memory is confused,
and foreknowledge, though rendered doubtful <span
id="fr_1638"></span>[1640](#fn_1638) by uncertain veils, is imaged in
shadows of our waking pursuits, and often indicates to us something of
what is going to happen: for by its subtlety of nature the mind has some
advantage, in ability to behold things, over mere corporeal grossness;
yet it cannot make its meaning clear by direct methods, so that the
information of the matter in hand should be plain and evident, but its
declaration of the future is ambiguous and doubtful,—what those who
interpret such things call an “enigma.”

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p17"></span>11. So the butler presses the cluster
for Pharaoh’s cup: so the baker seemed to carry his baskets; each
supposing himself in sleep to be engaged in those services with which he
was busied when awake: for the images of their customary occupations
imprinted on the prescient element of their soul, gave them for a time
the power of foretelling, by this sort of prophecy on the part of the
mind, what should come to pass.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p18"></span>12. But if Daniel and Joseph and
others like them were instructed by Divine power, without any confusion
of perception, in the knowledge of things to come, this is nothing to
the present <span id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-Page_402"></span>statement; for no one would ascribe
this to the power of dreams, since he will be constrained as a
consequence to suppose that those Divine appearances also which took
place in wakefulness were not a miraculous vision but a result of nature
brought about spontaneously. As then, while all men are guided by their
own minds, there are some few who are deemed worthy of evident Divine
communication; so, while the imagination of sleep naturally occurs in a
like and equivalent manner for all, some, not all, share by means of
their dreams in some more Divine manifestation: but to all the rest even
if a foreknowledge of anything does occur as a result of dreams, it
occurs in the way we have spoken of.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p19"></span>13. And again, if the Egyptian and the
Assyrian king were guided by God to the knowledge of the future, the
dispensation wrought by their means is a different thing: for it was
necessary that the hidden wisdom of the holy men <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1641](#fn_1639) should be made known, that each of
them might not pass his life without profit to the state. For how could
Daniel have been known for what he was, if the soothsayers and magicians
had not been unequal to the task of discovering the dream? And how could
Egypt have been preserved while Joseph was shut up in prison, if his
interpretation of the dream had not brought him to notice? Thus we must
reckon these cases as exceptional, and not class them with common
dreams.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p21"></span>14. But this ordinary seeing of dreams
is common to all men, and arises in our fancies in different modes and
forms: for either there remain, as we have said, in the reminiscent part
of the soul, the echoes of daily occupations; or, as often happens, the
constitution of dreams is framed with regard to such and such a
condition of the body: for thus the thirsty man seems to be among
springs, the man who is in need of food to be at a feast, and the young
man in the heat of youthful vigour is beset by fancies corresponding to
his passion.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p22"></span>15. I also knew another cause of the
fancies of sleep, when attending one of my relations attacked by frenzy;
who being annoyed by food being given him in too great quantity for his
strength, kept crying out and finding fault with those who were about
him for filling intestines with dung and putting them upon him: and when
his body was rapidly tending to perspire he blamed those who were with
him for having water ready to wet him with as he lay: and he did not
cease calling out till the result showed the meaning of these
complaints: for all at once a copious sweat broke out over his body, and
a relaxation of the bowels explained the weight in the intestines. The
same condition then which, while his sober judgment was dulled by
disease, his nature underwent, being sympathetically affected by the
condition of the body—not being without perception of what was amiss,
but being unable clearly to express its pain, by reason of the
distraction resulting from the disease—this, probably, if the
intelligent principle of the soul were lulled to rest, not from
infirmity but by natural sleep, might appear as a dream to one similarly
situated, the breaking out of perspiration being expressed by water, and
the pain occasioned by the food, by the weight of intestines.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p23"></span>16. This view also is taken by those
skilled in medicine, that according to the differences of complaints the
visions of dreams appear differently to the patients: that the visions
of those of weak stomach are of one kind, those of persons suffering
from injury to the cerebral membrane of another, those of persons in
fevers of yet another; that those of patients suffering from bilious and
from phlegmatic affections are diverse, and those again of plethoric
patients, and of patients in wasting disease, are different; whence we
may see that the nutritive and vegetative faculty of the soul has in it
by commixture some seed of the intelligent element, which is in some
sense brought into likeness to the particular state of the body, being
adapted in its fancies according to the complaint which has seized upon
it.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p24"></span>17. Moreover, most men’s dreams are
conformed to the state of their character: the brave man’s fancies are
of one kind, the coward’s of another; the wanton man’s dreams of one
kind, the continent man’s of another; the liberal man and the avaricious
man are subject to different fancies; while these fancies are nowhere
framed by the intellect, but by the less rational disposition of the
soul, which forms even in dreams the semblances of those things to which
each is accustomed by the practice of his waking hours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[399:1636](2050195.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p2"></span> The Latin version (and with it several
of the Greek <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>mss.</span>) makes this the fourteenth
chapter. The Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p2.2"></span>ms.</span> gives as its title:—“That our
body is always in motion.”

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[400:1637](2050195.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p4"></span> Life is represented as a succession of
opposite states (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p4.1"></span>τῶν ἐναντίων διαδοχὴ</span>), which yet
recur again and again in the same sequence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p4.2"></span>διὰ τῶν ὁμοίων</span>). This is illustrated
in the following section.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[400:1638](2050195.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7.1"></span>μηχανῆς</span> with the earlier editions
and (apparently) a large number of Forbes’ <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7.2"></span>mss.</span> in place of <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7.3"></span>μηχανικῆς</span>. But
<span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7.4"></span>μολυβδίνης</span>
may be for <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p7.5"></span>μολυβδαίνης</span>

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[400:1639](2050195.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p10.1"></span>δείκνυσιν</span>, as Forbes does
(apparently from all the <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p10.2"></span>mss.</span> and agreeing with the earlier
editt.). The Latin translation points to the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p10.3"></span>δείκνυται</span>

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[401:1640](2050195.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p16"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p16.2"></span>πιδιστάζουσα</span> with several of
Forbes’ <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p16.3"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[402:1641](2050195.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiv-p20"></span> “The holy men,” Joseph and Daniel,
who were enabled, by the authority they obtained through their
interpretation of dreams, to benefit the state.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the mind is not in a part of the body; wherein also is a
distinction of the movements of the body and of the soul.](2050196)
