[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050104)  [Next](2050106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.ix.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CXCI">p. CXCI</span>
<span id="viii.i.ix.i-Page_CXCI"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Book VII.</span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p2"></span>§1. *The seventh book shows from
various statements made to the Corinthians and to the Hebrews, and from
the words of the Lord, that the word “Lord” is not expressive of
essence, according to Eunomius’ exposition, but of dignity. and after
many notable remarks concerning “the Spirit” and the Lord, he shows that
Eunomius, from his own words, is found to argue in favour of orthodoxy,
though without intending it, and to be struck by his own shafts.*

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p3.1"></span>Since,</span> however, Eunomius asserts
that the word “Lord” is used in reference to the *essence* and not to
the *dignity* of the Only-begotten, and cites as a witness to this view
the Apostle, when he says to the Corinthians, “Now the Lord is the
Spirit <span id="fr_809"></span>[811](#fn_809.md) ,” it may perhaps be
opportune that we should not pass over even this error on his part
without correction. He asserts that the word “Lord” is significative of
essence, and by way of proof of this assumption he brings up the passage
above mentioned. “The Lord,” it says, “is the Spirit <span
id="fr_810"></span>[812](#fn_810.md) .” But our friend who interprets
Scripture at his own sweet will calls “Lordship” by the name of
“*essence,*” and thinks to bring his statement to proof by means of the
words quoted. Well, if it had been said by Paul, “Now the Lord is
essence,” we too would have concurred in his argument. But seeing that
the inspired writing on the one side says, “the Lord is the Spirit,” and
Eunomius says on the other, “Lordship is essence,” I do not know where
he finds support for his statement, unless he is prepared to say
again <span id="fr_811"></span>[813](#fn_811.md) that the word “Spirit”
stands in Scripture for “essence.” Let us consider, then, whether the
Apostle anywhere, in his use of the term “Spirit,” employs that word to
indicate “essence.” He says, “The Spirit itself beareth witness with our
Spirit <span id="fr_812"></span>[814](#fn_812.md) ,” and “no one knoweth
the things of a man save the Spirit of man which is in him <span
id="fr_813"></span>[815](#fn_813.md) ,” and “the letter killeth, but the
Spirit giveth life <span id="fr_814"></span>[816](#fn_814.md) ,” and “if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live <span
id="fr_815"></span>[817](#fn_815.md) ,” and “if we live in the Spirit let
us also walk in the Spirit <span id="fr_816"></span>[818](#fn_816.md) .”
Who indeed could count the utterances of the Apostle on this point? and
in them we nowhere find “essence” signified by this word. For he who
says that “the Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit,” signifies
nothing else than the Holy Spirit Which comes to be in the mind of the
faithful; for in many other passages of his writings he gives the name
of spirit to the mind, on the reception by which of the communion of the
Spirit the recipients attain the dignity of adoption. Again, in the
passage, “No one knoweth the things of a man save the spirit of man
which is in him,” if “man” is used of the essence, and “spirit”
likewise, it will follow from the phrase that the man is maintained to
be of two essences. Again, I know not how he who says that “the letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life,” sets “essence” in opposition to
“letter”; nor, again, how this writer imagines that when Paul says that
we ought “through the Spirit” to destroy “the deeds of the body,” he is
directing the signification of “spirit” to express “essence”; while as
for “living in the Spirit,” and “walking in the Spirit,” this would be
quite unintelligible if the sense of the word “Spirit” referred to
“essence.” For in what else than in essence do all we who are alive
partake of life?—thus when the Apostle is laying down advice for us on
this matter that we should “live in essence,” it is as though he said
“partake of life by means of yourselves, and not by means of others.” If
then it is not possible that this sense can be adopted in any passage,
how can Eunomius here once more imitate the interpreters of dreams, and
bid us to take “spirit” for “essence,” to the end that he may arrive in
due syllogistic form at his conclusion that the word “Lord” is applied
to the essence?—for if “spirit” is “essence” (he argues), and “the Lord
is Spirit,” the “Lord” is clearly found to be “essence.” How
incontestable is the force of this attempt! How can we evade or resolve
this irrefragable necessity of demonstration? The word “Lord,” he says,
is spoken of the essence. How does he maintain it? Because the Apostle
says, “The Lord is the <span id="page_CXCII">p. CXCII</span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-Page_CXCII"></span>Spirit.” Well, what has this to do
with essence? He gives us the further instruction that “spirit” is put
for “essence.” These are the arts of his demonstrative method! These are
the results of his Aristotelian science! This is why, in your view, we
are so much to be pitied, who are uninitiated in this wisdom! and you of
course are to be deemed happy, who track out the truth by a method like
this—that the Apostle’s meaning was such that we are to suppose “the
Spirit” was put by him for the Essence of the Only-begotten!

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p12"></span>Then how will you make it fit with
what follows? For when Paul says, “Now the Lord is the Spirit,” he goes
on to say, “and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” If
then “the Lord is the Spirit,” and “Spirit” means “essence,” what are we
to understand by “the essence of the essence”? He speaks again of
another Spirit of the Lord Who is the Spirit,—that is to say, according
to your interpretation, of another *essence*. Therefore in your view the
Apostle, when he writes expressly of “the Lord the Spirit,” and of “the
Spirit of the Lord,” means nothing else than an essence of an essence.
Well, let Eunomius make what he likes of that which is written; what we
understand of the matter is as follows. The Scripture, “given by
inspiration of God,” as the Apostle calls it, is the Scripture of the
Holy Spirit, and its intention is the profit of men. For “every
scripture,” he says, “is given by inspiration of God and is profitable”;
and the profit is varied and multiform, as the Apostle says—“for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness <span id="fr_817"></span>[819](#fn_817.md) .” Such a boon as
this, however, is not within any man’s reach to lay hold of, but the
Divine intention lies hid under the body of the Scripture, as it were
under a veil, some legislative enactment or some historical narrative
being cast over the truths that are contemplated by the mind. For this
reason, then, the Apostle tells us that those who look upon the body of
the Scripture have “a veil upon their heart <span
id="fr_818"></span>[820](#fn_818.md) ,” and are not able to look upon the
glory of the spiritual law, being hindered by the veil that has been
cast over the face of the law-giver. Wherefore he says, “the letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life,” showing that often the obvious
interpretation, if it be not taken according to the proper sense, has an
effect contrary to that life which is indicated by the Spirit, seeing
that this lays down for all men the perfection of virtue in freedom from
passion, while the history contained in the writings sometimes embraces
the exposition even of facts incongruous, and is understood, so to say,
to concur with the passions of our nature, whereto if any one applies
himself according to the obvious sense, he will make the Scripture a
doctrine of death. Accordingly, he says that over the perceptive powers
of the souls of men who handle what is written in too corporeal a
manner, the veil is cast; but for those who turn their contemplation to
that which is the object of the intelligence, there is revealed, bared,
as it were, of a mask, the glory that underlies the letter. And that
which is discovered by this more exalted perception he says is the Lord,
which is the Spirit. For he says, “when it shall turn to the Lord the
veil shall be taken away: now the Lord is the Spirit <span
id="fr_819"></span>[821](#fn_819.md) .” And in so saying he makes a
distinction of contrast between the lordship of the spirit and the
bondage of the letter; for as that which gives life is opposed to that
which kills, so he contrasts “the Lord” with bondage. And that we may
not be under any confusion when we are instructed concerning the Holy
Spirit (being led by the word “Lord” to the thought of the
Only-begotten), for this reason he guards the word by repetition, both
saying that “the Lord is the Spirit,” and making further mention of “the
Spirit of the Lord,” that the supremacy of His Nature may be shown by
the honour implied in lordship, while at the same time he may avoid
confusing in his argument the individuality of His Person. For he who
calls Him both “Lord” and “Spirit of the Lord,” teaches us to conceive
of Him as a separate individual besides the Only-begotten; just as
elsewhere he speaks of “the Spirit of Christ <span
id="fr_820"></span>[822](#fn_820.md) ,” employing fairly and in its mystic
sense this very term which is piously employed in the system of doctrine
according to the Gospel tradition. Thus we, the “most miserable of all
men,” being led onward by the Apostle in the mysteries, pass from the
letter that killeth to the Spirit that giveth life, learning from Him
Who was in Paradise initiated into the unspeakable mysteries, that all
things the Divine Scripture says are utterances of the Holy Spirit. For
“well did the Holy Spirit prophesy <span
id="fr_821"></span>[823](#fn_821.md) ,”—this he says to the Jews in Rome,
introducing the words of Isaiah; and to the Hebrews, alleging the
authority of the Holy Spirit in the words, “wherefore as saith the Holy
Spirit <span id="fr_822"></span>[824](#fn_822.md) ,” he adduces the words
of the Psalm which are spoken at length in the person of God; and from
the Lord Himself we learn the same thing,—that David declared the
heavenly mysteries not “in” himself (that is, not speaking according to
human nature). For how could any one, being but man, know the
supercelestial converse of the Father with the Son? But being “in the
Spirit” he said that the Lord spoke to the Lord those words which He has
uttered. For if, He says, “David *in the Spirit* calls him Lord, how is
He then his <span id="page_CXCIII">p. CXCIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-Page_CXCIII"></span>son <span
id="fr_823"></span>[825](#fn_823.md) ?” Thus it is by the power of the
Spirit that the holy men who are under Divine influence are inspired,
and every Scripture is for this reason said to be “given by inspiration
of God,” because it is the teaching of the Divine afflatus. If the
bodily veil of the words were removed, that which remains is Lord and
life and Spirit, according to the teaching of the great Paul, and
according to the words of the Gospel also. For Paul declares that he who
turns from the letter to the Spirit no longer apprehends the bondage
that slays, but the Lord which is the life-giving Spirit; and the
sublime Gospel says, “the words that I speak are spirit and are
life <span id="fr_824"></span>[826](#fn_824.md) ,” as being divested of the
bodily veil. The idea, however, that “the Spirit” is the essence of the
Only-begotten, we shall leave to our dreamers: or rather, we shall make
use, *ex abundanti,* of what they say, and arm the truth with the
weapons of the adversary. For it is allowable that the Egyptian should
be spoiled by the Israelites, and that we should make their wealth an
ornament for ourselves. If the essence of the Son is called “Spirit,”
and God also is Spirit, (for so the Gospel tells us <span
id="fr_825"></span>[827](#fn_825) .md), clearly the essence of the Father
is called “Spirit” also. But if it is their peculiar argument that
things which are introduced by different names are different also in
nature, the conclusion surely is, that things which are named alike are
not alien one from the other in nature either. Since then, according to
their account, the essence of the Father and that of the Son are both
called “Spirit,” hereby is clearly proved the absence of any difference
in essence. For a little further on Eunomius says:—“Of those essences
which are divergent the appellations significant of essence are also
surely divergent, but where there is one and the same name, that which
is declared by the same appellation will surely be one also”:—so that at
all points “He that taketh the wise in their own craftiness <span
id="fr_826"></span>[828](#fn_826.md) ” has turned the long labours of our
author, and the infinite toil spent on what he has elaborated, to the
establishment of the doctrine which we maintain. For if God is in the
Gospel called “Spirit,” and the essence of the Only-begotten is
maintained by Eunomius to be “Spirit,” as there is no apparent
difference in the one name as compared with the other, neither, surely,
will the things signified by the names be mutually different in nature.

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p23"></span>And now that I have exposed this
futile and pointless sham-argument, it seems to me that I may well pass
by without discussion what he next puts together by way of attack upon
our master’s statement. For a sufficient proof of the folly of his
remarks is to be found in his actual argument, which of itself proclaims
aloud its feebleness. To be entangled in a contest with such things as
this is like trampling on the slain. For when he sets forth with much
confidence some passage from our master, and treats it with preliminary
slander and contempt, and promises that he will show it to be worth
nothing at all, he meets with the same fortune as befalls small
children, to whom their imperfect and immature intelligence, and the
untrained condition of their perceptive faculties, do not give an
accurate understanding of what they see. Thus they often imagine that
the stars are but a little way above their heads, and pelt them with
clods when they appear, in their childish folly; and then, when the clod
falls, they clap their hands and laugh and brag to their comrades as if
their throw had reached the stars themselves. Such is the man who casts
at the truth with his childish missile, who sets forth like the stars
those splendid sayings of our master, and then hurls from the
ground,—from his downtrodden and grovelling understanding,—his earthy
and unstable arguments. And these, when they have gone so high that they
have no place to fall from, turn back again of themselves by their own
weight <span id="fr_827"></span>[829](#fn_827.md) . Now the passage of the
great Basil is worded as follows <span id="fr_828"></span>[830](#fn_828.md)
:—

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p26"></span>“Yet what sane man would agree with
the statement that of those things of which the names are different the
essences must needs be divergent also? For the appellations of Peter and
Paul, and, generally speaking, of men, are different, while the essence
of all is one: wherefore, in most respects we are mutually identical,
and differ one from another only in those special properties which are
observed in individuals: and hence also appellations are not indicative
of essence, but of the properties which mark the particular individual.
Thus, when we hear of Peter, we do not by the name understand the
essence (and by ‘essence’ I here mean the material substratum), but we
are impressed with the conception of the properties which we contemplate
in him.” These are the great man’s words. And what skill he who disputes
this statement displays against us, we learn,—any one, that is, who has
leisure for wasting time on unprofitable matters,—from the actual
composition of Eunomius.

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p27"></span>From his writings, I say, for I do not
like to insert in my own work the nauseous stuff our rhetorician utters,
or to display his ignorance and folly to contempt in the midst of my own
arguments. He goes on with a sort of eulogy upon the class of
significant words which express the subject, and, in his accustomed
style, <span id="page_CXCIV">p. CXCIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-Page_CXCIV"></span>patches and sticks together the
cast-off rags of phrases: poor Isocrates is nibbled at once more, and
shorn of words and figures to make out the point proposed,—here and
there even the Hebrew Philo receives the same treatment, and makes him a
contribution of phrases from his own labours,—yet not even thus is this
much-stitched and many-coloured web of words finished off, but every
assault, every defence of his conceptions, all his artistic preparation,
spontaneously collapses, and, as commonly happens with the bubbles when
the drops, borne down from above through a body of waters against some
obstacle, produce those foamy swellings which, as soon as they gather,
immediately dissolve, and leave upon the water no trace of their own
formation—such are the air-bubbles of our author’s thoughts, vanishing
without a touch at the moment they are put forth. For after all these
irrefragable statements, and the dreamy philosophizing wherein he
asserts that the distinct character of the essence is apprehended by the
divergence of names, as some mass of foam borne downstream breaks up
when it comes into contact with any more solid body, so his argument,
following its own spontaneous course, and coming unexpectedly into
collision with the truth, disperses into nothingness its unsubstantial
and bubble-like fabric of falsehood. For he speaks in these words:—“Who
is so foolish and so far removed from the constitution of men, as, in
discoursing of men to speak of one as a man, and, calling another a
horse, so to compare them?” I would answer him,—“You are right in
calling any one foolish who makes such blunders in the use of names. And
I will employ for the support of the truth the testimony you yourself
give. For if it is a piece of extreme folly to call one a horse and
another a man, supposing both were really men, it is surely a piece of
equal stupidity, when the Father is confessed to be God, and the Son is
confessed to be God, to call the one ‘created’ and the other
‘uncreated,’ since, as in the other case humanity, so in this case the
Godhead does not admit a change of name to that expressive of another
kind. For what the irrational is with respect to man, that also the
creature is with respect to the Godhead, being equally unable to receive
the same name with the nature that is superior to it. And as it is not
possible to apply the same definition to the rational animal and the
quadruped alike (for each is naturally differentiated by its special
property from the other), so neither can you express by the same terms
the created and the uncreated essence, seeing that those attributes
which are predicated of the latter essence are not discoverable in the
former. For as rationality is not discoverable in a horse, nor solidity
of hoofs in a man, so neither is Godhead discoverable in the creature,
nor the attribute of being created in the Godhead: but if He be God He
is certainly not created, and if He be created He is not God;
unless <span id="fr_829"></span>[831](#fn_829.md) , of course, one were to
apply by some misuse or customary mode of expression the mere name of
Godhead, as some horses have men’s names given them by their owners; yet
neither is the horse a man, though he be called by a human name, nor is
the created being God, even though some claim for him the name of
Godhead, and give him the benefit of the empty sound of a dissyllable.”
Since, then, Eunomius’ heretical statement is found spontaneously to
fall in with the truth, let him take his own advice and stand by his own
words, and by no means retract his own utterances, but consider that the
man is really foolish and stupid who names the subject not according as
it is, but says “horse” for “man,” and “sea” for “sky,” and “creature”
for “God.” And let no one think it unreasonable that the creature should
be set in opposition to God, but have regard to the prophets and to the
Apostles. For the prophet says in the person of the Father, “My Hand
made all these things” <span id="fr_830"></span>[832](#fn_830.md) , meaning
by “Hand,” in his dark saying, the power of the Only-begotten. Now the
Apostle says that all things are of the Father, and that all things are
by the Son <span id="fr_831"></span>[833](#fn_831.md) , and the prophetic
spirit in a way agrees with the Apostolic teaching, which itself also is
given through the Spirit. For in the one passage, the prophet, when he
says that all things are the work of the Hand of Him Who is over all,
sets forth the nature of those things which have come into being in its
relation to Him Who made them, while He Who made them is God over all,
Who has the Hand, and by It makes all things. And again, in the other
passage, the Apostle makes the same division of entities, making all
things depend upon their productive cause, yet not reckoning in the
number of “all things” that which produces them: so that we are hereby
taught the difference of nature between the created and the uncreated,
and it is shown that, in its own nature, that which makes is one thing
and that which is produced is another. Since, then, all things are of
God, and the Son is God, the creation is properly opposed to the
Godhead; while, since the Only-begotten is something else than the
nature of the universe (seeing that not even those who fight against the
truth contradict this), it follows of necessity that the Son also is
equally opposed to the creation, unless the words of the saints are
untrue which testify that by Him all things were made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_809"></span>[CXCI:811](2050105.htm#fr_809.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p4"></span> <span id="viii.i.ix.i-p4.1"></span>[2
Cor. iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[CXCI:812](2050105.htm#fr_810.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p5"></span> <span id="viii.i.ix.i-p5.1"></span>[2
Cor. iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[CXCI:813](2050105.htm#fr_811.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p6"></span> It is not quite clear whether <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.ix.i-p6.1"></span>πάλιν</span> is to be
constructed with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p6.2"></span>λέγοι</span> or with <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.ix.i-p6.3"></span>κεῖσθαι</span>, but the
difference in sense is slight.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[CXCI:814](2050105.htm#fr_812.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p6.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p7"></span> [Rom. viii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[CXCI:815](2050105.htm#fr_813.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p8"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[CXCI:816](2050105.htm#fr_814.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p9"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[CXCI:817](2050105.htm#fr_815.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[CXCI:818](2050105.htm#fr_816.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p11"></span> [Gal. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[CXCII:819](2050105.htm#fr_817.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p13"></span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p13.1"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[CXCII:820](2050105.htm#fr_818.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p14"></span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p14.1"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[CXCII:821](2050105.htm#fr_819.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p15"></span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p15.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[CXCII:822](2050105.htm#fr_820.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p16"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[CXCII:823](2050105.htm#fr_821.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p17"></span> Cf. [Acts xxviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[CXCII:824](2050105.htm#fr_822.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p18"></span> [Heb. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[CXCIII:825](2050105.htm#fr_823.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p19"></span> [Matt.
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045.md), [Ps.
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_824"></span>[CXCIII:826](2050105.htm#fr_824.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p20"></span> Cf. S. [John vi.
63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_825"></span>[CXCIII:827](2050105.htm#fr_825.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p21"></span> S. [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_826"></span>[CXCIII:828](2050105.htm#fr_826.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019.md), [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p22.1"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p22.2"></span>; cf. [Job v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p22.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[CXCIII:829](2050105.htm#fr_827.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p24"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation
slightly.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[CXCIII:830](2050105.htm#fr_828.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p25"></span> S. Basil adv. Eunomium II. 4 (p. 240
C.). The quotation as here given is not in exact verbal agreement with
the Benedictine text.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[CXCIV:831](2050105.htm#fr_829.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p28"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[CXCIV:832](2050105.htm#fr_830.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p29"></span> [Is. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p29.1"></span>.
Not verbally from the LXX.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[CXCIV:833](2050105.htm#fr_831.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p30"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.i.ix.i-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then declares that the close relation between names and things
is immutable, and thereafter proceeds accordingly, in the most excellent
manner, with his discourse concerning “generated” and
“ungenerate.”](2050106.md)
