[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050075)  [Next](2050077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.v.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CXXXV">p. CXXXV</span>
<span id="viii.i.v.i-Page_CXXXV"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p1.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p2"></span>§1. *This third book shows a third fall
of Eunomius, as refuting himself, and sometimes saying that the Son is
to be called Only-begotten in virtue of natural generation, and that
Holy Scripture proves this from the first; at other times, that by
reason of His being created He should not be called a Son, but a
“product,” or “creature.”*

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p3.1"></span>If,</span> when a man “strives
lawfully <span id="fr_520"></span>[522](#fn_520.md) ,” he finds a limit to
his struggle in the contest by his adversary’s either refusing the
struggle, and withdrawing of his own accord in favour of his conqueror
from his effort for victory, or being thrown according to the rules of
wrestling in three falls (whereby the glory of the crown is bestowed
with all the splendour of proclamation upon him who has proved
victorious in the umpire’s judgment), then, since Eunomius, though he
has been already twice thrown in our previous arguments, does not
consent that truth should hold the tokens of her victory over falsehood,
but yet a third time raises the dust against godly doctrine in his
accustomed arena of falsehood with his composition, strengthening
himself for his struggle on the side of deceit, our statement of truth
must also be now called forth to put his falsehood to rout, placing its
hopes in Him Who is the Giver and the Judge of victory, and at the same
time deriving strength from the very unfairness of the adversaries’
tricks of wrestling. For we are not ashamed to confess that we have
prepared for our contest no weapon of argument sharpened by rhetoric,
that we can bring forward to aid us in the fight with those arrayed
against us, no cleverness or sharpness of dialectic, such as with
inexperienced judges lays even on truth the suspicion of falsehood. One
strength our reasoning against falsehood has—first the very Word
Himself, Who is the might of our word, <span
id="fr_521"></span>[523](#fn_521.md) and in the next place the rottenness
of the arguments set against us, which is overthrown and falls by its
own spontaneous action. Now in order that it may be made as clear as
possible to all men, that the very efforts of Eunomius serve as means
for his own overthrow to those who contend with him, I will set forth to
my readers his phantom doctrine (for so I think that doctrine may be
called which is quite outside the truth), and I would have you all, who
are present at our struggle, and watch the encounter now taking place
between my doctrine and that which is matched with it, to be just judges
of the lawful striving of our arguments, that by your just award the
reasoning of godliness may be proclaimed as victor to the whole theatre
of the Church, having won undisputed victory over ungodliness, and being
decorated, in virtue of the three falls of its enemy, with the unfading
crown of them that are saved. Now this statement is set forth against
the truth by way of preface to his third discourse, and this is the
fashion of it:—“Preserving,” he says, “natural order, and abiding by
those things which are known to us from above, we do not refuse to speak
of the Son, seeing He is begotten, even by the name of ‘product of
generation <span id="fr_522"></span>[524](#fn_522.md) ,’ since the
generated essence and <span id="fr_523"></span>[525](#fn_523.md) the
appellation of Son make such a relation of words appropriate.” I beg the
reader to give his attention carefully to this point, that while he
calls God both “begotten” and “Son,” he refers the reason of such names
to “natural order,” and calls to witness to this conception the
knowledge possessed from above: so that if anything should be found in
the course of what follows contrary to the positions he has laid down,
it is clear to all that he is overthrown by himself, refuted by his own
arguments before ours are brought against him. And so let us consider
his statement in the light of his own words. He confesses that the name
of “Son” would by no means be properly applied to the Only-begotten God,
did not “natural order,” as he says, confirm the appellation. If, then,
one were to withdraw the order of nature from the consideration of the
designation of “Son,” his use of this name, being deprived of its proper
and natural significance, will be meaningless. And <span
id="page_CXXXVI">p. CXXXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.i-Page_CXXXVI"></span>moreover the fact that he says these
statements are confirmed, in that they abide by the knowledge possessed
from above, is a strong additional support to the orthodox view touching
the designation of “Son,” seeing that the inspired teaching of the
Scriptures, which comes to us from above, confirms our argument on these
matters. If these things are so, and this is a standard of truth that
admits of no deception, that these two concur—the “natural order,” as he
says, and the testimony of the knowledge given from above confirming the
natural interpretation—it is clear, that to assert anything contrary to
these, is nothing else than manifestly to fight against the truth
itself. Let us hear again what this writer, who makes nature his
instructor in the matter of this name, and says that he abides by the
knowledge given to us from above by the instruction of the saints, sets
out at length a little further on, after the passage I have just quoted.
For I will pretermit for the time the continuous recital of what is set
next in order in his treatise, that the contradiction in what he has
written may not escape detection, being veiled by the reading of the
intervening matter. “The same argument,” he says, “will apply also in
the case of what is made and created, as both the natural interpretation
and the mutual relation of the things, and also the use of the saints,
give us free authority for the use of the formula: wherefore one would
not be wrong in treating the thing made as corresponding to the maker,
and the thing created to the creator.” Of what product of making or of
creation does he speak, as having naturally the relation expressed in
its name towards its maker and creator? If of those we contemplate in
the creation, visible and invisible (as Paul recounts, when he says that
by Him all things were created, visible and invisible) <span
id="fr_524"></span>[526](#fn_524.md) , so that this relative conjunction of
names has a proper and special application, that which is made being set
in relation to the maker, that which is created to the creator,—if this
is his meaning, we agree with him. For in fact, since the Lord is the
Maker of angels, the angel is assuredly a thing made by Him that made
him: and since the Lord is the Creator of the world, clearly the world
itself and all that is therein are called the creature of Him that
created them. If however it is with this intention that he makes his
interpretation of “natural order,” systematizing the appropriation of
relative terms with a view to their mutual relation in verbal sense,
even thus it would be an extraordinary thing, seeing that every one is
aware of this, that he should leave his doctrinal statement to draw out
for us a system of grammatical trivialities <span
id="fr_525"></span>[527](#fn_525.md) . But if it is to the Only-begotten
God that he applies such phrases, so as to say that He is a thing made
by Him that made Him, a creature of Him that created Him, and to refer
this terminology to “the use of the saints,” let him first of all show
us in his statement what saints he says there are who declared the Maker
of all things to be a product and a creature, and whom he follows in
this audacity of phrase. The Church knows as saints those whose hearts
were divinely guided by the Holy Spirit,—patriarchs, lawgivers,
prophets, evangelists, apostles. If any among these is found to declare
in his inspired words that God over all, Who “upholds all things with
the word of His power,” and grasps with His hand all things that are,
and by Himself called the universe into being by the mere act of His
will, is a thing created and a product, he will stand excused, as
following, as he says, the “use of the saints <span
id="fr_526"></span>[528](#fn_526.md) ” in proceeding to formulate such
doctrines. But if the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures is freely placed
within the reach of all, and nothing is forbidden to or hidden from any
of those who choose to share in the divine instruction, how comes it
that he endeavours to lead his hearers astray by his misrepresentation
of the Scriptures, referring the term “creature,” applied to the
Only-begotten, to “the use of the saints”? For that by Him all things
were made, you may hear almost from the whole of their holy utterance,
from Moses and the prophets and apostles who come after him, whose
particular expressions it would be tedious here to set forth. Enough for
our purpose, with the others, and above the others, is the sublime John,
where in the preface to his discourse on the Divinity of the
Only-begotten he proclaims aloud the fact that there is none of the
things that were made which was not made through Him <span
id="fr_527"></span>[529](#fn_527.md) , a fact which is an incontestable and
positive proof of His being Lord of the creation, not reckoned in the
list of created things. For if all things that are made exist by no
other but by Him (and John bears witness that nothing among the things
that are, throughout the creation, was made without Him), who is so
blinded in understanding as not to see in the Evangelist’s proclamation
the truth, that He Who made all the creation is assuredly something else
besides the creation? For if all that is numbered among the things that
were made has its being through Him, while He Himself is “in the
beginning,” and is “with God,” being God, and Word, and Life, and Light,
and express Image, and Brightness, and <span id="page_CXXXVII">p.
CXXXVII</span> <span id="viii.i.v.i-Page_CXXXVII"></span>if none of the
things that were made throughout creation is named by the same
names—(not Word, not God, not Life, not Light, not Truth, not express
Image, not Brightness, not any of the other names proper to the Deity is
to be found employed of the creation)—then it is clear that He Who is
these things is by nature something else besides the creation, which
neither is nor is called any of these things. If, indeed, there existed
in such phrases an identity of names between the creation and its Maker,
he might perhaps be excused for making the name of “creation” also
common to the thing created and to Him Who made it, on the ground of the
community of the other names: but if the characteristics which are
contemplated by means of the names, in the created and in the uncreated
nature, are in no case reconcilable or common to both, how can the
misrepresentation of that man fail to be manifest to all, who dares to
apply the name of servitude to Him Who, as the Psalmist declares,
“ruleth with His power for ever <span id="fr_528"></span>[530](#fn_528.md)
,” and to bring Him Who, as the Apostle says, “in all things hath the
pre-eminence <span id="fr_529"></span>[531](#fn_529.md) ,” to a level with
the servile nature, by means of the name and conception of “creation”?
For that all <span id="fr_530"></span>[532](#fn_530.md) the creation is in
bondage the great Paul declares <span id="fr_531"></span>[533](#fn_531.md)
,— he who in the schools above the heavens was instructed in that
knowledge which may not be spoken, learning these things in that place
where every voice that conveys meaning by verbal utterance is still, and
where unspoken meditation becomes the word of instruction, teaching to
the purified heart by means of the silent illumination of the thoughts
those truths which transcend speech. If then on the one hand Paul
proclaims aloud “the creation is in bondage,” and on the other the
Only-begotten God is truly Lord and God over all, and John bears witness
to the fact that the whole creation of the things that were made is by
Him, how can any one, who is in any sense whatever numbered among
Christians, hold his peace when he sees Eunomius, by his inconsistent
and inconsequent systematizing, degrading to the humble state of the
creature, by means of an identity of name that tends to servitude, that
power of Lordship which surpasses all rule and all authority? And if he
says that he has some of the saints who declared Him to be a slave, or
created, or made, or any of these lowly and servile names, lo, here are
the Scriptures. Let him, or some other on his behalf, produce to us one
such phrase, and we will hold our peace. But if there is no such phrase
(and there could never be found in those inspired Scriptures which we
believe any such thought as to support this impiety), what need is there
to strive further upon points admitted with one who not only
misrepresents the words of the saints, but even contends against his own
definitions? For if the “order of nature,” as he himself admits, bears
additional testimony to the Son’s name by reason of His being begotten,
and thus the correspondence of the name is according to the relation of
the Begotten to the Begetter, how comes it that he wrests the
significance of the word “Son” from its natural application, and changes
the relation to “the thing made and its maker”—a relation which applies
not only in the case of the elements of the universe, but might also be
asserted of a gnat or an ant—that in so far as each of these is a thing
made, the relation of its name to its maker is similarly equivalent? The
blasphemous nature of his doctrine is clear, not only from many other
passages, but even from those quoted: and as for that “use of the
saints” which he alleges that he follows in these expressions, it is
clear that there is no such use at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[CXXXV:522](2050076.htm#fr_520.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p4"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[CXXXV:523](2050076.htm#fr_521.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p5"></span> The earlier editions here omit a long
passage, which Oehler restores.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[CXXXV:524](2050076.htm#fr_522.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p6.1"></span>γέννημα</span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[CXXXV:525](2050076.htm#fr_523.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p7"></span> Inserting <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p7.1"></span>καὶ</span>, which does not appear here in
Oehler’s text, but is found in later quotations of the same passage:
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.i-p7.2"></span>αὐτῆς</span> is
also found in the later citations.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[CXXXVI:526](2050076.htm#fr_524.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p8"></span> Cf. [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_525"></span>[CXXXVI:527](2050076.htm#fr_525.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p9"></span> Oehler’s punctuation here seems to
admit of alteration.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[CXXXVI:528](2050076.htm#fr_526.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p10.1"></span>τῇ χρήσει τῶν ἁγίων</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.i-p10.2"></span>τῇ κρίσει τῶν
ἁγίων</span>, the reading of Oehler: the words are apparently a
quotation from Eunomius, from whom the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p10.3"></span>χρήσις τῶν ἁγίων</span> has already been
cited.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[CXXXVI:529](2050076.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p10.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_528"></span>[CXXXVII:530](2050076.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p12"></span> [Ps.
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007.md)<span
id="viii.i.v.i-p12.1"></span>[Ps. lxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p12.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_529"></span>[CXXXVII:531](2050076.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p13"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[CXXXVII:532](2050076.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p14"></span> Substituting <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.i-p14.1"></span>πᾶσαν</span> for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.i-p14.2"></span>πᾶσιν</span> of
Oehler’s text.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[CXXXVII:533](2050076.htm#fr_531.md) <span
id="viii.i.v.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.i-p15"></span> [Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)<span id="viii.i.v.i-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then once more excellently, appropriately, and clearly
examines and expounds the passage, “The Lord Created Me.“](2050077.md)
