[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050042)  [Next](2050044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> §27. *He falsely imagines that
the same energies produce the same works, and that variation in the
works indicates variation in the energies.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>Of the same strain is that which
he adds in the next paragraph; “the same energies producing sameness of
works, and different works indicating difference in the energies as
well.” Finely and irresistibly does this noble thinker plead for his
doctrine. “The same energies produce sameness of works.” Let us test
this by facts. The energy of fire is always one and the same; it
consists in heating: but what sort of agreement do its results show?
Bronze melts in it; mud hardens; wax vanishes: while all other animals
are destroyed by it, the salamander is preserved alive <span
id="fr_153"></span>[155](#fn_153.md) ; tow burns, asbestos is washed by the
flames as if by water; so much for his ‘sameness of works from one and
the same energy.’ How too about the sun? Is not his power of warming
always the same; and yet while he causes one plant to grow, he withers
another, varying the results of his operation in accordance with the
latent force of each. ‘That on the rock’ withers; ‘that in deep earth’
yields an hundredfold. Investigate Nature’s work, and you will learn, in
the case of those bodies which she produces artistically, the amount of
accuracy there is in his statement that ‘sameness of energy effects
sameness of result.’ One single operation is the cause of conception,
but the composition of that which is effected internally therein is so
varied that it would be difficult for any one even to count all the
various qualities of the body. Again, imbibing the milk is one single
operation on the part of the infant, but the results of its being
nourished so are too complex to be all detailed. While this food passes
from the channel of the mouth into the secretory ducts <span
id="fr_154"></span>[156](#fn_154.md) , the transforming power of Nature
forwards it into the several parts proportionately to their wants; for
by digestion she divides its sum total into the small change of
multitudinous differences, and into supplies congenial to the subject
matter with which she deals; so that the same milk goes to feed
arteries, veins, brain and its membranes, marrow, bones, nerves <span
id="fr_155"></span>[157](#fn_155.md) , sinews, tendons, flesh, surface,
cartilages, fat, hair, nails, perspiration, vapours, phlegm, bile, and
besides these, all useless superfluities deriving from the same source.
You could not name either an organ, whether of motion or sensation, or
anything else making up the body’s bulk, which was not formed (in spite
of startling differences) from this one and selfsame operation of
feeding. If one were to compare the mechanic arts too it will be seen
what is the scientific value of his statement; for there we see in them
all the same operation, I mean the movement of the hands; but what have
the results in common? What has building a shrine to do with a coat,
though manual labour is employed on both? The house-breaker and the
well-digger both move their hands: the mining of the earth, the murder
of a man are results of the motion of the hands. The soldier slays the
foe, and the husbandman wields the fork which breaks the clod, with his
hands. How, then, can this doctrinaire lay it down that the ‘same
energies produce sameness of work?’ But even if we were to grant that
this view of his had any truth in it, the essential union of the Son
with the Father, and of the <span id="page_LXXII">p. LXXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-Page_LXXII"></span>Holy Spirit with the Son, is yet
again more fully proved. For if there existed any variation in their
energies, so that the Son worked His will in a different manner to the
Father, then (on the above supposition) it would be fair to conjecture,
from this variation, a variation also in the beings which were the
result of these varying energies. But if it is true that the manner of
the Father’s working is likewise the manner always of the Son’s, both
from our Lord’s own words and from what we should have expected *a
priori*—(for the one is not unbodied while the other is embodied, the
one is not from this material, the other from that, the one does not
work his will in this time and place, the other in that time and place,
nor is there difference of organs in them producing difference of
result, but the sole movement of their wish and of their will is
sufficient, seconded in the founding of the universe by the power that
can create anything)—if, I say, it is true that in all respects the
Father from Whom are all things, and the Son by Whom are all things in
the actual form of their operation work alike, then how can this man
hope to prove the essential difference between the Son and the Holy
Ghost by any difference and separation between the working of the Son
and the Father? The very opposite, as we have just seen, is proved to be
the case <span id="fr_156"></span>[158](#fn_156.md) ; seeing that there is
no manner of difference contemplated between the working of the Father
and that of the Son; and so that there is no gulf whatever between the
being of the Son and the being of the Spirit, is shewn by the identity
of the power which gives them their subsistence; and our pamphleteer
himself confirms this; for these are his words *verbatim*: “the same
energies producing sameness of works.” If sameness of works is really
produced by likeness of energies, and if (as they say) the Son is the
work of the Father and the Spirit the work of the Son, the likeness in
manner <span id="fr_157"></span>[159](#fn_157.md) of the Father’s and the
Son’s energies will demonstrate the sameness of these beings who each
result from them.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p8"></span>But he adds, “variation in the
works indicates variation in the energies.” How, again, is this dictum
of his corroborated by facts? Look, if you please, at plain instances.
Is not the ‘energy’ of command, in Him who embodied the world and all
things therein by His sole will, a single energy? “He spake and they
were made. He commanded and they were created.” Was not the thing
commanded in every case alike given existence: did not His single will
suffice to give subsistence to the nonexistent? How, then, when such
vast differences are seen coming from that one energy of command, can
this man shut his eyes to realities, and declare that the difference of
works indicates difference of energies? If our dogmatist insists on
this, that difference of works implies difference of energies, then we
should have expected the very contrary to that which is the case; viz.,
that everything in the world should be of one type. Can it be that he
does see here a universal likeness, and detects unlikeness only between
the Father and the Son?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p9"></span>Let him, then, observe, if he
never did before, the dissimilarity amongst the elements of the world,
and how each thing that goes to make up the framework of the whole hangs
on to its natural opposite. Some objects are light and buoyant, others
heavy and gravitating; some are always still, others always moving; and
amongst these last some move unchangingly on one plan <span
id="fr_158"></span>[160](#fn_158.md) , as the heaven, for instance, and the
planets, whose courses all revolve the opposite way to the universe,
others are transfused in all directions and rush at random, as air and
sea for instance, and every substance which is naturally
penetrating <span id="fr_159"></span>[161](#fn_159.md) . What need to
mention the contrasts seen between heat and cold, moist and dry, high
and low position? As for the numerous dissimilarities amongst animals
and plants, on the score of figure and size, and all the variations of
their products and their qualities, the human mind would fail to follow
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[LXXI:155](2050043.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> *is preserved alive;* <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>ξωογονεῖται</span>. This is the LXX.,
not the classical use, of the word. Cf. [Exod.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#017.md), [Judg.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>, &c. It is reproduced in the speech
of S. Stephen, [Acts 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#019.md), [Luke
17:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#033.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.3"></span>[Acts vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.4"></span>: cf. [Luke xvii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#033.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.5"></span>, “shall preserve (his life).”

<span id="fn_154"></span>[LXXI:156](2050043.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>ποκριτικοὺς</span>, *activè,* so, the
Medical writers. The Latin is ‘in meatus destinato descendit’ takes it
*passivè* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4.4"></span>ποκριτίκους</span>).

<span id="fn_155"></span>[LXXI:157](2050043.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>νεῦρα</span>. So since Galen’s time:
not ‘tendon.’

<span id="fn_156"></span>[LXXII:158](2050043.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p6"></span> Punctuating <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>παρασκευάζεται,
ἐπείδὴ, κ.τ.λ</span>. instead of a full stop, as Oehler.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[LXXII:159](2050043.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p7"></span> Gregory replaces ‘sameness’ (in
the case of the energies in Eunomius argument) by ‘likeness’ since the
Father and the Son could not be said to be the *same,* and their
energies, therefore, are not identical but similar.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[LXXII:160](2050043.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p10.2"></span>πὶ τὸ ἓν</span>.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[LXXII:161](2050043.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>ὐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvii-p11.2"></span>γρᾶς</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He falsely imagines that we can have an unalterable series of
harmonious natures existing side by side.](2050044.md)
