[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050014)  [Next](2050016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_XXXIV">p. XXXIV</span>
<span id="viii.i.ii-Page_XXXIV"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>Letter II.</span>

<span id="viii.i.ii-p2"></span>To his most pious brother Gregory. Peter
greeting in the Lord.

<span id="viii.i.ii-p3"></span>Having met with the writings of your
holiness and having perceived in your tract against this heresy your
zeal both for the truth and for our sainted father in God, I judge that
this work was not due simply to your own ability, but was that of one
who studied that the Truth should speak, even in the publication of his
own views. To the Holy Spirit of truth I would refer this plea for the
truth; just as to the father of lies, and not to Eunomius, should be
referred this animosity against sound faith. Indeed, that murderer from
the beginning who speaks in Eunomius has carefully whetted the sword
against himself; for if he had not been so bold against the truth, no
one would have roused you to undertake the cause of our religion. But to
the end that the rottenness and flimsiness of their doctrines may be
exposed, He who “taketh the wise in their own craftiness” hath allowed
them both to be headstrong against the truth, and to have laboured
vainly on this vain speech.

<span id="viii.i.ii-p4"></span>But since he that hath begun a good work
will finish it, faint not in furthering the Spirit’s power, nor leave
half-won the victory over the assailants of Christ’s glory; but imitate
thy true father who, like the zealot Phineas, pierced with one stroke of
his Answer both master and pupil. Plunge with thy intellectual arm the
sword of the Spirit through both these heretical pamphlets, lest, though
broken on the head, the serpent affright the simpler sort by still
quivering in the tail. When the first arguments have been answered,
should the last remain unnoticed, the many will suspect that they still
retain some strength against the truth.

<span id="viii.i.ii-p5"></span>The feeling shewn in your treatise will
be grateful, as salt, to the palate of the soul. As bread cannot be
eaten, according to Job, without salt, so the discourse which is not
savoured with the inmost sentiments of God’s word will never wake, and
never move, desire.

<span id="viii.i.ii-p6"></span>Be strong, then, in the thought that thou
art a beautiful example to succeeding times of the way in which
good-hearted children should act towards their virtuous fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](2050016)
