[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050193)  [Next](2050195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p1"></span> XII. *An examination of the question
where the ruling principle is to be considered to reside; wherein also
is a discussion of tears and laughter, and a physiological speculation
as to the inter-relation of matter, nature, and mind.* <span
id="fr_1625"></span>[1627](#fn_1625)

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>1. Let there be an end, then, of all
the vain and conjectural discussion of those who confine the
intelligible energy to certain bodily organs; of whom some lay it down
that the ruling principle is in the heart, while others say that the
mind resides in the brain, strengthening such opinions by some plausible
superficialities. For he who ascribes the principal authority to the
heart makes its local position evidence of his argument (because it
seems that it somehow occupies the middle position in the body <span
id="fr_1626"></span>[1628](#fn_1626) ), on the ground that the motion of
the will is easily distributed from the centre to the whole body, and so
proceeds to operation; and he makes the troublesome and passionate
disposition of man a testimony for his argument, because such affections
seem to move this part sympathetically. Those, on the other hand, who
consecrate the brain to reasoning, say that the head has been built by
nature as a kind of citadel of the whole body, and that in it the mind
dwells like a king, with a bodyguard of senses surrounding it like
messengers and shield-bearers. And these find a sign of their opinion in
the fact that the reasoning of those who have suffered some injury to
the membrane of the brain is abnormally distorted, and that those whose
heads are heavy with intoxication ignore what is seemly.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p5"></span>2. Each of those who uphold these
views puts forward some reasons of a more physical character on behalf
of his opinion concerning the ruling principle. One declares that the
motion which proceeds from the understanding is in some way akin to the
nature of fire, because fire and the understanding are alike in
perpetual motion; and since heat is allowed to have its source in the
region of the heart, he says on this ground that the motion of mind is
compounded with the mobility of heat, and asserts that the heart, in
which heat is enclosed, is the receptacle of the intelligent nature. The
other declares that the cerebral membrane (for so they call the tissue
that surrounds the brain) is as it were a foundation or root of all the
senses, and hereby makes good his own argument, on the ground that the
intellectual energy cannot have its seat save in that part where the
ear, connected with it, comes into concussion with the sounds that fall
upon it, and the sight (which naturally belongs to the hollow of the
place where the eyes are situated) makes its internal representation by
means of the images that fall upon the pupils, while the qualities of
scents are discerned in it by being drawn in through the nose, and the
sense of taste is tried by the test of the cerebral membrane, which
sends down from itself, by the veterbræ of the neck, sensitive
nerve-processes to the isthmoidal passage, and unites them with the
muscles there.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>3. I admit it to be true that the
intellectual part of the soul is often disturbed by prevalence of
passions; and that the reason is blunted by some bodily accident so as
to hinder its natural operation; and that the heart is a sort of source
of the fiery element in the body, and is moved in correspondence with
the impulses of passion; and moreover, in addition to this, I do not
reject (as I hear very much the same account from those who spend their
time on anatomical researches) the statement that the cerebral membrane
(according to the theory of those who take such a physiological view),
enfolding in itself the brain, and steeped in the vapours that issue
from it, forms a foundation for the senses; yet I do not hold this for a
proof that the incorporeal nature is bounded by any limits of place.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p7"></span>4. Certainly we are aware that mental
aberrations do not arise from heaviness of head alone, but skilled
physicians declare that our intellect is also weakened by the membranes
that underlie the sides being affected by disease, when they call the
disease frenzy, since the name given to those membranes is <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>φρένες</span>. And the
sensation resulting from sorrow is mistakenly supposed to arise at the
heart; for while it is not the heart, but the entrance of the belly that
is pained, people ignorantly refer the affection to the heart. Those,
however, who have carefully studied the affections in question give some
such account as follows:—by a compression and closing of the pores,
which naturally takes place over the whole body in a condition of grief,
everything that meets a hindrance in its passage is driven to the
cavities in the interior of the body, and hence also (as the respiratory
organs too are pressed by what surrounds them), the drawing <span
id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-Page_398"></span>of
breath often becomes more violent under the influence of nature
endeavouring to widen what has been contracted, so as to open out the
compressed passages; and such breathing we consider a symptom of grief
and call it a groan or a shriek. That, moreover, which appears to
oppress the region of the heart is a painful affection, not of the
heart, but of the entrance of the stomach, and occurs from the same
cause (I mean, that of the compression of the pores), as the vessel that
contains the bile, contracting, pours that bitter and pungent juice upon
the entrance of the stomach; and a proof of this is that the complexion
of those in grief becomes sallow and jaundiced, as the bile pours its
own juice into the veins by reason of excessive pressure.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p8"></span>5. Furthermore, the opposite
affection, that, I mean, of mirth and laughter, contributes to establish
the argument; for the pores of the body, in the case of those who are
dissolved in mirth by hearing something pleasant, are also somehow
dissolved and relaxed. Just as in the former case the slight and
insensible exhalations of the pores are checked by grief, and, as they
compress the internal arrangement of the higher viscera, drive up
towards the head and the cerebral membrane the humid vapour which, being
retained in excess by the cavities of the brain, is driven out by the
pores at its base <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1629](#fn_1627) , while the
closing of the eyelids expels the moisture in the form of drops (and the
drop is called a tear), so I would have you think that when the pores,
as a result of the contrary condition, are unusually widened, some air
is drawn in through them into the interior, and thence again expelled by
nature through the passage of the mouth, while all the viscera (and
especially, as they say, the liver) join in expelling this air by a
certain agitation and throbbing motion; whence it comes that nature,
contriving to give facility for the exit of the air, widens the passage
of the mouth, extending the cheeks on either side round about the
breath; and the result is called laughter.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p10"></span>6. We must not, then, on this account
ascribe the ruling principle any more to the liver than we must think,
because of the heated state of the blood about the heart in wrathful
dispositions, that the seat of the mind is in the heart; but we must
refer these matters to the character of our bodily organization, and
consider that the mind is equally in contact with each of the parts
according to a kind of combination which is indescribable.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p11"></span>7. Even if any should allege to us on
this point the Scripture which claims the ruling principle for the
heart, we shall not receive the statement without examination; for he
who makes mention of the heart speaks also of the reins, when he says,
“God trieth the hearts and reins” <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1630](#fn_1628) ; so that they must either confine
the intellectual principle to the two combined or to neither.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p13"></span>8. And although I am aware that the
intellectual energies are blunted, or even made altogether ineffective
in a certain condition of the body, I do not hold this a sufficient
evidence for limiting the faculty of the mind by any particular place,
so that it should be forced out of its proper amount of free space by
any inflammations that may arise in the neighbouring parts of the
body <span id="fr_1629"></span>[1631](#fn_1629) (for such an opinion is
a corporeal one, that when the receptacle is already occupied by
something placed in it, nothing else can find place there); for the
intelligible nature neither dwells in the empty spaces of bodies, nor is
extruded by encroachments of the flesh; but since the whole body is made
like some musical instrument, just as it often happens in the case of
those who know how to play, but are unable, because the unfitness of the
instrument does not admit of their art, to show their skill (for that
which is destroyed by time, or broken by a fall, or rendered useless by
rust or decay, is mute and inefficient, even if it be breathed upon by
one who may be an excellent artist in flute-playing); so too the mind,
passing over the whole instrument, and touching each of the parts in a
mode corresponding to its intellectual activities, according to its
nature, produces its proper effect on those parts which are in a natural
condition, but remains inoperative and ineffective upon those which are
unable to admit the movement of its art; for the mind is somehow
naturally adapted to be in close relation with that which is in a
natural condition, but to be alien from that which is removed from
nature.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p15"></span>9.  <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1632](#fn_1630) And here, I think there is a view
of the matter more close to nature, by which we may learn something of
the more refined doctrines. For since the most beautiful and supreme
good of all is the Divinity Itself, to which incline all things that
have a tendency towards what is beautiful and good <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1633](#fn_1631) , we therefore say that the <span
id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-Page_399"></span>mind, as being in the image of the
most beautiful, itself also remains in beauty and goodness so long as it
partakes as far as is possible in its likeness to the archetype; but if
it were at all to depart from this it is deprived of that beauty in
which it was. And as we said that the mind was adorned <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1634](#fn_1632) by the likeness of the archetypal
beauty, being formed as though it were a mirror to receive the figure of
that which it expresses, we consider that the nature which is governed
by it is attached to the mind in the same relation, and that it too is
adorned by the beauty that the mind gives, being, so to say, a mirror of
the mirror; and that by it is swayed and sustained the material element
of that existence in which the nature is contemplated.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p19"></span>10. Thus so long as one keeps in
touch with the other, the communication of the true beauty extends
proportionally through the whole series, beautifying by the superior
nature that which comes next to it; but when there is any interruption
of this beneficent connection, or when, on the contrary, the superior
comes to follow the inferior, then is displayed the misshapen character
of matter, when it is isolated from nature (for in itself matter is a
thing without form or structure), and by its shapelessness is also
destroyed that beauty of nature with which <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1635](#fn_1633) it is adorned through the mind; and
so the transmission of the ugliness of matter reaches through the nature
to the mind itself, so that the image of God is no longer seen in the
figure expressed by that which was moulded according to it; for the
mind, setting the idea of good like a mirror behind the back, turns off
the incident rays of the effulgence of the good, and it receives into
itself the impress of the shapelessness of matter.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p21"></span>11. And in this way is brought about
the genesis of evil, arising through the withdrawal of that which is
beautiful and good. Now all is beautiful and good that is closely
related to the First Good; but that which departs from its relation and
likeness to this is certainly devoid of beauty and goodness. If, then,
according to the statement we have been considering, that which is truly
good is one, and the mind itself also has its power of being beautiful
and good, in so far as it is in the image of the good and beautiful, and
the nature, which is sustained by the mind, has the like power, in so
far as it is an image of the image, it is hereby shown that our material
part holds together, and is upheld when it is controlled by nature; and
on the other hand is dissolved and disorganized when it is separated
from that which upholds and sustains it, and is dissevered from its
conjunction with beauty and goodness.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p22"></span>12. Now such a condition as this does
not arise except when there takes place an overturning of nature to the
opposite state, in which the desire has no inclination for beauty and
goodness, but for that which is in need of the adorning element; for it
must needs be that that which is made like to matter, destitute as
matter is of form of its own, should be assimilated to it in respect of
the absence alike of form and of beauty.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p23"></span>13. We have, however, discussed these
points in passing, as following on our argument, since they were
introduced by our speculation on the point before us; for the subject of
enquiry was, whether the intellectual faculty has its seat in any of the
parts of us, or extends equally over them all; for as for those who shut
up the mind locally in parts of the body, and who advance for the
establishment of this opinion of theirs the fact that the reason has not
free course in the case of those whose cerebral membranes are in an
unnatural condition, our argument showed that in respect of every part
of the compound nature of man, whereby every man has some natural
operation, the power of the soul remains equally ineffective if the part
does not continue in its natural condition. And thus there came into our
argument, following out this line of thought, the view we have just
stated, by which we learn that in the compound nature of man the mind is
governed by God, and that by it is governed our material life, provided
the latter remains in its natural state, but if it is perverted from
nature it is alienated also from that operation which is carried on by
the mind.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p24"></span>14. Let us return however once more
to the point from which we started—that in those who are not perverted
from their natural condition by some affection, the mind exercises its
own power, and is established firmly in those who are in sound health,
but on the contrary is powerless in those who do not admit its
operation; for we may confirm our opinion on these matters by yet other
arguments: and if it is not tedious for those to hear who are already
wearied with our discourse, we shall discuss these matters also, so far
as we are able, in a few words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[397:1627](2050194.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p2"></span> In the Latin version chap. xii.
includes only §§1—8 (incl.), to which the Bodleian <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> gives the
title:—“That the principle of man does not all reside in the brain, but
in the whole body.”

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[397:1628](2050194.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> This view of the position of the
heart is perhaps shared by Gregory himself: see *e.g.* ch. xxx. §15.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[398:1629](2050194.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>διὰ τῶν κατὰ τὴν βάσιν πόρων</span>. The
meaning of this is obscure. If we might read <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>τῶν κατὰ τὴν ὀψιν πόρων</span>, we should
have a parallel to <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>τοῦ κατὰ τὸ στόμα πόρου</span> below. But
there seems to be no variation in the <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[398:1630](2050194.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p12"></span> [Ps. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[398:1631](2050194.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p14"></span> The inflammation causing swelling in
the neighbouring parts, and so leaving no room for the mind.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[398:1632](2050194.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p16"></span> The Latin version (as well as
several of the Greek <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span>) makes this the beginning of
chap. xiii. The Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p16.2"></span>ms.</span> gives as the title:—“That as
the mind is governed by God, so is the material life of the body by the
mind.”

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[398:1633](2050194.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>καλὸν</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.2"></span>τὸ καλὸν</span> seem
in the following passage to be used of goodness, alike moral and
aesthetic: once or twice <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.3"></span>καλὸν</span> seems to be used as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.5"></span>γαθὸν</span> or as opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.6"></span>κακὸν</span>, in a
sense capable of being rendered simply by “good”; it also seems to carry
with it in other phrases the distinct idea of *aesthetic* goodness, or
“beauty,” and the use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.7"></span>κάλλος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.8"></span>καλλωπίζειν</span>,
in other phrases still, makes it necessary to preserve this idea in
translation. The phrases “beautiful and good,” or “beauty and goodness,”
have therefore been here adopted to express the single adjective <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.9"></span>καλὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[399:1634](2050194.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p17.10"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p18"></span> Omitting <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>τοῦ</span>, which Forbes inserts before
<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>κατακοσμεῖσθαι</span>: it appears to be
found in all the <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p18.3"></span>mss.</span>, but its insertion reduces
the grammar of the passage to hopeless confusion. Perhaps the true
reading is <span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p18.4"></span>τοῦ
πρωτοτύπου καλλιστοῦ</span>

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[399:1635](2050194.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p20"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>ᾧ</span>, with several of Forbes’ <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p20.2"></span>mss.</span>, for the
<span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p20.3"></span>ἥ</span>of the
Paris ed., and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xiii-p20.4"></span>ὅ</span> of Forbes’ text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Rationale of sleep, of yawning, and of dreams.](2050195)
