[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050119)  [Next](2050121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Then, having shown that
Eunomius’ calumny against the great Basil, that he called the
Only-begotten “Ungenerate,” is false, and having again with much
ingenuity discussed the eternity, being, and endlessness of the
Only-begotten, and the creation of light and of darkness, he concludes
the book.*

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p2"></span>With regard to his attempting to show
that we say the Only-begotten God is ungenerate, it is as though he
should say that we actually define the Father to be begotten: for either
statement is of the same absurdity, or rather of the same blas<span
id="page_CCXVII">p. CCXVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-Page_CCXVII"></span>phemous character. If, therefore,
he has made up his mind to slander us, let him add the other charge as
well, and spare nothing by which it may be in his power more violently
to exasperate his hearers against us. But if one of these charges is
withheld because its calumnious nature is apparent, why is the other
made? For it is just the same thing, as we have said, so far as the
impiety goes, to call the Son ungenerate and to call the Father
generated. Now if any such phrase can be found in our writings, in which
the Son is spoken of as ungenerate, we shall give the final vote against
ourselves: but if he is fabricating false charges and calumnies at his
pleasure, making any fictitious statement he pleases to slander our
doctrines, this fact may serve with sensible men for an evidence of our
orthodoxy, that while truth itself fights on our side, he brings forward
a lie to accuse our doctrine and makes up an indictment for unorthodoxy
that has no relation to our statements. To these charges, however, we
can give a concise answer. As we judge that man accursed who says that
the Only-begotten God is ungenerate, let him in turn anathematize the
man who lays it down that He who was in the beginning “once was not.”
For by such a method it will be shown who brings his charges truly, and
who calumniously. But if we deny his accusations, if, when we speak of a
Father, we understand as implied in that word a Son also, and if, when
we use the name “Son,” we declare that He really is what He is called,
being shed forth by generation from the ungenerate Light, how can the
calumny of those who persist that we say the Only-begotten is ungenerate
fail to be manifest? Yet we shall not, because we say that He exists by
generation, therefore admit that He “once was not.” For every one knows
that the contradiction between “being” and “not being” is immediate, so
that the affirmation of one of these terms is absolutely the destruction
of the other, and that, just as “being” is the same in regard to every
time at which any of the things that “are” is supposed to have its
existence (for the sky, and stars, and sun, and the rest of the things
that “are,” are not more in a state of being now than they were
yesterday, or the day before, or at any previous time), so the meaning
of “not being” expresses non-existence equally at every time, whether
one speaks of it in reference to what is earlier or to what is later.
For any of the things that do not exist <span
id="fr_919"></span>[921](#fn_919.md) is no more in a state of “not being”
now than if it were non-existent before, but the idea of “not being” is
one applied to that which “is not” at any distance of time. And for this
reason, in speaking of living creatures, while we use different words to
denote the dissolution into a state of “not being” of that which has
been, and the condition of non-existence of that which has never had an
entrance into being, and say either that a thing has never come into
being at all, or that which was generated has died, yet by either form
of speech we equally represent by our words “non-existence.” For as day
is bounded on each side by night, yet the parts of the night which bound
it are not named alike, but we speak of one as “after night-fall,” and
of the other as “before dawn,” while that which both phrases denote is
night, so, if any one looks on that which *is not* in contrast to that
which *is,* he will give different names to that state which is
antecedent to formation and to that which follows the dissolution of
what was formed, yet will conceive as one the condition which both
phrases signify—the condition which is antecedent to formation and the
condition following on dissolution after formation. For the state of
“not being” of that which has not been generated, and of that which has
died, save for the difference of the names, are the same,—with the
exception of the account which we take of the hope of the resurrection.
Now since we learn from Scripture that the Only-begotten God is the
Prince of Life, the very life, and light, and truth, and all that is
honourable in word or thought, we say that it is absurd and impious to
contemplate, in conjunction with Him Who really is, the opposite
conception, whether of dissolution tending to corruption, or of
non-existence before formation: but as we extend our thought in every
direction to what is to follow, or to what was before the ages, we
nowhere pause in our conceptions at the condition of “not being,”
judging it to tend equally to impiety to cut short the Divine being by
non-existence at any time whatever. For it is the same thing to say that
the immortal life is mortal, that the truth is a lie, that light is
darkness, and that that which is is not. He, accordingly, who refuses to
allow that He will at some future time cease to be, will also refuse to
allow that He “once was not,” avoiding, according to our view, the same
impiety on either hand: for, as no death cuts short the endlessness of
the life of the Only-begotten, so, as we look back, no period of
nonexistence will terminate His life in its course towards eternity,
that that which in reality *is* may be clear of all community with that
which in reality *is not.* For this cause the Lord, desiring that His
disciples might be far removed from this error (that they might never,
by themselves searching for something antecedent to <span
id="page_CCXVIII">p. CCXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-Page_CCXVIII"></span>the existence of the
Only-begotten, be led by their reasoning to the idea of non-existence),
saith, “I am in the Father, and the Father in Me <span
id="fr_920"></span>[922](#fn_920.md) ,” in the sense that neither is that
which *is not* conceived in that which *is*, nor that which is in that
which *is not*. And here the very order of the phrase explains the
orthodox doctrine; for because the Father is not of the Son, but the Son
of the Father, therefore He says, “I am in the Father,” showing the fact
that He is not of another but of Him, and then reverses the phrase to,
“and the Father in Me,” indicating that he who, in his curious
speculation, passes beyond the Son, passes also beyond the conception of
the Father: for He who is in anything cannot be found outside of that in
which He is: so that the man who, while not denying that the Father is
in the Son, yet imagines that he has in any degree apprehended the
Father as external to the Son, is talking idly. Idle too are the
wanderings of our adversaries’ fighting about shadows touching the
matter of “ungeneracy,” proceeding without solid foundation by means of
nonentities. Yet if I am to bring more fully to light the whole
absurdity of their argument, let me be allowed to spend a little longer
on this speculation. As they say that the Only-begotten God came into
existence “later,” after the Father, this “unbegotten” of theirs,
whatever they imagine it to be, is discovered of necessity to exhibit
with itself the idea of evil. Who knows not, that, just as the
non-existent is contrasted with the existent, so with every good thing
or name is contrasted the opposite conception, as “bad” with “good,”
“falsehood” with “truth,” “darkness” with “light,” and all the rest that
are similarly opposed to one another, where the opposition admits of no
middle term, and it is impossible that the two should co-exist, but the
presence of the one destroys its opposite, and with the withdrawal of
the other takes place the appearance of its contrary?

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p5"></span>Now these points being conceded to us,
the further point is also clear to any one, that, as Moses says darkness
was before the creation of light, so also in the case of the Son (if,
according to the heretical statement, the Father “made Him at that time
when He willed”), before He made Him, that Light which the Son is was
not; and, light not yet being, it is impossible that its opposite should
not be. For we learn also from the other instances that nothing that
comes from the Creator is at random, but that which was lacking is added
by creation to existing things. Thus it is quite clear that if God did
make the Son, He made Him by reason of a deficiency in the nature of
things. As, then, while sensible light was still lacking, there was
darkness, and darkness would certainly have prevailed had light not come
into being, so also, when the Son “as yet was not,” the very and true
Light, and all else that the Son is, did not exist. For even according
to the evidence of heresy, that which exists has no need of coming into
being; if therefore He made Him, He assuredly made that which did not
exist. Thus, according to their view, before the Son came into being,
neither had truth come into being, nor the intelligible Light, nor the
fount of life, nor, generally, the nature of any thing that is excellent
and good. Now, concurrently with the exclusion of each of these, there
is found to subsist the opposite conception: and if light was not, it
cannot be denied that darkness *was;* and so with the rest,—in place of
each of these more excellent conceptions it is clearly impossible that
its opposite did not exist in place of that which was lacking. It is
therefore a necessary conclusion, that when the Father, as the heretics
say, “had not as yet willed to make the Son,” none of those things which
the Son is being yet existent, we must say that He was surrounded by
darkness instead of Light, by falsehood instead of truth, by death
instead of life, by evil instead of good. For He Who creates, creates
things that are not; “That which is,” as Eunomius says, “needs not
generation”; and of those things which are considered as opposed, the
better cannot be non-existent, except by the existence of the worse.
These are the gifts with which the wisdom of heresy honours the Father,
by which it degrades the eternity of the Son, and ascribes to God and
the Father, before the “production” of the Son, the whole catalogue of
evils!

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p6"></span>And let no one think to rebut by
examples from the rest of creation the demonstration of the doctrinal
absurdity which results from this argument. One will perhaps say that,
as, when the sky was not, there was no opposite to it, so we are not
absolutely compelled to admit that if the Son, Who is Truth, had not
come into existence, the opposite did exist. To him we may reply that to
the sky there is no corresponding opposite, unless one were to say that
its non-existence is opposed to its existence. But to virtue is
certainly opposed that which is vicious (and the Lord is virtue); so
that when the sky was not, it does not follow that anything *was*; but
when good was not, its opposite *was*; thus he who says that good was
not, will certainly allow, even without intending it, that evil *was*.
“But the Father also,” he says <span id="fr_921"></span>[923](#fn_921.md) ,
“is absolute virtue, and life, and light unapproachable, and all that is
exalted in word or thought: so that there is no necessity to suppose,
when <span id="page_CCXIX">p. CCXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-Page_CCXIX"></span>the Only-begotten Light was not, the
existence of that darkness which is His corresponding opposite.” But
this is just what I say, that darkness never was; for the light never
“was not,” for “the light,” as the prophecy says, “is always in the
light <span id="fr_922"></span>[924](#fn_922.md) .” If, however, according
to the heretical doctrine, the “ungenerate light” is one thing, and the
“generated light” another, and the one is eternal, while the other comes
into existence at a later time, it follows of absolute necessity that in
the eternal light we should find no place for the establishment of its
opposite; (for if the light always shines, the power of darkness has no
place in it;) and that in the case of the light which comes into being,
as they say, afterwards, it is impossible that the light should shine
forth save out of darkness; and the interval of darkness between eternal
light and that which arises later will be clearly marked in every
way. <span id="fr_923"></span>[925](#fn_923.md) For there would have been
no need of the making of the later light, if that which was created had
not been of utility for some purpose: and the one use of light is that
of the dispersion by its means of the prevailing gloom. Now the light
which exists without creation is what it is by nature by reason of
itself; but the created light clearly comes into being by reason of
something else. It must be then that its existence was preceded by
darkness, on account of which the light was of necessity created, and it
is not possible by any reasoning to make plausible the view that
darkness did not precede the manifestation of the Only-begotten
Light,—on the supposition, that is, that He is believed to have been
“made” at a later time. Surely such a doctrine is beyond all impiety! It
is therefore clearly shown that the Father of truth did not make the
truth at a time when it was not; but, being the fountain of light and
truth, and of all good, He shed forth from Himself that Only-begotten
Light of truth by which the glory of His Person is expressly imaged; so
that the blasphemy of those who say that the Son was a later addition to
God by way of creation is at all points refuted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_919"></span>[CCXVII:921](2050120.htm#fr_919.md) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p3"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p3.1"></span>τῶν μὴ ὑφεστώτων</span>, as the sense
seems to require, unless we connect <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p3.2"></span>τῶν ὑφεστώτων</span> with <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p3.3"></span>οὐκ ἔστιν</span>. In
this case the sense will be practically the same, but the sentence will
be extremely involved. The point which S. Gregory desires to enforce is
that “not being,” or “non-existence,” is one and the same thing, whether
it is regarded as past, present, or future, and that it is, in any of
these aspects, an idea which we cannot without impiety attach to the
Divine Person of the Son.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[CCXVIII:922](2050120.htm#fr_920.md) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p4"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md)<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_921"></span>[CCXVIII:923](2050120.htm#fr_921.md) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p7"></span> The words are probably those of the
imaginary objector; but they may be a citation from Eunomius.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[CCXIX:924](2050120.htm#fr_922.md) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p8"></span> The reference is probably to [Ps.
xxxvi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009.md)<span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[CCXIX:925](2050120.htm#fr_923.md) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iv-p9"></span> *i.e.*the “later light” must have
arisen from darkness; therefore darkness must have intervened between
the “eternal light” and the “later light.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X](2050121.md)
