[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050143)  [Next](2050145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_CCCXXXVII">p.
CCCXXXVII</span> <span id="viii.vi-Page_CCCXXXVII"></span><span
class="c9"><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>On the Faith.</span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="viii.vi-p2.1"></span>To Simplicius.</span>

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>God</span> commands us by His prophet not to
esteem any new God to be God, and not to worship any strange God <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1323](#fn_1321) . Now it is clear that that is
called new which is not from everlasting, and on the contrary, that is
called everlasting which is not new. He, then, who does not believe that
the Only-begotten God is from everlasting of the Father does not deny
that He is new, for that which is not everlasting is confessedly new;
and that which is new is not God, according to the saying of Scripture,
“there shall not be in thee any new God <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[1324](#fn_1322) .” Therefore he who says that the
Son “once was not <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1325](#fn_1323) ,” denies
His Godhead. Again, He Who says “thou shalt never worship a strange
God <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1326](#fn_1324) ” forbids us to worship
another God; and the strange God is so called in contradistinction to
our own God. Who, then, is our own God? Clearly, the true God. And who
is the strange God? Surely, he who is alien from the nature of the true
God. If, therefore, our own God is the true God, and if, as the heretics
say, the Only-begotten God is not of the nature of the true God, He is a
strange God, and not our God. But the Gospel says, the sheep “will not
follow a stranger <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1327](#fn_1325) .” He that
says He is created will make Him alien from the nature of the true God.
What then will they do, who say that He is created? Do they worship that
same created being as God <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1328](#fn_1326) ,
or do they not? For if they do not worship Him, they follow the Jews in
denying the worship of Christ: and if they do worship Him, they are
idolaters, for they worship one alien from the true God. But surely it
is equally impious not to worship the Son, and to worship the strange
God. We must then say that the Son is the true Son of the true Father,
that we may both worship Him, and avoid condemnation as worshipping a
strange God. But to those who quote from the Proverbs the passage, “the
Lord created me <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1329](#fn_1327) ,” and think
that they hereby produce a strong argument that the Creator and Maker of
all things was created, we must answer that the Only-begotten God was
*made* for us many things. For He was the Word, and was made flesh; and
He was God, and was made man; and He was without body, and was made a
body; and besides, He was made “sin,” and “a curse,” and “a stone,” and
“an axe,” and “bread,” and “a lamb,” and “a way,” and “a door,” and “a
rock,” and many such things; not being by nature any of these, but being
made these things for our sakes, by way of dispensation. As, therefore,
being the Word, He was for our sakes made flesh, and as, being God, He
was made man, so also, being the Creator, He was made for our sakes a
creature; for the flesh is created. As, then, He said by the prophet,
“Thus saith the Lord, He that formed me from the womb to be His
servant <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1330](#fn_1328) ;” so He said also by
Solomon, “The Lord created me as the beginning of His ways, for His
works <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1331](#fn_1329) .” For all creation, as
the Apostle says, is in servitude <span
id="fr_1330"></span>[1332](#fn_1330) . Therefore both He Who was formed
in the Virgin’s womb, according to the word of the prophet, is the
servant, and not the Lord (that is to say, the man according to the
flesh, in whom God was manifested), and also, in the other passage, He
Who was created as the beginning of His ways is not God, but the man in
whom God was manifested to us for the renewing again of the ruined way
of man’s salvation. So that, since we recognize two things in Christ,
one Divine, the other human (the Divine by nature, but the human in the
Incarnation), we accordingly claim for the Godhead that which is
eternal, and that which is created we ascribe to His human nature. For
as, according to the prophet, He was formed in the womb as a servant, so
also, according to Solomon, He was manifested in <span
id="page_CCCXXXVIII">p. CCCXXXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.vi-Page_CCCXXXVIII"></span>the flesh by means of this servile
creation. But when they say, “if He was, He was not begotten, and if He
was begotten He was not,” let them learn that it is not fitting to
ascribe to His Divine nature the attributes which belong to His fleshly
origin <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1333](#fn_1331) . For bodies which do
not exist, are generated, and God makes those things to be which are
not, but does not Himself come into being from that which is not. And
for this reason also Paul calls Him “the brightness of glory <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1334](#fn_1332) ,” that we may learn that as the
light from the lamp is of the nature of that which sheds the brightness,
and is united with it (for as soon as the lamp appears the light that
comes from it shines out simultaneously), so in this place the Apostle
would have us consider both that the Son is of the Father, and that the
Father is never without the Son; for it is impossible that glory should
be without radiance, as it is impossible that the lamp should be without
brightness. But it is clear that as His being brightness is a testimony
to His being in relation with the glory (for if the glory did not exist,
the brightness shed from it would not exist), so, to say that the
brightness “once was not <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1335](#fn_1333) ” is
a declaration that the glory also was not, when the brightness was not;
for it is impossible that the glory should be without the brightness. As
therefore it is not possible to say in the case of the brightness, “If
it was, it did not come into being, and if it came into being it was
not,” so it is in vain to say this of the Son, seeing that the Son is
the brightness. Let those also who speak of “less” and “greater,” in the
case of the Father and the Son, learn from Paul not to measure things
immeasurable. For the Apostle says that the Son is the express image of
the Person of the Father <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1336](#fn_1334) . It
is clear then that however great the Person of the Father is, so great
also is the express image of that Person; for it is not possible that
the express image should be less than the Person contemplated in it. And
this the great John also teaches when he says, “In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1337](#fn_1335) .” For in saying that he was “in
the beginning” and not “after the beginning,” he showed that the
beginning was never without the Word; and in declaring that “the Word
was with God,” he signified the absence of defect in the Son in relation
to the Father; for the Word is contemplated as a whole together with the
whole being of God. For if the Word were deficient in His own greatness
so as not to be capable of relation with the whole being of God, we are
compelled to suppose that that part of God which extends beyond the Word
is without the Word. But in fact the whole magnitude of the Word is
contemplated together with the whole magnitude of God: and consequently
in statements concerning the Divine nature, it is not admissible to
speak of “greater” and “less.”

<span id="viii.vi-p20"></span>As for those who say that the begotten is
in its nature unlike the unbegotten, let them learn from the example of
Adam and Abel not to talk nonsense. For Adam himself was not begotten
according to the natural generation of men; but Abel was begotten of
Adam. Now, surely, he who was never begotten is called unbegotten, and
he who came into being by generation is called begotten <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[1338](#fn_1336) ; yet the fact that he was not
begotten did not hinder Adam from being a man, nor did the generation of
Abel make him at all different from man’s nature, but both the one and
the other were men, although the one existed by being begotten, and the
other without generation. So in the case of our statements as to the
Divine nature, the fact of not being begotten, and that of being
begotten, produce no diversity of nature, but, just as in the case of
Adam and Abel the manhood is one, so is the Godhead one in the case of
the Father and the Son.

<span id="viii.vi-p22"></span>Now touching the Holy Spirit also the
blasphemers make the same statement as they do concerning the Lord,
saying that He too is created. But the Church believes, as concerning
the Son, so equally concerning the Holy Spirit, that He is uncreated,
and that the whole creation becomes good by participation in the good
which is above it, while the Holy Spirit needs not any to make Him good
(seeing that He is good by virtue of His nature, as the Scripture
testifies) <span id="fr_1337"></span>[1339](#fn_1337) ; that the
creation is guided by the Spirit, while the Spirit gives guidance; that
the creation is governed, while the Spirit governs; that the creation is
comforted, while the Spirit comforts; that the creation is in bondage,
while the Spirit gives freedom; that the creation is made wise, while
the Spirit gives the grace of wisdom; that the creation partakes of the
gifts, while the Spirit bestows them at His pleasure: “For all these
worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as He will <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1340](#fn_1338) .” And
one may find multitudes of other proofs from the Scriptures that all the
supreme and Divine attributes which are applied by the Scriptures to the
Father and the Son are also to be contemplated in the Holy
Spirit:—immortality, blessedness, goodness, wisdom, power, justice,
holiness—<span id="page_CCCXXXIX">p. CCCXXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.vi-Page_CCCXXXIX"></span>every excellent attribute is
predicated of the Holy Spirit just as it is predicated of the Father and
of the Son, with the exception of those by which the Persons are clearly
and distinctly divided from each other; I mean, that the Holy Spirit is
not called the Father, or the Son; but all other names by which the
Father and the Son are named are applied by Scripture to the Holy Spirit
also. By this, then, we apprehend that the Holy Spirit is above
creation. Thus, where the Father and the Son are understood to be, there
the Holy Spirit also is understood to be; for the Father and the Son are
above creation, and this attribute the drift of our argument claims for
the Holy Spirit. So it follows, that one who places the Holy Spirit
above the creation has received the right and sound doctrine: for he
will confess that uncreated nature which we behold in the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit to be one.

<span id="viii.vi-p25"></span>But since they bring forward as a proof,
according to their ideas, of the created nature of the Holy Spirit, that
utterance of the prophet, which says, “He that stablisheth the thunder
and createth the spirit, and declareth unto man His Christ, <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1341](#fn_1339) ” we must consider this, that the
prophet speaks of the creation of another Spirit, in the stablishing of
the thunder, and not of the Holy Spirit. For the name of “thunder” is
given in mystical language to the Gospel. Those, then, in whom arises
firm and unshaken faith in the Gospel, pass from being flesh to become
spirit, as the Lord says, “That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is spirit <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1342](#fn_1340) .” It is God, then, Who by
stablishing the voice of the Gospel makes the believer spirit: and he
who is born of the Spirit and made spirit by such thunder, “declares”
Christ; as the Apostle says, “No man can say that Jesus Christ is Lord
but by the Holy Spirit <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1343](#fn_1341) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1323](2050144.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="viii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span> Cf. [Ps.
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009), [Exod.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span id="viii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1324](2050144.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="viii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span> Cf. [Ps.
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009), [Exod.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span id="viii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1325](2050144.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="viii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span> Reading with Oehler, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p7.2"></span>λέγων ὅτι ποτε οὐκ ἦν ὁ υἱ&
232·ς</span>; not as the Paris editions, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p7.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p7.4"></span>λέγων ὅτι ποτε οὐκ ἦν, οὗτος</span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1326](2050144.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="viii.vi-p7.5"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span> Cf. [Ex. xx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1327](2050144.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="viii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span> S. [John x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1328](2050144.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="viii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span> Adding to the text of the Paris edit.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p10.1"></span>θεὸν</span>, with
Oehler.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1329](2050144.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="viii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Prov.
viii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028)<span
id="viii.vi-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1330](2050144.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="viii.vi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span> [Is. xlix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005)<span id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1331](2050144.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="viii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p13.1"></span>[Prov.
viii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028)<span
id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[CCCXXXVII:1332](2050144.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="viii.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span> Cf. [Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span id="viii.vi-p14.1"></span>.
This clause is omitted in the Paris editions.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1333](2050144.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="viii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p15.1"></span>γενεσέως</span> with Oehler. The Paris
editions read <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p15.2"></span>γεννησέως</span>: but Oehler’s reading seems
to give a better sense.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1334](2050144.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="viii.vi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p16"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1335](2050144.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="viii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p17"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p17.1"></span>ποτὲ</span> for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p17.2"></span>τὲ</span> of the Paris
Edit.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1336](2050144.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="viii.vi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p18"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1337](2050144.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="viii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p19"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1338](2050144.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="viii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p21"></span> Inserting with Oehler the clause, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p21.1"></span>καὶ ὁ γεννηθὲις
γεννητός</span>, which is not in the text of the Paris Editt, though a
corresponding clause appears in the Latin translation.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1339](2050144.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="viii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p23"></span> The reference may be to <span
id="viii.vi-p23.1"></span>[Ps. cxliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#010)<span id="viii.vi-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[CCCXXXVIII:1340](2050144.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="viii.vi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p24"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p24.1"></span>[1 Cor.
xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="viii.vi-p24.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[CCCXXXIX:1341](2050144.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="viii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p26"></span> Cf. [Amos iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013)<span id="viii.vi-p26.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[CCCXXXIX:1342](2050144.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="viii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p27"></span> S. [John iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span id="viii.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[CCCXXXIX:1343](2050144.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="viii.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ascetic and Moral Treatises.](2050145)
