[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050093)  [Next](2050095.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CLXXII">p.
CLXXII</span> <span id="viii.i.vii.i-Page_CLXXII"></span><span
class="c9"><span id="viii.i.vii.i-p1.1"></span>Book V.</span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p2"></span>§1. *The fifth book promises to speak
of the words contained in the saying of the Apostle Peter, but delays
their exposition. He discourses first of the creation, to the effect
that, while nothing therein is deserving of worship, yet men, led astray
by their ill-informed and feeble intelligence, and marvelling at its
beauty, deified the several parts of the universe. And herein he
excellently expounds the passage of Isaiah, “I am God, the first.”*

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p3.1"></span>It</span> is now, perhaps, time to make
enquiry into what is said concerning the words of the Apostle
Peter <span id="fr_686"></span>[688](#fn_686.md) , by Eunomius himself, and
by our father <span id="fr_687"></span>[689](#fn_687.md) concerning the
latter. If a detailed examination should extend our discourse to
considerable length, the fair-minded reader will no doubt pardon this,
and will not blame us for wasting time in words, but lay the blame on
him who has given occasion for them. Let me be allowed also to make some
brief remarks preliminary to the proposed enquiry: it may be that they
too will be found not to be out of keeping with the aim of our
discussion.

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p6"></span>That no created thing is deserving of
man’s worship, the divine word so clearly declares as a law, that such a
truth may be learned from almost the whole of the inspired Scripture.
Moses, the Tables, the Law, the Prophets that follow, the Gospels, the
decrees of the Apostles, all alike forbid the act of reverencing the
creation. It would be a lengthy task to set out in order the particular
passages which refer to this matter; but though we set out only a few
from among the many instances of the inspired testimony, our argument is
surely equally convincing, since each of the divine words, albeit the
least, has equal force for declaration of the truth. Seeing, then, that
our conception of existences is divided into two, the creation and the
uncreated Nature, if the present contention of our adversaries should
prevail, so that we should say that the Son of God is created, we should
be absolutely compelled either to set at naught the proclamation of the
Gospel, and to refuse to worship that God the Word Who was in the
beginning, on the ground that we must not address worship to the
creation, or, if these marvels recorded in the Gospels are too urgent
for us, by which we are led to reverence and to worship Him Who is
displayed in them, to place, in that case, the created and the Uncreated
on the same level of honour; seeing that if, according to our
adversaries’ opinion, even the created God is worshipped, though having
in His nature no prerogative above the rest of the creation, and if this
view should get the upper hand, the doctrines of religion will be
entirely transformed to a kind of anarchy and democratic independence.
For when men believe that the nature they worship is not one, but have
their thoughts turned away to diverse Godheads, there will be none who
will stay the conception of the Deity in its progress through creation,
but the Divine element, once recognized in creation, will become a
stepping-stone to the like conception in the case of that which is next
contemplated, and that again for the next in order, and as a result of
this inferential process the error will extend to all things, as the
first deceit makes its way by contiguous cases even to the very last.

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p7"></span>To show that I am not making a random
statement beyond what probability admits of, I will cite as a credible
testimony in favour of my assertion the error which still prevails among
the heathen <span id="fr_688"></span>[690](#fn_688.md) . Seeing that they,
with their untrained and narrow intelligence, were disposed to look with
wonder on the beauties of nature, not employing the things they beheld
as a leader and guide to the beauty of the Nature that transcends them,
they rather made their intelligence halt on arriving at the objects of
its apprehension, and marvelled at each part of the creation
severally—for this cause they did not stay their conception of the Deity
at any single one of the things they beheld, but deemed everything they
looked on in creation to be divine. And thus with the Egyptians, as the
error developed its force more in respect of intellectual objects, the
countless forms of spiritual beings were reckoned to be so many natures
of Gods; while with the Babylonians the un<span id="page_CLXXIII">p.
CLXXIII</span> <span id="viii.i.vii.i-Page_CLXXIII"></span>erring
circuit of the firmament was accounted a God, to whom they also gave the
name of Bel. So, too, the foolishness of the heathen deifying
individually the seven successive spheres, one bowed down to one,
another to another, according to some individual form of error. For as
they perceived all these circles moving in mutual relation, seeing that
they had gone astray as to the most exalted, they maintained the same
error by logical sequence, even to the last of them. And in addition to
these, the æther itself, and the atmosphere diffused beneath it, the
earth and sea and the subterranean region, and in the earth itself all
things which are useful or needful for man’s life,—of all these there
was none which they held to be without part or lot in the Divine nature,
but they bowed down to each of them, bringing themselves, by means of
some one of the objects conspicuous in the creation, into bondage to all
the successive parts of the creation, in such a way that, had the act of
reverencing the creation been from the beginning even to them a thing
evidently unlawful, they would not have been led astray into this deceit
of polytheism. Let us look to it, then, lest we too share the same
fate,—we who in being taught by Scripture to reverence the true Godhead,
were trained to consider all created existence as external to the Divine
nature, and to worship and revere that uncreated Nature alone, Whose
characteristic and token is that it never either begins to be or ceases
to be; since the great Isaiah thus speaks of the Divine nature with
reference to these doctrines, in his exalted utterance,—who speaks in
the person of the Deity, “I am the first, and hereafter am I, and no God
was before Me, and no God shall be after Me <span
id="fr_689"></span>[691](#fn_689.md) .” For knowing more perfectly than all
others the mystery of the religion of the Gospel, this great prophet,
who foretold even that marvellous sign concerning the Virgin, and gave
us the good tidings <span id="fr_690"></span>[692](#fn_690.md) of the birth
of the Child, and clearly pointed out to us that Name of the Son,—he, in
a word, who by the Spirit includes in himself all the truth,—in order
that the characteristic of the Divine Nature, whereby we discern that
which really *is* from that which came into being, might be made as
plain as possible to all, utters this saying in the person of God: “I am
the first, and hereafter am I, and before Me no God hath been, and after
Me is none.” Since, then, neither is that God which was before God, nor
is that God which is after God, (for that which is after God is the
creation, and that which is anterior to God is nothing, and Nothing is
not God;—or one should rather say, that which is anterior to God is God
in His eternal blessedness, defined in contradistinction to
Nothing <span id="fr_691"></span>[693](#fn_691.md) ;—since, I say, this
inspired utterance was spoken by the mouth of the prophet, we learn by
his means the doctrine that the Divine Nature is one, continuous with
Itself and indiscerptible, not admitting in Itself priority and
posteriority, though it be declared in Trinity, and with no one of the
things we contemplate in it more ancient or more recent than another.
Since, then, the saying is the saying of God, whether you grant that the
words are the words of the Father or of the Son, the orthodox doctrine
is equally upheld by either. For if it is the Father that speaks thus,
He bears witness to the Son that He is not “after” Himself: for if the
Son is God, and whatever is “after” the Father is not God, it is clear
that the saying bears witness to the truth that the Son is in the
Father, and not after the Father. If, on the other hand, one were to
grant that this utterance is of the Son, the phrase, “None hath been
before Me,” will be a clear intimation that He Whom we contemplate “in
the Beginning <span id="fr_692"></span>[694](#fn_692.md) ” is apprehended
together with the eternity of the Beginning. If, then, anything is
“after” God, this is discovered, by the passages quoted, to be a
creature, and not God: for He says, “That which is after Me is not
God <span id="fr_693"></span>[695](#fn_693.md) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_686"></span>[CLXXII:688](2050094.htm#fr_686.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p4"></span> The words referred to are those in
[Acts ii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[CLXXII:689](2050094.htm#fr_687.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p5"></span> S. Basil: the passages discussed are
afterwards referred to in detail.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[CLXXII:690](2050094.htm#fr_688.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p8"></span> With the following passage may be
compared the parallel account in the Book of [Wisd.
13](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#000.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[CLXXIII:691](2050094.htm#fr_689.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p9"></span> Cf. [Isa.
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004.md), [Isa.
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006.md), [Isa.
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012.md)<span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p9.1"></span>[Is. xli.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p9.2"></span>,
xliv. 6, xlviii. 12 (LXX.). If the whole passage is intended to be a
quotation, it is not made exactly from any one of these; the opening
words are from the second passage referred to; and perhaps this is the
only portion intended to be a quotation, the second clause being
explanatory; the words of the second clause are varied in the repetition
immediately afterwards.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[CLXXIII:692](2050094.htm#fr_690.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p10.1"></span>εὐαγγελισάμενος</span>

<span id="fn_691"></span>[CLXXIII:693](2050094.htm#fr_691.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p11.1"></span>πρὸς οὐδὲν ὁριζόμενος</span>; *i.e.*
before the name of “God” could be applied, as now, in contradistinction
to *creation*, it was applied in contradistinction to nothing, and that
distinction was in a sense the definition of God. Or the words may be
turned, as Gulonius turns them, “nulla re determinatus,” “with no
limitation”—the contradistinction to creation being regarded as a
limitation by way of definition.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[CLXXIII:694](2050094.htm#fr_692.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p12"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_693"></span>[CLXXIII:695](2050094.htm#fr_693.md) <span
id="viii.i.vii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.i-p13"></span> Taking the whole phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.i-p13.1"></span>τὸ μετ᾽ ἐμὲ ον</span>
as a loose quotation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then explains the phrase of S. Peter, “Him God made Lord and
Christ.” And herein he sets forth the opposing statement of Eunomius,
which he made on account of such phrase against S. Basil, and his
lurking revilings and insults.](2050095.md)
