[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050049)  [Next](2050051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> §34. *The Passage where he
attacks the ‘*Ομοούσιον*, and the contention in answer to it.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>I will omit to speak of the words
which occur before this passage which has been quoted. They contain
merely shameless abuse of our Master and Father in God, and nothing
bearing on the matter in hand. But on the passage itself, as he advances
by the device of this terrible dilemma a double-edged refutation, we
cannot be silent; we must accept the intellectual challenge, and fight
for the Faith with all the power we have, and show that the formidable
two-edged sword which he has sharpened is feebler than a make-believe in
a scene-painting.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p3"></span>He attacks the community of
substance with two suppositions; he says that we either name as Father
and as Son two independent principles drawn out parallel to each other,
and then say that one of these existencies is produced by the other
existence: or else we say that one and the same essence is conceived of,
participating in both names in turn, both being <span
id="fr_171"></span>[173](#fn_171) Father, and becoming Son, and itself
produced in generation from itself. I put this in my own words, thereby
not misinterpreting his thought, but only correcting the tumid
exaggeration of its expression, in such a way as to reveal his meaning
by clearer words and afford a comprehensive view of it. Having blamed us
for want of polish and for having brought to the controversy an
insufficient amount of learning, he decks out his own work in such a
glitter of style, and passes the nail <span
id="fr_172"></span>[174](#fn_172) , to use his own phrase, so often over
his own sentences, and makes his periods so smart with this elaborate
prettiness, that he captivates the reader at once with the attractions
of language; such amongst many others is the passage we have just
recited by way of preface. We will, by leave, again recite it. “And so
the scolding you have given is only a halter, not to be eluded, which
you have woven for your own necks; justice, as might have been expected,
records in your own words a verdict against yourselves.”

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p6"></span>Observe these flowers of the old
Attic; what polished brilliance of diction plays over his composition;
what a delicate and subtle charm of style is in bloom there! However,
let this be as people think. Our course requires us again to turn to the
thought in those words; let us plunge once more into the phrases of this
pamphleteer. “Either you conceive of the beings as separated and
independent of each other, and then bring down one of them, by
generation, to the rank of Son, and contend that One who exists
independently nevertheless was made by means of the Other existence.”
That is enough for the present. He says, then, that we preach <span
id="fr_173"></span>[175](#fn_173) two causeless Beings. How can this
man, who is always accusing us of levelling and confusing, assert <span
id="page_LXXX">p. LXXX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-Page_LXXX"></span>this from our believing, as we
do, in a single substance of Both. If two natures, alien to each other
on the score of their being, were preached by our Faith, just as it is
preached by the Anomœan school, then there would be good reason for
thinking that this distinction of natures led to the supposition of two
causeless beings. But if, as is the case, we acknowledge one nature with
the differences of Person, if, while the Father is believed in, the Son
also is glorified, how can such a Faith be misrepresented by our
opponents as preaching Two First Causes? Then he says, ‘of these two
causes, one is lowered’ by us ‘to the rank of Son.’ Let him point out
one champion of such a doctrine; whether he can convict any single
person of talking like this, or only knows of such a doctrine as taught
anywhere at all in the Church, we will hold our peace. For who is so
wild in his reasonings, and so bereft of reflection as, after speaking
of Father and Son, to imagine in spite of that two ungenerate beings:
and then again to suppose that the One of them has come into being by
means of the Other? Besides, what logical necessity does he show for
pushing our teaching towards such suppositions? By what arguments does
he show that such an absurdity must result from it? If indeed he adduced
one single article of our Faith, and then, whether as a quibble or with
a real force of demonstration, made this criticism upon it, there might
have been some reason for his doing so with a view to invalidate that
article. But when there is not, and never can be such a doctrine in the
Church, when neither a teacher of it nor a hearer of it is to be found,
and the absurdity cannot be shown, either, to be the strict logical
consequence of anything, I cannot understand the meaning of his fighting
thus with shadows. It is just as if some phenzy-struck person supposed
himself to be grappling with an imaginary combatant, and then, having
with great efforts thrown himself down, thought that it was his foe who
was lying there; our clever pamphleteer is in the same state; he feigns
suppositions which we know nothing about, and he fights with the shadows
which are sketched by the workings of his own brain.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p8"></span>For I challenge him to say why a
believer in the Son as having come into being from the Father must
advance to the opinion that there are two First Causes; and let him tell
us who is most guilty of this establishment of two First Causes; one who
asserts that the Son is falsely so named, or one who insists that, when
we call Him that, the name represents a reality? The first, rejecting a
real generation of the Son, and affirming simply that He exists, would
be more open to the suspicion of making Him a First Cause, if he exists
indeed, but not by generation: whereas the second, making the
representative sign of the Person of the Only-begotten to consist in
subsisting generatively from the Father, cannot by any possibility be
drawn into the error of supposing the Son to be Ungenerate. And yet as
long as, according to you thinkers, the non-generation of the Son by the
Father is to be held, the Son Himself will be properly called Ungenerate
in one of the many meanings of the Ungenerate; seeing that, as some
things come into existence by being born and others by being fashioned,
nothing prevents our calling one of the latter, which does not subsist
by *generation*, an Ungenerate, looking only to the idea of generation;
and this your account, defining, as it does, our Lord to be a creature,
does establish about Him. So, my very learned sirs, it is in your view,
not ours, when it is thus followed out, that the Only-begotten can be
named Ungenerate: and you will find that “justice,”—whatever you mean by
that,—records in *your own* words <span
id="fr_174"></span>[176](#fn_174) a verdict against us.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p10"></span>It is easy also to find mud in
his words after that to cast upon this execrable teaching. For the other
horn of his dilemma partakes in the same mental delusion; he says, “or
else you first allow one single causeless being, and then marking this
out by an act of generation into Father and Son, you declare that this
non-generated being came into existence by means of itself.” What is
this new and marvellous story? How is one begotten by oneself, having
oneself for father, and becoming one’s own son? What dizziness and
delusion is here? It is like supposing the roof to be turning down below
one’s feet, and the floor above one’s head; it is like the mental state
of one with his senses stupified with drink, who shouts out persistently
that the ground does not stand still beneath, and that the walls are
disappearing, and that everything he sees is whirling round and will not
keep still. Perhaps our pamphleteer had such a tumult in his soul when
he wrote; if so, we must pity him rather than abhor him. For who is so
out of hearing of our divine doctrine, who is so far from the mysteries
of the Church, as to accept such a view as this to the detriment of the
Faith. Rather, it is hardly enough to say, that no one ever dreamed of
such an absurdity to its detriment. Why, in the case of human nature, or
any other <span id="page_LXXXI">p. LXXXI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-Page_LXXXI"></span>entity falling within the grasp
of the senses who, when he hears of a community of substance, dreams
either that all things that are compared together on the ground of
substance are without a cause or beginning, or that something comes into
existence out of itself, at once producing and being produced by itself?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p11"></span>The first man, and the man born
from him, received their being in a different way; the latter by
copulation, the former from the moulding of Christ Himself; and yet,
though they are thus believed to be two, they are inseparable in the
definition of their being, and are not considered as two beings, without
beginning or cause, running parallel to each other; nor can the existing
one be said to be generated by the existing one, or the two be ever
thought of as one in the monstrous sense that each is his own father,
and his own son; but it is because the one and the other was a man that
the two have the same definition of being; each was mortal, reasoning,
capable of intuition and of science. If, then, the idea of humanity in
Adam and Abel does not vary with the difference of their origin, neither
the order nor the manner of their coming into existence making any
difference in their nature, which is the same in both, according to the
testimony of every one in his senses, and no one, not greatly needing
treatment for insanity, would deny it; what necessity is there that
against the divine nature we should admit this strange thought? Having
heard of Father and Son from the Truth, we are taught in those two
subjects the oneness of their nature; their natural relation to each
other expressed by those names indicates that nature; and so do Our
Lord’s own words. For when He said, “I and My Father are one <span
id="fr_175"></span>[177](#fn_175) ,” He conveys by that confession of a
Father exactly the truth that He Himself is not a first cause, at the
same time that He asserts by His union with the Father their common
nature; so that these words of His secure our faith from the taint of
heretical error on either side: for Sabellius has no ground for his
confusion of the individuality of each Person, when the Only-begotten
has so distinctly marked Himself off from the Father in those words, “I
and My Father;” and Arius finds no confirmation of his doctrine of the
strangeness of either nature to the other, since this oneness of both
cannot admit distinction in nature. For that which is signified in these
words by the oneness of Father and Son is nothing else but what belongs
to them on the score of their actual being; all the other moral
excellences which are to be observed in them as over and above <span
id="fr_176"></span>[178](#fn_176) their nature may without error be set
down as shared in by all created beings. For instance, Our Lord is
called merciful and pitiful by the prophet <span
id="fr_177"></span>[179](#fn_177) , and He wills us to be and to be
called the same; “Be ye therefore merciful <span
id="fr_178"></span>[180](#fn_178) ,” and “Blessed are the merciful <span
id="fr_179"></span>[181](#fn_179) ,” and many such passages. If, then,
any one by diligence and attention has modelled himself according to the
divine will, and become kind and pitiful and compassionate, or meek and
lowly of heart, such as many of the saints are testified to have become
in the pursuit of such excellences, does it follow that they are
therefore one with God, or united to Him by virtue of any one of them?
Not so. That which is not in every respect the same, cannot be ‘one’
with him whose nature thus varies from it. Accordingly, a man becomes
‘one’ with another, when in will, as our Lord says, they are ‘perfected
into one <span id="fr_180"></span>[182](#fn_180) ,’ this union of wills
being added to the connexion of nature. So also the Father and Son are
one, the community of nature and the community of will running, in them,
into one. But if the Son had been joined in wish only to the Father, and
divided from Him in His nature, how is it that we find Him testifying to
His oneness with the Father, when all the time He was sundered from Him
in the point most proper to Him of all?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[LXXIX:173](2050050.htm#fr_171) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p4"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>οὖσαν</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>οὐσίαν</span> of
Oehler and Migne.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[LXXIX:174](2050050.htm#fr_172) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>ξουυχίζει</span>

<span id="fn_173"></span>[LXXIX:175](2050050.htm#fr_173) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>πρεσβεύειν</span>. So Lucian. Diog.
Laert., and Origen passim.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[LXXX:176](2050050.htm#fr_174) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9"></span> *your own words,* i.e. not ours,
as you say. The Codex of Turin has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>τοῖς ἡμετέροις</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>ἡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9.3"></span>μῖν</span> above:
but Oehler has wisely followed that of Venice. Eunomius had said of
Basil’s party (§34) ‘justice records in your own words a verdict against
yourselves.’ ‘No,’ Gregory answers; ‘*your* words (interpreting our
doctrine) alone lend themselves to that.’ But to change <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9.4"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμῶν</span>
of the Codd. also to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p9.5"></span>καθ᾽ ὑμῶν</span> would supply a still
better sense.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[LXXXI:177](2050050.htm#fr_175) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p12"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[LXXXI:178](2050050.htm#fr_176) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>σα ἐπιθεωρεῖται τῇ φύσει</span>.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[LXXXI:179](2050050.htm#fr_177) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p14"></span> [Psalm ciii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[LXXXI:180](2050050.htm#fr_178) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p15"></span> [Luke vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[LXXXI:181](2050050.htm#fr_179) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p16"></span> [Matthew v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[LXXXI:182](2050050.htm#fr_180) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p17"></span> [John xvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>. “I in them, and thou in Me, that
they may be perfected into one.” (R.V.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proof that the Anomœan teaching tends to Manichæism.](2050051)
