[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050147)  [Next](2050149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="ix.ii.i-Page_342"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="ix.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p3.1"></span>A few</span> words are necessary to explain the
scope and aim of this remarkable treatise. It is not the work of one who
held a brief for monasticism. Gregory deals with the celibate life in a
different way from other Catholic writers upon this theme. Athanasius
and Basil both saw in it the means of exhibiting to the world the
Christian life definitely founded on the orthodox faith; and, for each
celibate himself, this visible imitation of Christ would be more
concentrated, when secular distractions and dissipations had been put
aside for ever. Their aims were entirely moral and ecclesiastical. But
Gregory deals with the entire human development in things spiritual. He
has given the history of the struggle for moral and intellectual
perfection, and the conditions of its success. He had his own inner
Christian experience, the result of a recluse youth, on the one hand; he
had the systems of heathen and Christian philosophy on the other. The
ideal life that he has sketched is as lofty in its aspiration as the
latter, and is couched in philosophic rather than in Scriptural
language; but its scientific ground-work is entirely peculiar to
himself. That groundwork is briefly this; spirit must be freed, so as to
be drawn to the Divine Spirit; and to be so freed a “virginity” of the
soul is necessary. He comes in this way to blame marriage, because in
most of the marriages that he has known, this virginity of the soul is
conspicuously absent. But he does not blame the married state in itself;
as he himself distinctly tells us. The virginity he seeks may exist even
there; and it is not by any means the same thing as celibacy. It is
*disengagedness of heart*; and is, as many passages in this treatise
indicate, identical with philosophy, whose higher manifestations had
long ago been defined as Love, called forth by the sight of the
immaterial Beauty. Where this sight is not interrupted, or not treated
with indifference, there Virginity exists. With Gregory philosophy had
become Life, and it is virginity that keeps it so, and therein keeps it
from being lost. Another word with which Gregory identified virginity is
“incorruptibility,” in language sometimes which recalls the lines—

<span id="ix.ii.i-p4"></span>“What, what is Virtue, but repose of mind?

<span id="ix.ii.i-p5"></span>A pure ethereal calm that knows no storm,

<span id="ix.ii.i-p6"></span>Above the reach of wild ambition’s wind,

<span id="ix.ii.i-p7"></span>Above the passions that this world deform,

<span id="ix.ii.i-p8"></span>And torture man, a proud malignant worm.”

<span id="ix.ii.i-p9"></span>Yet no one would imagine that here the
poet, any more than S. Paul in [Ephes. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024)<span id="ix.ii.i-p9.1"></span> (see
p. 343, note 3), meant celibacy *per se*. But it may be asked, how came
Gregory to use the word Virginity at all for pure disengagement of soul?
The answer seems to be, that he was very fond of metaphors and elaborate
comparisons, ever since the days that he was a student of Rhetoric; this
treatise itself is full of similes from nature, and they are not so much
poetry or rhetoric, as necessary means of bringing his meaning vividly
before readers. Virginity, then, is one of these bold and telling
figures; and in his hands it is a very suggestive metaphor; though
certainly at times it runs away with him. The accusation, then, that
when he identifies Piety and Virginity, he makes the former consist in a
mere externality, is unfounded. He uses the one word for the other
without apprising us that it is a metaphor, and he omits to give any
dietary rules by which this virginity is secured. Therefore he *appears*
to mean celibacy. But on the other hand no arguments can be drawn from
this treatise against the monastic life; only Gregory is busied with
other matters. Rather, if the actual marriages of his time are such as
he describes, it is a silent witness to the reasonableness, if not to
the necessity, of such a life within the church. For this view of
virginity as solving the question of Gregory’s supposed marriage, see
Prolegomena, p. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Virginity.](2050149)
