[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050070)  [Next](2050072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p1"></span> §12. *He thus proceeds to a
magnificent discourse of the interpretation of “Mediator,” “Like,”
“Ungenerate,” and “generate,” and of “The likeness and seal of the
energy of the Almighty and of His Works.”*

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p2"></span>Again, what is the manifold mediation
which with wearying iteration he assigns to God, calling Him “Mediator
in doctrines, Mediator in the Law <span
id="fr_409"></span>[411](#fn_409) ”? It is not thus that we are taught
by the lofty utterance of the Apostle, who says that having made void
the law of commandments by His own doctrines, He is the mediator between
God and man, declaring it by this saying, “There is one God, and one
mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus <span
id="fr_410"></span>[412](#fn_410) ;” where by the distinction implied in
the word “mediator” he reveals to us the whole aim of the mystery of
godliness. Now the aim is this. Humanity once revolted through the
malice of the enemy, and, brought into bondage to sin, was also
alienated from the true Life. After this the Lord of the creature calls
back to Him His own creature, and becomes Man while still remaining God,
being both God and Man in the entirety of the two several natures, and
thus humanity was indissolubly united to God, the Man that is in Christ
conducting the work of mediation, to Whom, by the first-fruits assumed
for us, all the lump is potentially united <span
id="fr_411"></span>[413](#fn_411) . Since, then, a mediator is not a
mediator of one <span id="fr_412"></span>[414](#fn_412) , and God is
one, not divided among the Persons in Whom we have been taught to
believe (for the Godhead in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost is
one), the Lord, therefore, becomes a mediator once for all betwixt <span
id="page_CXXIII">p. CXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-Page_CXXIII"></span>God and men, binding man to the
Deity by Himself. But even by the idea of a mediator we are taught the
godly doctrine enshrined in the Creed. For the Mediator between God and
man entered as it were into fellowship with human nature, not by being
merely deemed a man, but having truly become so: in like manner also,
being very God, He has not, as Eunomius will have us consider, been
honoured by the bare title of Godhead.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p7"></span>What he adds to the preceding
statements is characterized by the same want of meaning, or rather by
the same malignity of meaning. For in calling Him “Son” Whom, a little
before, he had plainly declared to be created, and in calling Him “only
begotten God” Whom he reckoned with the rest of things that have come
into being by creation, he affirms that He is like Him that begat Him
only “by an especial likeness, in a peculiar sense.” Accordingly, we
must first distinguish the significations of the term “like,” in how
many senses it is employed in ordinary use, and afterwards proceed to
discuss Eunomius’ positions. In the first place, then, all things that
beguile our senses, not being really identical in nature, but producing
illusion by some of the accidents of the respective subjects, as form,
colour, sound, and the impressions conveyed by taste or smell or touch,
while really different in nature, but supposed to be other than they
truly are, these custom declares to have the relation of “likeness,” as,
for example, when the lifeless material is shaped by art, whether
carving, painting, or modelling, into an imitation of a living creature,
the imitation is said to be “like” the original. For in such a case the
nature of the animal is one thing, and that of the material, which
cheats the sight by mere colour and form, is another. To the same class
of likeness belongs the image of the original figure in a mirror, which
gives appearances of motion, without, however, being in nature identical
with its original. In just the same way our hearing may experience the
same deception, when, for instance, some one, imitating the song of the
nightingale with his own voice, persuades our hearing so that we seem to
be listening to the bird. Taste, again, is subject to the same illusion,
when the juice of figs mimics the pleasant taste of honey: for there is
a certain resemblance to the sweetness of honey in the juice of the
fruit. So, too, the sense of smell may sometimes be imposed upon by
resemblance, when the scent of the herb camomile, imitating the fragrant
apple itself, deceives our perception: and in the same way with touch
also, likeness belies the truth in various modes, since a silver or
brass coin, of equal size and similar weight with a gold one, may pass
for the gold piece if our sight does not discern the truth.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p8"></span>We have thus generally described in a
few words the several cases in which objects, because they are deemed to
be different from what they really are, produce delusions in our senses.
It is possible, of course, by a more laborious investigation, to extend
one’s enquiry through all things which are really different in kind one
from another, but are nevertheless thought, by virtue of some accidental
resemblance, to be like one to the other. Can it possibly be such a form
of “likeness” as this, that he is continually attributing to the Son?
Nay, surely he cannot be so infatuated as to discover deceptive
similarity in Him Who is the Truth. Again, in the inspired Scriptures,
we are told of another kind of resemblance by Him Who said, “Let us make
man in our image, after our likeness <span
id="fr_413"></span>[415](#fn_413) ;” but I do not suppose that Eunomius
would discern this kind of likeness between the Father and the Son, so
as to make out the Only-begotten God to be identical with man. We are
also aware of another kind of likeness, of which the word speaks in
Genesis concerning Seth,—“Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after
his image <span id="fr_414"></span>[416](#fn_414) ”; and if this is the
kind of likeness of which Eunomius speaks, we do not think his statement
is to be rejected. For in this case the nature of the two objects which
are alike is not different, and the impress and type imply community of
nature. These, or such as these, are our views upon the variety of
meanings of “like.” Let us see, then, with what intention Eunomius
asserts of the Son that “especial likeness” to the Father, when he says
that He is “like the Father with an especial likeness, in a peculiar
sense, not as Father to Father, for they are not two Fathers.” He
promises to show us the “especial likeness” of the Son to the Father,
and proceeds by his definition to establish the position that we ought
not to conceive of Him as being like. For by saying, “He is not like as
Father to Father,” he makes out that He is not like; and again when he
adds, “nor as Ungenerate to Ungenerate,” by this phrase, too, he forbids
us to conceive a likeness in the Son to the Father; and finally, by
subjoining “nor as Son to Son,” he introduces a third conception, by
which he entirely subverts the meaning of “like.” So it is that he
follows up his own statements, and conducts his demonstration of
likeness by establishing unlikeness. And now let us examine the
discernment and frankness which he displays in these distinctions. After
saying that the Son is like the Father, he guards the statement by
adding that we ought not to think that the Son is like the Father, “as
Father to Father.” Why, what man on <span id="page_CXXIV">p.
CXXIV</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.xii-Page_CXXIV"></span>earth is such a
fool as, on learning that the Son is like the Father, to be brought by
any course of reasoning to think of the likeness of Father to Father?
“Nor as Son to Son”:—here, again, the acuteness of the distinction is
equally conspicuous. When he tells us that the Son is like the Father,
he adds the further definition that He must not be understood to be like
Him in the same way as He would be like another Son. These are the
mysteries of the awful doctrines of Eunomius, by which his disciples are
made wiser than the rest of the world, by learning that the Son, by His
likeness to the Father, is not like a Son, for the Son is not the
Father: nor is He like “as Ungenerate to Ungenerate,” for the Son is not
ungenerate. But the mystery which we have received, when it speaks of
the Father, certainly bids us understand the Father of the Son, and when
it names the Son, teaches us to apprehend the Son of the Father. And
until the present time we never felt the need of these philosophic
refinements, that by the words Father and Son are suggested two Fathers
or two Sons, a pair, so to say, of ungenerate beings.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p11"></span>Now the drift of Eunomius’ excessive
concern about the Ungenerate has been often explained before; and it
shall here be briefly discovered yet again. For as the term Father
points to no difference of nature from the Son, his impiety, if he had
brought his statement to a close here, would have had no support, seeing
that the natural sense of the names Father and Son excludes the idea of
their being alien in essence. But as it is, by employing the terms
“generate” and “ungenerate,” since the contradictory opposition between
them admits of no mean, just like that between “mortal” and “immortal,”
“rational” and “irrational,” and all those terms which are opposed to
each other by the mutually exclusive nature of their meaning,—by the use
of these terms, I repeat, he gives free course to his profanity, so as
to contemplate as existing in the “generate” with reference to the
“ungenerate” the same difference which there is between “mortal” and
“immortal”: and even as the nature of the mortal is one, and that of the
immortal another, and as the special attributes of the rational and of
the irrational are essentially incompatible, just so he wants to make
out that the nature of the ungenerate is one, and that of the generate
another, in order to show that as the irrational nature has been created
in subjection to the rational, so the generate is by a necessity of its
being in a state of subordination to the ungenerate. For which reason he
attaches to the ungenerate the name of “Almighty,” and this he does not
apply to express providential operation, as the argument led the way for
him in suggesting, but transfers the application of the word to
arbitrary sovereignty, so as to make the Son to be a part of the subject
and subordinate universe, a fellow-slave with all the rest to Him Who
with arbitrary and absolute sovereignty controls all alike. And that it
is with an eye to this result that he employs these argumentative
distinctions, will be clearly established from the passage before us.
For after those sapient and carefully-considered expressions, that He is
not like either as Father to Father, or as Son to Son,—and yet there is
no necessity that father should invariably be like father or son like
son: for suppose there is one father among the Ethiopians, and another
among the Scythians, and each of these has a son, the Ethiopian’s son
black, but the Scythian white-skinned and with hair of a golden tinge,
yet none the more because each is a father does the Scythian turn black
on the Ethiopian’s account, nor does the Ethiopian’s body change to
white on account of the Scythian,—after saying this, however, according
to his own fancy, Eunomius subjoins that “He is like as Son to
Father <span id="fr_415"></span>[417](#fn_415) .” But although such a
phrase indicates kinship in nature, as the inspired Scripture attests in
the case of Seth and Adam, our doctor, with but small respect for his
intelligent readers, introduces his idle exposition of the title “Son,”
defining Him to be the image and seal of the energy <span
id="fr_416"></span>[418](#fn_416) of the Almighty. “For the Son,” he
says, “is the image and seal of the energy of the Almighty.” Let him who
hath ears to hear first, I pray, consider this particular point—What is
“the seal of the energy”? Every energy is contemplated as exertion in
the party who exhibits it, and on the completion of his exertion, it has
no independent existence. Thus, for example, the energy of the runner is
the motion of his feet, and when the motion has stopped there is no
longer any energy. So too about every pursuit the same may be said;—when
the exertion of him who is busied about anything ceases, the energy
ceases also, and has no independent existence, either when a person is
actively engaged in the exertion he undertakes, or when he ceases from
that exertion. What then does he tell us that the energy is in itself,
which is neither essence, nor image, nor person? So he speaks of the Son
as the similitude of the impersonal, and that which is like the
non-existent surely has itself no existence at all. This is what his
juggling with idle opinions comes to,—belief in nonentity! for that
which is like nonentity surely <span id="page_CXXV">p. CXXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-Page_CXXV"></span>itself is not. O Paul and John and
all you others of the band of Apostles and Evangelists, who are they
that arm their venomous tongues against your words? who are they that
raise their frog-like croakings against your heavenly thunder? What then
saith the son of thunder? “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God <span
id="fr_417"></span>[419](#fn_417) .” And what saith he that came after
him, that other who had been within the heavenly temple, who in Paradise
had been initiated into mysteries unspeakable? “Being,” he says, “the
Brightness of His glory, and the express Image of His person <span
id="fr_418"></span>[420](#fn_418) .” What, after these have thus spoken,
are the words of our ventriloquist <span
id="fr_419"></span>[421](#fn_419) ? “The seal,” quoth he, “of the energy
of the Almighty.” He makes Him third after the Father, with that
non-existent energy mediating between them, or rather moulded at
pleasure by non-existence. God the Word, Who was in the beginning, is
“the seal of the energy”:—the Only-begotten God, Who is contemplated in
the eternity of the Beginning of existent things, Who is in the bosom of
the Father <span id="fr_420"></span>[422](#fn_420) , Who sustains all
things, by the word of His power <span id="fr_421"></span>[423](#fn_421)
, the creator of the ages, from Whom and through Whom and in Whom are
all things <span id="fr_422"></span>[424](#fn_422) , Who sitteth upon
the circle of the earth, and hath meted out heaven with the span, Who
measureth the water in the hollow of his hand <span
id="fr_423"></span>[425](#fn_423) , Who holdeth in His hand all things
that are, Who dwelleth on high and looketh upon the things that are
lowly <span id="fr_424"></span>[426](#fn_424) , or rather did look upon
them to make all the world to be His footstool <span
id="fr_425"></span>[427](#fn_425) , imprinted by the footmark of the
Word—the form of God <span id="fr_426"></span>[428](#fn_426) is “the
seal” of an “energy.” Is God then an energy, not a Person? Surely Paul
when expounding this very truth says He is “the express image,” not of
His energy, but “of His Person.” Is the Brightness of His glory a seal
of the energy of God? Alas for his impious ignorance! What is there
intermediate between God and His own form? and Whom does the Person
employ as mediator with His own express image? and what can be conceived
as coming between the glory and its brightness? But while there are such
weighty and numerous testimonies wherein the greatness of the Lord of
the creation is proclaimed by those who were entrusted with the
proclamation of the Gospel, what sort of language does this forerunner
of the final apostasy hold concerning Him? What says he? “As image,” he
says, “and seal of all the energy and power of the Almighty.” How does
he take upon himself to emend the words of the mighty Paul? Paul says
that the Son is “the Power of God <span
id="fr_427"></span>[429](#fn_427) ”; Eunomius calls Him “the seal of a
power,” not the Power. And then, repeating his expression, what is it
that he adds to his previous statement? He calls Him “seal of the
Father’s works and words and counsels.” To what works of the Father is
He like? He will say, of course, the world, and all things that are
therein. But the Gospel has testified that all these things are the
works of the Only-begotten. To what works of the Father, then, was He
likened? of what works was He made the seal? what Scripture ever
entitled Him “seal of the Father’s works”? But if any one should grant
Eunomius the right to fashion his words at his own will, as he desires,
even though Scripture does not agree with him, let him tell us what
works of the Father there are of which he says that the Son was made the
seal, apart from those that have been wrought by the Son. All things
visible and invisible are the work of the Son: in the visible are
included the whole world and all that is therein; in the invisible, the
supramundane creation. What works of the Father, then, are remaining to
be contemplated by themselves, over and above things visible and
invisible, whereof he says that the Son was made the “seal”? Will he
perhaps, when driven into a corner, return once more to the fetid vomit
of heresy, and say that the Son is a work of the Father? How then does
the Son come to be the seal of these works when He Himself, as Eunomius
says, is the work of the Father? Or does he say that the same Person is
at once a work and the likeness of a work? Let this be granted: let us
suppose him to speak of the other works of which he says the Father was
the creator, if indeed he intends us to understand likeness by the term
“seal.” But what other “words” of the Father does Eunomius know, besides
that Word Who was ever in the Father, Whom he calls a “seal”—Him Who is
and is called the Word in the absolute, true, and primary sense? And to
what counsels can he possibly refer, apart from the Wisdom of God, to
which the Wisdom of God is made like, in becoming a “seal” of those
counsels? Look at the want of discrimination and circumspection, at the
confused muddle of his statement, how he brings the mystery into
ridicule, without understanding either what he says or what he is
arguing about. For He Who has the Father in His entirety in Himself, and
is Himself in His entirety in the Father, as Word and Wisdom and Power
and Truth, as His express image and brightness, Himself is all things in
the Father, and does not come to be the image and seal and likeness of
certain other things discerned in the Father prior to Himself.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p25"></span><span id="page_CXXVI">p.
CXXVI</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.xii-Page_CXXVI"></span>Then Eunomius
allows to Him the credit of the destruction of men by water in the days
of Noah, of the rain of fire that fell upon Sodom, and of the just
vengeance upon the Egyptians, as though he were making some great
concessions to Him Who holds in His hand the ends of the world, in Whom,
as the Apostle says, “all things consist <span
id="fr_428"></span>[430](#fn_428) ,” as though he were not aware that to
Him Who encompasses all things, and guides and sways according to His
good pleasure all that hath already been and all that will be, the
mention of two or three marvels does not mean the addition of glory, so
much as the suppression of the rest means its deprivation or loss. But
even if no word be said of these, the one utterance of Paul is enough by
itself to point to them all inclusively—the one utterance which says
that He “is above all, and through all, and in all <span
id="fr_429"></span>[431](#fn_429) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_409"></span>[CXXII:411](2050071.htm#fr_409) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p3"></span> Here again the exact connexion of
the quotation from Eunomius with the extracts preceding is uncertain.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[CXXII:412](2050071.htm#fr_410) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p4"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_411"></span>[CXXII:413](2050071.htm#fr_411) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p5"></span> Cf. [Rom. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_412"></span>[CXXII:414](2050071.htm#fr_412) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p6"></span> [Gal. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[CXXIII:415](2050071.htm#fr_413) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p9"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[CXXIII:416](2050071.htm#fr_414) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p10"></span> [Gen. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[CXXIV:417](2050071.htm#fr_415) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p12"></span> This is apparently a quotation from
Eunomius in continuation of what has gone before.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[CXXIV:418](2050071.htm#fr_416) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p13"></span> The word employed is <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p13.2"></span>νέργεια</span>;
which might be translated by “active force,” or “operation,” as
elsewhere.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[CXXV:419](2050071.htm#fr_417) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p14"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_418"></span>[CXXV:420](2050071.htm#fr_418) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p15"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[CXXV:421](2050071.htm#fr_419) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16"></span> Cf. the use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.2"></span>γγαστρίμυθος</span>
in LXX. (*e.g.* <span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.3"></span>[Lev. xix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.4"></span>, [Is. xliv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.5"></span>).

<span id="fn_420"></span>[CXXV:422](2050071.htm#fr_420) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p16.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p17"></span> S. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_421"></span>[CXXV:423](2050071.htm#fr_421) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p18"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_422"></span>[CXXV:424](2050071.htm#fr_422) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p19"></span> Cf. [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_423"></span>[CXXV:425](2050071.htm#fr_423) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p20"></span> Cf. [Isa. xl.
12-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[CXXV:426](2050071.htm#fr_424) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p21"></span> Cf. [Ps. cxxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[CXXV:427](2050071.htm#fr_425) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p22"></span> Cf. [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="fn_426"></span>[CXXV:428](2050071.htm#fr_426) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p23"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="fn_427"></span>[CXXV:429](2050071.htm#fr_427) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p24"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[CXXVI:430](2050071.htm#fr_428) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p26"></span> [Col. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[CXXVI:431](2050071.htm#fr_429) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xii-p27"></span> [Eph. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xii-p27.1"></span>. The application of the words to the
Son is remarkable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He expounds the passage of the Gospel, “The Father judgeth no
man,” and further speaks of the assumption of man with body and soul
wrought by the Lord, of the transgression of Adam, and of death and the
resurrection of the dead.](2050072)
