[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050085)  [Next](2050087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He then again admirably
discusses the term* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> *as it is four times
employed by the Apostle.*

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p2"></span>But that the readers of our work may
find no ambiguity left of such a kind as to afford any support to the
heretical doctrines, it may be worth while to add to the passages
examined by us this point also from Holy Scripture. They will perhaps
raise a question from the very apostolic writings which we quoted: “How
could He be called ‘the first-born of creation <span
id="fr_620"></span>[622](#fn_620) ’ if He were not what creation is? for
every first-born is the first-born not of another kind, but of its own:
as Reuben, having precedence in respect of birth of those who are
counted after him, was the first-born, a man the first-born of men; and
many others are called the first-born of the brothers who are reckoned
with them.” They say then, “We assert that He Who is ‘the first-born of
creation’ is of that same essence which we consider the essence of all
creation. Now if the whole creation is of one essence with the Father of
all, we will not deny that the first-born of creation is this also: but
if the God of all differs in essence from the creation, we must of
necessity say that neither has the first-born of creation community in
essence with God.” The structure of this objection is not, I think, at
all less imposing in the form in which it is alleged by us, than in the
form in which it would probably be brought against us by our
adversaries. But what we ought to know as regards this point shall now,
so far as we are able, be plainly set forth in our discourse.

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p4"></span>Four times the name of “first-born”
or “first-begotten” is used by the Apostle in all his writings: but he
has made mention of the name in different senses and not in the same
manner. For now he speaks of “the first-born of all creation <span
id="fr_621"></span>[623](#fn_621) ,” and again of “the first-born among
many brethren <span id="fr_622"></span>[624](#fn_622) ,” then of “the
first-born from the dead <span id="fr_623"></span>[625](#fn_623) ;” and
in the Epistle to the Hebrews the name of “first-begotten” is absolute,
being mentioned by itself: for he speaks thus, “When again He bringeth
the first-begotten into the world, He saith, ‘Let all the angels worship
Him <span id="fr_624"></span>[626](#fn_624) .’” As these passages are
thus distinct, it may be well to interpret each of them separately by
itself, how He is the “first-born of creation,” how “among many
brethren,” how “from the dead,” and how, spoken of by Himself apart from
each of these, when He is again brought into the world, He is worshipped
by all His angels. Let us begin then, if you will, our survey of the
passages before us with the last-mentioned.

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p9"></span>“When again He bringeth in,” he says,
“the first-begotten into the world.” The addition of “again” shows, by
the force of this word, that this event happens not for the first time:
for we use this word of the repetition of things which have once
happened. He signifies, therefore, by the phrase, the dread appearing of
the Judge at the end of the ages, when He is seen no more in the form of
a servant, but seated in glory upon the throne of His kingdom, and
worshipped by all the angels that are around Him. Therefore He Who once
entered into the world, becoming the first-born “from the dead,” and “of
His brethren,” and “of all creation,” does not, when He comes again into
the world as He that judges the world in righteousness <span
id="fr_625"></span>[627](#fn_625) , as the prophecy saith, cast off the
name of the first-begotten, which He once received for our sakes; but as
at the name of Jesus, which is above every name, every knee bows <span
id="fr_626"></span>[628](#fn_626) , so also the company of all the
angels worships Him Who comes in the name of the First-begotten, in
their rejoicing over the restoration of men, wherewith, by becoming the
first-born among us, He restored us again to the grace which we had at
the beginning <span id="fr_627"></span>[629](#fn_627) . For since there
is joy among the angels over those who are rescued <span
id="page_CLVIII">p. CLVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-Page_CLVIII"></span>from sin, (because until now that
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain at the vanity that affects
us <span id="fr_628"></span>[630](#fn_628) , judging our perdition to be
their own loss,) when that manifestation of the sons of God takes place
which they look for and expect, and when the sheep is brought safe to
the hundred above, (and we surely—humanity that is to say—are that sheep
which the Good Shepherd saved by becoming the first-begotten <span
id="fr_629"></span>[631](#fn_629) ,) then especially will they offer, in
their intense thanksgiving on our behalf, their worship to God, Who by
being first-begotten restored him that had wandered from his Father’s
home.

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p15"></span>Now that we have arrived at the
understanding of these words, no one could any longer hesitate as to the
other passages, for what reason He is the first-born, either “of the
dead,” or “of the creation,” or “among many brethren.” For all these
passages refer to the same point, although each of them sets forth some
special conception. He is the first-born from the dead, Who first by
Himself loosed the pains of death <span
id="fr_630"></span>[632](#fn_630) , that He might also make that birth
of the resurrection a way for all men <span
id="fr_631"></span>[633](#fn_631) . Again, He becomes “the first-born
among many brethren,” Who is born before us by the new birth of
regeneration in water, for the travail whereof the hovering of the Dove
was the midwife, whereby He makes those who share with Him in the like
birth to be His own brethren, and becomes the first-born of those who
after Him are born of water and of the Spirit <span
id="fr_632"></span>[634](#fn_632) : and to speak briefly, as there are
in us three births, whereby human nature is quickened, one of the body,
another in the sacrament of regeneration, another by that resurrection
of the dead for which we look, He is first-born in all three:—of the
twofold regeneration which is wrought by two (by baptism and by the
resurrection), by being Himself the leader in each of them; while in the
flesh He is first-born, as having first and alone devised in His own
case that birth unknown to nature, which no one in the many generations
of men had originated. If these passages, then, have been rightly
understood, neither will the signification of the “creation,” of which
He is first-born, be unknown to us. For we recognize a twofold creation
of our nature, the first that whereby we were made, the second that
whereby we were made anew. But there would have been no need of the
second creation had we not made the first unavailing by our
disobedience. Accordingly, when the first creation had waxed old and
vanished away, it was needful that there should be a new creation in
Christ, (as the Apostle says, who asserts that we should no longer see
in the second creation any trace of that which has waxed old, saying,
“Having put off the old man with his deeds and his lusts, put on the new
man which is created according to God <span
id="fr_633"></span>[635](#fn_633) ,” and “If any man be in Christ,” he
says, “he is a new creature: the old things are passed away, behold all
things are become new <span id="fr_634"></span>[636](#fn_634) :”) —for
the maker of human nature at the first and afterwards is one and the
same. *Then* He took dust from the earth and formed man: again, He took
dust from the Virgin, and did not merely form man, but formed man about
Himself: *then*, He created; afterwards, He was created: *then,* the
Word made flesh; afterwards, the Word became flesh, that He might change
our flesh to spirit, by being made partaker with us in flesh and blood.
Of this new creation therefore in Christ, which He Himself began, He was
called the first-born, being the first-fruits of all, both of those
begotten into life, and of those quickened by resurrection of the dead,
“that He might be Lord both of the dead and of the living <span
id="fr_635"></span>[637](#fn_635) ,” and might sanctify the whole
lump <span id="fr_636"></span>[638](#fn_636) by means of its
first-fruits in Himself. Now that the character of “first-born” does not
apply to the Son in respect of His pre-temporal existence the
appellation of “Only-begotten” testifies. For he who is truly
only-begotten has no brethren, for how could any one be only-begotten if
numbered among brethren? but as He is called God and man, Son of God and
Son of man,—for He has the form of God and the form of a servant <span
id="fr_637"></span>[639](#fn_637) , being some things according to His
supreme nature, becoming other things in His dispensation of love to
man,—so too, being the Only-begotten God, He becomes the first-born of
all creation,—the Only-begotten, He that is in the bosom of the Father,
yet, among those who are saved by the new creation, both becoming and
being called the first born of the creation. But if, as heresy will have
it, He is called first-born because He was made before the rest of the
creation, the name does not agree with what they maintain concerning the
Only-begotten God. For they do not say this,—that the Son and the
universe were from the Father in like manner,—but they say, that the
Only-begotten God was made by the Father, and that all else was made by
the Only-begotten. Therefore on the same ground on which, while they
hold that the Son was created, they call God the Father of the created
Being, on the same <span id="page_CLIX">p. CLIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-Page_CLIX"></span>ground, while they say that all
things were made by the Only-begotten God, they give Him the name not of
the “first-born” of the things that were made by Him, but more properly
of their “Father,” as the same relation existing in both cases towards
the things created, logically gives rise to the same appellation. For if
God, Who is over all, is not properly called the “First-born,” but the
Father of the Being He Himself created, the Only-begotten God will
surely also be called, by the same reasoning, the “father,” and not
properly the “first-born” of His own creatures, so that the appellation
of “first-born” will be altogether improper and superfluous, having no
place in the heretical conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_620"></span>[CLVII:622](2050086.htm#fr_620) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p3"></span> Cf. [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p3.1"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p3.2"></span>Πρωτότοκος</span> may be, as it is in the
Authorized Version, translated either by “first born,” or by
“first-begotten.” Compare with this passage Book II. §8, where the use
of the word in Holy Scripture is discussed.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[CLVII:623](2050086.htm#fr_621) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p5"></span> Cf. [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_622"></span>[CLVII:624](2050086.htm#fr_622) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p6"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[CLVII:625](2050086.htm#fr_623) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p7"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[CLVII:626](2050086.htm#fr_624) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p8"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_625"></span>[CLVII:627](2050086.htm#fr_625) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p10"></span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ps. xcviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[CLVII:628](2050086.htm#fr_626) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p11"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_627"></span>[CLVII:629](2050086.htm#fr_627) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p12"></span> Oehler’s punctuation, which is
probably due to a printer’s error, is here a good deal altered.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[CLVIII:630](2050086.htm#fr_628) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p13"></span> Cf. [Rom. viii.
19-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[CLVIII:631](2050086.htm#fr_629) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p14"></span> This interpretation is of course
common to many of the Fathers, though S. Augustine, for instance,
explains the “ninety and nine” otherwise, and his explanation has been
often followed by modern writers and preachers. The present
interpretation is assumed in a prayer, no doubt of great antiquity,
which is found in the Liturgy of S. James, both in the Greek and the
Syriac version, and also in the Greek form of the Coptic Liturgy of S.
Basil, where it is said to be “from the Liturgy of S. James.”

<span id="fn_630"></span>[CLVIII:632](2050086.htm#fr_630) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p16"></span> [Acts ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[CLVIII:633](2050086.htm#fr_631) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p17"></span> See Book II. §§4 and 8, and note on
the former passage.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[CLVIII:634](2050086.htm#fr_632) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p18"></span> With this passage may be compared
the parallel passage in Bk. II. §8. The interpretation of the “many
brethren” of those baptized suggests that Gregory understood the
“predestination” spoken of in <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p18.2"></span> to be predestination to *baptism.*

<span id="fn_633"></span>[CLVIII:635](2050086.htm#fr_633) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p19"></span> Cf. [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009), [Eph.
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>[Col. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>, and [Eph. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p19.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[CLVIII:636](2050086.htm#fr_634) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p20"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_635"></span>[CLVIII:637](2050086.htm#fr_635) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p21"></span> [Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[CLVIII:638](2050086.htm#fr_636) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p22"></span> Cf. [Rom. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="fn_637"></span>[CLVIII:639](2050086.htm#fr_637) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iii-p23"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He proceeds again to discuss the impassibility of the Lord's
generation; and the folly of Eunomius, who says that the generated
essence involves the appellation of Son, and again, forgetting this,
denies the relation of the Son to the Father: and herein he speaks of
Circe and of the mandrake poison.](2050087)
