[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050219)  [Next](2050221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Prologue.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> presiding ministers of the “mystery
of godliness” <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1935](#fn_1933) have need of a
system in their instructions, in order that the Church may be
replenished by the accession of such as should be saved <span
id="fr_1934"></span>[1936](#fn_1934) , through the teaching of the word
of Faith being brought home to the hearing of unbelievers. Not that the
same method of instruction will be suitable in the case of all who
approach the word. The catechism must be adapted to the diversities of
their religious worship; with an eye, indeed, to the one aim and end of
the system, but not using the same method of preparation in each
individual case. The Judaizer has been preoccupied with one set of
notions, one conversant with Hellenism, with others; while the Anomœan,
and the Manichee, with the followers of Marcion <span
id="fr_1935"></span>[1937](#fn_1935) , Valentinus, and Basilides <span
id="fr_1936"></span>[1938](#fn_1936) , and the rest on the list of those
who have wandered <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="xi.ii.ii-Page_474"></span>into heresy, each of them being
prepossessed with their peculiar notions, necessitate a special
controversy with their several. opinions. The method of recovery must be
adapted to the form of the disease. You will not by the same means cure
the polytheism of the Greek, and the unbelief of the Jew as to the
Only-begotten God: nor as regards those who have wandered into heresy
will you, by the same arguments in each case, upset their misleading
romances as to the tenets of the Faith. No one could set Sabellius <span
id="fr_1937"></span>[1939](#fn_1937) right by the same instruction as
would benefit the Anomœan <span id="fr_1938"></span>[1940](#fn_1938) .
The controversy with the Manichee is profitless against the Jew <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1941](#fn_1939) . It is necessary, therefore, as I
have said, to regard the opinions which the persons have taken up, and
to frame your argument in accordance with the error into which each has
fallen, by advancing in each discussion certain principles and
reasonable propositions, that thus, through what is agreed upon on both
sides, the truth may conclusively be brought to light. When, then, a
discussion is held with one of those who favour Greek ideas, it would be
well to make the ascertaining of this the commencement of the reasoning,
*i.e.* whether he presupposes the existence of a God, or concurs with
the atheistic view. Should he say there is no God, then, from the
consideration of the skilful and wise economy of the Universe he will be
brought to acknowledge that there is a certain overmastering power
manifested through these channels. If, on the other hand, he should have
no doubt as to the existence of Deity, but should be inclined to
entertain the presumption of a plurality of Gods, then we will adopt
against him some such train of reasoning as this: “does he think Deity
is perfect or defective?” and if, as is likely, he bears testimony to
the perfection in the Divine nature, then we will demand of him to grant
a perfection throughout in everything that is observable in that
divinity, in order that Deity may not be regarded as a mixture of
opposites, defect and perfection. But whether as respects power, or the
conception of goodness, or wisdom and imperishability and eternal
existence, or any other notion besides suitable to the nature of Deity,
that is found to lie close to the subject of our contemplation, in all
he will agree that perfection is the idea to be entertained of the
Divine nature, as being a just inference from these premises. If this,
then, be granted us, it would not be difficult to bring round these
scattered notions of a plurality of Gods to the acknowledgment of a
unity of Deity. For if he admits that perfection is in every respect to
be ascribed to the subject before us, though there is a plurality of
these perfect things which are marked with the same character, he must
be required by a logical necessity, either to point out the
particularity in each of these things which present no distinctive
variation, but are found always with the same marks, or, if (he cannot
do that, and) the mind can grasp nothing in them in the way of
particular, to give up the idea of any distinction. For if neither as
regards “more and less” a person can detect a difference (in as much as
the idea of perfection does not admit of it), nor as regards “worse” and
“better” (for he cannot entertain a notion of Deity at all where the
term “worse” is not got rid of), nor as regards “ancient” and “modern”
(for what exists not for ever is foreign to the notion of Deity), but on
the contrary the idea of Godhead is one and the same, no peculiarity
being on any ground of reason to be discovered in any one point, it is
an absolute necessity that the mistaken fancy of a plurality of Gods
would be forced to the acknowledgment of a unity of Deity. For if
goodness, and justice, and wisdom, and power may be equally predicated
of it, then also imperishability and eternal existence, and every
orthodox idea would be in the same way admitted. As then all distinctive
difference in any aspect whatever has been gradually removed, it
necessarily follows that together with it a plurality of Gods has been
removed from his belief, the general identity bringing round conviction
to the Unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[473:1935](2050220.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p3"></span> <span id="xi.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>[1 Tim.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="xi.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[473:1936](2050220.htm#fr_1934) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p4"></span> [Acts ii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047)<span id="xi.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[473:1937](2050220.htm#fr_1935) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p5"></span> Marcion, a disciple of Cerdo, added a
third Principle to the two which his master taught. The first is an
unnamed, invisible, and good God, but no creator; the second is a
visible and creative God, *i.e.* the Demiurge; the third intermediate
between the invisible and visible God, *i.e.* the Devil. The Demiurge is
the God and Judge of the Jews. Marcion affirmed the Resurrection of the
soul alone. He rejected the Law and the Prophets as proceeding from the
Demiurge; only Christ came down from the unnamed and invisible Father to
save the soul, and to confute this God of the Jews. The only Gospel he
acknowledged was S. Luke’s, omitting the beginning which details our
Lord’s Conception and Incarnation. Other portions also both in the
middle and the end he curtailed. Besides this broken Gospel of S. Luke
he retained ten of the Apostolic letters, but garbled even them. Gregory
says elsewhere that the followers of Eunomius got their “duality of
Gods” from Marcion, but went beyond him in denying essential goodness to
the Only-begotten, the “God of the Gospel.”

<span id="fn_1936"></span>[473:1938](2050220.htm#fr_1936) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p6"></span> Of the Gnostics Valentinus and Basilides
the truest and best account is given in H. L. Mansel’s *Gnostics,* and
in the articles upon them in the *Dictionary of Christian Biography.* It
is there shown how all their visions of celestial Hierarchies, and the
romances connected with them, were born of the attempt to solve the
insoluble problem, *i.e.* how that which in modern philosophy would be
called the Infinite is to pass into the Finite. They fell into the
fatalism of the Emanationist view of the Deity, but still the attempt
was an honest one.

<span id="fn_1937"></span>[474:1939](2050220.htm#fr_1937) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p7"></span> Sabellius. The Sabellian heresy was rife
in the century preceding: *i.e.* that Personality is attributed to the
Deity only from the exigency of human language, that consequently He is
sometimes characterized as the Father, when operations and works more
appropriate to the paternal relation are spoken of; and so in like
manner of the Son, and the Holy Ghost; as when Redemption is the
subject, or Sanctification. In making the Son the Father, it is the
opposite pole to Arianism.

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[474:1940](2050220.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p8"></span> “We see also the rise (*i.e.* <span
class="c22"><span id="xi.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 350) of a new
and more defiant Arian school, more in earnest than the older
generation, impatient of their shuffling diplomacy, and less pliant to
court influences. Aetius.…came to rest in a clear and simple form of
Arianism. Christianity without mystery seems to have been his aim. The
Anomœan leaders took their stand on the doctrine of Arius himself and
dwelt with emphasis on its most offensive aspects. Arius had long ago
laid down the absolute unlikeness of the Son to the Father, but for
years past the Arianizers had prudently softened it down. Now, however,
‘unlike’ became the watchword of Aetius and Eunomius”: Gwatkin’s
*Arians.* For the way in which this school treated the Trinity see
*Against Eunomius,* p. 50.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[474:1941](2050220.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="xi.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.ii-p9"></span> *I.e.*an argument against Dualism would
only confirm the Jew in his stern monotheism. Manes had taught also that
“those souls who believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God renounce the
worship of the God of the Jews, who is the Prince of Darkness,” and that
“the Old Testament was the work of this Prince, who was substituted by
the Jews in the place of the true God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2050221)
