[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050228)  [Next](2050230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>Up</span> to this point, perhaps, one who has
followed the course of our argument will agree with it, inasmuch as it
does not seem to him that anything has been said which is foreign to the
proper conception of the Deity. But towards what follows and constitutes
the strongest part of this Revelation of the truth, he will not be
similarly disposed; the human birth, I mean, the growth of infancy to
maturity, the eating and drinking, the fatigue and sleep, the sorrow and
tears, the false accusation and judgment hall, the cross of death and
consignment to the tomb. All these things, included as they are in this
revelation, to a certain extent blunt the faith of the more
narrow-minded, and so they reject the sequel itself in consequence of
these antecedents. They will not allow that in the Resurrection from the
dead there is anything consistent with the Deity, because of the
unseemly circumstances of the Death. Well, I deem it necessary first of
all to remove our thoughts for a moment from the grossness of the carnal
element, and to fix them on what is morally beautiful in itself, and on
what is not, and on the distinguishing marks by which each of them is to
be apprehended. No one, I think, who has reflected will challenge the
assertion that, in the whole nature of things, one thing only is
disgraceful, and that is vicious weakness; while whatever has no
connection with vice is a stranger to all disgrace; and whatever has no
mixture in it of disgrace is certainly to be found on the side of the
beautiful; and what is really beautiful has in it no mixture of its
opposite. Now whatever is to be regarded as coming within the sphere of
the beautiful becomes the character of God. Either, then, let them show
that there was viciousness in His birth, His bringing up, His growth,
His progress to the perfection of His nature, His experience of death
and return from death; or, if they allow that the aforesaid
circumstances of His life remain outside the sphere of viciousness, they
will perforce admit that there is nothing of disgrace in this that is
foreign to viciousness. Since, then, what is thus removed from every
disgraceful and vicious quality is abundantly shown to be morally
beautiful, how can one fail to pity the folly of men who give it as
their opinion that what is morally beautiful is not becoming in the case
of God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2050230)
