[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050220)  [Next](2050222) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>But</span> since our system of religion is
wont to observe a distinction of persons in the unity of the Nature, to
prevent our argument in our contention with Greeks sinking to the level
of Judaism there is need again of a distinct technical statement in
order to correct all error on this point.

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p3"></span>For not even by those who are external to
<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="xi.ii.iii-Page_475"></span>our doctrine is the Deity held to be
without Logos <span id="fr_1940"></span>[1942](#fn_1940) . Now this
admission of theirs will quite enable our argument to be unfolded. For
he who admits that God is not without Logos, will agree that a being who
is not without Logos (or word) certainly possesses Logos. Now it is to
be observed that the utterance of man is expressed by the same term. If,
then, he should say that he understands what the Logos of God is
according to the analogy of things with us, he will thus be led on to a
loftier idea, it being an absolute necessity for him to believe that the
utterance, just as everything else, corresponds with the nature. Though,
that is, there is a certain sort of force, and life, and wisdom,
observed in the human subject, yet no one from the similarity of the
terms would suppose that the life, or power, or wisdom, were in the case
of God of such a sort as that, but the significations of all such terms
are lowered to accord with the standard of our nature. For since our
nature is liable to corruption and weak, therefore is our life short,
our strength unsubstantial, our word unstable <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1943](#fn_1941) . But in that transcendent nature,
through the greatness of the subject contemplated, every thing that is
said about it is elevated with it. Therefore though mention be made of
God’s Word it will not be thought of as having its realization in the
utterance of what is spoken, and as then vanishing away, like our
speech, into the nonexistent. On the contrary, as our nature, liable as
it is to come to an end, is endued with speech which likewise comes to
an end, so that, imperishable and ever-existing nature has eternal, and
substantial speech. If, then, logic requires him to admit this eternal
subsistence of God’s Word, it is altogether necessary to admit also that
the subsistence <span id="fr_1942"></span>[1944](#fn_1942) of that word
consists in a living state; for it is an impiety to suppose that the
Word has a soulless subsistence after the manner of stones. But if it
subsists, being as it is something with intellect and without body, then
certainly it lives, whereas if it be divorced from life, then as
certainly it does not subsist; but this idea that the Word of God does
not subsist, has been shown to be blasphemy. By consequence, therefore,
it has also been shown that the Word is to be considered as in a living
condition. And since the nature of the Logos is reasonably believed to
be simple, and exhibits in itself no duplicity or combination, no one
would contemplate the existence of the living Logos as dependent on a
mere participation of life, for such a supposition, which is to say that
one thing is within another, would not exclude the idea of
compositeness; but, since the simplicity has been admitted, we are
compelled to think that the Logos has an independent life, and not a
mere participation of life. If, then, the Logos, as being life,
lives <span id="fr_1943"></span>[1945](#fn_1943) , it certainly has the
faculty <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="xi.ii.iii-Page_476"></span>of will, for no one of living creatures
is without such a faculty. Moreover that such a will has also capacity
to act must be the conclusion of a devout mind. For if you admit not
this potency, you prove the reverse to exist. But no; impotence is quite
removed from our conception of Deity. Nothing of incongruity is to be
observed in connection with the Divine nature, but it is absolutely
necessary to admit that the power of that word is as great as the
purpose, lest mixture, or concurrence, of contradictions be found in an
existence that is incomposite, as would be the case if, in the same
purpose, we were to detect both impotence and power, if, that is, there
were power to do one thing, but no power to do something else. Also we
must suppose that this will in its power to do all things will have no
tendency to anything that is evil (for impulse towards evil is foreign
to the Divine nature), but that whatever is good, this it also wishes,
and, wishing, is able to perform, and, being able, will not fail to
perform <span id="fr_1944"></span>[1946](#fn_1944) ; but that it will
bring all its proposals for good to effectual accomplishment. Now the
world *is* good, and all its contents are seen to be wisely and
skilfully ordered. All of them, therefore, are the works of the Word, of
one who, while He lives and subsists, in that He is God’s Word, has a
will too, in that He lives; of one too who has power to effect what He
wills, and who wills what is absolutely good and wise and all else that
connotes superiority. Whereas, then, the world is admitted to be
something good, and from what has been said the world has been shown to
be the work of the Word, who both wills and is able to effect the good,
this Word is other than He of whom He is the Word. For this, too, to a
certain extent is a term of “relation,” inasmuch as the Father of the
Word must needs be thought of with the Word, for it would not be word
were it not a word of some one. If, then, the mind of the hearers, from
the relative meaning of the term, makes a distinction between the Word
and Him from whom He proceeds, we should find that the Gospel mystery,
in its contention with the Greek conceptions, would not be in danger of
coinciding with those who prefer the beliefs of the Jews. But it will
equally escape the absurdity of either party, by acknowledging both that
the living Word of God is an effective and creative being, which is what
the Jew refuses to receive, and also that the Word itself, and He from
whom He is, do not differ in their nature. As in our own case we say
that the word is from the mind, and no more entirely the same as the
mind, than altogether other than it (for, by its being from it, it is
something else, and not it; still by its bringing the mind in evidence
it can no longer be considered as something other than it; and so it is
in its essence one with mind, while as a subject it is different), in
like manner, too, the Word of God by its self-subsistence is distinct
from Him from whom it has its subsistence; and yet by exhibiting in
itself those qualities which are recognized in God it is the same in
nature with Him who is recognizable by the same distinctive marks. For
whether one adopts goodness <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1947](#fn_1945) ,
or power, or wisdom, or eternal existence, or the incapability of vice,
death, and decay, or an entire perfection, or anything whatever of the
kind, to mark one’s conception of the Father, by means of the same marks
he will find the Word that subsists from Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[475:1942](2050221.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p4"></span> *the Deity…without Logos.* In another
treatise (*De Fide*, p. 40) Gregory bases the argument for the eternity
of the <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>Λόγος</span>
on <span id="xi.ii.iii-p4.2"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xi.ii.iii-p4.3"></span>,
where it is not said, “after the beginning,” but “in the beginning.” The
beginning, therefore, never was without the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p4.4"></span>Λόγος</span>.

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[475:1943](2050221.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p5"></span> *unstable:* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>παγὴς</span> (the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p5.3"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p5.4"></span>ρπαγις</span> is
manifestly wrong). So afterwards human speech is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p5.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p5.6"></span>πίκηρος</span>. Cf.
Athanasius (*Contr. Arian.* 3): “Since man came from the non-existent,
therefore his ‘word’ also has a pause, and does not last. From man we
get, day after day, many different words, because the first abide not,
but are forgotten.”

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[475:1944](2050221.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p5.7"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>πόστασιν</span>. About this oft repeated word
the question arises whether we are indebted to Christians or to
Platonists for the first skilful use of it in expressing that which is
*neither substance nor quality.* Abraham Tucker (*Light of Nature,* ii.
p. 191) hazards the following remark with regard to the Platonic Triad,
*i.e.* Goodness, Intelligence, Activity, viz. that *quality* would not
do as a general name for these principles, because the ideas and
abstract essences existed in the Intelligence, &c., and qualities cannot
exist in one another, *e.g.* yellowness cannot be soft: nor could
*substance* be the term, for then they must have been component parts of
the Existent, which would have destroyed the unity of the Godhead:
“therefore, he (Plato) styled them Hypostases or Subsistencies, which is
something between substance and quality, inexisting in the one, and
serving as a receptacle for the other’s inexistency within it.” But he
adds, “I do not recommend this explanation to anybody”; nor does he
state the authority for this Platonic use, so lucidly explained, of the
word. Indeed, if the word had ever been applied to the principles of the
Platonic triad, to express in the case of each of them “the distinct
subsistence in a common <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.3"></span>οὐσία</span>,” it would have falsified the
very conception of the first, *i.e.* Goodness, which was *never
relative.* So that this very word seems to emphasize, so far, the
antagonism between Christianity and Platonism. Socrates (*E. H*. iii. 7)
bears witness to the absence of the word from the ancient Greek
philosophy: “it appears to us that the Greek philosophers have given us
various definitions of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.4"></span>οὐσία</span>, but have not taken the
slightest notice of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.5"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.6"></span>πόστασις</span>.…it is not found in any of
the ancients except occasionally in a sense quite different from that
which is attached to it at the present day (*i.e.* fifth century). Thus
Sophocles in his tragedy entitled *Phœnix* uses it to signify
‘treachery’; in Menander it implies ‘sauces’ (*i e.* sediment). But
although the ancient philosophical writers scarcely noticed the word,
the more modern ones have frequently used it *instead of* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p6.7"></span>οὐσία</span>.” But it
was, as far as can be traced, the unerring genius of Origen that first
threw around the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.8"></span>Λόγος</span> that atmosphere of a new term,
*i.e.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.9"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.10"></span>πόστασις</span>, as well as <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p6.11"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p6.12"></span>μοούσιος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p6.13"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p6.14"></span>αὐτόθεος</span>, which
afterward made it possible to present the Second Person to the
Greek-speaking world as the member of an equal and indivisible Trinity.
It was he who first selected such words and saw what they were capable
of; though he did not insist on that fuller meaning which was put upon
them when all danger within the Church of Sabellianism had disappeared,
and error passed in the guise of Arianism to the opposite extreme.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[475:1945](2050221.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p6.15"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p7"></span> *lives.* This doctrine is far removed
from that of Philo, *i.e.* from the Alexandrine philosophy. The very
first statement of S. John represents the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>Λόγος</span> as having a backward movement
towards the Deity, as well as a forward movement from Him; as held
there, and yet sent thence by a force which he calls Love, so that the
primal movement towards the world does not come from the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>Λόγος</span>, but from
the Father Himself. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p7.3"></span>Λόγος</span> here is the Word, and *not the
Reason;* He is the living effect of a living cause, not a theory or
hypothesis standing at the gateway of an insoluble mystery. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p7.4"></span>Λόγος</span> speaks
because the Father speaks, not because the Supreme cannot and will not
speak; and their relations are often the reverse of those they hold in
Philo; for the Father becomes at times the meditator between the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p7.5"></span>Λόγος</span> and the
world drawing men towards Him and subduing portions of the Creation
before His path. Psychology seems to pour a light straight into the
Council-chamber of the Eternal; while Metaphysics had turned away from
it, with her finger on her lips. Philo may have used, as Tholuck thinks,
those very texts of the Old Testament which support the Christian
doctrine of the Word, and in the translation of which the LXX. supplied
him with the Greek word. But, however derived, his theology eventually
ranged itself with those pantheistic views of the universe which subdued
all thinking minds not Christianized, for more than three centuries
after him. The majority of recent critics certainly favour the
supposition that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p7.6"></span>Λόγος</span> of Philo is a being numerically
distinct from the Supreme; but when the relation of the Supreme is
attentively traced in each, the actual antagonism of the Christian
system and his begins to be apparent. The Supreme of Philo is not and
can never be related to the world. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iii-p7.7"></span>Λόγος</span> is a logical necessity as a
mediator between the two; a spiritual being certainly, but only the head
of a long series of such beings, who succeed at last in filling the
passage between the finite and the infinite. In this system there is no
mission of love and of free will; such beings are but as the milestones
to mark the distance between man and the Great Unknown. It is
significant that Vacherot, the leading historian of the Alexandrine
school of philosophy, doubts whether John the Evangelist ever even heard
of the Jewish philosopher of Alexandria. It is pretty much the same with
the members of the Neoplatonic Triad as with the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p7.8"></span>Λόγος</span> of Philo.
The God of Plotinus and Proclus is not a God in three hypostases: he is
simply one, Intelligence and Soul being his necessary emanations; they
are in God, but they are not God: Soul is but a hypostasis of a
hypostasis. The One is not a hypostasis, but above it. This “Trinity”
depends on the distinction and succession of the *necessary* movements
of the Deity; it consists of three distinct and separate principles of
things. The Trinity is really peculiar to Christianity. Three
inseparable Hypostases make equally a part of the Divine nature, so that
to take away one would be to destroy the whole. The Word and Spirit are
Divine, not intermediaries disposed in a hierarchy on the route of the
world to God. As Plotinus reproached the Gnostics, the Christian
mysticism despises the world, and suppressing the intermediaries who in
other doctrines serve to elevate the soul gradually to God, it
transports it by one impulse as it were into the Divine nature. The
Christian goes straight to God by Faith. The Imagination, Reason, and
Contemplation of the Neoplatonists, *i.e.* the three movements of the
soul which correspond to their lower “trinity” of Nature, Soul,
Intelligence, are no longer necessary. There is an antipathy profound
between the two systems; How then could the one be said to influence the
other? Neoplatonism may have tinged Christianity, while it was still
seeking for language in which to express its inner self: but it never
influenced the intrinsically moral character of the Christian Creeds.
The Alexandrine philosophy is all metaphysics, and its rock was
pantheism; all, even matter, proceeds from God necessarily and
eternally. The Church never hesitated: she saw the abyss that opens upon
that path; and by severe decrees she has closed the way to pantheism.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[476:1946](2050221.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p7.9"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p8"></span> *will not fail to perform;* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>μὴ ἀνενεργητον
εἶναι</span>. This is a favourite word with Gregory, and the Platonist
Synesius.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[476:1947](2050221.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="xi.ii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p9"></span> *goodness.* “God is love;” but how is
this love above or equal to the Power? “Infinite Goodness, according to
our apprehension, requires that it should exhaust omnipotence: that it
should give capacities of enjoyment and confer blessings until there
were no more to be conferred: but our idea of omnipotence requires that
it should be inexhaustible; that nothing should limit its operation, so
that it should do no more than it has done. Therefore, it is much easier
to conceive an imperfect creature completely good, than a perfect Being
who is so.…Since, then, we find our understanding incapable of
comprehending *infinite* goodness joined with *infinite* power, we need
not be surprised at finding our thoughts perplexed concerning them…we
may presume that the obscurity rises from something wrong in our ideas,
*not from any inconsistencies in the subjects themselves.*” Abraham
Tucker, *L. of N*., i. 355.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2050222)
