[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050182)  [Next](2050184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span> I. *Wherein is a partial inquiry into
the nature of the world, and a more minute exposition of the things
which preceded the genesis of man* <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1589](#fn_1587.md)

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span>1. “This is the book of the generation
of heaven and earth <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1590](#fn_1588.md) ,” saith
the Scripture, when all that is seen was finished, and each of the
things that are betook itself to its own separate place, when the body
of heaven compassed all things round, and those bodies which are heavy
and of downward tendency, the earth and the water, holding each other
in, took the middle place of the universe; while, as a sort of bond and
stability for the things that were made, the Divine power and skill was
implanted in the growth of things, guiding all things with the reins of
a double operation (for it was by rest and motion that it devised the
genesis of the things that were not, and the continuance of the things
that are), driving around, about the heavy and changeless element
contributed by the creation that does not move, as about some fixed
path, the exceedingly rapid motion of the sphere, like a wheel, and
preserving the indissolubility of both by their mutual action, as the
circling substance by its rapid motion compresses the compact body of
the earth round about, while that which is firm and unyielding, <span
id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span id="x.ii.ii.ii-Page_389"></span>by
reason of its unchanging fixedness, continually augments the whirling
motion of those things which revolve round it, and intensity <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[1591](#fn_1589.md) is produced in equal measure in
each of the natures which thus differ in their operation, in the
stationary nature, I mean, and in the mobile revolution; for neither is
the earth shifted from its own base, nor does the heaven ever relax in
its vehemence, or slacken its motion.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p6"></span>2. These, moreover, were first framed
before other things, according to the Divine wisdom, to be as it were a
beginning of the whole machine, the great Moses indicating, I suppose,
where he says that the heaven and the earth were made by God “in the
beginning <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1592](#fn_1590.md) ” that all things
that are seen in the creation are the offspring of rest and motion,
brought into being by the Divine will. Now the heaven and the earth
being diametrically opposed to each other in their operations, the
creation which lies between the opposites, and has in part a share in
what is adjacent to it, itself acts as a mean between the extremes, so
that there is manifestly a mutual contact of the opposites through the
mean; for air in a manner imitates the perpetual motion and subtlety of
the fiery substance, both in the lightness of its nature, and in its
suitableness for motion; yet it is not such as to be alienated from the
solid substance, for it is no more in a state of continual flux and
dispersion than in a permanent state of immobility, but becomes, in its
affinity to each, a kind of borderland of the opposition between
operations, at once uniting in itself and dividing things which are
naturally distinct.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p8"></span>3. In the same way, liquid substance
also is attached by double qualities to each of the opposites; for in so
far as it is heavy and of downward tendency it is closely akin to the
earthy; but in so far as it partakes of a certain fluid and mobile
energy it is not altogether alien from the nature which is in motion;
and by means of this also there is effected a kind of mixture and
concurrence of the opposites, weight being transferred to motion, and
motion finding no hindrance in weight, so that things most extremely
opposite in nature combine with one another, and are mutually joined by
those which act as means between them.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>4. But to speak strictly, one should
rather say that the very nature of the contraries themselves is not
entirely without mixture of properties, each with the other, so that, as
I think, all that we see in the world mutually agree, and the creation,
though discovered in properties of contrary natures, is yet at union
with itself. For as motion is not conceived merely as local shifting,
but is also contemplated in change and alteration, and on the other hand
the immovable nature does not admit motion by way of alteration, the
wisdom of God has transposed these properties, and wrought
unchangeableness in that which is ever moving, and change in that which
is immovable; doing this, it may be, by a providential dispensation, so
that that property of nature which constitutes its immutability and
immobility might not, when viewed in any created object, cause the
creature to be accounted as God; for that which may happen to move or
change would cease to admit of the conception of Godhead. Hence the
earth is stable without being immutable, while the heaven, on the
contrary, as it has no mutability, so has not stability either, that the
Divine power, by interweaving change in the stable nature and motion
with that which is not subject to change, might, by the interchange of
attributes, at once join them both closely to each other, and make them
alien from the conception of Deity; for as has been said, neither of
these (neither that which is unstable, nor that which is mutable) can be
considered to belong to the more Divine nature.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p10"></span>5. Now all things were already arrived
at their own end: “the heaven and the earth <span
id="fr_1591"></span>[1593](#fn_1591.md) ,” as Moses says, “were finished,”
and all things that lie between them, and the particular things were
adorned with their appropriate beauty; the heaven with the rays of the
stars, the sea and air with the living creatures that swim and fly, and
the earth with all varieties of plants and animals, to all which,
empowered by the Divine will, it gave birth together; the earth was
full, too, of her produce, bringing forth fruits at the same time with
flowers; the meadows were full of all that grows therein, and all the
mountain ridges, and summits, and every hillside, and slope, and hollow,
were crowned with young grass, and with the varied produce of the trees,
just risen from the ground, yet shot up at once into their perfect
beauty; and all the beasts that had come into life at God’s command were
rejoicing, we may suppose, and skipping about, running to and fro in the
thickets in herds according to their kind, while every sheltered and
shady spot was ringing with the chants of the songbirds. And at sea, we
may suppose, the sight to be seen was of the like kind, as it had just
settled to quiet and calm in the gathering together of its depths, where
havens and harbours spontaneously hollowed out on the coasts made the
sea reconciled with the land; and the gentle motion of the waves vied in
beauty with the meadows, <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-Page_390"></span>rippling delicately with light and
harmless breezes that skimmed the surface; and all the wealth of
creation by land and sea was ready, and none was there to share it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[388:1589](2050183.htm#fr_1587.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span> A Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the Latin version, cited by
Forbes, which gives independent titles, has here:—“Of the perfection and
beauty of the world and of the harmonious discord of the four elements.”

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[388:1590](2050183.htm#fr_1588.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p4"></span> [Gen. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004.md)<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[389:1591](2050183.htm#fr_1589.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>περβόλη</span> apparently means “intensity”
or “a high degree of force,” not “*excess* of force,” since, though the
force in each is augmented, it does not exceed that in the other, which
is augmented also *pari passu.*

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[389:1592](2050183.htm#fr_1590.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p7"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[389:1593](2050183.htm#fr_1591.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p11"></span> [Gen. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001.md)<span id="x.ii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why man appeared last, after the creation.](2050184.md)
