[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050046)  [Next](2050048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxi-p1"></span> §31. *The observations made by
watching Providence are sufficient to give us the knowledge of sameness
of Being.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxi-p2"></span>And yet, if he could see the
consequences of his own statements, he would be led on by them to
acquiesce in the doctrine of the Church. For if the maker’s nature is an
indication of the thing made, as he affirms, and if, according to his
school, the Son is something made by the Father, anyone who has observed
the Father’s nature would have certainly known thereby that of the Son;
if, I say, it is true that the worker’s nature is a sign of that which
he works. But the Only-begotten, as they say, of the Father’s
*unlikeness*, will be excluded from operating <span id="page_LXXVI">p.
LXXVI</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxi-Page_LXXVI"></span>through
Providence. Eunomius need not trouble any more about His being
generated, nor force out of that another proof of the son’s unlikeness.
The difference of purpose will itself be sufficient to bring to light
His alien nature. For the First Being is, even by our opponents’
confession, one and single, and necessarily His will must be thought of
as following the bent of His nature; but Providence shows that purpose
is good, and so the nature from which that purpose comes is shown to be
good also. So the Father alone works good; and the Son does not purpose
the same things as He, if we adopt the assumptions of our adversary; the
difference then, of their nature will be clearly attested by this
variation of their purposes. But if, while the Father is provident for
the Universe, the Son is equally provident for it (for ‘what He sees the
Father doing that also the Son does’), this sameness of their purposes
exhibits a communion of nature in those who thus purpose the same
things. Why, then, is all mention of Providence omitted by him, as if it
would not help us at all to that which we are searching for. Yet many
familiar examples make for our view of it. Anyone who has gazed on the
brightness of fire and experienced its power of warming, when he
approaches another such brightness and another such warmth, will
assuredly be led on to think of fire; for his senses through the medium
of these similar phænomena will conduct him to the fact of a kindred
element producing both; anything that was not fire could not work on all
occasions like fire. Just so, when we perceive a similar and equal
amount of providential power in the Father and in the Son, we make a
guess by means of what thus comes within the range of our knowledge
about things which transcend our comprehension; we feel that causes of
an alien nature cannot be detected in these equal and similar effects.
As the observed phenomena are to each other, so will the subjects of
those phenomena be: if the first are opposed to each other, we must
reckon the revealed entities to be so too; if the first are alike, so
too must those others be. Our Lord said allegorically that their fruit
is the sign of the characters of trees, meaning that it does not belie
that character, that the bad is not attached to the good tree, nor the
good to the bad tree;—“by their fruits ye shall know them;”—so when the
fruit, Providence, presents no difference, we detect a single nature
from which that fruit has sprung, even though the trees be different
from which the fruit is put forth. Through that, then, which is
cognizable by our apprehension, viz., the scheme or Providence visible
in the Son in the same way as in the Father, the common likeness of the
Only-begotten and the Father is placed beyond a doubt; and it is the
identity of the fruits of Providence by which we know it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His dictum that 'the manner of the likeness must follow the
manner of the generation' is unintelligible.](2050048.md)
