[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050105)  [Next](2050107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_CXCV">p. CXCV</span>
<span id="viii.i.ix.ii-Page_CXCV"></span>§2. *He then declares that the
close relation between names and things is immutable, and thereafter
proceeds accordingly, in the most excellent manner, with his discourse
concerning “generated” and “ungenerate.”*

<span id="viii.i.ix.ii-p2"></span>Now seeing that the Only-begotten is
in the Divine Scriptures proclaimed to be God, let Eunomius consider his
own argument, and condemn for utter folly the man who parts the Divine
into created and uncreated, as he does him who divides “man” into
“horse” and “man.” For he himself says, a little further on, after his
intermediate nonsense, “the close relation of names to things is
immutable,” where he himself by this statement assents to the fixed
character of the true connection of appellations with their subject. If,
then, the name of Godhead is properly employed in close connection with
the Only-begotten God (and Eunomius, though he may desire to be out of
harmony with us, will surely concede that the Scripture does not lie,
and that the name of the Godhead is not inharmoniously attributed to the
Only-begotten), let him persuade himself by his own reasoning that if
“the close relation of names to things is immutable,” and the Lord is
called by the name of “God,” he cannot apprehend any difference in
respect of the conception of Godhead between the Father and the Son,
seeing that this name is common to both,—or rather not this name only,
but there is a long list of names in which the Son shares, without
divergence of meaning, the appellations of the Father,—“good,”
“incorruptible,” “just,” “judge,” “long-suffering,” “merciful,”
“eternal,” “everlasting,” all that indicate the expression of majesty of
nature and power,—without any reservation being made in His case in any
of the names in regard of the exalted nature of the conception. But
Eunomius passes by, as it were with closed eye, the number, great as it
is, of the Divine appellations, and looks only to one point, his
“generate and ungenerate,”—trusting to a slight and weak cord his
doctrine, tossed and driven as it is by the blasts of error.

<span id="viii.i.ix.ii-p3"></span>He asserts that “no man who has any
regard for the truth either calls any generated thing ‘ungenerate,’ or
calls God Who is over all ‘Son’ or ‘generate.’” This statement needs no
further arguments on our part for its refutation. For he does not
shelter his craft with any veils, as his wont is, but treats the
inversion of his absurd statement as equivalent <span
id="fr_832"></span>[834](#fn_832.md) , while he says that neither is any
generated thing spoken of as “ungenerate,” nor is God Who is over all
called “Son” or “generate,” without making any special distinction for
the Only-begotten Godhead of the Son as compared with the rest of the
“generated,” but makes his opposition of “all things that have come into
being” to “God” without discrimination, not excepting the Son from “all
things.” And in the inversion of his absurdities he clearly separates,
forsooth, the Son from the Divine Nature, when he says that neither is
any generated thing spoken of as “ungenerate,” nor is God called “Son”
or “generate,” and manifestly reveals by this contradistinction the
horrid character of his blasphemy. For when he has distinguished the
“things that have come into being” from the “ungenerate,” he goes on to
say, in that antistrophal induction of his, that it is impossible to
call (not the “unbegotten,” but) “God,” “Son” or “generate,” trying by
these words to show that which is not ungenerate is not God, and that
the Only-begotten God is, by the fact of being begotten, as far removed
from being God as the ungenerate is from being generated in fact or in
name. For it is not in ignorance of the consequence of his argument that
he makes an inversion of the terms employed thus inharmonious and
incongruous: it is in his assault on the doctrine of orthodoxy that he
opposes “the Godhead” to “the generate”—and this is the point he tries
to establish by his words, that that which is not ungenerate is not God.
What was the true sequence of his argument? that having said “no
generated thing is ungenerate,” he should proceed with the inference,
“nor, if anything is naturally ungenerate, can it be generate.” Such a
statement at once contains truth and avoids blasphemy. But now by his
premise that no generated thing is ungenerate, and his inference that
God is not generated, he clearly shuts out the Only-begotten God from
being God, laying down that because He is not ungenerate, neither is He
God. Do we then need any further proofs to expose this monstrous
blasphemy? Is not this enough by itself to serve for a record against
the adversary of Christ, who by the arguments cited maintains that the
Word, Who in the beginning was God, is not God? What need is there to
engage further with such men as this? For we do not entangle ourselves
in controversy with those who busy themselves with idols and with the
blood that is shed upon their altars, not that we acquiesce in the
destruction of those who are besotted about idols, but because their
disease is too strong for our treatment. Thus, just as the fact itself
declares idolatry, and the evil that men do boldly and arrogantly
anticipates the reproach of those who <span id="page_CXCVI">p.
CXCVI</span> <span id="viii.i.ix.ii-Page_CXCVI"></span>accuse it, so
here too I think that the advocates of orthodoxy should keep silence
towards one who openly proclaims his impiety to his own discredit, just
as medicine also stands powerless in the case of a cancerous complaint,
because the disease is too strong for the art to deal with.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_832"></span>[CXCV:834](2050106.htm#fr_832.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.ii-p4"></span> That is, in making a rhetorical
inversion of a proposition in itself objectionable, he so re-states it
as to make it really a different proposition while treating it as
equivalent. The original proposition is objectionable as classing the
Son with all generated existences: the inversion of it, because the term
“God” is substituted illicitly for the term “ungenerate.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thereafter he discusses the divergence of names and of things,
speaking, of that which is ungenerate as without a cause, and of that
which is non-existent, as the Scindapsus, Minotaur, Blityri, Cyclops,
Scylla, which never were generated at all, and shows that things which
are essentially different, are mutually destructive, as fire of water,
and the rest in their several relations. But in the case of the Father
and the Son, as the essence is common, and the properties reciprocally
interchangeable, no injury results to the Nature.](2050107.md)
