[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050032)  [Next](2050034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii-p1"></span> §17. *Discussion as to the exact
nature of the ‘energies’ which, this man declares, ‘follow’ the being of
the Father and of the Son.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii-p2"></span>Then he says “there must of course
be included in this account the energies that accompany each Being, and
the names appropriate to these energies.” Shrouded in such a mist of
vagueness, the meaning of this is far from clear: but one might
conjecture it is as follows. By the energies of the Beings, he means
those powers which have produced the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by
which the First Being made the Second, and the Second the Third: and he
means that the names of the results produced have been provided in a
manner appropriate to those results. We have already exposed the
mischief of these names, and will again, when we return to that part of
the question, should additional discussion of it be required.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii-p3"></span>But it is worth a moment’s while
now to consider how energies ‘follow’ beings: what these energies are
essentially: whether different to the beings which they ‘follow,’ or
part of them, and of their inmost nature: and then, if different, how
and whence they arise: if the same, how they have got cut off from them,
and instead of co-existing ‘follow’ <span id="page_LV">p. LV</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii-Page_LV"></span>them externally only. This is
necessary, for we cannot learn all at once from his words whether some
natural necessity compels the ‘energy,’ whatever that may be, to
‘follow’ the being, the way heat and vapour follow fire, and the various
exhalations the bodies which produce them. Still I do not think that he
would affirm that we should consider the being of God to be something
heterogeneous and composite, having the energy inalienably contained in
the idea of itself, like an ‘accident’ in some subject-matter: he must
mean that the beings, deliberately and voluntarily moved, produce by
themselves the desired result. But, if this be so, who would style this
free result of intention as one of its external consequences? We have
never heard of such an expression used in common parlance in such cases;
the energy of the worker of anything is not said to ‘follow’ that
worker. We cannot separate one from the other and leave one behind by
itself: but, when one mentions the energy, one comprehends in the idea
that which is moved with the energy, and when one mentions the worker
one implies at once the unmentioned energy.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvii-p4"></span>An illustration will make our
meaning clearer. We say a man works in iron, or in wood, or in anything
else. This single expression conveys at once the idea of the working and
of the artificer, so that if we withdraw the one, the other has no
existence. If then they are thus thought of together, i.e. the energy
and he who exercises it, how in this case can there be said to “follow”
upon the first being the energy which produces the second being, like a
sort of go-between to both, and neither coalescing with the nature of
the first, nor combining with the second: separated from the first
because it is not its very nature, but only the exercise of its nature,
and from that which results afterwards because it does not therein
reproduce a mere energy, but an active being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He has no reason for distinguishing a plurality of beings in the
Trinity. He offers no demonstration that it is so.](2050034.md)
