[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050051)  [Next](2050053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p1"></span> §36. *A passing repetition of the
teaching of the Church.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p2"></span>But if a man keeps steadfast to
the sound doctrine, and believes that the Son is of the nature which is
divine without admixture, he will find everything in harmony with the
other truths of his religion, viz., that Our Lord is the maker of all
things, that He is King of the universe, set above it not by an
arbitrary act of capricious power, but ruling by virtue of a superior
nature; and besides this, he will find that the one First Cause <span
id="fr_186"></span>[188](#fn_186.md) , as taught by us, is not divided by
any unlikeness of substance into separate first causes, but one Godhead,
one Cause, one Power over all things is believed in, that Godhead being
discoverable by the harmony existing between these like beings, and
leading on the mind through one like to another like, so that the Cause
of all things, which is Our Lord, shines in our hearts by means of the
Holy Spirit; (for it is impossible, as the Apostle says, that the Lord
Jesus can be truly known, “except by the Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_187"></span>[189](#fn_187) ”.md); and then all the Cause beyond,
which is God over all, is found through Our Lord, Who is the Cause of
all things; nor, indeed, is it possible to gain an exact knowledge of
the Archetypal Good, except as it appears in the (visible) image of that
invisible. But then, after passing that summit of theology, I mean the
God over all, we turn as it were back again in the racecourse of the
mind, and speed through conjoint and kindred ideas from the Father,
through the Son, to the Holy Ghost. For once having taken our stand on
the comprehension of the Ungenerate Light, we perceive <span
id="fr_188"></span>[190](#fn_188.md) that moment from that vantage ground
the Light that streams from Him, like the ray co-existent with the sun,
whose cause indeed is in the sun, but whose existence is synchronous
with the sun, not being a later addition, but appearing at the first
sight of the sun itself: or rather (for there is no necessity to be
slaves to this similitude, and so give a handle to the critics to use
against our teaching by reason of the inadequacy of our image), it will
not be a ray of the sun that we shall perceive, but another sun blazing
forth, as an offspring, out of the Ungenerate sun, and simultaneously
with our conception of the First, and in every way like him, in beauty,
in power, in lustre, in size, <span id="page_LXXXV">p. LXXXV</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-Page_LXXXV"></span>in brilliance, in all
things at once that we observe in the sun. Then again, we see yet
another such Light after the same fashion sundered by no interval of
time from that offspring Light, and while shining forth by means of It
yet tracing the source of its being to the Primal Light; itself,
nevertheless, a Light shining in like manner as the one first conceived
of, and itself a source of light and doing all that light does. There
is, indeed, no difference between one light and another light, *qua
light*, when the one shows no lack or diminution of illuminating grace,
but by its complete perfection forms part of the highest light of all,
and is beheld along with the Father and the Son, though counted after
them, and by its own power gives access to the light that is perceived
in the Father and Son to all who are able to partake of it. So far upon
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[LXXXIV:188](2050052.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p3"></span> *One First Cause,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>μοναρχίας</span>.
In a notable passage on the Greeks who came up to the Feast ([John xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>), Cyril (*Catena,* p. 307), uses the
same word. “Such, seeing that some of the Jews’ customs did not greatly
differ from their own, as far as related to the manner of sacrifice, and
the belief in a *One first Cause*…came up with them to worship,” &c.
Philo had already used the word so (*De Charit.*). Athanasius opposes it
to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p3.3"></span>πολυθεία</span> (*Quæst. ad Antioch.*
I.).

<span id="fn_187"></span>[LXXXIV:189](2050052.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p3.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[LXXXIV:190](2050052.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>νοήσαμεν</span>: aorist of
instantaneous action.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence of S. Basil's statement, attacked by Eunomius, that the
terms 'Father' and 'The Ungenerate' can have the same meaning.](2050053.md)
