[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050140)  [Next](2050142.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_CCCXV">p. CCCXV</span>
<span id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXV"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>On the Holy Spirit.</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii-p2.1"></span>Against the Followers of Macedonius.  <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1221](#fn_1219.md) </span>

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>————————————

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.iii-p6.1"></span>It</span> may indeed be undignified to give
any answer at all to the statements that are foolish; we seem to be
pointed that way by Solomon’s wise advice, “not to answer a fool
according to his folly.” But there is a danger lest through our silence
error may prevail over the truth, and so the rotting sore <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1222](#fn_1220.md) of this heresy may invade it, and
make havoc of the sound word of the faith. It has appeared to me,
therefore, to be imperative to answer, not indeed according to the folly
of these men who offer objections of such a description to our Religion,
but for the correction of their depraved ideas. For that advice quoted
above from the Proverbs gives, I think, the watchword not for silence,
but for the correction of those who are displaying some act of folly;
our answers, that is, are not to run on the level of their foolish
conceptions, but rather to overturn those unthinking and deluded views
as to doctrine.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span>What then is the charge they bring against
us? They accuse us of profanity for entertaining lofty conceptions about
the Holy Spirit. All that we, in following the teachings of the Fathers,
confess as to the Spirit, they take in a sense of their own, and make it
a handle against us, to denounce us for profanity <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1223](#fn_1221.md) . We, for instance, confess that
the Holy Spirit is of the same rank as the Father and the Son, so that
there is no difference between them in anything, to be thought or named,
that devotion can ascribe to a Divine nature. We confess that, save His
being contemplated as with peculiar attributes in regard of Person, the
Holy Spirit is indeed from God, and of the Christ, according to
Scripture <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1224](#fn_1222.md) , but that, while
not to be confounded with the Father in being never originated, nor with
the Son in being the Only-begotten, and while to be regarded separately
in certain distinctive properties, He has in all else, as I have just
said, an exact identity <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1225](#fn_1223.md) <span
id="page_CCCXVI">p. CCCXVI</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXVI"></span>with them. But our opponents aver that
He is a stranger to any vital communion with the Father and the Son;
that by reason of an essential variation He is inferior to, and less
than they in every point; in power, in glory, in dignity, in fine in
everything that in word or thought we ascribe to Deity; that, in
consequence, in their glory He has no share, to equal honour with them
He has no claim; and that, as for power, He possesses only so much of it
as is sufficient for the partial activities assigned to Him; that with
the creative force He is quite disconnected.

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span>Such is the conception of Him that
possesses them; and the logical consequence of it is that the Spirit has
in Himself none of those marks which our devotion, in word or thought,
ascribes to a Divine nature. What then, shall be our way of arguing? We
shall answer nothing new, nothing of our own invention, though they
challenge us to it; we shall fall back upon the testimony in Holy
Scripture about the Spirit, whence we learn that the Holy Spirit is
Divine, and is to be called so. Now, if they allow this, and will not
contradict the words of inspiration, then they, with all their eagerness
to fight with us, must tell us why they are for contending with us,
instead of with Scripture. We say nothing different from that which
Scripture says.—But in a Divine nature, as such, when once we have
believed in it, we can recognize no distinctions suggested either by the
Scripture teaching or by our own common sense; distinctions, that is,
that would divide that Divine and transcendent nature within itself by
any degrees of intensity and remission, so as to be altered from itself
by being more or less. Because we firmly believe that it is simple,
uniform, incomposite, because we see in it no complicity or composition
of dissimilars, therefore it is that, when once our minds have grasped
the idea of Deity, we accept by the implication of that very name the
perfection in it of every conceivable thing that befits the Deity.
Deity, in fact, exhibits perfection in every line in which the good can
be found. If it fails and comes short of perfection in any single point,
in that point the conception of Deity will be impaired, so that it
cannot, therein, be or be called Deity at all; for how could we apply
that word to a thing that is imperfect and deficient, and requiring an
addition external to itself?

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>We can confirm our argument by material
instances. Fire naturally imparts the sense of heat to those who touch
it, with all its component parts <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1226](#fn_1224.md) ; one part of it does not have the
heat more intense, the other less intense; but as long as it is fire at
all, it exhibits an invariable oneness with itself in an absolutely
complete sameness of activity; if in any part it gets cooled at all, in
that part it can no longer be called fire; for, with the change of its
heat-giving activity into the reverse, its name also is changed. It is
the same with water, with air, with every element that underlies the
universe; there is one and the same description of the element, in each
case, admitting of no ideas of excess or defect; water, for instance,
cannot be called more or less water; as long as it maintains an equal
standard of wetness, so long the term water will be realized by it; but
when once it is changed in the direction of the opposite quality <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1227](#fn_1225.md) the name to be applied to it must
be changed also. The yielding, buoyant, “nimble” <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[1228](#fn_1226.md) nature of the air, too, is to be
seen in every part of it; while what is dense, heavy, downward
gravitating, sinks out of the connotation of the very term “air.” So
Deity, as long as it possesses perfection throughout all the properties
that devotion <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1229](#fn_1227.md) may attach to
it, by virtue of this perfection in everything good does not belie its
name; but if any one of those things that contribute to this idea of
perfection is subtracted from it, the name of Deity is falsified in that
particular, and does not apply to the subject any longer. It is equally
impossible to apply to a dry substance the name of water, to that whose
quality is a state of coolness the name of fire, to stiff and hard
things the name of air, and to call that thing Divine which does not at
once imply the idea of perfection; or rather the impossibility is
greater in this last case.

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span>If, then, the Holy Spirit is truly, and
not in name only, called Divine both by Scripture and by our Fathers,
what ground is left for those who oppose the glory of the Spirit? He is
Divine, and absolutely good, and Omnipotent, and wise, and glorious, and
eternal; He is everything of this kind that can be named to raise our
thoughts to the grandeur of His being. The singleness of the subject of
these properties testifies that He does not possess them in a measure
only, as if we could imagine that He was one thing in His very
substance, but became another by the presence of the aforesaid
qualities. That condition is peculiar <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1230](#fn_1228.md) <span id="page_CCCXVII">p.
CCCXVII</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXVII"></span>to those beings
who have been given a composite nature; whereas the Holy Spirit is
single and simple in every respect equally. This is allowed by all; the
man who denies it does not exist. If, then, there is but one simple and
single definition of His being, the good which He possesses is not an
acquired good; but, whatever He may be besides, He is Himself Goodness,
and Wisdom, and Power, and Sanctification, and Righteousness, and
Everlastingness, and Imperishability, and every name that is lofty, and
elevating above other names. What, then, is the state of mind that leads
these men, who do not fear the fearful sentence passed upon the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, to maintain that such a Being does not
possess glory? For they clearly put that statement forward; that we
ought not to believe that He should be glorified: though I know not for
what reason they judge it to be expedient not to confess the true nature
of that which is essentially glorious.

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span>For the plea will not avail them in their
self-defence, that He is delivered by our Lord to His disciples third in
order, and that therefore He is estranged from our ideal of Deity. Where
in each case activity in working good shows no diminution or variation
whatever, how unreasonable it is to suppose the numerical order to be a
sign of any diminution or essential variation <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1231](#fn_1229.md) ! It is as if a man were to see a
separate flame burning on three torches (and we will suppose that the
third flame is caused by that of the first being transmitted to the
middle, and then kindling the end torch <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1232](#fn_1230) .md), and were to maintain that the
heat in the first exceeded that of the others; that that next it showed
a variation from it in the direction of the less; and that the third
could not be called fire at all, though it burnt and shone just like
fire, and did everything that fire does. But if there is really no
hindrance to the third torch being fire, though it has been kindled from
a previous flame, what is the philosophy of these men, who profanely
think that they can slight the dignity of the Holy Spirit because He is
named by the Divine lips after the Father and the Son? Certainly, if
there is in our conceptions of the Substance of the Spirit anything that
falls short of the Divine ideal, they do well in testifying to His not
possessing glory; but if the highness of His dignity is to be perceived
in every point, why do they grudge to make the confession of His glory?
As if any one after describing some one as a man, were to consider it
not safe to go on to say of him as well that he is reasoning, mortal, or
anything else that can be predicated of a man, and so were to cancel
what he had just allowed; for if he is not reasoning, he is not a man at
all; but if the latter is granted, how can there be any hesitation about
the conceptions already implied in “man”? So, with regard to the Spirit,
if when one calls Him Divine one speaks the truth, neither when one
defines Him to be worthy of honour, to be glorious, good, omnipotent,
does one lie; for all such conceptions are at once admitted with the
idea of Deity. So that they must accept one of two alternatives; either
not to call Him Divine at all, or to refrain from subtracting from His
Deity any one of those conceptions which are attributable to Deity. We
must then, most surely, comprehend along with each other these two
thoughts, viz. the Divine nature, and along with it a just idea, a
devout intuition <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1233](#fn_1231.md) , of that
Divine and transcendent nature.

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span>Since, then, it has been affirmed, and
truly affirmed, that the Spirit is of the Divine Essence, and since in
that one word “Divine” every idea of greatness, as we have said, is
involved, it follows that he who grants that Divinity has potentially
granted <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1234](#fn_1232.md) all the rest;—the
gloriousness, the omnipotence, everything indicative of superiority. It
is indeed a monstrous thing to refuse to confess this in the case of the
Spirit; monstrous, because of the incongruity, as applied to Him, of the
terms which in the list of opposites correspond to the above terms. I
mean, if one does not grant gloriousness, one must grant the absence of
gloriousness; if one sets aside His power, one must acquiesce in its
opposite. So also with regard to honour, and goodness, and any other
superiority, if they are not accepted, their opposites must be conceded.

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span>But if all must shrink from that, as
going even beyond the most revolting blasphemy, then a devout mind must
accept the nobler names and conceptions of the Holy Spirit, and must
pronounce concerning Him all that we have already named, that He has
honour, power, glory, goodness, and everything else that inspires
devotion. It must own, too, that these realities do not attach to Him in
imperfection or with any limit to the quality of their brilliance, but
that they correspond with their names to infinity. He is not to be
regarded as possessing dignity up to a certain point, and then becoming
different; but He is <span id="page_CCCXVIII">p. CCCXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXVIII"></span>always such. If you begin to count
behind the ages, or if you fix your gaze on the Hereafter <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1235](#fn_1233.md) , you will find no falling off
whatever in dignity, or glory, or omnipotence, such as to constitute Him
capable of increase by addition, or of diminution by subtraction. Being
wholly and entirely perfect, He admits diminution in nothing.
Whereinsoever, on such a supposition as theirs, He is lessened, therein
He will be exposed to the inroad of ideas tending to dishonour Him. For
that which is not absolutely perfect must be suspected on some one point
of partaking of the opposite character. But if to entertain even the
thought of this is a sign of extreme derangement of mind, it is well to
confess our belief that His perfection in all that is good is altogether
unlimited, uncircumscribed, in no particular diminished.

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span>If such is the doctrine concerning Him
when followed out <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1236](#fn_1234.md) , let the
same inquiry be made concerning the Son and the Father as well. Do you
not confess <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1237](#fn_1235.md) a perfection of
glory in the case of the one as in the case of the other? I think that
all who reflect will allow it. If, then, the honour of the Father is
perfect, and the honour of the Son is perfect, and they have confessed
as well the perfection of honour for the Holy Spirit, wherefore do these
new theorists dictate to us that we are not to allow in His case an
equality of honour with the Father and the Son? As for ourselves, we
follow out the above considerations and find ourselves unable to think,
as well as to say, that that which requires no addition for its
perfection is, as compared with something else, less dignified; for when
we have something wherein, owing to its faultless perfection, reason can
discover no possibility of increase, I do not see either wherein it can
discover any possibility of diminution. But these men, in denying the
equality of honour, really lay down the comparative absence of it; and
so also when they follow out further this same line of thought, by a
diminution arising from comparison they divert all the conceptions that
devotion has formed of the Holy Spirit; they do not own His perfection
either in goodness, or omnipotence, or in any such attribute. But if
they shrink from such open profanity and allow His perfection in every
attribute of good, then these clever people must tell us how one perfect
thing can be more perfect or less perfect than another perfect thing;
for so long as the definition of perfection applies to it, that thing
can not admit of a greater and a less in the matter of perfection.

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span>If, then, they agree that the Holy Spirit
is perfect absolutely, and it has been admitted in addition that true
reverence requires perfection in every good thing for the Father and the
Son as well, what reasons can justify them in taking away the
Father <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1238](#fn_1236.md) when once they have
granted Him? For to take away “equality of dignity” with the Father is a
sure proof that they do not think that the Spirit has a share in the
perfection of the Father. And as regards the idea itself of this honour
in the case of the Divine Being, from which they would exclude the
Spirit, what do they mean by it? Do they mean that honour which men
confer on men, when by word and gesture they pay respect to them,
signifying their own deference in the form of precedence and all
such-like practices, which in the foolish fashion of the day are kept up
in the name of “honour.” But all these things depend on the goodwill of
those who perform them; and if we suppose a case in which they do not
choose to perform them, then there is no one amongst mankind who has
from mere nature any advantage, such that he should necessarily be more
honoured than the rest; for all are marked alike with the same natural
proportions. The truth of this is clear; it does not admit of any doubt.
We see, for instance, the man who to-day, because of the office which he
holds, is considered by the crowd an object of honour, becoming tomorrow
himself one of those who pay honour, the office having been transferred
to another. Do they, then, conceive of an honour such as that in the
case of the Divine Being, so that, as long as we please to pay it, that
Divine honour is retained, but when we cease to do so it ceases too at
the dictate of our will? Absurd thought, and blasphemous as well! The
Deity, being independent of us, does not grow in honour; He is evermore
the same; He cannot pass into a better or a worse state; for He has no
better, and admits no worse.

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span>In what sort of manner, then, can you
honour the Deity? How can you heighten the Highest? How can you give
glory to that which is above all glory? How can you praise the
Incomprehensible? If “all the nations are as a drop of a bucket <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1239](#fn_1237.md) ,” as Isaiah says, if all living
humanity were to send up one united note of praise in harmony together,
what addition will this gift of a mere drop be to that which is glorious
essentially? The heavens are telling the glory of God <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1240](#fn_1238.md) , and yet they are counted poor
heralds of His worth; because His Majesty is exalted, not as far as the
heavens, <span id="page_CCCXIX">p. CCCXIX</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXIX"></span>but high above those heavens, which are
themselves included within a small fraction of the Deity called
figuratively His “span <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1241](#fn_1239.md) .” And
shall a man, this frail and short-lived creature, so aptly likened to
“grass,” who “to-day is,” and to-morrow is not, believe that he can
worthily honour the Divine Being? It would be like some one lighting a
thin fibre from some tow and fancying that by that spark he was making
an addition to the dazzling rays of the sun. By what words, pray, will
you honour the Holy Spirit, supposing you do wish to honour Him at all?
By saying that He is absolutely immortal, without turning, or
variableness, always beautiful, always independent of ascription from
others, working as He wills all things in all, Holy, leading, direct,
just, of true utterance, “searching the deep things of God,” “proceeding
from the Father,” “receiving <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1242](#fn_1240.md)
from the Son,” and all such-like things, what, after all, do you lend to
Him by these and such-like terms? Do you mention what He has, or do you
honour Him by what He has not? Well, if you attest what He has not, your
ascription is meaningless and comes to nothing; for he who calls
bitterness “sweetness,” while he lies himself, has failed to commend
that which is blamable. Whereas, if you mention what He has, such and
such a quality is essential, whether men recognize it or not; He remains
the object of faith <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1243](#fn_1241.md) , says
the Apostle, if we have not faith.

<span id="viii.iii-p42"></span>What means, then, this lowering and this
expanding of their soul, on the part of these men who are enthusiastic
for the Father’s honour, and grant to the Son an equal share with Him,
but in the case of the Spirit are for narrowing down their favours;
seeing that it has been demonstrated that the intrinsic worth of the
Divine Being does not depend for its contents upon any will of ours, but
has been always inalienably inherent in Him? Their narrowness of mind,
and unthankfulness, is exposed in this opinion of theirs, while the Holy
Spirit is essentially honourable, glorious, almighty, and all that we
can conceive of in the way of exaltation, in spite of them.

<span id="viii.iii-p43"></span>“Yes,” replies one of them, “but we have
been taught by Scripture that the Father is the Creator, and in the same
way that it was ‘through the Son <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1244](#fn_1242.md) ’ that ‘all things were made’; but
God’s word tells us nothing of this kind about the Spirit; and how,
then, can it be right to place the Holy Spirit in a position of equal
dignity with One Who has displayed such magnificence of power through
the Creation?”

<span id="viii.iii-p45"></span>What shall we answer to this? That the
thoughts of their hearts are so much idle talk, when they imagine that
the Spirit was not always with the Father and the Son, but that, as
occasion varies, He is sometimes to be contemplated as alone, sometimes
to be found in the closest union with Them. For if the heaven, and the
earth, and all created things were really made through the Son and from
the Father, but apart from the Spirit, what was the Holy Spirit doing at
the time when the Father was at work with the Son upon the Creation? Was
He employed upon some other works, and was this the reason that He had
no hand in the building of the Universe? But, then, what special work of
the Spirit have they to point to, at the time when the world was being
made? Surely, it is senseless folly to conceive of a creation other than
that which came into existence from the Father through the Son. Well,
suppose that He was not employed at all, but dissociated Himself from
the busy work of creating by reason of an inclination to ease and rest,
which shrank from toil?

<span id="viii.iii-p46"></span>May the gracious Spirit Himself pardon
this baseless supposition of ours! The blasphemy of these theorists,
which we have had to follow out in every step it takes, has caused us
unwittingly to soil our discussion with the mud of their own imaginings.
The view which is consistent with all reverence is as follows. We are
not to think of the Father as ever parted from the Son, nor to look for
the Son as separate from the Holy Spirit. As it is impossible to mount
to the Father, unless our thoughts are exalted thither through the Son,
so it is impossible also to say that Jesus is Lord except by the Holy
Spirit. Therefore, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are to be known only in
a perfect Trinity, in closest consequence and union with each other,
before all creation, before all the ages, before anything whatever of
which we can form an idea <span id="fr_1243"></span>[1245](#fn_1243.md) .
The Father is always Father, and in Him the Son, and with the Son the
Holy Spirit. If these Persons, then, are inseparate from each other, how
great is the folly of these men who undertake to sunder this
indivisibility by certain distinctions of time, and so far to divide the
Inseparable as to assert confidently, “the Father alone, through the Son
alone, made all things”; the Holy Spirit, that is, being not present at
all on the occasion of this making, or else not working. Well, if He was
not present, they must tell us where He was; and whether, while God
embraces all things, they can imagine any separate standing-place for
the Spirit, so that He could have remained in isolation during the time
occupied by the process of creating. If, on the other hand, He was
present, how was it <span id="page_CCCXX">p. CCCXX</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXX"></span>that He was inactive? Because He could
not, or because He would not, work? Did He abstain willingly, or because
some strong necessity drove Him away? Now, if He deliberately embraced
this inactivity, He must reject working in any other possible way
either; and He Who affirmed that “He worketh all things in all, as He
wills <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1246](#fn_1244.md) ,” is according to them
a liar. If, on the contrary, this Spirit has the impulse to work, but
some overwhelming control hinders His design, they must tell us the
wherefore of this hindrance. Was it owing to his being grudged a share
in the glory of those operations, and in order to secure that the
admiration at their success should not extend to a third person as its
object; or to a distrust of His help, as if His co-operation would
result in present mischief? These clever men most certainly furnish the
grounds for our holding one of these two hypotheses; or else, if a
grudging spirit has no connection with the Deity, any more than a
failure can be conceived of in any relation to an Infallible Being, what
meaning of any kind is there in these narrow views of theirs, which
isolate the Spirit’s power from all world-building efficiency? Their
duty rather was to expel their low human way of thinking, by means of
loftier ideas, and to make a calculation more worthy of the sublimity of
the objects in question. For neither did the Universal God make the
universe “through the Son,” as needing any help, nor does the
Only-begotten God work all things “by the Holy Spirit,” as having a
power that comes short of His design; but the fountain of power is the
Father, and the power of the Father is the Son, and the spirit of that
power is the Holy Spirit; and Creation entirely, in all its visible and
spiritual extent, is the finished work of that Divine power. And seeing
that no toil can be thought of in the composition of anything connected
with the Divine Being (for performance being bound to the moment of
willing, the Plan at once becomes a Reality), we should be justified in
calling all that Nature which came into existence by creation a movement
of Will, an impulse of Design, a transmission of Power, beginning from
the Father, advancing through the Son, and completed in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="viii.iii-p49"></span>This is the view we take, after the
unprofessional way usual with us; and we reject all these elaborate
sophistries of our adversaries, believing and confessing as we do, that
in every deed and thought, whether in this world, or beyond this world,
whether in time or in eternity, the Holy Spirit is to be apprehended as
joined to the Father and Son, and is wanting in no wish or energy, or
anything else that is implied in a devout conception of Supreme
Goodness <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1247](#fn_1245.md) ; and, therefore,
that, except for the distinction of order and Person, no variation in
any point is to be apprehended; but we assert that while His place is
counted third in mere sequence after the Father and Son, third in the
order of the transmission, in all other respects we acknowledge His
inseparable union with them; both in nature, in honour, in godhead, and
glory, and majesty, and almighty power, and in all devout belief.

<span id="viii.iii-p51"></span>But with regard to service and worship,
and the other things which they so nicely calculate about, and bring
into prominence, we say this; that the Holy Spirit is exalted above all
that we can do for Him with our merely human purpose; our worship is far
beneath the honour due; and anything else that in human customs is held
as honourable is somewhere below the dignity of the Spirit; for that
which in its essence is measureless surpasses those who offer their all
with so slight and circumscribed and paltry a power of giving. This,
then, we say to those of them who subscribe to the reverential
conception of the Holy Spirit that He is Divine, and of the Divine
nature. But if there is any of them who rejects this statement, and this
idea involved in the very name of Divinity, and says that which, to the
destruction of the Spirit’s greatness, is in circulation amongst the
many, namely, that He belongs, not to making, but to made, beings, that
it is right to regard Him not as of a Divine, but as of a created
nature, we answer to a proposition such as this, that we do not
understand how we can count those who make it amongst the number of
Christians at all. For just as it would not be possible to style the
unformed embryo a human being, but only a potential one, assuming that
it is completed so as to come forth to human birth, while as long as it
is in this unformed state, it is something other than a human being; so
our reason cannot recognize as a Christian one who has failed to
receive, with regard to the entire mystery, the genuine form of our
religion <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1248](#fn_1246.md) . We can hear Jews
believing in God, and our God too: even our Lord reminds <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1249](#fn_1247.md) them in the Gospel that they
recognize no other God than the Father of the Only-begotten, “of Whom ye
say that he is your God.” Are we, then, to call the Jews Christians
because they too agree to worship the God Whom we adore? I am aware,
too, that the Manichees go about vaunting the name of Christ. Because
they hold revered the Name to which we bow the knee, shall we therefore
number them amongst Christians? So, too, <span id="page_CCCXXI">p.
CCCXXI</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXXI"></span>he who both
believes in the Father and receives the Son, but sets aside the Majesty
of the Spirit, has “denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel,” and
belies the name of Christ which he bears. The Apostle bids the man of
God to be “perfect <span id="fr_1248"></span>[1250](#fn_1248.md) .” Now, to
take only the *general* man, perfection must consist in completeness in
every aspect of human nature, in having reason, capability of thought
and knowledge, a share of animal life, an upright bearing, risibility,
broadness of nail; and if any one were to term some individual a man,
and yet were unable to produce evidence in his case of the foregoing
signs of human nature, his terming him so would be a valueless honour.
Thus, too, the Christian is marked by his Belief in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; in this consists the form of him who is fashioned <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[1251](#fn_1249.md) in accordance with the mystery of
the truth. But if his form is arranged otherwise, I will not recognize
the existence of anything whence the form is absent; there is a blurring
out of the mark, and a loss of the essential form, and an alteration of
the characteristic signs of our complete humanity, when the Holy Spirit
is not included in the Belief. For indeed the word of Ecclesiastes says
true; your heretic is no living man, but “bones,” he says <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1252](#fn_1250.md) , “in the womb of her that is with
child <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1253](#fn_1251.md) ”; for how can one who
does not think of the unction along with the Anointed be said to believe
in the Anointed? “Him,” says (Peter), “did God anoint with the Holy
Spirit <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1254](#fn_1252.md) .”

<span id="viii.iii-p59"></span>These destroyers of the Spirit’s glory,
who relegate Him to a subject world, must tell us of what thing that
unction is the symbol. It not a symbol of the Kingship? And what? Do
they not believe in the Only-begotten as in His very nature a King? Men
who have not once for all enveloped their hearts with the Jewish
“vail <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1255](#fn_1253.md) ” will not gainsay that
He is this. If, then, the Son is in His very nature a king, and the
unction is the symbol of His kingship, what, in the way of a
consequence, does your reason demonstrate? Why, that the Unction is not
a thing alien to that Kingship, and so that the Spirit is not to be
ranked in the Trinity as anything strange and foreign either. For the
Son is King, and His living, realized, and personified Kingship is found
in the Holy Spirit, Who anoints the Only-begotten, and so makes Him the
Anointed, and the King of all things that exist. If, then, the Father is
King, and the Only-begotten is King, and the Holy Ghost is the Kingship,
one and the same definition of Kingship must prevail throughout this
Trinity, and the thought of “unction” conveys the hidden meaning that
there is no interval of separation between the Son and the Holy Spirit.
For as between the body’s surface and the liquid of the oil nothing
intervening can be detected, either in reason or in perception, so
inseparable is the union of the Spirit with the Son; and the result is
that whosoever is to touch the Son by faith must needs first encounter
the oil in the very act of touching; there is not a part of Him devoid
of the Holy Spirit. Therefore belief in the Lordship of the Son arises
in those who entertain it, by means of the Holy Ghost; on all sides the
Holy Ghost is met by those who by faith approach the Son. If, then, the
Son is essentially a King, and the Holy Spirit is that dignity of
Kingship which anoints the Son, what deprivation of this Kingship, in
its essence and comparing it with itself, can be imagined?

<span id="viii.iii-p61"></span>Again, let us look at it in this way.
Kingship is most assuredly shown in the rule over subjects. Now what is
“subject” to this Kingly Being? The Word includes the ages certainly,
and all that is in them; “Thy Kingdom,” it says, “is a Kingdom of ages,”
and, by ages, it means every substance in them created in infinite
space <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1256](#fn_1254.md) , whether visible or
invisible; for in them all things were created by the Maker of those
ages. If, then, the Kingship must always be thought of along with the
King, and the world of subjects is acknowledged to be something other
than the world of rulers, what absurdity it is for these men to
contradict themselves thus, attributing as they do the unction as an
expression for the worth of Him Whose very nature it is to be a King,
yet degrading that unction Itself to the rank of a subject, as if
wanting in such worth! If It is a subject by virtue of its nature, then
why is It made the unction of Kingship, and so associated with the
Kingly dignity of the Only-begotten? If, on the other hand, the capacity
to rule is shown by Its being included in the majesty of Kingship, where
is the necessity of having everything dragged down to a plebeian <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1257](#fn_1255.md) and servile lower condition, and
numbered with the subject creation? When we affirm of the Spirit the two
conditions, we cannot be in both cases speaking the truth: *i.e.* that
He is ruling, and that He is subject. If He rules, He is not under any
lord, but if He is subject, then He cannot be comprehended with the
Being who is a King. Men are recognized as amongst men, <span
id="page_CCCXXII">p. CCCXXII</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXXII"></span>angels amongst angels, everything
amongst its kind; and so the Holy Spirit must needs be believed to
belong to one only of two worlds; to the ruling, or to the inferior
world; for between these two our reason can recognize nothing; no new
invention of any natural attribute on the borderland of the Created and
the Uncreated can be thought of, such as would participate in both, yet
be neither entirely; we cannot imagine such an amalgamation and welding
together of opposites by anything being blended of the Created and the
Uncreated, and two opposites thus coalescing into one person, in which
case the result of that strange mixture would not only be a composite
thing, but composed of elements that were unlike, and disagreeing as to
time; for that which receives its personality from a creation is
assuredly posterior to that which subsists without a creation.

<span id="viii.iii-p64"></span>If, then, they declare the Holy Ghost to
be blended of both, they must consequently view that blending as of a
prior with a posterior thing; and, according to them, He will be prior
to Himself; and reversely, posterior to Himself; from the Uncreated He
will get the seniority, and from the Created the juniority. But, in the
nature of things, this cannot be; and so it must most certainly be true
to affirm of the Holy Spirit one only of these alternatives, and that
is, the attribute of being Uncreated; for notice the amount of absurdity
involved in the other alternative; all things that we can think of in
the actual creation have, by virtue of all having received their
existence by an act of creation, a rank and value perfectly equal in all
cases, and so what reason can there be for separating the Holy Spirit
from the rest of the creation, and ranking Him with the Father and the
Son? Logic, then, will discover this about Him; That which is
contemplated as part of the Uncreated, does not exist by creation; or,
if It does, then It has no more power than its kindred creation, It
cannot associate itself with that Transcendent Nature; if, on the other
hand, they declare that He is a created being, and at the same time has
a power which is above the creation, then the creation will be found at
variance with itself, divided into ruler and ruled, so that part of it
is the benefactor, part the benefited, part the sanctifier, part the
sanctified; and all that fund of blessings which we believe to be
provided for the creation by the Holy Spirit are present in Him, welling
up abundantly, and pouring forth upon others, while the creation remains
in need of the thence-issuing help and grace, and receives, as a mere
dole, those blessings which can be passed to it from a fellow-creature!
That would be like favouritism and respecting of persons; when we know
that there is no such partiality in the nature of things, as that those
existences which differ in no way from each other on the score of
substance should not have equal power; and I think that no one who
reflects will admit such views. Either He imparts nothing to others, if
He possesses nothing essentially; or, if we do believe that He does
give, His possession beforehand of that gift must be granted; this
capacity of giving blessings, whilst needing oneself no such extraneous
help, is the peculiar and exquisite privilege of Deity, and of no other.

<span id="viii.iii-p65"></span>Then let us look to this too. In Holy
Baptism, what is it that we secure thereby? Is it not a participation in
a life no longer subject to death? I think that no one who can in any
way be reckoned amongst Christians will deny that statement. What then?
Is that life-giving power in the water itself which is employed to
convey the grace of Baptism? Or is it not rather clear to every one that
this element is only employed as a means in the external ministry, and
of itself contributes nothing towards the sanctification, unless it be
first transformed itself by the sanctification; and that what gives life
to the baptized is the Spirit; as our Lord Himself says in respect to
Him with His own lips, “It is the Spirit that giveth life;” but for the
completion of this grace He alone, received by faith, does not give
life, but belief in our Lord must precede, in order that the lively gift
may come upon the believer, as our Lord has spoken, “He giveth life to
whom He willeth.” But further still, seeing that this grace administered
through the Son is dependent on the Ungenerate Source of all, Scripture
accordingly teaches us that belief in the Father Who engendereth all
things is to come first; so that this life-giving grace should be
completed, for those fit to receive it, after starting from that Source
as from a spring pouring life abundantly, through the Only-begotten Who
is the True life, by the operation of the Holy Spirit. If, then, life
comes in baptism, and baptism receives its completion in the name of
Father, Son, and Spirit, what do these men mean who count this Minister
of life as nothing? If the gift is a slight one, they must tell us the
thing that is more precious than this life. But if everything whatever
that is precious is second to this life, I mean that higher and precious
life in which the brute creation has no part, how can they dare to
depreciate so great a favour, or rather the actual Being who grants the
favour, and to degrade Him in their conceptions of Him to a subject
world by disjoining Him from the higher world of deity <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1258](#fn_1256.md) . Finally, if they will <span
id="page_CCCXXIII">p. CCCXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXXIII"></span>have it that this bestowal of life is
a small thing, and that it means nothing great and awful in the nature
of the Bestower, how is it they do not draw the conclusion which this
very view makes inevitable, namely, that we must suppose, even with
regard to the Only-begotten and the Father Himself, nothing great in
Their life, the same as that which we have through the Holy Spirit,
supplied as it is from the Father through the Son?

<span id="viii.iii-p67"></span>So that if these despisers and impugners
of their very own life conceive of the gift as a little one, and decree
accordingly to slight the Being who imparts the gift, let them be made
aware that they cannot limit to one Person only their ingratitude, but
must extend its profanity beyond the Holy Spirit to the Holy Trinity
Itself. For like as the grace flows down in an unbroken stream from the
Father, through the Son and the Spirit, upon the persons worthy of it,
so does this profanity return backward, and is transmitted from the Son
to the God of all the world, passing from one to the other. If, when a
man is slighted, He Who sent him is slighted (yet what a distance there
was between the man and the Sender!), what criminality <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1259](#fn_1257.md) is thereby implied in those who
thus defy the Holy Spirit! Perhaps this is the blasphemy against our
Law-giver <span id="fr_1258"></span>[1260](#fn_1258.md) for which the
judgment without remission has been decreed; since in Him the <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1261](#fn_1259.md) entire Being, Blessed and Divine,
is insulted also. As the devout worshipper of the Spirit sees in Him the
glory of the Only-begotten, and in that sight beholds the image of the
Infinite God, and by means of that image makes an outline, upon his own
cognition <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1262](#fn_1260.md) , of the Original,
so most plainly does this contemner <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1263](#fn_1261) (of the Spirit.md), whenever he
advances any of his bold statements against the glory of the Spirit,
extend, by virtue of the same reasoning, his profanity to the Son, and
beyond Him to the Father. Therefore, those who reflect must have fear
lest they perpetrate an audacity the result of which will be the
complete blotting out of the perpetrator of it; and while they exalt the
Spirit in the naming, they will even before the naming exalt Him in
their thought, it being impossible that words can mount along with
thought; still when one shall have reached the highest limit of human
faculties, the utmost height and magnificence of idea to which the mind
can ever attain, even then one must believe it is far below the glory
that belongs to <span id="fr_1262"></span>[1264](#fn_1262.md) Him,
according to the words in the Psalms, that “after exalting the Lord our
God, even then ye scarcely worship the footstool beneath His feet”: and
the cause of this dignity being so incomprehensible is nothing else than
that He is holy.

<span id="viii.iii-p74"></span>If, then, every height of man’s ability
falls below the grandeur of the Spirit (for that is what the Word means
in the metaphor of “footstool”), what vanity is theirs who think that
there is within themselves a power so great that it rests with them to
define the amount of value to be attributed to a being who is
invaluable! And so they pronounce the Holy Spirit unworthy of some
things which are associated with the idea of value, as if their own
abilities could do far more than the Spirit, as estimated by them, is
capable of. What pitiable, what wretched madness! They understand not
what they are themselves when they talk like this, and what the Holy
Spirit against Whom they insolently range themselves. Who will tell
these people that men are “a spirit that goeth forth and returneth not
again <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1265](#fn_1263.md) ,” built up in their
mother’s womb by means of a soiled conception, and returning all of them
to a soiled earth; inheriting a life that is likened unto grass;
blooming for a little during life’s illusion <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1266](#fn_1264.md) , and then withering away, and all
the bloom upon them being shed and vanishing; they themselves not
knowing with certainty what they were before their birth, nor into what
they will be changed, their soul being ignorant of her peculiar destiny
as long as she tarries in the flesh? Such is man.

<span id="viii.iii-p77"></span>On the contrary the Holy Spirit is, to
begin with, because of qualities that are essentially holy, that which
the Father, essentially Holy, is; and such as the Only-begotten is, such
is the Holy Spirit; then, again, He is so by virtue of life-giving, of
imperishability, of unvariableness, of everlastingness, of justice, of
wisdom, of rectitude, of sovereignty, of goodness, of power, of capacity
to give all good things, and above them all life itself, and by being
everywhere, being present in each, filling the earth, residing in the
heavens, shed abroad upon supernatural Powers, filling all things
according to the deserts of each, Himself remaining full, being with all
who are worthy, and yet not parted from the Holy Trinity. He ever
“searches the deep things of God,” ever “receives” from the Son, ever is
being “sent,” and yet not separated, and being “glorified,” and yet He
has always had glory. It is plain, indeed, that one who gives glory to
another must be found himself in the possession of superabundant glory;
for <span id="page_CCCXXIV">p. CCCXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXXIV"></span>how could one devoid of glory glorify
another? Unless a thing be itself light, how can it display the gracious
gift of light? So the power to glorify could never be displayed by one
who was not himself glory <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1267](#fn_1265.md) ,
and honour, and majesty, and greatness. Now the Spirit does glorify the
Father and the Son. Neither does He lie Who saith, “Them that glorify Me
I glorify” <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1268](#fn_1266.md) ; and “I have
glorified Thee <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1269](#fn_1267.md) ,” is said by
our Lord to the Father; and again He says, “Glorify Thou Me with the
glory which I had with Thee before the world was <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1270](#fn_1268.md) .” The Divine Voice answers, “I
have both glorified, and will glorify again <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[1271](#fn_1269.md) .” You see the revolving circle of
the glory moving from Like to Like. The Son is glorified by the Spirit;
the Father is glorified by the Son; again the Son has His glory from the
Father; and the Only-begotten thus becomes the glory of the Spirit. For
with what shall the Father be glorified, but with the true glory of the
Son: and with what again shall the Son be glorified, but with the
majesty of the Spirit? In like manner, again, Faith completes the
circle, and glorifies the Son by means of the Spirit, and the Father by
means of the Son.

<span id="viii.iii-p83"></span>If such, then, is the greatness of the
Spirit, and whatever is morally beautiful, whatever is good, coming from
God as it does through the Son, is completed by the instrumentality of
the Spirit that “worketh all in all,” why do they set themselves against
their own life? Why do they alienate themselves from the hope belonging
to “such as are to be saved”? Why do they sever themselves from their
cleaving unto God? For how can any man cleave unto the Lord unless the
Spirit operates within us that union of ourselves with Him? Why do they
haggle with us about the amount of service and of worship? Why do they
use that word “worship” in an ironical sense, derogatory to a Divine and
entirely Independent Being, supposing that they desire their own
salvation? We would say to them, “Your supplication is the advantage of
you who ask, and not the honouring of Him Who grants it. Why, then, do
you approach your Benefactor as if you had something to give? Or rather,
why do you refuse to name as a benefactor at all Him Who gives you your
blessings, and slight the Life-giver while clinging to Life? Why,
seeking for His sanctification, do you misconceive of the Dispenser of
the Grace of sanctification; and as to the giving of those blessings,
why, not denying that He has the power, do you deem Him not worthy to be
asked to give, and fail to take this into consideration, viz. how much
greater a thing it is to give some blessing than to be asked to give it?
The asking does not unmistakably witness to greatness in him who is
asked; for it is possible that one who does not have the thing to give
might be asked for it, for the asking depends only on the will of the
asker. But one who actually bestows some blessing has thereby given
undoubted evidence of a power residing in him. Why then, while
testifying to the greater thing in Him,—I mean the power to bestow
everything that is morally beautiful <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1272](#fn_1270.md) —do you deprive Him of the asking,
as of something of importance; although his asking, as we have said, is
often performed in the case of those who have nothing in their power,
owing to the delusion of their devotees? For instance, the slaves of
superstition ask the idols for the objects of their wishes; but the
asking does not, in this instance of the idols, confer any glory; only
people pay that attention to them owing to the deluded expectation that
they will get some one of the things they ask for, and so they do not
cease to ask. But you, persuaded as you are of what and how great things
the Holy Spirit is the Giver, do you neglect the asking them from Him,
taking refuge in the law which bids you ‘worship God and serve Him
only <span id="fr_1271"></span>[1273](#fn_1271.md) ?’ Well, how will you
worship Him only, tell me, when you have severed Him from His intimate
union with His own Only-begotten and His own Spirit? This worship is
simply Jewish.

<span id="viii.iii-p86"></span>But you will say, “When I think of the
Father it is the Son (alone) that I have included as well in that term.”
But tell me; when you have grasped the notion of the Son have you not
admitted therein that of the Holy Spirit too? For how can you confess
the Son except by the Holy Spirit? At what moment, then, is the Spirit
in a state of separation from the Son, so that when the Father is being
worshipped, the worship of the Spirit is not included along with that of
the Son? And as regards their worship itself, what in the world do they
reckon it to be? They bestow it, as some exquisite piece of honour, upon
the God over all, and convey it over, sometimes, so as to reach the
Only-begotten also; but the Holy Spirit they regard as unworthy of such
a privilege. Now, in the common parlance of mankind, that
self-prostration of inferiors upon the ground which they practise when
they salute their betters is termed worship. Thus, it was by such a
posture that the patriarch Jacob, in his self-humiliation, seems to have
wished to show his inferiority when coming to <span id="page_CCCXXV">p.
CCCXXV</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_CCCXXV"></span>meet his brother
and to appease his wrath; for “he bowed himself to the ground,” says the
Scripture, “three times” <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1274](#fn_1272.md) ;
and Joseph’s brethren, as long as they knew him not, and he pretended
before them that he knew them not, by reason of the exaltation of his
rank reverenced his sovereignty with this worship; and even the great
Abraham himself “bowed himself <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1275](#fn_1273.md) ” “to the children of Heth,” a
stranger amongst the natives of that land, showing, I opine, by that
action, how far more powerful those natives were than sojourners. It is
possible to speak of many such actions both in the ancient records, and
from examples before our eyes in the world now <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1276](#fn_1274.md) .

<span id="viii.iii-p90"></span>Do they too, then, mean this by their
worship? Well, is it anything but absurdity to think that it is wrong to
honour the Holy Spirit with that with which the patriarch honoured even
Canaanites? Or do they consider their “worship” something different to
this, as if one sort were fitting for men, another sort for the Supreme
Being? But then, how is it that they omit worship altogether in the
instance of the Spirit, not even bestowing upon Him the worship conceded
in the case of men? And what kind of worship do they imagine to be
reserved especially for the Deity? Is it to be spoken word, or acted
gesture? Well, but are not these marks of honour shared by men as well?
In their case words are spoken and gestures acted. Is it not, then,
plain to every one who possesses the least amount of reflection, that
any gift worthy of the Deity mankind has not got to give; for the Author
of all blessings has no need of us. But it is we men who have
transferred these indications of respect and admiration, which we adopt
towards each other, when we would show by the acknowledgment of a
neighbour’s superiority that one of us is in a humbler position than
another, to our attendance upon a Higher Power; out of our possessions
we make a gift of what is most precious to a priceless Nature.
Therefore, since men, approaching emperors and potentates for the
objects which they wish in some way to obtain from those rulers, do not
bring to them their mere petition only, but employ every possible means
to induce them to feel pity and favour towards themselves, adopting a
humble voice, and a kneeling position <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1277](#fn_1275.md) , clasping their knees, prostrating
themselves on the ground, and putting forward to plead for their
petition all sorts of pathetic signs, to wake that pity,—so it is that
those who recognize the True Potentate, by Whom all things in existence
are controlled, when they are supplicating for that which they have at
heart, some lowly in spirit because of pitiable conditions in this
world, some with their thoughts lifted up because of their eternal
mysterious hopes, seeing that they know not how to ask, and that their
humanity is not capable of displaying any reverence that can reach to
the grandeur of that Glory, carry the ceremonial used in the case of men
into the service of the Deity. And this is what “worship” is,—that, I
mean, which is offered for objects we have at heart along with
supplication and humiliation. Therefore Daniel too bends the knees to
the Lord, when asking His love for the captive people; and He Who “bare
our sicknesses,” and intercedes for us, is recorded in the Gospel to
have fallen on His face, because of the man that He had taken upon Him,
at the hour of prayer, and in this posture to have made His petition,
enjoining thereby, I think, that at the time of our petition our voice
is not to be bold, but that we are to assume the attitude of the
wretched; since the Lord “resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the
humble;” and somewhere else (He says), “he that exalteth himself shall
be abased.” If, then, “worship” is a sort of suppliant state, or
pleading put forward for the object of the petition, what is the
intention of these new-fashioned regulations? These men do not even
deign to ask of the Giver, nor to kneel to the Ruler, nor to attend upon
the Potentate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[CCCXV:1221](2050141.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> Macedonius had been a very eminent
Semi-Arian doctor. He was deposed from the See of Constantinople, A.D.
360: and it was actually the influence of the Eunomians that brought
this about. He went into exile and formed his sect. He considered the
Holy Spirit as “a divine energy diffused throughout the universe: and
not a person distinct from the Father and the Son” (Socrates, H. E. iv.
4). This opinion had many partizans in the Asiatic provinces, “but,”
says Mosheim, “the Council of Constantinople crushed it.” However, that
the final clauses of the Nicene Creed which express distinctly, amongst
other truths, the deity and personality of the Third Person of the
Trinity were added at that Council to the original form, is extremely
doubtful. For—1. We find the expanded form which we now use in the
Nicene Creed, in a work written by Epiphanius *seven years before* the
Council of Constantinople. So that at all events the enlarged Creed was
not prepared by the Fathers then assembled. 2. It is extremely doubtful
if any symbol at all was set forth at Constantinople. Neither Socrates,
nor Sozomen, nor Theodoret makes mention of one: but all speak of
adherence to the evangelic faith ratified at Nicæa. It is significant
too that the expanded form was entirely ignored by the Council of
Ephesus, 431. But at the Council of Chalcedon, 451, it was brought
forward: though even then it appears that it was far from attaining
general acceptance. By 540 it had become the accepted form (according to
a letter of Pope Vigilius). “It seems most likely therefore that it was
a profession received amongst the churches in the patriarchate of
Constantinople, but at first not more widely circulated” (J. R. Lumby,
*Commentary on Prayer-Book*, S. P. C. K., p. 66) F. J. A. Hort, however,
(see Two Dissertations by) regards this “Constantinopolitan” Creed as
the old Creed of Jerusalem enlarged and expanded; and he suggests that
S. Cyril of Jerusalem may have produced it before the Council, which
gave it some sort of approval. The addition, moreover, of the later
clauses was not, as Mosheim seems to imagine, the only difference
between *the* Nicene Creed and this Creed.

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span>That this lateness of accepted definition
on a vital point should not excite our wonder, Neander shows “the
apprehension of the idea (of the ὁμοούσιον of the Holy Spirit) had been
so little permeated as yet by the Christian consciousness of the unity
of God, that Gregory of Nazianzum could still say in 380, ‘Some of our
theologians consider the Holy Spirit to be a certain mode of the Divine
energy, others a creature of God, others God Himself. Others say they do
not know which opinion they ought to accept, out of reverence for the
Scriptures which *have not clearly explained this point*.’ Hilary of
Poictiers says in his own original way that ‘he was well aware that
nothing could be foreign to God’s nature, which searches into the deep
things of that nature. Should one be displeased at being told that He
exists by and through Him, by and from Whom are all things, that He is
the Spirit of God, but also God’s gift to believers, then will the
apostles and prophets displease him; for they affirm only that He
*exists*.’” There can be little doubt, however, that Gregory, in the
following fragment, is defending a statement already in existence. He
seems even to follow the order of the words, “Lord and giver of Life.”
“Who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified.”
Doubtless the next clause, “Who spake by the Prophets,” was dealt with
in what is lost. But, essentially a creed-maker as he was, his claim to
have himself added these final clauses cannot be substantiated. For the
<span class="c22"><span id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. of this
treatise, see p. 31.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[CCCXV:1222](2050141.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p7.1"></span>σηπεδονώδης</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p7.2"></span>γάγγραινα</span>: both used by Galen.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[CCCXV:1223](2050141.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>εἰς ἀσεβείαν γράφειν</span>. This is Mai’s
reading. Cf. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p9.3"></span>σεβείας γραφή</span>. The *active* (instead of
middle) in this sense is found in Aristoph. Av. 1052: the passive is not
infrequent in Demosthenes and Æschines.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[CCCXV:1224](2050141.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span> *From God, and of the Christ, according
to Scripture.* This is noticeable. The Greek is <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>κ τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐστι, καὶ τοῦ
Χριστοῦ ἐστι, καθὼς γέγραπται</span>. Compare the words below
“proceeding from the Father, receiving from the Son.”

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[CCCXV:1225](2050141.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>τὸ ἀπαράλλακτον</span> (but there is
something lost before this: perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p11.2"></span>τὸ ἡνωμένον</span>). This word is used to
express substantial identity. Origen uses it in alluding to the “Stoic
resurrection,” *i.e.* the time when the “Great Year” shall again begin,
and the world’s history be literally repeated, *i.e.* the “identical
Socrates shall marry the identical Xantippe, and teach the identical
philosophy, &c.” This expression was a favourite one also with
Chrysostom and Cyril of Alexandria to express the identity of Glory, of
Godhead, and of Honour, in the Blessed Trinity.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[CCCXVI:1226](2050141.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p14.1"></span>μορίοις</span> (cf. the same word below) for
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p14.2"></span>μορίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[CCCXVI:1227](2050141.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>πρὸς τὴν ἐναντίαν ποιότητα</span>.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[CCCXVI:1228](2050141.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span> *nimble,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>κουφὸν</span>; compare Macbeth, I. vi.

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>“The air

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span>Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>Unto our senses.”

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[CCCXVI:1229](2050141.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>εὐσεβῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[CCCXVI:1230](2050141.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p22.2"></span>διον γὰρ τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[CCCXVII:1231](2050141.htm#fr_1229.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p24.2"></span>λαττώσεώς τινος ἢ κατὰ φύσιν παραλλαγῆς, κ.
τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[CCCXVII:1232](2050141.htm#fr_1230.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span> “The Ancient Greek Fathers, speaking of
this procession, mention the Father only, and never, I think, express
the Son, as sticking constantly in this to the language of the
Scriptures (<span id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>[John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>)”—Pearson. The language of the above simile
of Gregory would be an illustration of this. So Greg. Naz., *Orat. I. de
Filio,* “standing on our definitions, we introduce the Ungenerate, the
Generated, and that which proceeds from the Father.” This last
expression was so known and public, that it is recorded even by Lucian
in his *Philopatris,* §12.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[CCCXVII:1233](2050141.htm#fr_1231.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>καὶ τῆς εὐσεβοῦς ἐννοίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[CCCXVII:1234](2050141.htm#fr_1232.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span> The edition of Cardinal Mai has <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.2"></span>ἐκεῖνο δοὺς τῇ δυνάμει,
συνωμολόγησε, κ. τ. λ</span>. But the sense requires the comma to be
placed after <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p28.3"></span>δοὺς</span>.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[CCCXVIII:1235](2050141.htm#fr_1233.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p30.1"></span>τὸ ἐφεξῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[CCCXVIII:1236](2050141.htm#fr_1234.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p32.2"></span>φεξῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[CCCXVIII:1237](2050141.htm#fr_1235.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p33.2"></span>μολογεῖς</span>

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[CCCXVIII:1238](2050141.htm#fr_1236.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span> *i.e.*from fellowship with the Spirit.
The text is <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p35.1"></span>τίς ὁ
λόγος καθ᾽ ὃν εὔλογον κρίνουσιν πατέρα ἀναιρεῖν</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p35.2"></span>δεδώκασι</span>; (for
which <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p35.3"></span>δεδωκόσι</span> is a conjecture). But perhaps
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p35.4"></span>πνεῦμα
ἀναιρεῖν</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p35.5"></span>διδάσκωσι</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p35.6"></span>διδάξωσι</span>, would be
a more intelligible reading; though the examples of the hortatory
subjunctive other than in the first person are, according to Porson (*ad
Eurip. Hec.* 430), to be reckoned among solecisms in classical Greek.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[CCCXVIII:1239](2050141.htm#fr_1237.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span> [Is. xl.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015.md)<span id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>.
But Mai’s text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.2"></span>σταθμὸς</span>, not <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.3"></span>σταγὼν</span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[CCCXVIII:1240](2050141.htm#fr_1238.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p37.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[CCCXIX:1241](2050141.htm#fr_1239.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span> [Is. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012.md)<span id="viii.iii-p39.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p39.2"></span>Τίς ἐμέ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p39.3"></span>trjse…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p39.4"></span>τὸν οὐρανὸν
σπιθαμῇ</span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[CCCXIX:1242](2050141.htm#fr_1240.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p40.1"></span>λαμβανόμενον</span>

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[CCCXIX:1243](2050141.htm#fr_1241.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p41.1"></span>πιστὸς</span>. [2 Tim. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013.md)<span id="viii.iii-p41.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[CCCXIX:1244](2050141.htm#fr_1242.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p44"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[CCCXIX:1245](2050141.htm#fr_1243.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p47.1"></span>πρὸ πάσης καταληπτῆς ἐπινοίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[CCCXX:1246](2050141.htm#fr_1244.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p48"></span> <span id="viii.iii-p48.1"></span>[1 Cor.
xiii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p48.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[CCCXX:1247](2050141.htm#fr_1245.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p50.1"></span>κατὰ τὸ ἀγαθόν</span>; probably here in its
Platonic, rather than its ordinary sense.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[CCCXX:1248](2050141.htm#fr_1246.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p52.1"></span>τὴν ἀληθῆ μόρφωσιν τῆς εὐσεβείας</span>

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[CCCXX:1249](2050141.htm#fr_1247.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p53.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p53.2"></span>ντίθεται: συντίθεται</span>, “concedes to,”
would perhaps be better.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[CCCXXI:1250](2050141.htm#fr_1248.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p54"></span> [2 Cor.
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md), [1 Cor.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p54.1"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md)<span id="viii.iii-p54.2"></span>.
Cf. [1 Cor. xiv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p54.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[CCCXXI:1251](2050141.htm#fr_1249.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p54.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p55"></span> Cf. [2 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013.md)<span id="viii.iii-p55.1"></span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p55.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p55.3"></span>ποτύπωσιν</span>); <span
id="viii.iii-p55.4"></span>[Rom. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020.md)<span id="viii.iii-p55.5"></span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p55.6"></span>μόρφωσιν</span>);
[Rom. 6.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p55.7"></span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p55.8"></span>τύπον</span>), all referring to truth as
contained in a formula. Cf. also <span id="viii.iii-p55.9"></span>[Gal.
iv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p55.10"></span>.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[CCCXXI:1252](2050141.htm#fr_1250.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p55.11"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p56"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p56.1"></span>καθὼς ἐκεῖνος φησὶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[CCCXXI:1253](2050141.htm#fr_1251.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p57"></span> [Eccles. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p57.1"></span>
(LXX.). <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p57.2"></span>οὐκ ἔστι
γινωσκων τίς ἡ ὁδὸς τοῦ πνεύματος, ὡς ὀστᾶ ἐν γαστρὶ κυοφορούσης</span>

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[CCCXXI:1254](2050141.htm#fr_1252.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p58"></span> [Acts
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038.md), [Acts
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p58.1"></span>[Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038.md)<span id="viii.iii-p58.2"></span>.
Cf. iv. 27.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[CCCXXI:1255](2050141.htm#fr_1253.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p60"></span> <span id="viii.iii-p60.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015.md)<span id="viii.iii-p60.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[CCCXXI:1256](2050141.htm#fr_1254.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p62.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p62.2"></span>κ τοῦ περιέχοντος</span>. This expression of
Anaxagoras is repeated more than once in the Treatise “On the Soul.”

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[CCCXXI:1257](2050141.htm#fr_1255.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.2"></span>διωτικήν</span>. On [1 Cor. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016.md)<span id="viii.iii-p63.3"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p63.4"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p63.5"></span>Ο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p63.6"></span>ἀναπληρῶν τὸν τόπον τοῦ
ἰδιώτου</span>, Theodoret says, “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.7"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.8"></span>διώτην καλεῖ τὸν ἐν τῷ λαικῷ τάγματι
τεταγμένον</span>.” Theophylact also renders the word by the same
equivalent.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[CCCXXII:1258](2050141.htm#fr_1256.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p66"></span> “Whether or not the Macedonians
explicitly denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost is uncertain; but they
viewed Him as essentially separate from, and external to, the One
Indivisible Godhead. The ‘Nicene’ Creed declares that He is the *Lord,*
or Sovereign Spirit because the heretics considered Him to be a minister
of God; and the Supreme *Giver of Life,* because they considered Him a
mere instrument by which we receive the gift.”—Newman’s *Arians,* note
p. 420.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[CCCXXIII:1259](2050141.htm#fr_1257.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p68.1"></span>κατάκρισιν</span>

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[CCCXXIII:1260](2050141.htm#fr_1258.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p69.1"></span>κατὰ τοῦ νομοθέτου</span> is Mai’s reading.
But <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p69.2"></span>κατὰ τὸν
νομοθέτην</span>, *i.e.* according to S. [Mark
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029.md), [Luke
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p69.3"></span>[Mark iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029.md)<span id="viii.iii-p69.4"></span>,
S. [Luke xii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p69.5"></span>, would be preferable. Migne reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p69.6"></span>παρὰ</span> in this
sense.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[CCCXXIII:1261](2050141.htm#fr_1259.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p69.7"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p70.1"></span>τὸ</span> has probably dropped out.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[CCCXXIII:1262](2050141.htm#fr_1260.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p71.1"></span>τῇ γνώσει ἑαυτοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[CCCXXIII:1263](2050141.htm#fr_1261.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p72"></span> Something has dropped out here.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[CCCXXIII:1264](2050141.htm#fr_1262.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p73.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p73.2"></span>πιβαλλόυσης</span>. Cf. <span
id="viii.iii-p73.3"></span>[Ps. xcix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p73.4"></span>; [2
Chron. xxviii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#002.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p73.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[CCCXXIII:1265](2050141.htm#fr_1263.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p75"></span> <span id="viii.iii-p75.1"></span>[Wisdom
xvi. 14](../../../bib/apo/wis016.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p75.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[CCCXXIII:1266](2050141.htm#fr_1264.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p76.1"></span>βιωτικῆς ἀπάτης</span>.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[CCCXXIV:1267](2050141.htm#fr_1265.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p78"></span> It is worth noticing that Gregory
maintains (Hom. xv. on Canticles) that <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p78.1"></span>Δόξα</span> in Scripture means the Holy
Ghost.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[CCCXXIV:1268](2050141.htm#fr_1266.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p79"></span> Cf. [1 Sam. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030.md)<span id="viii.iii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[CCCXXIV:1269](2050141.htm#fr_1267.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p80"></span> S. [John xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[CCCXXIV:1270](2050141.htm#fr_1268.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p81"></span> S. [John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[CCCXXIV:1271](2050141.htm#fr_1269.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p82"></span> S. [John xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028.md)<span id="viii.iii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[CCCXXIV:1272](2050141.htm#fr_1270.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p84.1"></span>καλὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[CCCXXIV:1273](2050141.htm#fr_1271.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p85"></span> <span id="viii.iii-p85.1"></span>[Deut.
vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p85.2"></span>; x. 20.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[CCCXXV:1274](2050141.htm#fr_1272.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p87"></span> The LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p87.1"></span>προσεκύνησεν ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἑπτάκις</span>,
[Gen. xxxiii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#003.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p87.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[CCCXXV:1275](2050141.htm#fr_1273.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p87.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p88.1"></span>προσεκύνησε τῷ λαῷ τῆς γῆς</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p88.2"></span>τοῖς υἱοῖς τοῦ
Χετ</span>, <span id="viii.iii-p88.3"></span>[Gen. xxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.iii-p88.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[CCCXXV:1276](2050141.htm#fr_1274.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p88.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p89.1"></span>τοῦ βίου</span>. This is a late use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p89.2"></span>βίος</span>.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[CCCXXV:1277](2050141.htm#fr_1275.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p91"></span> Still the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p91.1"></span>προσκυνεῖν</span> became consecrated to the
highest Christian worship while <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p91.2"></span>θεραπεύειν</span> was employed for address to
the angels. “Every supplication, every prayer, every entreaty, and every
giving of thanks must be offered to the Almighty through the High Priest
who is over all the angels, the incarnate Word and God. And we shall
make supplication and prayer to the Word Himself also, and we shall give
Him thanks if we can distinguish prayer in its proper meaning from the
wrong use of the word,” Origen c. Cels. v. 4 (Cf. viii. 13, where he
answers the question whether Gabriel, Michael, and the rest of the
archangels should be addressed, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p91.3"></span>θεραπευέσθαι</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Holy Trinity, and of the Godhead of the Holy
Spirit.](2050142.md)
