[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050152)  [Next](2050154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>Would</span> indeed that some profit might
come to myself from this effort! I should have undertaken this labour
with the greater readiness, if I could have hope of sharing, according
to the Scripture, in the fruits of the plough and the threshing-floor;
the toil would then have been a pleasure. As it is, this my knowledge of
the beauty of virginity is in some sort vain and useless to me, just as
the corn is to the muzzled ox that treads <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1351](#fn_1349) the floor, or the water that
streams from the precipice to a thirsty man when he cannot reach it.
Happy they who have still the power of choosing the better way, and have
not debarred themselves from it by engagements of the secular life, as
we have, whom a gulf now divides from glorious virginity: no one can
climb up to that who has once planted his foot upon the secular life. We
are but spectators of others’ blessings and witnesses to the happiness
of another <span id="fr_1350"></span>[1352](#fn_1350) class. Even if we
strike out some fitting thoughts about virginity, we shall not be better
than the cooks and scullions who provide sweet luxuries for the tables
of the rich, without having any portion themselves in what they prepare.
What a blessing if it had been otherwise, if we had not to learn the
good by after-regrets! Now *they* are the enviable ones, *they* succeed
even beyond their prayers and their desires, who have not put out of
their power the enjoyment of these delights. We are like those who have
a wealthy society with which to compare their own poverty, and so are
all the more vexed and discontented with their present lot. The more
exactly we understand the riches of virginity, the more we must bewail
the other life; for we realize by this contrast with better things, how
poor it is. I do not speak only of the future rewards in store for those
who have lived thus excellently, but those rewards also which they have
while alive here; for if any one would make up his mind to measure
exactly the difference between the two courses, he would find it
well-nigh as great as that between heaven and earth. The truth of this
statement may be known by looking at actual facts.

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p5"></span>But in writing this sad tragedy what
will be a fit beginning? How shall we really bring to view the evils
common to life? All men know them by experience, but somehow nature has
contrived to blind the actual sufferers so that they willingly ignore
their condition. Shall we begin with its choicest sweets? Well then, is
not the sum total of all that is hoped for in marriage to get delightful
companionship? Grant this obtained; let us sketch a marriage in every
way most happy; illustrious birth, competent means, suitable ages, the
very flower of the prime of life, deep affection, the very best that
each can think of the other <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1353](#fn_1351) ,
that sweet rivalry of each wishing to surpass the other in loving; in
addition, popularity, power, wide reputation, and everything else. But
observe that even beneath this array of blessings the fire of an
inevitable pain is smouldering. I do not speak of the envy that is
always springing up against those of distinguished rank, and the
liability to attack which hangs over those who seem prosperous, and that
natural hatred of superiors shown by those who do not share equally in
the good fortune, which make these seemingly favoured ones pass an
anxious time more full of pain than pleasure. I omit that from the
picture, and will suppose that envy against them is asleep; although it
would not be easy to find a single life in which both these blessings
were joined, *i.e.* happiness above the common, and <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-Page_346"></span>escape from envy. However, let us, if
so it is to be, suppose a married life free from all such trials; and
let us see if it is possible for those who live with such an amount of
good fortune to enjoy it. Why, what kind of vexation is left, you will
ask, when even envy of their happiness does not reach them? I affirm
that this very thing, this sweetness that surrounds their lives, is the
spark which kindles pain. They are human all the time, things weak and
perishing; they have to look upon the tombs of their progenitors; and so
pain is inseparably bound up with their existence, if they have the
least power of reflection. This continued expectancy of death, realized
by no sure tokens, but hanging over them the terrible uncertainty of the
future, disturbs their present joy, clouding it over with the fear of
what is coming. If only, before experience comes, the results of
experience could be learnt, or if, when one has entered on this course,
it were possible by some other means of conjecture to survey the
reality, then what a crowd of deserters would run from marriage into the
virgin life; what care and eagerness never to be entangled in that
retentive snare, where no one knows for certain how the net galls till
they have actually entered it! You would see there, if only you could do
it without danger, many contraries uniting; smiles melting into tears,
pain mingled with pleasure, death always hanging by expectation over the
children that are born, and putting a finger upon each of the sweetest
joys. Whenever the husband looks at the beloved face, that moment the
fear of separation accompanies the look. If he listens to the sweet
voice, the thought comes into his mind that some day he will not hear
it. Whenever he is glad with gazing on her beauty, then he shudders most
with the presentiment of mourning her loss. When he marks all those
charms which to youth are so precious and which the thoughtless seek
for, the bright eyes beneath the lids, the arching eyebrows, the cheek
with its sweet and dimpling smile, the natural red that blooms upon the
lips, the gold-bound hair shining in many-twisted masses on the head,
and all that transient grace, then, though he may be little given to
reflection, he must have this thought also in his inmost soul that some
day all this beauty will melt away and become as nothing, turned after
all this show into noisome and unsightly bones, which wear no trace, no
memorial, no remnant of that living bloom. Can he live delighted when he
thinks of that? Can he trust in these treasures which he holds as if
they would be always his? Nay, it is plain that he will stagger as if he
were mocked by a dream, and will have his faith in life shaken, and will
look upon what he sees as no longer his. You will understand, if you
have a comprehensive view of things as they are, that nothing in this
life looks that which it is. It shows to us by the illusions of our
imagination one thing, instead of something else. Men gaze open-mouthed
at it, and it mocks them with hopes; for a while it hides itself beneath
this deceitful show; then all of a sudden in the reverses of life it is
revealed as something different from that which men’s hopes, conceived
by its fraud in foolish hearts, had pictured. Will life’s sweetness seem
worth taking delight in to him who reflects on this? Will he ever be
able really to feel it, so as to have joy in the goods he holds? Will he
not, disturbed by the constant fear of some reverse, have the use
without the enjoyment? I will but mention the portents, dreams, omens,
and such-like things which by a foolish habit of thought are taken
notice of, and always make men fear the worst. But her time of labour
comes upon the young wife; and the occasion is regarded not as the
bringing of a child into the world, but as the approach of death; in
bearing it is expected that she will die; and, indeed, often this sad
presentiment is true, and before they spread the birthday feast, before
they taste any of their expected joys, they have to change their
rejoicing into lamentation. Still in love’s fever, still at the height
of their passionate affection, not yet having grasped life’s sweetest
gifts, as in the vision of a dream, they are suddenly torn away from all
they possessed. But what comes next? Domestics, like conquering foes,
dismantle the bridal chamber; they deck it for the funeral, but it is
death’s <span id="fr_1352"></span>[1354](#fn_1352) room now; they make
the useless wailings <span id="fr_1353"></span>[1355](#fn_1353) and
beatings of the hands. Then there is the memory of former days, curses
on those who advised the marriage, recriminations against friends who
did not stop it; blame thrown on parents whether they be alive or dead,
bitter outbursts against human destiny, arraigning of the whole course
of nature, complaints and accusations even against the Divine
government; war within the man himself, and fighting with those who
would admonish; no repugnance to the most shocking words and acts. In
some this state of mind continues, and their reason is more completely
swallowed up by grief; and *their* tragedy has a sadder ending, the
victim not enduring to survive the calamity.

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p9"></span>But rather than this let us suppose a
happier case. The danger of childbirth is past; a child is born to them,
the very image of its parents’ beauty. Are the occasions for grief at
all lessened thereby? Rather they are <span id="page_347">p. 347</span>
<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-Page_347"></span>increased; for the parents retain
all their former fears, and feel in addition those on behalf of the
child, lest anything should happen to it in its bringing up; for
instance a bad accident, or by some turn of misfortunes a sickness, a
fever <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1356](#fn_1354) , any dangerous
disease. Both parents share alike in these; but who could recount the
special anxieties of the wife? We omit the most obvious, which all can
understand, the weariness of pregnancy, the danger in childbirth, the
cares of nursing, the tearing of her heart in two for her offspring,
and, if she is the mother of many, the dividing of her soul into as many
parts as she has children; the tenderness with which she herself feels
all that is happening to them. That is well understood by every one. But
the oracle of God tells us that she is not her own mistress, but finds
her resources only in him whom wedlock has made her lord; and so, if she
be for ever so short a time left alone, she feels as if she were
separated from her head, and can ill bear it; she even takes this short
absence of her husband to be the prelude to her widowhood; her fear
makes her at once give up all hope; accordingly her eyes, filled with
terrified suspense, are always fixed upon the door; her ears are always
busied with what others are whispering; her heart, stung with her fears,
is well-nigh bursting even before any bad <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1357](#fn_1355) news has arrived; a noise in the
doorway, whether fancied or real, acts as a messenger of ill, and on a
sudden shakes her very soul; most likely all outside is well, and there
is no cause to fear at all; but her fainting spirit is quicker than any
message, and turns her fancy from good tidings to despair. Thus even the
most favoured live, and they are not altogether to be envied; their life
is not to be compared to the freedom of virginity. Yet this hasty sketch
has omitted many of the more distressing details. Often this young wife
too, just wedded, still brilliant in bridal grace, still perhaps
blushing when her bridegroom enters, and shyly stealing furtive glances
at him, when passion is all the more intense because modesty prevents it
being shown, suddenly has to take the name of a poor lonely widow and be
called all that is pitiable. Death comes in an instant and changes that
bright creature in her white and rich attire into a black-robed mourner.
He takes off the bridal ornaments and clothes her with the colours of
bereavement. There is darkness in the once cheerful room, and the
waiting-women sing their long dirges. She hates her friends when they
try to soften her grief; she will not take food, she wastes away, and in
her soul’s deep dejection has a strong longing only for her death, a
longing which often lasts till it comes. Even supposing that time puts
an end to this sorrow, still another comes, whether she has children or
not. If she has, they are fatherless, and, as objects of pity
themselves, renew the memory of her loss. If she is childless, then the
name of her lost husband is rooted up, and this grief is greater than
the seeming consolation. I will say little of the other special sorrows
of widowhood; for who could enumerate them all exactly? She finds her
enemies in her relatives. Some actually take advantage of her
affliction. Others exult over her loss, and see with malignant joy the
home falling to pieces, the insolence of the servants, and the other
distresses visible in such a case, of which there are plenty. In
consequence of these, many women are compelled to risk once more the
trial of the same things, not being able to endure this bitter derision.
As if they could revenge insults by increasing their own sufferings!
Others, remembering the past, will put up with anything rather than
plunge a second time into the like troubles. If you wish to learn all
the trials of this married life, listen to those women who actually know
it. How they congratulate those who have chosen from the first the
virgin life, and have not had to learn by experience about the better
way, that virginity is fortified against all these ills, that it has no
orphan state, no widowhood to mourn; it is always in the presence of the
undying Bridegroom; it has the offspring of devotion always to rejoice
in; it sees continually a home that is truly its own, furnished with
every treasure because the Master always dwells there; in this case
death does not bring separation, but union with Him Who is longed for;
for when (a soul) departs <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1358](#fn_1356) ,
then it is with Christ, as the Apostle says. But it is time, now that we
have examined on the one side the feelings of those whose lot is happy,
to make a revelation of other lives, where poverty and adversity and all
the other evils which men have to suffer are a fixed condition;
deformities, I mean, and diseases, and all other lifelong afflictions.
He whose life is contained in himself either escapes them altogether or
can bear them easily, possessing a collected mind which is not
distracted from itself; while he who shares himself with wife and child
often has not a moment to bestow even upon regrets for his own
condition, because anxiety for his dear ones fills his heart. But it is
superfluous to dwell upon that which every one knows. If to what seems
prosperity <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-Page_348"></span>such pain and weariness is bound, what
may we not expect of the opposite condition? Every description which
attempts to represent it to our view will fall short of the reality. Yet
perhaps we may in a very few words declare the depths of its misery.
Those whose lot is contrary to that which passes as prosperous receive
their sorrows as well from causes contrary to that. Prosperous lives are
marred by the expectancy, or the presence, of death; but the misery of
these is that death delays his coming. These lives then are widely
divided by opposite feelings; although equally without hope, they
converge to the same end. So many-sided, then, so strangely different
are the ills with which marriage supplies the world. There is pain
always, whether children are born, or can never be expected, whether
they live, or die. One abounds in them but has not enough means for
their support; another feels the want of an heir to the great fortune he
has toiled for, and regards as a blessing the other’s misfortune; each
of them, in fact, wishes for that very thing which he sees the other
regretting. Again, one man loses by death a much-loved <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1359](#fn_1357) son; another has a reprobate son
alive; both equally to be pitied, though the one mourns over the death,
the other over the life, of his boy. Neither will I do more than mention
how sadly and disastrously family jealousies and quarrels, arising from
real or fancied causes, end. Who could go completely into all those
details? If you would know what a network of these evils human life is,
you need not go back again to those old stories which have furnished
subjects to dramatic poets. *They* are regarded as myths on account of
their shocking extravagance; there are in them murders and eating of
children, husband-murders, murders of mothers and brothers, incestuous
unions, and every sort of disturbance of nature; and yet the old
chronicler begins the story which ends in such horrors with marriage.
But turning from all that, gaze only upon the tragedies that are being
enacted on this life’s stage; it is marriage that supplies mankind with
actors there. Go to the law-courts and read through the laws there; then
you will know the shameful secrets of marriage. Just as when you hear a
physician explaining various diseases, you understand the misery of the
human frame by learning the number and the kind of sufferings it is
liable to, so when you peruse the laws and read there the strange
variety of crimes in marriage to which their penalties are attached, you
will have a pretty accurate idea of its properties; for the law does not
provide remedies for evils which do not exist, any more than a physician
has a treatment for diseases which are never known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[345:1351](2050153.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>πιστρεφομένῳ τὴν ἅλωνα</span>. This word is
used for “walking over,” in Hesiod, *Theogon.* 753, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p3.3"></span>γαῖαν
ἐπιστρέφεται</span>

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[345:1352](2050153.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>τέρων</span>, following Cod. Reg., for
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p4.4"></span>κατέρων</span>.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[345:1353](2050153.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>πὲρ τοῦ ἄλλου</span> (a *late* use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.3"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.4"></span>λλος</span>). This was
Livineius’ conjecture for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.5"></span>τῶν ἄλλων</span>: the interchange of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.6"></span>υ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.7"></span>ν</span> is a common
mistake.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[346:1354](2050153.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p6.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p7"></span> There is a play on the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>θάλαμος</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p7.2"></span>θάνατος</span>:
“the one is changed into the other.”

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[346:1355](2050153.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p8.2"></span>τὶ τούτων ἀνακλήσεις</span>: “*amongst*
these”, *i.e.* the domestics. Livineius reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p8.3"></span>τούτοις</span>, and renders “Succedunt
inutilis revocatio, inanis manuum plausus,” *i.e.* as the last funeral
act.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[347:1356](2050153.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>πύρωσιν</span>, with Galesinius: the Paris
Editt. read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>πήρωσιν</span>

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[347:1357](2050153.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>νεώτερον</span>, in a bad sense. So
Zosimus, lib. i. p. 658, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>πράγματα ῾Ρωμαίοις νεώτερα
μηχανήσασθαι</span>

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[347:1358](2050153.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>ναλύσῃ</span>: [Philip. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p12.3"></span>. Tertullian (*De Patient.* 9) translates,
“Cupis recipi (*i.e.* to flit, depart) jam et esse cum Domino.” Beza,
however, says that the metaphor is taken from unharnessing after a race.
Chrysostom and Jerome seem to take it of loosing off the cable.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[348:1359](2050153.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>γαπημένος παῖς</span>. Cod. Reg. has <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.4"></span>καταθύμιος</span>, a
favorite word with Gregory. Livineius reads ὁκαθήμενος, which he renders
“nanus” (*i.e.* of low stature), and cites Pollux Onomast. lib. 3, c. 24
(where <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.iv-p13.6"></span>ποκαθήμενος</span> = iners); it might also
bear the meaning of “stay-at-home,” in contrast to the prodigal in the
next sentence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2050154)
