[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050077)  [Next](2050079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.v.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He then shows, from the instance
of Adam and Abel, and other examples, the absence of alienation of
essence in the case of the “generate” and “ungenerate.”*

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p2"></span>Now seeing that Eunomius’ conflict
with himself has been made manifest, where he has been shown to
contradict himself, at one time saying, “He ought to be called ‘Son,’
according to nature, because He is begotten,” at another that, because
He is created, He is no more called “Son,” but a “product,” I think it
right that the careful and attentive reader, as it is not possible, when
two statements are mutually at variance, that the truth should be found
equally in both, should reject of the two that which is impious and
blasphemous—that, I mean, with regard to the “creature” and the
“product,” and should assent to that only which is of orthodox tendency,
which confesses that <span id="page_CXLIII">p. CXLIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-Page_CXLIII"></span>the appellation of “Son” naturally
attaches to the Only-begotten God: so that the word of truth would seem
to be recommended even by the voice of its enemies.

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p3"></span>I resume my discourse, however, taking
up that point of his argument which we originally set aside. “We do not
refuse,” he says, “to call the Son, seeing He is generate, even by the
name of ‘product of generation <span id="fr_572"></span>[574](#fn_572)
,’ since the generated essence itself, and the appellation of ‘Son,’
make such a relation of words appropriate.” Meanwhile let the reader who
is critically following the argument remember this, that in speaking of
the “generated essence” in the case of the Only-begotten, he by
consequence allows us to speak of the “ungenerate essence” in the case
of the Father, so that neither absence of generation, nor generation,
can any longer be supposed to constitute the essence, but the essence
must be taken separately, and its being, or not being begotten, must be
conceived separately by means of the peculiar attributes contemplated in
it. Let us, however, consider more carefully his argument on this point.
He says that an essence has been begotten, and that the name of this
generated essence is “Son.” Well, at this point our argument will
convict that of our opponents on two grounds, first, of an attempt at
knavery, secondly, of slackness in their attempt against ourselves. For
he is playing the knave when he speaks of “generation of essence,” in
order to establish his opposition between the essences, when once they
are divided in respect of a difference of nature between “generate” and
“ungenerate”: while the slackness of their attempt is shown by the very
positions their knavery tries to establish. For he who says the essence
is generate, clearly defines generation as being something else distinct
from the essence, so that the significance of generation cannot be
assigned to the word “essence.” For he has not in this passage
represented the matter as he often does, so as to say that generation is
itself the essence, but acknowledges that the essence is generated, so
that there is produced in his readers a distinct notion in the case of
each word: for one conception arises in him who hears that it was
generated, and another is called up by the name of “essence.” Our
argument may be made clearer by example. The Lord says in the
Gospel <span id="fr_573"></span>[575](#fn_573) that a woman, when her
travail is drawing near, is in sorrow, but afterwards rejoices in
gladness because a man is born into the world. As then in this passage
we derive from the Gospel two distinct conceptions,—one the birth which
we conceive to be by way of generation, the other that which results
from the birth (for the birth is not the man, but the man is by the
birth),—so here too, when Eunomius confesses that the essence was
generated, we learn by the latter word that the essence comes from
something, and by the former we conceive that subject itself which has
its real being from something. If then the signification of essence is
one thing, and the word expressing generation suggests to us another
conception, their clever contrivances are quite gone to ruin, like
earthen vessels hurled one against the other, and mutually smashed to
pieces. For it will no longer be possible for them, if they apply the
opposition of “generate” and “ungenerate” to the essence of the Father
and the Son, to apply at the same time to the things themselves the
mutual conflict between these names <span
id="fr_574"></span>[576](#fn_574) . For as it is confessed by Eunomius
that the essence is generate (seeing that the example from the Gospel
explains the meaning of such a phrase, where, when we hear that a man is
generated, we do not conceive the man to be the same thing as his
generation, but receive a separate conception in each of the two words),
heresy will surely no longer be permitted to express by such words her
doctrine of the difference of the essences. In order, however, that our
account of these matters may be cleared up as far as possible, let us
once more discuss the point in the following way. He Who framed the
universe made the nature of man with all things in the beginning, and
after Adam was made, He then appointed for men the law of generation one
from another, saying, “Be fruitful and multiply <span
id="fr_575"></span>[577](#fn_575) .” Now while Abel came into existence
by way of generation, what reasonable man would deny that, in the actual
sense of human generation, Adam existed ungenerately? Yet the first man
had in himself the complete definition of man’s essential nature, and he
who was generated of him was enrolled under the same essential name. But
if the essence that was generated was made anything other than that
which was not generated, the same essential name would not apply to
both: for of those things whose essence is different, the essential name
also is not the same. Since, then, the essential nature of Adam and of
Abel is marked by the same characteristics, we must certainly agree that
one essence is in both, and that the one and the other are exhibited in
the same nature. For Adam and Abel are both one so far as the <span
id="page_CXLIV">p. CXLIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-Page_CXLIV"></span>definition of their nature is
concerned, but are distinguished one from the other without confusion by
the individual attributes observed in each of them. We cannot therefore
properly say that Adam generated another essence besides himself, but
rather that of himself he generated another self, with whom was produced
the whole definition of the essence of him who generated him. What,
then, we learn in the case of human nature by means of the inferential
guidance afforded to us by the definition, this I think we ought to take
for our guidance also to the pure apprehension of the Divine doctrines.
For when we have shaken off from the Divine and exalted doctrines all
carnal and material notions, we shall be most surely led by the
remaining conception, when it is purged of such ideas, to the lofty and
unapproachable heights. It is confessed even by our adversaries that
God, Who is over all, both is and is called the Father of the
Only-begotten, and they moreover give to the Only-begotten God, Who is
of the Father, the name of “begotten,” by reason of His being generated.
Since then among men the word “father” has certain significances
attaching to it, from which the pure nature is alien, it behoves a man
to lay aside all material conceptions which enter in by association with
the carnal significance of the word “father,” and to form in the case of
the God and Father a conception befitting the Divine nature, expressive
only of the reality of the relationship. Since, therefore, in the notion
of a human father there is included not only all that the flesh suggests
to our thoughts, but a certain notion of interval is also undoubtedly
conceived with the idea of human fatherhood, it would be well, in the
case of the Divine generation, to reject, together with bodily
pollution, the notion of interval also, that so what properly belongs to
matter may be completely purged away, and the transcendent generation
may be clear, not only from the idea of passion, but from that of
interval. Now he who says that God is a Father will unite with the
thought that God is, the further thought that He is something: for that
which has its being from some beginning, certainly also derives from
something the beginning of its being, whatever it is: but He in Whose
case being had no beginning, has not His beginning from anything, even
although we contemplate in Him some other attribute than simple
existence. Well, God is a Father. It follows that He is what He is from
eternity: for He did not become, but *is* a Father: for in God that
which was, both is and will be. On the other hand, if He once was not
anything, then He neither is nor will be that thing: for He is not
believed to be the Father of a Being such that it may be piously
asserted that God once existed by Himself without that Being. For the
Father is the Father of Life, and Truth, and Wisdom, and Light, and
Sanctification, and Power, and all else of a like kind that the
Only-begotten is or is called. Thus when the adversaries allege that the
Light “once was not,” I know not to which the greater injury is done,
whether to the Light, in that the Light is not, or to Him that has the
Light, in that He has not the Light. So also with Life and Truth and
Power, and all the other characters in which the Only-begotten fills the
Father’s bosom, being all things in His own fulness. For the absurdity
will be equal either way, and the impiety against the Father will equal
the blasphemy against the Son: for in saying that the Lord “once was
not,” you will not merely assert the non-existence of Power, but you
will be saying that the Power of God, Who is the Father of the Power,
“was not.” Thus the assertion made by your doctrine that the Son “once
was not,” establishes nothing else than a destitution of all good in the
case of the Father. See to what an end these wise men’s acuteness leads,
how by them the word of the Lord is made good, which says, “He that
despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me <span
id="fr_576"></span>[578](#fn_576) :” for by the very arguments by which
they despise the existence at any time of the Only-begotten, they also
dishonour the Father, stripping off by their doctrine from the Father’s
glory every good name and conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_572"></span>[CXLIII:574](2050078.htm#fr_572) <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p4.1"></span>γέννημα</span>. This word, in what
follows, is sometimes translated simply by the word “product,” where it
is not contrasted with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p4.2"></span>ποίημα</span> (the “product of making”),
or where the argument depends especially upon its grammatical form
(which indicates that the thing denoted is the *result of a process*),
rather than upon the idea of the particular process.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[CXLIII:575](2050078.htm#fr_573) <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p5"></span> Cf. S. [John xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_574"></span>[CXLIII:576](2050078.htm#fr_574) <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p6"></span> If, that is, they speak of the
“generated essence” in contra-distinction to “ungenerate essence” they
are precluded from saying that the essence of the Son *is* that He is
begotten, and that the essence of the Father *is* that He is ungenerate:
that which constitutes the essence cannot be made an epithet of the
essence.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[CXLIII:577](2050078.htm#fr_575) <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p7"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[CXLIV:578](2050078.htm#fr_576) <span
id="viii.i.v.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p8"></span> S. [Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="viii.i.v.iii-p8.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He thus shows the oneness of the Eternal Son with the Father the
identity of essence and the community of nature (wherein is a natural
inquiry into the production of wine), and that the terms “Son” and
“product” in the naming of the Only-Begotten include a like idea of
relationship.](2050079)
