[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050024)  [Next](2050026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p1"></span> §9. *In charging Basil with not
defending his faith at the time of the ‘Trials,’ he lays himself open to
the same charge.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p2"></span>He hints at a certain locality where
this trial for heresy took place; but he gives us no certain indication
where it was, and the reader is obliged to guess in the dark. Thither,
he tells us, a congress of picked representatives from all quarters was
summoned; and he is at his best here, placing before our eyes with some
vigorous strokes the preparation of the event which he pretends took
place. Then, he says, a trial in which he would have had to run for his
very life was put into the hands of certain arbitrators, to whom our
Teacher and Master who was present gave his charge <span
id="fr_83"></span>[85](#fn_83.md) ; and as all the voting power was thus
won over to the enemies’ side, he yielded the position <span
id="fr_84"></span>[86](#fn_84.md) , fled from the place, and hunted
everywhere for some hearth and home; and he is great, in this graphic
sketch <span id="fr_85"></span>[87](#fn_85.md) , in arraigning the
cowardice of our hero; as any one who likes may see by looking at what
he has written. But I cannot stop to give specimens here of the bitter
gall of his utterances; I must pass on to that, for the sake of which I
mentioned all this.

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p6"></span>Where, then, was that unnamed spot in
which this examination of his teachings was to take place? What was this
occasion when the best then were collected for a trial? Who were these
men who hurried over land and sea to share in these labours? What was
this ‘expectant world that hung upon the issue of the voting?’ Who was
‘the arranger of the trial?’ However, let us consider that he invented
all that to swell out the importance of his story, as boys at school are
apt to do in *their* fictitious conversations of this kind; and let him
only tell us who that ‘terrible combatant’ was whom our Master shrunk
from encountering. If this also is a fiction, let him be the winner
again, and have the advantage of his vain words. We will say nothing: in
the useless fight with shadows the real victory is to decline conquering
in *that.* But if he speaks of the events at Constantinople and means
the assembly there, and is in this fever of literary indignation at
tragedies enacted there, and means himself by that great and redoubtable
athlete, then we would display the reasons why, though present on the
occasion, we did not plunge into the fight.

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p7"></span><span id="page_XLIV">p. XLIV</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-Page_XLIV"></span>Now let this man who upbraids
that hero with his cowardice tell us whether *he* went down into the
thick of the fray, whether *he* uttered one syllable in defence of his
own orthodoxy, whether *he* made any vigorous peroration, whether *he*
victoriously grappled with the foe? He cannot tell us that, or he
manifestly contradicts himself, for he owns that by his default he
received the adverse verdict. If it was a duty to speak at the actual
time of the trial (for that is the law which he lays down for us in his
book), then why was he then condemned by default? If on the other hand
he did well in observing silence before such dicasts, how
arbitrarily <span id="fr_86"></span>[88](#fn_86.md) he praises himself, but
blames us, for silence at such a time! What can be more absurdly unjust
than this! When two treatises have been put forth since the time of the
trial, he declares that his apology, though written so very long after,
was in time, but reviles that which answered his own as quite too late!
Surely he ought to have abused Basil’s intended counter-statement before
it was actually made; but this is not found amongst his other
complaints. Knowing as he did what Basil was going to write when the
time of the trial had passed away, why in the world did he not find
fault with it there and then? In fact it is clear from his own
confession that he never made that apology in the trial itself. I will
repeat again his words:—‘We confess that we were condemned by default;’
and he adds why; ‘Evil-disposed persons had been passed as jurymen,’ or
rather, to use his own phrase, ‘there was a packed panel of them where a
jury ought to have sat.’ Whereas, on the other hand, it is clear from
another passage in his book that he attests that his apology was made
‘at the proper time.’ It runs thus:—“That I was urged to make this
apology at the proper time and in the proper manner from no pretended
reasons, but compelled to do so on behalf of those who went security for
me, is clear from facts and also from this man’s words.” He adroitly
twists his words round to meet every possible objection; but what will
he say to this? ‘It was not right to keep silent during the trial.’ Then
why was Eunomius speechless during that same trial? And why is his
apology, coming as it did after the trial, in good time? And if in good
time, why is Basil’s controversy with him not in good time?

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p9"></span>But the remark of that holy father is
especially true, that Eunomius in pretending to make an apology really
gave his teaching the support he wished to give it; and that genuine
emulator of Phineas’ zeal, destroying as he does with the sword of the
Word every spiritual fornicator, dealt in the ‘Answer to his blasphemy’
a sword-thrust that was calculated at once to heal a soul and to destroy
a heresy. If he resists that stroke, and with a soul deadened by
apostacy will not admit the cure, the blame rests with him who chooses
the evil, as the Gentile proverb says. So far for Eunomius’ treatment of
truth, and of us: and now the law of former times, which allows an equal
return on those who are the first to injure, might prompt us to
discharge on him a counter-shower of abuse, and, as he is a very easy
subject for this, to be very liberal of it, so as to outdo the pain
which he has inflicted: for if he was so rich in insolent invective
against one who gave no chance for calumny, how many of such epithets
might we not expect to find for those who have satirized that saintly
life? But we have been taught from the first by that scholar of the
Truth to be scholars of the Gospel ourselves, and therefore we will not
take an eye for an eye, nor a tooth for a tooth; we know well that all
the evil that happens admits of being annihilated by its opposite, and
that no bad word and no bad deed would ever develope into such desperate
wickedness, if one good one could only be got in to break the continuity
of the vicious stream. Therefore the routine of insolence and
abusiveness is checked from repeating itself by long-suffering: whereas
if insolence is met with insolence and abuse with abuse, you will but
feed with itself this monster-vice, and increase it vastly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[XLIII:85](2050025.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p3.2"></span>ποφωνεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_84"></span>[XLIII:86](2050025.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p4"></span> Sozomen (vi. 26): “After his
(Eunomius) elevation to the bishopric of Cyzicus he was accused by his
own clergy of introducing innovations. Eudoxius obliged him to undergo a
public trial and give an account of his doctrines to the people:
finding, however, no fault in him, Eudoxius exhorted him to return to
Cyzicus. He replied he could not remain with people who regarded him
with suspicion, and it is said seized this opportunity to secede from
communion.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[XLIII:87](2050025.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p5.2"></span>πογραφῇ</span>; or else ‘on the subject
of Basil’s charge.’

<span id="fn_86"></span>[XLIV:88](2050025.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>τίς ἡ ἀποκλήρωσις</span>: this is a
favourite word with Origen and Gregory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: All his insulting epithets are shewn by facts to be
false.](2050026.md)
