[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050171)  [Next](2050173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>We</span> see how the husbandmen have a
method for separating the chaff, which is united with the wheat, with a
view to employ each for its proper purpose, the one for the sustenance
of man, the other for burning and the feeding of animals. The labourer
in the field of temperance will in like manner distinguish the
satisfaction from the mere delight, and will fling this latter nature to
savages <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1499](#fn_1497.md) “whose end is to be
burned <span id="fr_1498"></span>[1500](#fn_1498.md) ,” as the Apostle
says, but will take the other, in proportion to the actual need, with
thankfulness. Many, however, slide into the very opposite kind of
excess, and unconsciously to themselves, in their over-preciseness,
laboriously thwart their own design; they let their soul fall down the
other side from the heights of Divine elevation to the level of dull
thoughts and occupations, where their minds are so bent upon regulations
which merely affect the body, that they can no longer walk in their
heavenly freedom and gaze above; their only inclination is to this
tormenting and afflicting of the flesh. It would be well, then, to give
this also careful thought, so as to be equally on our guard against
either over-amount <span id="fr_1499"></span>[1501](#fn_1499.md) , neither
stifling the mind beneath the wound of the flesh, nor, on the other
hand, by gratuitously inflicted weakenings sapping and lowering the
powers, so that it can have no thought but of the body’s pain <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1502](#fn_1500.md) ; and let every one remember that
wise precept, which warns us from turning to the right hand or to the
left. I have heard a certain physician of my acquaintance, in the course
of explaining the secrets of his art, say that our body consists of four
elements, not of the same species, but disposed to be conflicting: yet
the hot penetrated the cold, and an equally unexpected union of the wet
and the dry took place, the contradictories of each pair being brought
into contact by their relationship to the intervening pair. He added an
extremely subtle explanation of this account of his studies in nature.
Each of these elements was in its essence *diametrically* <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[1503](#fn_1501.md) opposed to its contradictory; but
then it had two other qualities lying on each side of it, and by virtue
of its kinship with them it came into contact with its contradictory;
for example, the cold and the hot each unite with the wet, or the dry;
and again, the wet and the dry each unite with the hot, or the cold: and
so this sameness of quality, when it manifests itself in
contradictories, is itself the agent which affects the union of those
contradictories. What business of mine, however, is it to explain
exactly the details of this change from this mutual separation and
repugnance of nature, to this mutual union through the medium of kindred
qualities, except for the purpose for which we mentioned it? And that
purpose was to add that the author of this analysis of the body’s
constitution advised that all possible care be taken to preserve a
balance between these properties, for that in fact health consisted in
not letting any one of them gain the mastery within us. If his doctrine
has truth in it, then, for our health’s continuance, we must secure such
a habit, and by no irregularity of diet produce either an excess or a
defect in any member of these our constituent elements. The
chariot-master, if the young horses which he has to drive will not work
well together, does not urge a fast one with the whip, and rein in a
slow one; nor, again, does he let a horse that <span id="page_368">p.
368</span> <span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-Page_368"></span>shies in the traces
or is hard-mouthed gallop his own way to the confusion of orderly
driving; but he quickens the pace of the first, checks the second,
reaches the third with cuts of his whip, till he has made them all
breathe evenly together in a straight career. Now our mind in like
manner holds in its grasp the reins of this chariot of the body; and in
that capacity it will not devise, in the time of youth, when heat of
temperament is abundant, ways of heightening that fever; nor will it
multiply the cooling and the thinning things when the body is already
chilled by illness or by time; and in the case of all these physical
qualities it will be guided by the Scripture, so as actually to realize
it: “He that gathered much had nothing over; and he that had gathered
little had no lack <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1504](#fn_1502.md) .” It will
curtail immoderate lengths in either direction, and so will be careful
to replenish where there is much lack. The inefficiency of the body from
either cause will be that which it guards against; it will train the
flesh, neither making it wild and ungovernable by excessive pampering,
nor sickly and unstrung and nerveless for the required work by
immoderate mortification. That is temperance’s highest aim; it looks not
to the afflicting of the body, but to the peaceful action of the soul’s
functions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[367:1499](2050172.htm#fr_1497.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>τοῖς ἀλογωτέροις</span>. Fronto Ducæus
translates “bardis objiciat,” *i.e.* “savages,” not “beasts.”

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[367:1500](2050172.htm#fr_1498.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p4"></span> [Heb. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>. “The *Apostle*” here is to be noticed.
The same teaching, as to there being no necessity for pleasure, is found
in Clement of Alexandria. He says it is not our <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>σκοπός</span>, 2
*Pæd*. c. i. and 2 *Strom.,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p4.3"></span>καθόλου γὰρ οὐκ ἀναγκαῖον τὸ τῆς ἡδονῆς
πάθος, ἐπακολούθιμον δὲ χρείαις ταῖς φυσικαῖς, κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[367:1501](2050172.htm#fr_1499.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.2"></span>πιμετρίας</span>. Cf. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.4"></span>ν ἐπιμέτρῳ</span>,
Polyb., “into the bargain.”

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[367:1502](2050172.htm#fr_1500.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>καὶ περὶ τοὺς σωματικοὺς πόνους
ἠσχολημένον</span> (*i.e.* “busied,”): Galesinius’ translation must here
be wrong, “ad corporis labores prorsus inutilem.”

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[367:1503](2050172.htm#fr_1501.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p7"></span> Cold can unite with Wet or Dry
which “lie on each side of” it, and are “kindred” to it: and so through
one or the other (which are also “kindred” to Hot) can come “in contact
with” Hot. (So of all.) A wet thing becomes the medium in which both
cold and heat can be manifested.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[368:1504](2050172.htm#fr_1502.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>λαττονήσῃ</span> (for LXX. [Exod.
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018.md), [2 Cor.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.3"></span>, have <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.5"></span>λαττόνησεν</span>), not <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.7"></span>λαττώσῃ</span> with
Livineius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2050173.md)
