[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050196)  [Next](2050198.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p1"></span> XV. *That the soul proper, in fact and
name, is the rational soul, while the others are called so equivocally;
wherein also is this statement, that the power of the mind extends
throughout the whole body in fitting contact with every part* <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1643](#fn_1641.md) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>1. Now, if some things in creation
possess the nutritive faculty, and others again are regulated by the
perceptive faculty, while the former have no share of perception nor the
latter of the intellectual nature, and if for this reason any one is
inclined to the opinion of a plurality of souls, such a man will be
positing a variety of souls in a way not in accordance with their
distinguishing definition. For everything which we conceive among
existing things, if it be perfectly that which it is, is also properly
called by the name it bears: but of that which is not every respect what
it is called, the appellation also is vain. For instance:—if one were to
show us true bread, we say that he properly applies the name to the
subject: but if one were to show us instead that which had been made of
stone to resemble the natural bread, which had the same shape, and equal
size, and similarity of colour, so as in most points to be the same with
its prototype, but which yet lacks the power of being food, on this
account we say that the stone receives the name of “bread,” not
properly, but by a misnomer, and all things which fall under the same
description, which are not absolutely what they are called, have their
name from a misuse of terms.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p4"></span>2. Thus, as the soul finds its
perfection in that which is intellectual and rational, everything that
is not so may indeed share the name of “soul,” but is not really soul,
but a certain vital energy associated with the appellation of
“soul <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1644](#fn_1642.md) .” And for this reason
also He Who gave laws on every matter, gave the animal nature likewise,
as not far removed from this vegetative life <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1645](#fn_1643.md) , for the use of man, to be for
those who partake of it instead of herbs:—for He says, “Ye shall eat all
kinds of flesh even as the green herb <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1646](#fn_1644.md) ;” for the perceptive energy seems
to have but a slight advantage over that which is nourished and grows
without it. Let this teach carnal men not to bind their intellect
closely to the phenomena of sense, but rather to busy themselves with
their spiritual advantages, as the true soul is found in these, while
sense has equal power also among the brute creation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p8"></span>3. The course of our argument, however,
has diverged to another point: for the subject of our speculation was
not the fact that the energy of mind is of more dignity among the
attributes we conceive in man than the material element of his being,
but the fact that the mind is not confined to any one part of us, but is
equally in all and through all, neither surrounding anything without,
nor being enclosed within any<span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-Page_404"></span>thing: for these phrases are properly
applied to casks or other bodies that are placed one inside the other;
but the union of the mental with the bodily presents a connection
unspeakable and inconceivable,—not being *within* it (for the
incorporeal is not enclosed in a body), nor yet surrounding it without
(for that which is incorporeal does not include <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1647](#fn_1645) anything.md), but the mind approaching
our nature in some inexplicable and incomprehensible way, and coming
into contact with it, is to be regarded as both in it and around it,
neither implanted in it nor enfolded with it, but in a way which we
cannot speak or think, except so far as this, that while the nature
prospers according to its own order, the mind is also operative; but if
any misfortune befalls the former, the movement of the intellect halts
correspondingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[403:1643](2050197.htm#fr_1641.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p2"></span> Otherwise chap. xvi. The Bodleian
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Latin version gives the title:—“That the vital energy of the irrational
creatures is not truly but equivocally called ‘soul’, and of the
unspeakable communion of body and soul.”

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[403:1644](2050197.htm#fr_1642.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>τῇ τῆς ψυχῆς κλήσει συγκεκριμένη</span>.
The meaning is apparently something like that given; but if we might
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p5.2"></span>συγκεχρημένη</span> the sense of the
passage would be much plainer.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[403:1645](2050197.htm#fr_1643.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p6"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>φυτικής</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p6.2"></span>φυσικῆς</span> as
before, ch. 8, §4 (where see note).

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[403:1646](2050197.htm#fr_1644.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p7"></span> Cf. [Gen. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md)<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.
The quotation, except the last few words, is not verbally from the LXX.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[404:1647](2050197.htm#fr_1645.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p9"></span> It does not seem of much consequence
whether we read <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>περιλαμβάνεται</span> with Forbes and the
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p9.2"></span>mss.</span>, and
treat it as of the middle voice, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p9.3"></span>περιλαμβάνει τι</span> with the Paris
Editt. The reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xvi-p9.4"></span>περιλαμβάνεται</span>, taken *passively,*
obscures the sense of the passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A contemplation of the Divine utterance which said--“Let us make
man after our image and likeness”; wherein is examined what is the
definition of the image, and how the passible and mortal is like to the
Blessed and Impassible, and how in the image there are male and female,
seeing these are not in the prototype.](2050198.md)
