[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050157)  [Next](2050159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>Let</span> no one think however that herein
we depreciate marriage as an institution. We are well aware that it is
not a stranger to God’s blessing. But since the common instincts of
mankind can plead sufficiently on its behalf, instincts which prompt by
a spontaneous bias to take the high road of marriage for the procreation
of children, whereas Virginity in a way thwarts this natural impulse, it
is a superfluous task to compose formally an Exhortation to marriage. We
put forward the pleasure of it instead, as a most doughty champion on
its behalf. It may be however, notwithstanding this, that there *is*
some need of such a treatise, occasioned by those who travesty the
teaching of the Church. Such persons <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1379](#fn_1377) “have their conscience seared with
a hot iron,” as the Apostle expresses it; and very truly too,
considering that, deserting the guidance of the Holy Spirit for the
“doctrines of devils,” they have some ulcers and blisters stamped upon
their hearts, abominating God’s creatures, and calling them “foul,”
“seducing,” “mischievous,” and so on. “But what have I to do to judge
them that are without <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1380](#fn_1378) ?” asks
the Apostle. Truly those persons are outside the Court in which the
words of our mysteries are spoken; they are not installed under God’s
roof, but in the monastery of the Evil One. They “are taken captive by
him at his will <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1381](#fn_1379) .” They
therefore do not understand that all virtue is found in moderation, and
that any declension to either side <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1382](#fn_1380) of it becomes a vice. He, in fact,
who grasps the middle point between doing too little and doing too much
has hit the distinction between vice and virtue. Instances will make
this clearer. Cowardice and audacity are two recognized vices opposed to
each other; the one the defect, the other the excess of confidence;
between them lies courage. Again, piety is neither atheism nor
superstition; it is equally impious to deny a God and to believe in many
gods. Is there need of more examples to bring this principle home? The
man who avoids both meanness and prodigality will by this shunning of
extremes form the moral habit of liberality; for liberality is the thing
which is neither inclined to spend at random vast and useless sums, nor
yet to be closely calculating in necessary expenses. We need not go into
details in the case of all good qualities. Reason, in all of them, has
established virtue to be a middle state between two extremes. Sobriety
itself therefore is a middle state, and manifestly involves the two
declensions on either side towards vice; he, that is, who is wanting in
firmness of soul, and is so easily worsted in the combat with pleasure
as never even to have approached the path of a virtuous and sober life,
slides into shameful indulgence; while he who goes beyond the safe
ground of sobriety and overshoots the moderation of this virtue, falls
as it were <span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-Page_353"></span>from a precipice into the “doctrines of
devils,” “having his conscience seared with a hot iron.” In declaring
marriage abominable he brands himself with such reproaches; for “if the
tree is corrupt” (as the Gospel says), “the fruit also of the tree will
be like it <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1383](#fn_1381) ”; if a man is the
shoot and fruitage of the tree of marriage, reproaches cast on that turn
upon him who casts them <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1384](#fn_1382) .
These persons, then, are like branded criminals already; their
conscience is covered with the stripes of this unnatural teaching. But
our view of marriage is this; that, while the pursuit of heavenly things
should be a man’s first care, yet if he can use the advantages of
marriage with sobriety and moderation, he need not despise this way of
serving the state. An example might be found in the patriarch Isaac. He
married Rebecca when he was past the flower of his age and his prime was
well-nigh spent, so that his marriage was not the deed of passion, but
because of God’s blessing that should be upon his seed. He cohabited
with her till the birth of her only children <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1385](#fn_1383) , and then, closing the channels of
the senses, lived wholly for the Unseen; for this is what seems to be
meant by the mention in his history of the *dimness* of the Patriarch’s
eyes. But let that be as those think who are skilled in reading these
meanings, and let us proceed with the continuity of our discourse. What
then, were we saying? That in the cases where it is possible at once to
be true to the diviner love, and to embrace wedlock, there is no reason
for setting aside this dispensation of nature and misrepresenting as
abominable that which is honourable. Let us take again our illustration
of the water and the spring. Whenever the husbandman, in order to
irrigate a particular spot, is bringing the stream thither, but there is
need before it gets there of a small outlet, he will allow only so much
to escape into that outlet as is adequate to supply the demand, and can
then easily be blended again with the main stream. If, as an
inexperienced and easy-going steward, he opens too wide a channel, there
will be danger of the whole stream quitting its direct bed and pouring
itself sideways. In the same way, if (as life does need a mutual
succession) a man so treats this need as to give spiritual things the
first thought, and because of the shortness <span
id="fr_1384"></span>[1386](#fn_1384) of the time indulges but sparingly
the sexual passion and keeps it under restraint, that man would realize
the character of the prudent husband man to which the Apostle exhorts
us. About the details of paying these trifling debts of nature he will
not be over-calculating, but the long hours of his prayers <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1387](#fn_1385) will secure the purity which is the
key-note of his life. He will always fear lest by this kind of
indulgence he may become nothing but flesh and blood; for in them God’s
Spirit does not dwell. He who is of so weak a character that he cannot
make a manful stand against nature’s impulse had better <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1388](#fn_1386) keep himself very far away from
such temptations, rather than descend into a combat which is above his
strength. There is no small danger for him lest, cajoled in the
valuation of pleasure, he should think that there exists no other good
but that which is enjoyed along with some sensual emotion, and, turning
altogether from the love of immaterial delights, should become entirely
of the flesh, seeking always his pleasure only there, so that his
character will be a Pleasure-lover, not a God-lover. It is not every
man’s gift, owing to weakness of nature, to hit the due proportion in
these matters; there is a danger of being carried far beyond it, and
“sticking fast in the deep mire <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1389](#fn_1387) ,” to use the Psalmist’s words. It
would therefore be for our interest, as our discourse has been
suggesting, to pass through life without a trial of these temptations,
lest under cover of the excuse of lawful indulgence passion should gain
an entrance into the citadel of the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[352:1379](2050158.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p3"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[352:1380](2050158.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p4"></span> [1 Cor. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[352:1381](2050158.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p5"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[352:1382](2050158.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>πὶ τὰ παρακείμενα</span>. Galesinius
wrongly renders “in contrarias partes.” Cf. Arist. Eth. ii. 5.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[353:1383](2050158.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p7"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#018)<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>;
from which it will be seen that Gregory confirms the Vulgate “malum” for
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>σαπρόν</span>,
since he quotes it as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p7.3"></span>κακὸν</span> here.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[353:1384](2050158.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p8.1"></span>τοῦ προφέροντος</span>; not “of their
Creator,” or “of their father” (Livineius).

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[353:1385](2050158.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>μέχρι μιᾶς ὠδῖνος</span>. So perhaps [Rom.
ix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9.2"></span>: <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9.3"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9.4"></span>Ρεβέκκα ἐξ ἑνὸς κοίτην ἔχουσα</span>,
*i.e.* ex uno concubitu. Below, c. 9 (p. 139, c. 11), Gregory uses the
same expression of one *birth.*

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[353:1386](2050158.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>καιροῦ συστολὴν</span>

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[353:1387](2050158.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>τὴν ἐκ συμφώνου καθαρότητα τῇ σχολῇ τῶν
προσευχῶν ἀφορίζων</span>, “durch häufiges Gebet die innige Reinheit
festzustellen sucht,” J. Rupp. The Latin fails to give the full force,
“ex convenientia quadam munditiam animi in orationum studio constituit:”
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p11.2"></span>σχολὴ</span> is
*abundant* time from the business of life.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[353:1388](2050158.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>κρείττων, κ. τ. λ</span>., “melius”
(Livineius), not “validior.”

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[353:1389](2050158.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>λύν</span>, a better reading than <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.3"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.4"></span>λην</span>. Cf. <span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.5"></span>[Ps. lxix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.6"></span>,
“the mire of depth” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.7"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.ix-p13.8"></span>λὺν βυθοῦ</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2050159)
