[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050099)  [Next](2050101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CLXXXII">p.
CLXXXII</span> <span id="viii.i.viii.i-Page_CLXXXII"></span><span
class="c9"><span id="viii.i.viii.i-p1.1"></span>Book VI.</span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p2"></span>§1. *The sixth book shows that He Who
came for man’s salvation was not a mere man, as Eunomius, falsely
slandering him, affirmed that the great Basil had said, but the
Only-begotten Son of God, putting on human flesh, and becoming a
mediator between God and man, on Whom we believe, as subject to
suffering in the flesh, but impassible in His Godhead; and demonstrates
the calumny of Eunomius.*

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p3.1"></span>But</span> I perceive that while the
necessities of the subject compelled me to follow this line of thought,
I have lingered too long over this passage <span
id="fr_745"></span>[747](#fn_745) . I must now resume the train of his
complaints, that we may pass by none of the charges brought against us
without an answer. And first I propose that we should examine this
point, that he charges us with asserting that an ordinary man has
wrought the salvation of the world. For although this point has been to
some extent already cleared up by the investigations we have made, we
shall yet briefly deal with it once more, that the mind of those who are
acting as our judges on this slanderous accusation may be entirely freed
from misapprehension. So far are we from referring to an ordinary man
the cause of this great and unspeakable grace, that even if any should
refer so great a boon to Peter and Paul, or to an angel from heaven, we
should say with Paul, “let him be anathema <span
id="fr_746"></span>[748](#fn_746) .” For Paul was not crucified for us,
nor were we baptized into a human name <span
id="fr_747"></span>[749](#fn_747) . Surely the doctrine which our
adversaries oppose to the truth is not thereby strengthened when we
confess that the saving power of Christ is more potent than human
nature <span id="fr_748"></span>[750](#fn_748) :—yet it may seem to be
so, for their aim is to maintain at all points the difference of the
essence of the Son from that of the Father, and they strive to show the
dissimilarity of essence not only by the contrast of the Generated with
the Ungenerate, but also by the opposition of the passible to the
impassible. And while this is more openly maintained in the last part of
their argument, it is also clearly shown in their present
discourse <span id="fr_749"></span>[751](#fn_749) . For if he finds
fault with those who refer the Passion to the Human Nature, his
intention is certainly to subject to the Passion the Godhead Itself. For
our conception being twofold, and admitting of two developments,
accordingly as the Divinity or the Humanity is held to have been in a
condition of suffering, an attack on one of these views is clearly a
maintaining of the other. Accordingly, if they find fault with those who
look upon the Passion as concerning the Man, they will clearly approve
those who say that the Godhead of the Son was subject to passion, and
the position which these last maintain becomes an argument in favour of
their own absurd doctrine. For if, according to their statement, the
Godhead of the Son suffers, while that of the Father is preserved in
absolute impassibility, then the impassible Nature is essentially
different from that which admits passion. Seeing, therefore, that the
dictum before us, though, so far as it is limited by number of words, it
is a short one, yet affords principles and hypotheses for every kind of
doctrinal pravity, it would seem right that our readers should require
in our reply not so much brevity as soundness. We, then, neither
attribute our own salvation to a man, nor admit that the incorruptible
and Divine Nature is capable of suffering and mortality: but since we
must assuredly believe the Divine utterances which declare to us that
the Word that was in the beginning was God <span
id="fr_750"></span>[752](#fn_750) , and that afterward the Word made
flesh was seen upon the earth and conversed with men <span
id="fr_751"></span>[753](#fn_751) , we admit in our creed those
conceptions which are consonant with the Divine utterance. For when we
hear that He is Light, and Power, and Righteousness, and Life, and
Truth, and that by Him all things were made, we account all these and
such-like statements as things to be believed, referring them to God the
Word: but when we hear of pain, of slumber, of need, of trouble, of
bonds, of nails, of the spear, of blood, of wounds, of burial, of the
sepulchre, and all else of this kind, even if they are somewhat opposed
to <span id="page_CLXXXIII">p. CLXXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-Page_CLXXXIII"></span>what has previously been stated,
we none the less admit them to be things to be believed, and true,
having regard to the flesh; which we receive by faith as conjoined with
the Word. For as it is not possible to contemplate the peculiar
attributes of the flesh as existing in the Word that was in the
beginning, so also on the other hand we may not conceive those which are
proper to the Godhead as existing in the nature of the flesh. As,
therefore, the teaching of the Gospel concerning our Lord is mingled,
partly of lofty and Divine ideas, partly of those which are lowly and
human, we assign every particular phrase accordingly to one or other of
these Natures which we conceive in the mystery, that which is human to
the Humanity, that which is lofty to the Godhead, and say that, as God,
the Son is certainly impassible and incapable of corruption: and
whatever suffering is asserted concerning Him in the Gospel, He
assuredly wrought by means of His Human Nature which admitted of such
suffering. For verily the Godhead works the salvation of the world by
means of that body which encompassed It, in such wise that the suffering
was of the body, but the operation was of God; and even if some wrest to
the support of the opposite doctrine the words of the Apostle, “God
spared not His own Son, <span id="fr_752"></span>[754](#fn_752) ” and,
“God sent His own Son <span id="fr_753"></span>[755](#fn_753) ,” and
other similar phrases which seem to refer, in the matter of the Passion,
to the Divine Nature, and not to the Humanity, we shall none the less
refuse to abandon sound doctrine, seeing that Paul himself declares to
us more clearly the mystery of this subject. For he everywhere
attributes to the Human element in Christ the dispensation of the
Passion, when he says, “for since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead <span id="fr_754"></span>[756](#fn_754) ,”
and, “God, sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
condemned sin in the flesh <span id="fr_755"></span>[757](#fn_755) ”
(for he says, “in the *flesh*,” not “in the Godhead”); and “He was
crucified through weakness” (where by “weakness” he means “the flesh”),
“yet liveth by power <span id="fr_756"></span>[758](#fn_756) ” (while he
indicates by “power” the Divine Nature); and, “He died unto sin” (that
is, with regard to the body), “but liveth unto God <span
id="fr_757"></span>[759](#fn_757) ” (that is, with regard to the
Godhead, so that by these words it is established that, while the Man
tasted death, the immortal Nature did not admit the suffering of death);
and again; “He made Him to be sin for us, Who knew no sin <span
id="fr_758"></span>[760](#fn_758) ,” giving once more the name of “sin”
to the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_745"></span>[CLXXXII:747](2050100.htm#fr_745) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p4"></span> The passage in S. Peter’s speech
([Acts ii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p4.1"></span>) discussed in the preceding book.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[CLXXXII:748](2050100.htm#fr_746) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p5"></span> Cf. [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_747"></span>[CLXXXII:749](2050100.htm#fr_747) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[CLXXXII:750](2050100.htm#fr_748) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p7"></span> The sense of this passage is rather
obscure. S. Gregory intends, it would seem, to point out that, although
an acknowledgment that the suffering Christ was more than man may seem
at first sight to support the Eunomian view of the passibility of the
Godhead of the Son, this is not its necessary effect. Apparently either
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.viii.i-p7.1"></span>οὐ μὴν</span>
must be taken as equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p7.2"></span>οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ</span>, or a clause such as
that expressed in the translation must be supplied before <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.viii.i-p7.3"></span>τοῖς μὲν γὰρ
κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[CLXXXII:751](2050100.htm#fr_749) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p7.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p8"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation, which
here follows that of the earlier editions.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[CLXXXII:752](2050100.htm#fr_750) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p9"></span> Cf. <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p9.1"></span>S. John i. 1

<span id="fn_751"></span>[CLXXXII:753](2050100.htm#fr_751) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p10"></span> Cf. [Bar. iii.
37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_752"></span>[CLXXXIII:754](2050100.htm#fr_752) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p11"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[CLXXXIII:755](2050100.htm#fr_753) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p12"></span> Cf. [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_754"></span>[CLXXXIII:756](2050100.htm#fr_754) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[CLXXXIII:757](2050100.htm#fr_755) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p14"></span> Cf. [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_756"></span>[CLXXXIII:758](2050100.htm#fr_756) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p15"></span> <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p15.1"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[CLXXXIII:759](2050100.htm#fr_757) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p16"></span> [Rom. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[CLXXXIII:760](2050100.htm#fr_758) <span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.i-p17"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.viii.i-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then he again mentions S. Peter's word, “made,” and the passage
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which says that Jesus was made by God “an
Apostle and High Priest”: and, after giving a sufficient answer to the
charges brought against him by Eunomius, shows that Eunomius himself
supports Basil's arguments, and says that the Only-begotten Son, when He
had put on the flesh, became Lord.](2050101)
