[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050047)  [Next](2050049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p1"></span> §32. *His dictum that ‘the manner
of the likeness must follow the manner of the generation’ is
unintelligible.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p2"></span>But to prevent such a thought
being entertained, and pretending to be forced somehow away from it, he
says that he withdraws from all these results of Providence, and goes
back to the manner of the Son’s generation, because “the manner of His
likeness must follow the manner of His generation.” What an irresistible
proof! How forcibly does this verbiage compel assent! What skill and
precision there is in the wording of this assertion! Then, if we know
the manner of the generation, we shall know by that the manner of the
likeness. Well, then; seeing that all, or at all events most, animals
born by parturition have the same manner of generation, and, according
to their logic, the manner of likeness follows this manner of
generation, these animals, following as they do the same model in their
production, will resemble entirely those similarly generated; for things
that are like the same thing are like one another. If, then, according
to the view of this heresy, the manner of the generation makes every
thing generated just like itself, and it is a fact that this manner does
not vary at all in diversified kinds of animals but remains the same in
the greatest part of them, we shall find that this sweeping and
unqualified assertion of his establishes, by virtue of this similarity
of birth, a mutual resemblance between men, dogs, camels, mice,
elephants, leopards, and every other animal which Nature produces in the
same manner. Or does he mean, not, that things brought into the world in
a similar way are all like each other, but that each one of them is like
that being only which is the source of its life. But if so, he ought to
have declared that the child is like the parent, not that the “manner of
the likeness” resembles the “manner of the generation.” But this, which
is so probable in itself, and is observed as a fact in Nature, that the
begotten resembles the begetter, he will not admit as a truth; it would
reduce his whole argumentation to a proof of the contrary of what he
intended. If he allowed the offspring to be like the parent, his
laboured store of arguments to prove the *unlikeness* of the Beings
would be refuted as evanescent and groundless.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p3"></span>So he says “the manner of the
likeness follows the manner of the generation.” This, when tested by the
exact critic of the meaning of any idea <span
id="fr_164"></span>[166](#fn_164.md) , will be found completely
unintel<span id="page_LXXVII">p. LXXVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-Page_LXXVII"></span>ligible. It is plainly
impossible to say what a “manner of generation” can mean. Does it mean
the figure of the parent, or his impulse, or his disposition; or the
time, or the place, or the completing of the embryo by conception; or
the generative receptacles; or nothing of that kind, but something else
of the things observed in ‘generation.’ It is impossible to find out
what he means. The impropriety and vagueness of the word “manner” causes
perplexity as to its signification here; every possible one is equally
open to our surmises, and presents as well an equal want of connexion
with the subject before us. So also with this phrase of his “manner of
likeness;” it is devoid of any vestige of meaning, if we fix our
attention on the examples familiarly known to us. For the thing
generated is not to be likened there to the kind or the manner of its
birth. Birth consists, in the case of animal birth, in a separation of
body from body, in which the animal perfectly moulded in the womb is
brought forth; but the thing born is a man, or horse, or cow, or
whatever it may chance to be in its existence through birth. How,
therefore, the “manner of the likeness of the offspring follows the
manner of its generation” must be left to him, or to some pupil of his
in midwifery, to explain. Birth is one thing: the thing born is another:
they are different ideas altogether. No one with any sense would deny
that what he says is perfectly untrue in the case of animal births. But
if he calls the actual making and the actual fashioning a “manner of the
generation,” which the “manner of the likeness” of the thing produced is
to “follow,” even so his statement is removed from all likelihood, as we
shall see from some illustrations. Iron is hammered out by the blows of
the artificer into some useful instrument. How, then, the outline of its
edge, if such there happen to be, can be said to be similar to the hand
of the worker, or to the manner of its fashioning, to the hammers, for
instance, and the coals and the bellows and the anvil by means of which
he has moulded it, no one could explain. And what can be said in one
case fits all, where there is any operation producing a result; the
thing produced cannot be said to be like the “manner of its generation.”
What has the shape of a garment got to do with the spool, or the rods,
or the comb, or with the form of the weaver’s instruments at all? What
has an actual seat got to do with the working of the blocks; or any
finished production with the build of him who achieved it?—But I think
even our opponents would allow that this rule of his is not in force in
sensible and material instances.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p5"></span>It remains to see whether it
contributes anything further to the proof of his blasphemy. What, then,
was he aiming at? The necessity of believing in accordance with their
being in the likeness or unlikeness of the Son to the Father; and, as we
cannot know about this being from considerations of Providence, the
necessity of having recourse to the “manner of the generation,” whereby
we may know, not indeed whether the Begotten is like the Begetter
(absolutely), but only a certain “manner of likeness” between them; and
as this manner is a secret to the many, the necessity of going at some
length into the being of the Begetter. Then has he forgotten his own
definitions about the beings having to be known from their works? But
this begotten being, which he calls the work of the supreme being, has
as yet no light thrown upon it (according to him); so how can its nature
be dealt with? And how can he “mount above this lower and therefore more
directly comprehensible thing,” and so cling to the absolute and supreme
being? Again, he always throughout his discourse lays claim to an
accurate knowledge of the divine utterances; yet here he pays them scant
reverence, ignoring the fact that it is not possible to approach to a
knowledge of the Father except through the Son. “No man knoweth the
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son shall reveal
Him <span id="fr_165"></span>[167](#fn_165.md) .” Yet Eunomius, while on
every occasion, where he can insult our devout and God-adoring
conceptions of the Son, he asserts in plain words the Son’s inferiority,
establishes His superiority unconsciously in this device of his for
knowing the Deity; for he assumes that the Father’s being lends itself
the more readily to our comprehension, and then attempts to trace and
argue out the Son’s nature from that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[LXXVI:166](2050048.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p4.2"></span>ννοίας λόγον</span>.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[LXXVII:167](2050048.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p6"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He declares falsely that 'the manner of the generation is to be
known from the intrinsic worth of the generator'.](2050049.md)
