[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050123)  [Next](2050125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He then shows the eternity of
the Son’s generation, and the inseparable identity of His essence with
Him that begat Him, and likens the folly of Eunomius to children playing
with sand.*

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p2"></span>But since, in what follows, he is
active in stirring up the ill savour of his disgusting attempts, whereby
he tries to make out that the Only-begotten God “once was not,” it will
be well, as our mind on this head has been made pretty clear by our
previous arguments, no longer to plunge our argument also in what is
likewise bad, except perhaps that it is not unseasonable to add this one
point, having selected it from the multitude. He says (some one having
remarked that “the property of not being begotten is equally associated
with the essence of the Father <span id="fr_948"></span>[950](#fn_948.md)
”), “The argument proceeds by like steps to those by which it came to a
conclusion in the case of the Son.” The orthodox doctrine is clearly
strengthened by the attack of its adversaries, the doctrine, namely,
that we ought not to think that not to be begotten or to be begotten are
identical with the essence <span id="fr_949"></span>[951](#fn_949.md) , but
that these should be contemplated, it is true, in the subject, while the
subject in its proper definition is something else beyond these, and
since no difference is found in the subject, because the difference of
“begotten” and “unbegotten” is apart from the essence, and does not
affect it, it necessarily follows that the essence must be allowed to be
in both Persons without variation. Let us moreover inquire, over and
above what has been already said, into this point, in what sense he says
that “generation” is alien from the Father,—whether he does so
conceiving of it as an essence or an operation. If he conceives it to be
an operation, it is clearly equally connected with its result and with
its author, as in every kind of production one may see the operation
alike in the product and the producer, appearing in the production of
the effects and not separated from their artificer. But if he terms
“generation” an essence separate from the essence of the Father,
admitting that the Lord came into being therefrom, then he plainly puts
this in the place of the Father as regards the Only-begotten, so that
two Fathers are conceived in the case of the Son, one a Father in name
alone, Whom he calls “the Ungenerate,” Who has nothing to do with
generation, and the other, which he calls “generation,” performing the
part of a Father to the Only-begotten.

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p5"></span>And this is brought home even more
by the statements of Eunomius himself than by our own arguments. For in
what follows, he says:—“God, being without generation, is also prior to
that which is generate,” and a little further on, “for He Whose
existence arises from being generated did not exist before He was
generated.” Accordingly, if the Father has nothing to do <span
id="page_CCXXIV">p. CCXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iii-Page_CCXXIV"></span>with generation, and if it is
from generation that the Son derives His being, then the Father has no
action in respect of the subsistence of the Son, and is apart from all
connection with generation, from which the Son draws His being. If,
then, the Father is alien from the generation of the Son, they either
invent for the Son another Father under the name of “generation,” or in
their wisdom make out the Son to be self-begotten and self-generated.
You see the confusion of mind of the man who exhibits his ignorance to
us up and down in his own argument, how his profanity wanders in many
paths, or rather in places where no path is, without advancing to its
mark by any trustworthy guidance; and as one may see in the case of
infants, when in their childish sport they imitate the building of
houses with sand, that what they build is not framed on any plan, or by
any rules of art, to resemble the original, but first they make
something at haphazard, and in silly fashion, and then take counsel what
to call it,—this penetration I discern in our author. For after getting
together words of impiety according to what first comes into his head,
like a heap of sand, he begins to cast about to see whither his
unintelligible profanity tends, growing up as it does spontaneously from
what he has said, without any rational sequence. For I do not imagine
that he originally proposed to invent generation as an actual
subsistence standing to the essence of the Son in the place of the
Father, nor that it was part of our rhetorician’s plan that the Father
should be considered as alien from the generation of the Son, nor was
the absurdity of self-generation deliberately introduced. But all such
absurdities have been emitted by our author without reflection, so that,
as regards them, the man who so blunders is not even worth much
refutation, as he knows, to borrow the Apostle’s words, “neither what he
says, nor whereof he affirms <span id="fr_950"></span>[952](#fn_950.md) .”

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p7"></span>“For He Whose existence arises from
generation,” he says, “did not exist before generation.” If he here uses
the term “generation” of the Father, I agree with Him, and there is no
opponent. For one may mean the same thing by either phrase, by saying
either that Abraham begat Isaac, or, that Abraham was the father of
Isaac. Since then to be father is the same as to have begotten, if any
one shifts the words from one form of speech to the other, paternity
will be shown to be identical with generation. If, therefore, what
Eunomius says is this, “He Whose existence is derived from the Father
was not before the Father,” the statement is sound, and we give our vote
in favour of it. But if he is recurring in the phrase to that generation
of which we have spoken before, and says that it is separated from the
Father but associated with the Son, then I think it waste of time to
linger over the consideration of the unintelligible. For whether he
thinks generation to be a self-existent object, or whether by the name
he is carried in thought to that which has no actual existence, I have
not to this day been able to find out from his language. For his fluid
and baseless argument lends itself alike to either supposition,
inclining to one side or to the other according to the fancy of the
thinker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_948"></span>[CCXXIII:950](2050124.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p3"></span> Presumably the quotation from the
unknown author, if completed, would run, “as that of being begotten is
associated with the essence of the Son.”

<span id="fn_949"></span>[CCXXIII:951](2050124.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p4"></span> If the property of not being
begotten is “associated with” the essence, it clearly cannot be the
essence, as Eunomius elsewhere maintains it to be: hence the phrase
which he here adopts concedes S. Gregory’s position on this point.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[CCXXIV:952](2050124.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iii-p6"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007.md)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After this he shows that the Son, who truly is, and is in the
bosom of the Father, is simple and uncompounded, and that, He Who
redeemed us from bondage is not under dominion of the Father, nor in a
state of slavery: and that otherwise not He alone, but also the Father
Who is in the Son and is One with Him, must be a slave; and that the
word “being” is formed from the word to “be.” And having excellently and
notably discussed all these matters, he concludes the book.](2050125.md)
