[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050247)  [Next](2050249.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>But</span> they deride our state of nature,
and din into our ears the manner of our being born, supposing in this
way to make the mystery ridiculous, as if it were unbecoming in God by
such an entrance into the world as this to connect Himself with the
fellowship of the human life. But we touched upon this point before,
when we said that the only thing which is essentially degraded is moral
evil or whatever has an affinity with such evil; whereas the orderly
process of Nature, arranged as it has been by the Divine will and law,
is beyond the reach of any misrepresentation on the score of wickedness:
otherwise this accusation would reach up to the Author of Nature, if
anything connected with Nature were to be found fault with as degraded
and unseemly. If, then, the Deity is separate only from evil, and if
there is no nature in evil, and if the mystery declares that God was
born in man but not in evil; and if, for man, there is but one way of
entrance upon life, namely that by which the embryo passes on to the
stage of life, what other mode of entrance upon life would they
prescribe for God? these people, I mean, who, while they judge it right
and proper that the nature which evil had weakened should be visited by
the Divine power, yet take offence at this special method of the
visitation, not remembering that the whole organization of the body is
of equal value throughout, and that nothing in it, of all the elements
that contribute to the continuance of the animal life, is liable to the
charge of being worthless or wicked. For the whole arrangement of the
bodily organs and limbs has been constructed with one end in view, and
that is, the continuance in life of humanity; and while the other organs
of the body conserve the present actual vitality of men, each being
apportioned to a different operation, and by their means the faculties
of sense and action are exercised, the generative organs on the contrary
involve a forecast of the future, introducing as they do, by themselves,
their counteracting transmission for our race. Looking, therefore, to
their utility, to which of those parts which are deemed more honourable
are these inferior <span id="fr_2007"></span>[2009](#fn_2007.md) ? Nay,
than which must they not in all reason be deemed more worthy of honour?
For not by the eye, or ear, or tongue, or any other sense, is the
continuation of our race carried on. These, as has been remarked,
pertain to the enjoyment of the present. But by those other organs the
immortality of humanity is secured, so that death, though ever operating
against us, thus in a certain measure becomes powerless and ineffectual,
since Nature, to baffle him, is ever as it were throwing herself into
the breach through those who come successively into being. What
unseemliness, then, is contained in our revelation of God mingled with
the life of humanity through those very means by which Nature carries on
the combat against death?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[497:2009](2050248.htm#fr_2007.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxx-p3"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. xii.
14-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014.md)<span
id="xi.ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](2050249.md)
