[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050039)  [Next](2050041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p1"></span> §24. *His elaborate account of
degrees and differences in ‘works’ and ‘energies’ within the Trinity is
absurd*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>Now let us see what he adds, as the
consequence of this. After saying that we must perforce regard the Being
as greater and less and that while <span
id="fr_135"></span>[137](#fn_135) the ones, by virtue of a pre-eminent
magnitude and value, occupy a leading place, the others must be detruded
to a lower place, because their nature and their value is secondary, he
adds this; “their difference amounts to that existing between their
works: it would in fact be impious to say that the same energy produced
the angels or the stars, and the heavens or man; but one would
positively maintain about this, that in proportion as some works are
older and more honourable than others, so does one energy transcend
another, because sameness of energy produces sameness of work, and
difference of work indicates difference of energy.”

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p4"></span>I suspect that their author himself
would find it difficult to tell us what he meant when he wrote those
words. Their thought is obscured by the rhetorical mud, which is so
thick that one can hardly see beyond any clue to interpret them. “Their
difference amounts to that existing between their works” is a sentence
which might be suspected of coming from some Loxias of pagan story,
mystifying his hearers. But if we may make a guess at the drift of his
observations here by following out those which we have already examined,
this would be his meaning, viz., that if we know the amount of
difference between one work and another, we shall know the amount of
that between the corresponding energies. But what “works” he here speaks
of, it is impossible to discover from his words. If he means the works
to be observed in the creation, I do not see how this hangs on to what
goes before. For the question was about Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
what occasion was there, then, for one thinking rationally to inquire
one after another into the nature of earth, and water, and air, and
fire, and the different animals, and to distinguish some works as older
and more honourable than others, and to speak of one energy as
transcending another? But if he calls the Only-begotten and the Holy
Spirit “works,” what does he mean by the “differences” of the energies
which produce these works: and what are  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[138](#fn_136) those wonderful energies of this
writer which transcend the others? He has neither explained the
particular way in which he means them to “transcend” each other; nor has
he discussed the nature of these energies: but he has advanced in
neither direction, neither proving so far their real subsistence, nor
their being some unsubstantial exertion of a will. Throughout it all his
meaning hangs suspended between these two conceptions, and oscillates
from one to the other. He adds that “it would be impious to say that the
same energy produced the angels or the stars, and the heavens or man.”
Again we ask what necessity there is to draw this conclusion from his
previous remarks? I do not see that it is proved any more  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[139](#fn_137) because the energies vary amongst
themselves as much as the works do, and because the works are not all
from the same source but are stated by him to come from different
sources. As for the heavens and each angel, star, and man, or anything
else understood by the word “creation,” we know from Scripture that they
are all the work of One: whereas in their system of theology the Son and
the Spirit are not the work of one and the same, the Son being the work
of the energy which ‘follows’ the first Being, and the Spirit the
further work of that work. What the connexion, then, is between that
statement and the heavens, man, angel, star, which he drags in, must be
revealed by himself, or some one whom he has initiated into his profound
philosophy. The blasphemy intended by his words is plain <span
id="page_LXVI">p. LXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-Page_LXVI"></span>enough, but the way the profanity
is stated is inconsistent with itself. To suppose that within the Holy
Trinity there is a difference as wide as that which we can observe
between the heavens which envelope the whole creation, and one single
man or the star which shines in them, is openly profane: but still the
connexion of such thoughts and the pertinence of such a comparison is a
mystery to me, and I suspect also to its author himself. If indeed his
account of the creation were of this sort, viz., that while the heavens
were the work of some transcendent energy each star in them was the
result of an energy accompanying the heavens, and that then an angel was
the result of that star, and a man of that angel, his argument would
then have consisted in a comparison of similar processes, and might have
somewhat confirmed his doctrine. But since he grants that it was all
made by One (unless he wishes to contradict Scripture downright), while
he describes the production of the Persons after a different fashion,
what connexion is there between this newly imported view and what went
before?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p7"></span>But let it be granted to him that
this comparison does have some connexion with proving variation amongst
the Beings (for this is what he desires to establish); still let us see
how that which follows hangs on to what he has just said, ‘In proportion
as one work is prior to another and more precious than it, so would a
pious mind affirm that one energy transcends another.’ If in this he
alludes to the sensible world, the statement is a long way from the
matter in hand. There is no necessity whatever that requires one whose
subject is theological to philosophize about the order in which the
different results achieved in the world-making are to come, and to lay
down that the energies of the Creator are higher and lower analogously
to the magnitude of each thing then made. But if he speaks of the
Persons themselves, and means by works that are ‘older and more
honourable’ those ‘works’ which he has just fashioned in his own creed,
that is, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, it would be perhaps better to pass
over in silence such an abominable view, than to create even the
appearance of its being an argument by entangling ourselves with it. For
can a ‘more honourable’ be discovered where there is not a less
honourable? If he can go so far, and with so light a heart, in profanity
as to hint that the expression and the idea ‘less precious’ can be
predicated of anything whatever which we believe of the Trinity, then it
were well to stop our ears, and get as quickly as possible out of
hearing of such wickedness, and the contagion of reasoning which will be
transfused into the heart, as from a vessel full of uncleanness.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p8"></span>Can any one dare to speak of the
divine and supreme Being in such a way that a less degree of honour in
comparison is proved by the argument. “That all,” says the evangelist,
“may honour the Son, as they honour the Father. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[140](#fn_138) ” This utterance (and such an
utterance is a law to us) makes a law of this equality in honour: yet
this man annuls both the law and its Giver, and apportions to the One
more, to the Other less of honour, by some occult method for measuring
its extra abundance which he has discovered. By the custom of mankind
the differences of worth are the measure of the amount of honour which
each in authority receives; so that inferiors do not approach the lower
magistracies in the same guise exactly as they do the sovereign, and the
greater or less display of fear or reverence on their part indicates the
greater or the less worshipfulness in the objects of it: in fact we may
discover, in this disposition of inferiors, who *are* the specially
honourable; when, for instance, we see some one feared beyond his
neighbours, or the recipient of more reverence than the rest. But in the
case of the divine nature, because every perfection in the way of
goodness is connoted with the very name of God, we cannot discover, at
all events as *we* look at it, any ground for degrees of honour. Where
there is no greater and smaller in power, or glory, or wisdom, or love,
or of any other imaginable good whatever, but the good which the Son has
is the Father’s also, and all that is the Father’s is seen in the Son,
what possible state of mind can induce us to show the more reverence in
the case of the Father? If we think of royal power and worth the Son is
King: if of a judge, ‘all judgment is committed to the Son <span
id="fr_139"></span>[141](#fn_139) :’ if of the magnificent office of
Creation, ‘all things were made by Him <span
id="fr_140"></span>[142](#fn_140) :’ if of the Author of our life, we
know the True Life came down as far as our nature: if of our being taken
out of darkness, we know He is the True Light, who weans us from
darkness: if wisdom is precious to any, Christ is God’s power and
Wisdom <span id="fr_141"></span>[143](#fn_141) .

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p13"></span>Our very souls, then, being
disposed so naturally and in proportion to their capacity, and yet so
miraculously, to recognize so many and great wonders in Christ, what
further excess of honour is left us to pay exclusively to the Father, as
inappropriate to the Son? Human reverence of the Deity, looked at in its
plainest meaning, is nothing else but <span id="page_LXVII">p.
LXVII</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-Page_LXVII"></span>an attitude of
love towards Him, and a confession of the perfections in Him: and I
think that the precept ‘so ought the Son to be honoured as the
Father <span id="fr_142"></span>[144](#fn_142) ,’ is enjoined by the
Word in place of love. For the Law commands that we pay to God this
fitting honour by *loving* Him with all our heart and strength and here
is the equivalent of that love, in that the Word as Lawgiver thus says,
that the Son ought to be *honoured* as the Father.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p15"></span>It was this kind of honour that
the great David fully paid, when he confessed to the Lord in a
prelude <span id="fr_143"></span>[145](#fn_143) of his psalmody that he
loved the Lord, and told all the reasons for his love, calling Him his
“rock” and “fortress,” and “refuge,” and “deliverer,” and “God-helper,”
and “hope,” and “buckler,” and “horn of salvation,” and “protector.” If
the Only-begotten Son is not all these to mankind, let the excess of
honour be reduced to this extent as this heresy dictates: but if we have
always believed Him to be, and to be entitled to, all this and even
more, and to be equal in every operation and conception of the good to
the majesty of the Father’s goodness, how can it be pronounced
consistent, either not to love such a character, or to slight it while
we love it? No one can say that we ought to love Him with *all* our
heart and strength, but to honour Him only with half. If, then, the Son
is to be honoured with the whole heart in rendering to Him all our love,
by what device can anything superior to His honour be discovered, when
such a measure of honour is paid Him in the coin of love as our whole
heart is capable of? Vainly, therefore, in the case of Beings
essentially honourable, will any one dogmatize about a superior honour,
and by comparison suggest an inferior honour.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p17"></span>Again; only in the case of the
creation is it true to speak of ‘priority.’ The sequence of works was
there displayed in the order of the days; and the heavens may be said to
have preceded by so much the making of man, and that interval may be
measured by the interval of days. But in the divine nature, which
transcends all idea of time and surpasses all reach of thought, to talk
of a “prior” and a “later” in the honours of time is a privilege only of
this new-fangled philosophy. In short he who declares the Father to be
‘prior’ to the subsistence of the Son declares nothing short of this,
viz., that the Son is later than the things made by the Son <span
id="fr_144"></span>[146](#fn_144) (if at least it is true to say that
all the ages, and all duration of time was created after the Son, and by
the Son).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[LXV:137](2050040.htm#fr_135) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>τὰς μὲν</span>, i.e. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>Οὑσίος</span>.
Eunomius’ Arianism here degenerates into mere Emanationism: but even in
this system the Substances were living: it is best on the whole to
translate <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p3.3"></span>οὐσία</span> ‘being,’ and this, as a
rule, is adhered to throughout.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[LXV:138](2050040.htm#fr_136) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>κᾀκείναι αἱ ἐνεργείαι αὖται</span>.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[LXV:139](2050040.htm#fr_137) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>τῷ παρηλλάχθαι, κ.τ.λ</span>. This is
Oehler’s emendation for the faulty reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p6.2"></span>τὸ</span> of the editions.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[LXVI:140](2050040.htm#fr_138) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p9"></span> [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[LXVI:141](2050040.htm#fr_139) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p10"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p10.2"></span>; i. 3.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[LXVI:142](2050040.htm#fr_140) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p11"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>[John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p11.2"></span>; i. 3.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[LXVI:143](2050040.htm#fr_141) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>. “Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God.”

<span id="fn_142"></span>[LXVII:144](2050040.htm#fr_142) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p14"></span> [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>. The Gospel enjoins honour and means
love: the Law enjoins love and means honour.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[LXVII:145](2050040.htm#fr_143) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16"></span> *a prelude.* See [Ps.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001), [Ps.
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>[Psalm vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16.2"></span> and [Psalm xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16.3"></span>, “fortress,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16.4"></span>κραταίωμα</span>;
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p16.5"></span>στερέωμα</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[LXVII:146](2050040.htm#fr_144) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiv-p18"></span> The meaning is that, if the Son
is later (in time) than the Father, then time must have already existed
for this comparison to be made; i.e. the Son is later than time as well
as the Father. This involves a contradiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He who asserts that the Father is 'prior' to the Son with any
thought of an interval must perforce allow that even the Father is not
without beginning.](2050041)
