[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050281)  [Next](2050283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Letter XVI</span>.—*To Amphilochius*.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p2.1"></span>I am</span> well persuaded that by God’s
grace the business of the Church of the Martyrs is in a fair way. Would
that you were willing in the matter. The task we have in hand will find
its end by the power of God, Who is able, wherever He speaks, to turn
word into deed. Seeing that, as the Apostle says, “He Who has begun a
good work will also perform it <span
id="fr_2231"></span>[2233](#fn_2231.md) ”, I would exhort you in this also
to be an imitator of the great Paul, and to advance our hope to actual
fulfilment, and send us so many workmen as may suffice for the work we
have in hand.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p4"></span>Your Perfection might perhaps be informed
by calculation of the dimensions to which the total work will attain:
and to this end I will endeavour to explain the whole structure by a
verbal description. The form of the chapel is a cross, which has its
figure completed throughout, as you would expect, by four structures.
The junctions of the buildings intercept one another, as we see
everywhere in the cruciform pattern. But within the cross there lies a
circle, divided by eight angles (I call the octagonal figure a circle in
view of its circumference), in such wise that the two pairs of sides of
the octagon which are diametrically opposed to one another, unite by
means of arches the central circle to the adjoining blocks of building;
while the other four sides of the octagon, which lie between the
quadrilateral buildings, will not themselves be carried to meet the
buildings, but upon each of them will be described a semicircle like a
shell <span id="fr_2232"></span>[2234](#fn_2232.md) , terminating in an
arch above: so that the arches will be eight in all, and by their means
the quadrilateral and semicircular buildings will be connected, side by
side, with the central <span id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span
id="xiii.xvii-Page_541"></span>structure. In the blocks of masonry
formed by the angles there will be an equal number of pillars, at once
for ornament and for strength, and these again will carry arches built
of equal size to correspond with those within <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2235](#fn_2233.md) . And above these eight arches,
with the symmetry of an upper range of windows, the octagonal building
will be raised to the height of four cubits: the part rising from it
will be a cone shaped like a top, as the vaulting <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2236](#fn_2234.md) narrows the figure of the roof from
its full width to a pointed wedge. The dimensions below will be,—the
width of each of the quadrilateral buildings, eight cubits, the length
of them half as much again, the height as much as the proportion of the
width allows. It will be as much in the semicircles also. The whole
length between the piers extends in the same way to eight cubits, and
the depth will be as much as will be given by the sweep of the compasses
with the fixed point placed in the middle of the side <span
id="fr_2235"></span>[2237](#fn_2235.md) and extending to the end. The
height will be determined in this case too by the proportion to the
width. And the thickness of the wall, an interval of three feet from
inside these spaces, which are measured internally, will run round the
whole building.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p9"></span>I have troubled your Excellency with this
serious trifling, with this intention, that by the thickness of the
walls, and by the intermediate spaces, you may accurately ascertain what
sum the number of feet gives as the measurement; because your intellect
is exceedingly quick in all matters, and makes its way, by God’s grace,
in whatever subject you will, and it is possible for you, by subtle
calculation, to ascertain the sum made up by all the parts, so as to
send us masons neither more nor fewer than our need requires. And I beg
you to direct your attention specially to this point, that some of them
may be skilled in making vaulting <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2238](#fn_2236.md) without supports: for I am informed
that when built in this way it is more durable than what is made to rest
on props. It is the scarcity of wood that brings us to this device of
roofing the whole fabric with stone; because the place supplies no
timber for roofing. Let your unerring mind be persuaded, because some of
the people here contract with me to furnish thirty workmen for a stater,
for the dressed stonework, of course with a specified ration along with
the stater. But the material of our masonry is not of this sort <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2239](#fn_2237.md) , but brick made of clay and chance
stones, so that they do not need to spend time in fitting the faces of
the stones accurately together. I know that so far as skill and fairness
in the matter of wages are concerned, the workmen in your neighbourhood
are better for our purpose than those who follow the trade here. The
sculptor’s work lies not only in the eight pillars, which must
themselves be improved and beautified, but the work requires altar-like
base-mouldings <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2240](#fn_2238.md) , and capitals
carved in the Corinthian style. The porch, too, will be of marbles
wrought with appropriate ornaments. The doors set upon these will be
adorned with some such designs as are usually employed by way of
embellishment at the projection of the cornice. Of all these, of course,
we shall furnish the materials; the form to be impressed on the
materials art will bestow. Besides these there will be in the colonnade
not less than forty pillars: these also will be of wrought stone. Now if
my account has explained the work in detail, I hope it may be possible
for your Sanctity, on perceiving what is needed, to relieve us
completely from anxiety so far as the workmen are concerned. If,
however, the workman were inclined to make a bargain favourable to us,
let a distinct measure of work, if possible, be fixed for the day, so
that he may not pass his time doing nothing, and then, though he has no
work to show for it, as having worked for us so many days, demand
payment for them. I know that we shall appear to most people to be
higglers, in being so particular about the contracts. But I beg you to
pardon me; for that Mammon about whom I have so often said such hard
things, has at last departed from me as far as he can possibly go, being
disgusted, I suppose, at the nonsense that is constantly talked against
him, and has fortified himself against me by an impassable gulf—to wit,
poverty—so that neither can he come to me, nor can I pass to him <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2241](#fn_2239.md) . This is why I make a point of the
fairness of the workmen, to the end that we may be able to fulfil the
task before us, and not be hindered by poverty—that laudable and
desirable evil. Well, in all this there is a certain admixture of jest.
But do you, man of God, in such ways as are possible and legitimate,
boldly promise in bargaining with the men that they will all meet with
fair treatment at our hands, and full payment of their wages: for we
shall give all and keep back nothing, as God also opens to us, by your
prayers, His hand of blessing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[540:2233](2050282.htm#fr_2231.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p3"></span> Cf. [Phil. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006.md)<span id="xiii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[540:2234](2050282.htm#fr_2232.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p5"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p5.1"></span>κογχοειδῶς</span>

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[541:2235](2050282.htm#fr_2233.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p6"></span> That is, on an inner line; the upper row
having their supports at the *angles* of the inscribed octagon, and
therefore at a point further removed from the centre of the circle than
those of the lower tier, which correspond to the *sides* of the octagon.
Or, simply, “those inside the building,” the upper tier showing in the
outside view of the structure, while the lower row would only be visible
from the interior. There is apparently a corresponding row of windows
*above* the upper row of arches, carrying the central tower four cubits
higher. This at least seems the sense of the clause immediately
following.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[541:2236](2050282.htm#fr_2234.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p7"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p7.1"></span>εἰλησέως</span>, of which this seems to be
the meaning.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[541:2237](2050282.htm#fr_2235.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p8"></span> *i.e.*of the side of the octagon.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[541:2238](2050282.htm#fr_2236.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p10.1"></span>εἴλησιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[541:2239](2050282.htm#fr_2237.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p11"></span> *i.e.*not dressed stone.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[541:2240](2050282.htm#fr_2238.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p12"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvii-p12.1"></span>σπεῖρα</span> is a moulding at the base of
the column, equivalent to the Latin *torus.*

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[541:2241](2050282.htm#fr_2239.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p13"></span> Cf. S. [Luke xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026.md)<span id="xiii.xvii-p13.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eustathia, Ambrosia, and Basilissa.](2050283.md)
