[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050174)  [Next](2050176.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_372"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>On Infants’ Early Deaths. <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1531](#fn_1529.md) </span>

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.iii-p4.1"></span>Every</span> essayist and every pamphleteer will
have you, most Excellent, to display his eloquence upon; your wondrous
qualities will be a broad race-course wherein he may expatiate. A noble
and suggestive subject in able hands has indeed a way of making a
grander style, lifting it to the height of the great reality. We,
however, like an aged horse, will remain outside this proposed
race-course, only turning the ear to listen for the contest waged in
celebrating your praises, if the sound of any literary car careering in
full swing through such wonders may reach us. But though old age may
compel a horse to remain away from the race, it may often happen that
the din of the trampling racers rouses him into excitement, that he
lifts his head with eager looks, that he shows his spirit in his
breathings, and prances and paws the ground frequently, though this
eagerness is all that is left to him, and time has sapped his powers of
going. In the same way our pen remains outside the combat, and age
compels it to yield the course to the professors who flourish now;
nevertheless its eagerness to join the contest about you survives, and
that it can still evince, even though these stylists who flourish now
are at the height of their powers <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1532](#fn_1530.md) . But none of this display of my
enthusiasm for you has anything to do with sounding your own praises: no
style, however nervous and well-balanced, would easily succeed there; so
that any one, who attempted to describe that embarrassing yet harmonious
mixture of opposites in your character, would inevitably be left far
behind your real worth. Nature, indeed, by throwing out the shade of the
eyelashes before the glaring rays, brings to the eyes themselves a
weaker light, and so the sunlight becomes tolerable to us, mingling as
it does, in quantities proportionate to our need, with the shadows which
the lashes cast. Just so the grandeur and the greatness of your
character, tempered by your modesty and humbleness of mind, instead of
blinding the beholder’s eye, makes the sight on the contrary a
pleasurable one; wherein this humbleness of mind does not occasion the
splendour of the greatness to be dimmed, and its latent force to be
overlooked; but the one is to be noticed in the other, the humility of
your character in its elevation, and the grandeur reversely in the
lowliness. Others must describe all this; and extol, besides, the
many-sightedness of your mind. Your intellectual eyes are indeed as
numerous, it may perhaps be said, as the hairs of the head; their keen
unerring gaze is on everything alike; the distant is foreseen; the near
is not unnoticed; they do not wait for experience to teach expedience;
they see with Hope’s insight, or else with that of Memory; they scan the
present all over; first on one thing, then on another, but without
confusing them, your mind works with the same energy and with the amount
of attention that is required. Another, too, must record his admiration
of the way in which poverty is made rich by you; if indeed any one is to
be found in this age of ours who will make *that* a subject of praise
and wonder. Yet surely now, if never before, the love of poverty will
through you abound, and your *ingotten* wealth <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1533](#fn_1531.md) will be envied above the *ingots*
of Crœsus. For whom has sea and land, with all the dower of their
natural produce, enriched, as thy rejection of worldly abundance has
enriched thee? They wipe the stain from steel and so make it shine like
silver: so has the gleam of thy life grown brighter, ever carefully
cleansed from the rust of wealth. We leave that to those who can enlarge
upon it, and also upon your excellent knowledge of the things in which
it is more glorious to gain than to abstain from gain. Grant me,
however, leave to say, that you do <span id="page_373">p. 373</span>
<span id="ix.iii-Page_373"></span>not despise all acquisitions; that
there are some which, though none of your predecessors has been able to
clutch, yet you and you alone have seized with both your hands; for,
instead of dresses and slaves and money, you have and hold the very
souls of men, and store them in the treasure-house of your love. The
essayists and pamphleteers, whose glory comes from such laudations, will
go into these matters. But our pen, veteran as it now is, is to rouse
itself only so far as to go at a foot’s pace through the problem which
your wisdom has proposed; namely, this—what we are to think of those who
are taken prematurely, the moment of whose birth almost coincides with
that of their death. The cultured heathen Plato spoke, in the person of
one who had come to life again <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1534](#fn_1532.md) , much philosophy about the
judgment courts in that other world; but he has left this other question
a mystery, as ostensibly too great for human conjecture to be employed
upon. If, then, there is anything in these lucubrations of ours that is
of a nature to clear up the obscurities of this question, you will
doubtless welcome the new account of it; if otherwise, you will at all
events excuse this in old age, and accept, if nothing else, our wish to
afford you some degree of pleasure. History <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1535](#fn_1533.md) says that Xerxes, that great prince
who had made almost every land under the sun into one vast camp, and
roused with his own designs the whole world, when he was marching
against the Greeks received with delight a poor man’s gift; and that
gift was water, and that not in a jar, but carried in the hollow of the
palm of his hand. So do you, of your innate generosity, follow his
example; to him the will made the gift, and our gift may be found in
itself but a poor watery thing. In the case of the wonders in the
heavens, a man *sees* their beauty equally, whether he is trained to
watch them, or whether he gazes upwards with an unscientific eye; but
the *feeling* towards them is not the same in the man who comes from
philosophy to their contemplation, and in him who has only his senses of
perception to commit them to; the latter may be pleased with the
sunlight, or deem the beauty of stars worthy of his wonder, or have
watched the stages of the moon’s course throughout the month; but the
former, who has the soul-insight, and whose training has enlightened him
so as to comprehend the phenomena of the heavens, leaves unnoticed all
these things which delight the senses of the more unthinking, and looks
at the harmony of the whole, inspecting the concert which results even
from opposite movements in the circular revolutions; how the inner
circles of these turn the contrary way to that in which the fixed stars
are carried round <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1536](#fn_1534.md) ; how those
of the heavenly bodies to be observed in these inner circles are
variously grouped in their approachments and divergements, their
disappearances behind each other and their flank movements, and yet
effect always precisely in the same way that notable and never-ending
harmony; of which those are conscious who do not overlook the position
of the tiniest star, and whose minds, by training domiciled above, pay
equal attention to them all. In the same way do you, a precious life to
me, watch the Divine economy; leaving those objects which unceasingly
occupy the minds of the crowd, wealth, I mean, and luxury <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1537](#fn_1535.md) and vainglory—things which like
sunbeams flashing in their faces dazzle the unthinking—you will not pass
without inquiry the seemingly most trivial questions in the world; for
you do most carefully scrutinize the inequalities in human lives; not
only with regard to wealth and penury, and the differences of position
and descent (for you know that they are as nothing, and that they owe
their existence not to any intrinsic reality, but to the foolish
estimate of those who are struck with nonentities, as if they were
actual things; and that if one were only to abstract from somebody who
glitters with glory the blind adoration <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1538](#fn_1536.md) of those who gaze at him, nothing
would be left him after all the inflated pride which elates him, even
though the whole mass of the world’s riches were buried in his cellars),
but it is one of your anxieties to know, amongst the other intentions of
each detail of the Divine government, wherefore it is that, while the
life of one is lengthened into old age, another has only so far a
portion of it as to breathe the air with one gasp, and die. If nothing
in this world happens without God, but all is linked to the Divine will,
and if the Deity is skilful and prudential, then it follows necessarily
that there is some plan in these things bearing the mark of His wisdom,
and at the same time of His providential care. A blind unmeaning
occurrence can never be the work of God; for it is the property of God,
as the Scripture says <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1539](#fn_1537.md) , to
“make all things in wisdom.” What wisdom, then, can we trace in the
following? A human being enters on the scene of life, draws in the air,
beginning the process of living with a cry of pain, pays the tribute of
a tear to Nature <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1540](#fn_1538.md) , just
tastes life’s sorrows, before any of its sweets have been his, before
his feelings have gained <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_374"></span>any strength; still loose in all his joints,
tender, pulpy, unset; in a word, before he is even human (if the gift of
reason is man’s peculiarity, and he has never had it in him), such an
one, with no advantage over the embryo in the womb except that he has
seen the air, so short-lived, dies and goes to pieces again; being
either exposed or suffocated, or else of his own accord ceasing to live
from weakness. What are we to think about him? How are we to feel about
such deaths? Will a soul such as that behold its Judge? Will it stand
with the rest before the tribunal? Will it undergo its trial for deeds
done in life? Will it receive the just recompense by being purged,
according to the Gospel utterances, in fire, or refreshed with the dew
of blessing <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1541](#fn_1539.md) ? But I do not
see how we can imagine that, in the case of such a soul. The word
“retribution” implies that something must have been previously given;
but he who has not lived at all has been deprived of the material from
which to give anything. There being, then, no retribution, there is
neither good nor evil left to expect. “Retribution” purports to be the
paying back of one of these two qualities; but that which is to be found
neither in the category of good nor that of bad is in no category at
all; for this antithesis between good and bad is an opposition that
admits no middle; and neither will come to him who has not made a
beginning with either of them. What therefore falls under neither of
these heads may be said not even to have existed. But if some one says
that such a life does not only exist, but exists as one of the good
ones, and that God gives, though He does not repay, what is good to
such, we may ask what sort of reason he advances for this partiality;
how is justice apparent in such a view; how will he prove his idea in
concordance with the utterances in the Gospels? There (the Master) says,
the acquisition of the Kingdom comes to those who are deemed worthy of
it, as a matter of exchange. “When ye have done such and such things,
then it is right that ye get the Kingdom as a reward.” But in this case
there is no act of doing or of willing beforehand, and so what occasion
is there for saying that these will receive from God any expected
recompense? If one unreservedly accepts a statement such as that, to the
effect that any so passing into life will necessarily be classed amongst
the good, it will dawn upon him then that not partaking in life at all
will be a happier state than living, seeing that in the one case the
enjoyment of good is placed beyond a doubt even with barbarian
parentage, or a conception from a union not legitimate; but he who has
lived the span ordinarily possible to Nature gets the pollution of evil
necessarily mingled more or less with his life, or, if he is to be quite
outside this contagion, it will be at the price of much painful effort.
For virtue is achieved by its seekers not without a struggle; nor is
abstinence from the paths of pleasure a painless process to human
nature. So that one of two probations must be the inevitable fate of him
who has had the longer lease of life; either to combat here on Virtue’s
toilsome field, or to suffer there the painful recompense of a life of
evil. But in the case of infants prematurely dying there is nothing of
that sort; but they pass to the blessed lot at once, if those who take
this view of the matter speak true. It follows also necessarily from
this that a state of unreason is preferable to having reason, and virtue
will thereby be revealed as of no value: if he who has never possessed
it suffers no loss, so, as regards the enjoyment of blessedness, the
labour to acquire it will be useless folly; the unthinking condition
will be the one that comes out best from God’s judgment. For these and
such-like reasons you bid me sift the matter, with a view to our
getting, by dint of a closely-reasoned inquiry, some firm ground on
which to rest our thoughts about it.

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>For my part, in view of the difficulties of
the subject proposed, I think the exclamation of the Apostle very
suitable to the present case, just as he uttered it over unfathomable
questions: “O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding
out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1542](#fn_1540.md) ?” But seeing on the other hand
that that Apostle declares it to be a peculiarity of him that is
spiritual to “judge all things <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1543](#fn_1541.md) ,” and commends those who have been
“enriched <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1544](#fn_1542.md) ” by the Divine
grace “in all utterance and in all knowledge,” I venture to assert that
it is not right to omit the <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_375"></span>examination which is within the range of our
ability, nor to leave the question here raised without making any
inquiries, or having any ideas about it; lest, like the actual subject
of our proposed discussion, this essay should have an ineffectual
ending, spoilt before its maturity by the fatal indolence of those who
will not nerve themselves to search out the truth, like a new-born
infant ere it sees the light and acquires any strength. I assert, too,
that it is not well at once to confront and meet objections, as if we
were pleading in court, but to introduce a certain order into the
discussion and to lead the view on from one point to another. What,
then, should this order be? First, we want to know the whence of human
nature, and the wherefore of its ever having come into existence. If we
hit the answer to these questions, we shall not fail in getting the
required explanation. Now, that everything that exists, after God, in
the intellectual or sensible world of beings owes that existence to Him,
is a proposition which it is superfluous to prove; no one, with however
little insight into the truth of things, would gainsay it. For every one
agrees that the Universe is linked to one First Cause; that nothing in
it owes its existence to itself, so as to be its own origin and cause;
but that there is on the other hand a single uncreate eternal Essence,
the same for ever, which transcends all our ideas of distance, conceived
of as without increase or decrease, and beyond the scope of any
definition; and that time and space with all their consequences, and
anything previous to these that thought can grasp in the intelligible
supramundane world, are all the productions of this Essence. Well, then,
we affirm that human nature is one of these productions; and a word of
the inspired Teaching helps us in this, which declares that when God had
brought all things else upon the scene of life, man was exhibited upon
the earth, a mixture from Divine sources, the godlike intellectual
essence being in him united with the several portions of earthly
elements contributed towards his formation, and that he was fashioned by
his Maker to be the incarnate likeness of Divine transcendent Power. It
would be better however to quote the very words: “And God created man,
in the image of God created He him <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1545](#fn_1543.md) .” Now the reason of the making of
this animate being has been given by certain writers previous to us as
follows. The whole creation is divided into two parts; that “which is
seen,” and that “which is not seen,” to use the Apostle’s words (the
second meaning the intelligible and immaterial, the first, the sensible
and material); and being thus divided, the angelic and spiritual
natures, which are among “the things not seen,” reside in places above
the world, and above the heavens, because such a residence is in
correspondence with their constitution; for an intellectual nature is a
fine, clear, unencumbered, agile kind of thing, and a heavenly body is
fine and light, and perpetually moving, and the earth on the contrary,
which stands last in the list of things sensible, can never be an
adequate and congenial spot for creatures intellectual to sojourn in.
For what correspondence can there possibly be between that which is
light and buoyant, on the one hand, and that which is heavy and
gravitating on the other? Well, in order that the earth may not be
completely devoid of the local indwelling of the intellectual and the
immaterial, man (these writers tell us) was fashioned by the Supreme
forethought, and his earthy parts moulded over the intellectual and
godlike essence of his soul; and so this amalgamation with that which
has material weight enables the soul to live on this element of earth,
which possesses a certain bond of kindred with the substance of the
flesh. The design of all that is being born <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1546](#fn_1544.md) , then, is that the Power which is
above both the heavenly and the earthly universe may in all parts of the
creation be glorified by means of intellectual natures, conspiring to
the same end by virtue of the same faculty in operation in all, I mean
that of looking upon God. But this operation of looking upon God is
nothing less than the life-nourishment appropriate, as like to like, to
an intellectual nature. For just as these bodies, earthy as they are,
are preserved by nourishment that is earthy, and we detect in them all
alike, whether brute or reasoning, the operations of a material kind of
vitality, so it is right to assume that there is an intellectual
life-nourishment as well, by which such natures <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1547](#fn_1545.md) are maintained in existence. But if
bodily food, coming and going as it does in circulation, nevertheless
imparts a certain amount of vital energy to those who get it, how much
more does the partaking of the real thing, always remaining and always
the same, preserve the eater in existence? If, then, this is the
life-nourishment of an intellectual nature, namely, to have a part in
God, this part will not be gained by that which is of an opposite
quality; the would-be partaker must in some degree be akin to that which
is to be partaken of. The eye enjoys the light by virtue of having light
within itself to seize its <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_376"></span>kindred light, and the finger or any other
limb cannot effect the act of vision because none of this natural light
is organized in any of them. The same necessity requires that in our
partaking of God there should be some kinship in the constitution of the
partaker with that which is partaken of. Therefore, as the Scripture
says, man was made in the image of God; that like, I take it, might be
able to see like; and to see God is, as was said above, the life of the
soul. But seeing that ignorance of the true good is like a mist that
obscures the visual keenness of the soul, and that when that mist grows
denser a cloud is formed so thick that Truth’s ray cannot pierce through
these depths of ignorance, it follows further that with the total
deprivation of the light the soul’s life ceases altogether; for we have
said that the real life of the soul is acted out in partaking of the
Good; but when ignorance hinders this apprehension of God, the soul
which thus ceases to partake of God, ceases also to live. But no one can
force us to give the family history <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1548](#fn_1546.md) of this ignorance, asking whence
and from what father it is; let him be given to understand from the word
itself that “ignorance” and “knowledge” indicate one of the relations of
the soul; <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1549](#fn_1547.md) but no relation,
whether expressed or not, conveys the idea of substance; a relation and
a substance are quite of different descriptions. If, then, knowledge is
not a substance, but a perfected <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1550](#fn_1548.md) operation of the soul, it must be
conceded that ignorance must be much farther removed still from anything
in the way of substance; but that which is not in that way does not
exist at all; and so it would be useless to trouble ourselves about
where it comes from. Now seeing that the Word <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1551](#fn_1549.md) declares that the living in God is
the life of the soul, and seeing that this living is knowledge according
to each man’s ability, and that ignorance does not imply the reality of
anything, but is only the negation of the operation of knowing, and
seeing that upon this partaking in God being no longer effected there
follows at once the cancelling of the soul’s life, which is the worst of
evils,—because of all this the Producer of all Good would work in us the
cure of such an evil. A cure is a good thing, but one who does not look
to the evangelic mystery would still be ignorant of the manner of the
cure. We have shown that alienation from God, Who is the Life, is an
evil; the cure, then, of this infirmity is, again to be made friends
with God, and so to be in life once more. When such a life, then, is
always held up in hope before humanity, it cannot be said that the
winning of this life is absolutely a reward of a good life, and that the
contrary is a punishment (of a bad one); but what we insist on resembles
the case of the eyes. We do not say that one who has clear eyesight is
rewarded as with a prize by being able to perceive the objects of sight;
nor on the other hand that he who has diseased eyes experiences a
failure of optic activity as the result of some penal sentence. With the
eye in a natural state sight follows necessarily; with it vitiated by
disease failure of sight as necessarily follows. In the same way the
life of blessedness is as a familiar second nature to those who have
kept clear the senses of the soul; but when the blinding stream of
ignorance prevents our partaking in the real light, then it necessarily
follows that we miss that, the enjoyment of which we declare to be the
life of the partaker.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>Now that we have laid down these premisses,
it is time to examine in the light of them the question proposed to us.
It was somewhat of this kind. “If the recompense of blessedness is
assigned according to the principles of justice, in what class shall he
be placed who has died in infancy without having laid in this life any
foundation, good or bad, whereby any return according to his deserts may
be given him?” To this we shall make answer, with our eye fixed upon the
consequences of that which we have already laid down, that this
happiness in the future, while it is in its essence a heritage of
humanity, may at the same time be called in one sense a recompense; and
we will make clear our meaning by the same instance as before. Let us
suppose two persons suffering from an affection of the eyes; and that
the one surrenders himself most diligently to the process of being
cured, and undergoes all that Medicine can apply to him, however painful
it may be; and that the other indulges without restraint in baths <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1552](#fn_1550.md) and wine-drinking, and listens to
no advice whatever of his doctor as to the healing of his eyes. Well,
when we look to the end of each of these we say that each duly receives
in requital the fruits of his choice, the one in deprivation of the
light, the other in its enjoyment; by a misuse of the word we do
actually call that which necessarily follows, a recompense. We may
speak, then, in this way also as regards this question of the infants:
we may say that the enjoyment of that future life does indeed belong of
right to the human being, but that, seeing the plague of ignorance has
seized almost all now living in the flesh, he who has purged himself of
it by means of the necessary courses of treatment receives the due
reward of his diligence, when he enters on the life that is truly <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_377"></span>natural;
while he who refuses Virtue’s purgatives and renders that plague of
ignorance, through the pleasures he has been entrapped by, difficult in
his case to cure, gets himself into an unnatural state, and so is
estranged from the truly natural life, and has no share in the existence
which of right belongs to us and is congenial to us. Whereas the
innocent babe has no such plague before its soul’s eyes obscuring <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1553](#fn_1551.md) its measure of light, and so it
continues to exist in that natural life; it does not need the soundness
which comes from purgation, because it never admitted the plague into
its soul at all. Further, the present life appears to me to offer a sort
of analogy to the future life we hope for, and to be intimately
connected with it, thus; the tenderest infancy is suckled and reared
with milk from the breast; then another sort of food appropriate to the
subject of this fostering, and intimately adapted to his needs,
succeeds, until at last he arrives at full growth. And so I think, in
quantities continually adapted to it, in a sort of regular progress, the
soul partakes of that truly natural life; according to its capacity and
its power it receives a measure of the delights of the Blessed state;
indeed we learn as much from Paul, who had a different sort of food for
him who was already grown in virtue and for the imperfect “babe.” For to
the last he says, “I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for
hitherto ye were not able to bear it <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1554](#fn_1552.md) .” But to those who have grown to
the full measure of intellectual maturity he says, “But strong meat
belongeth to those that are of full age, even those who by reason of use
have their senses exercised… <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1555](#fn_1553.md)
” Now it is not right to say that the man and the infant are in a
similar state however free both may be from any contact of disease (for
how can those who do not partake of exactly the same things be in an
equal state of enjoyment?); on the contrary, though the absence of any
affliction from disease may be predicated of both alike as long as both
are out of the reach of its influence, yet, when we come to the matter
of delights, there is no likeness in the enjoyment, though the
percipients are in the same condition. For the man there is a natural
delight in discussions, and in the management of affairs, and in the
honourable discharge of the duties of an office, and in being
distinguished for acts of help to the needy; in living, it may be, with
a wife whom he loves, and ruling his household; and in all those
amusements to be found in this life in the way of pastime, in musical
pieces and theatrical spectacles, in the chase, in bathing, in
gymnastics, in the mirth of banquets, and anything else of that sort.
For the infant, on the contrary, there is a natural delight in its milk,
and in its nurse’s arms, and in gentle rocking that induces and then
sweetens its slumber. Any happiness beyond this the tenderness of its
years naturally prevents it from feeling. In the same manner those who
in their life here have nourished the forces of their souls by a course
of virtue, and have, to use the Apostle’s words, had the “senses” of
their minds “exercised,” will, if they are translated to that life
beyond, which is out of the body, proportionately to the condition and
the powers they have attained participate in that divine delight; they
will have more or they will have less of its riches according to the
capacity acquired. But the soul that has never felt the taste of virtue,
while it may indeed remain perfectly free from the sufferings which flow
from wickedness having never caught the disease of evil at all, does
nevertheless in the first instance <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1556](#fn_1554.md) partake only so far in that life
beyond (which consists, according to our previous definition, in the
knowing and being in God) as this nursling can receive; until the time
comes that it has thriven on the contemplation of the truly Existent as
on a congenial diet, and, becoming capable of receiving more, takes at
will more from that abundant supply of the truly Existent which is
offered.

<span id="ix.iii-p32"></span>Having, then, all these considerations in
our view, we hold that the soul of him who has reached every virtue in
his course, and the soul of him whose portion of life has been simply
nothing, are equally out of the reach of those sufferings which flow
from wickedness. Nevertheless we do not conceive of the employment of
their lives as on the same level at all. The one has heard those
heavenly announcements, by which, in the words of the Prophet, “the
glory of God is declared <span id="fr_1555"></span>[1557](#fn_1555.md) ,”
and, travelling through creation, has been led to the apprehension of a
Master of the creation; he has taken the true Wisdom for his teacher,
that Wisdom which the spectacle of the Universe suggests; and when he
observed the beauty of this material sunlight he had grasped by analogy
the beauty of the real sunlight <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1558](#fn_1556.md) ; he saw in the solid firm<span
id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_378"></span>ness of
this earth the unchangeableness of its Creator; when he perceived the
immensity of the heavens he was led on the road towards the vast
Infinity of that Power which encompasses the Universe; when he saw the
rays of the sun reaching from such sublimities even to ourselves he
began to believe, by the means of such phenomena, that the activities of
the Divine Intelligence did not fail to descend from the heights of
Deity even to each one of us; for if a single luminary can occupy
everything alike that lies beneath it with the force of light, and, more
than that, can, while lending itself to all who can use it, still remain
self-centred and undissipated, how much more shall the Creator of that
luminary become “all in all,” as the Apostle speaks, and come into each
with such a measure of Himself as each subject of His influence can
receive! Nay, look only at an ear of corn, at the germinating of some
plant, at a ripe bunch of grapes, at the beauty of early autumn, whether
in fruit or flower, at the grass springing unbidden, at the mountain
reaching up with its summit to the height of the ether, at the springs
on its slopes bursting from those swelling breasts, and running in
rivers through the glens, at the sea receiving those streams from every
direction and yet remaining within its limits, with waves edged by the
stretches of beach and never stepping beyond those fixed boundaries of
continent: look at these and such-like sights, and how can the eye of
reason fail to find in them all that our education for Realities
requires? Has a man who looks at such spectacles procured for himself
only a slight power for the enjoyment of those delights beyond? Not to
speak of the studies which sharpen the mind towards moral excellence,
geometry, I mean, and astronomy, and the knowledge of the truth that the
science of numbers gives, and every method that furnishes a proof of the
unknown and a conviction of the known, and, before all these, the
philosophy contained in the inspired Writings, which affords a complete
purification to those who educate themselves thereby in the mysteries of
God. But the man who has acquired the knowledge of none of these things
and has not even been conducted by the material cosmos to the perception
of the beauties above it, and passes through life with his mind in a
kind of tender, unformed, and untrained state, he is not the man that is
likely to be placed amongst the same surroundings as our argument has
indicated that other man, before spoken of, to be placed; so that, in
this view, it can no longer be maintained that, in the two supposed and
completely opposite cases, the one who has taken no part in life is more
blessed than the one who has taken a noble part in it. Certainly, in
comparison with one who has lived all his life in sin, not only the
innocent babe but even one who has never come into the world at all will
be blessed. We learn as much too in the case of Judas, from the sentence
pronounced upon him in the Gospels <span
id="fr_1557"></span>[1559](#fn_1557.md) ; namely, that when we think of
such men, that which never existed is to be preferred to that which has
existed in such sin. For, as to the latter, on account of the depth of
the ingrained evil, the chastisement in the way of purgation will be
extended into infinity <span id="fr_1558"></span>[1560](#fn_1558.md) ; but
as for what has never existed, how can any torment touch it?—However,
notwithstanding that, the man who institutes a comparison between the
infantine immature life and that of perfect virtue, must himself be
pronounced immature for so judging of realities. Do you, then, in
consequence of this, ask the reason why so and so, quite tender in age,
is quietly taken away from amongst the living? Do you ask what the
Divine wisdom contemplates in this? Well, if you are thinking of all
those infants who are proofs of illicit connections, and so are made
away with by their parents, you are not justified in calling to account,
for such wickedness, that God Who will surely bring to judgment the
unholy deeds done in this way. In the case, on the other hand, of any
infant who, though his parents have nurtured him, and have with nursing
and supplication spent earnest care upon him, nevertheless does not
continue in this world, but succumbs to a sickness even unto death,
which is unmistakably the sole cause of it, we venture upon the
following considerations. It is a sign of the perfection of God’s
providence, that He not only heals maladies <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1561](#fn_1559.md) that have come into existence, but
also provides that some should be never mixed up at all in the things
which He has forbidden; it is reasonable, that is, to expect that He Who
knows the future equally with the past should check the advance of an
infant to complete maturity, in order that the evil may not be developed
which His foreknowledge has detected in his future life, and in order
that a lifetime granted to one whose evil dispositions will be lifelong
may not become the actual <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_379"></span>material for his vice. We shall better
explain what we are thinking of by an illustration.

<span id="ix.iii-p38"></span>Suppose a banquet of very varied abundance,
prepared for a certain number of guests, and let the chair be taken by
one of their number who is gifted to know accurately the peculiarities
of constitution in each of them, and what food is best adapted to each
temperament, what is harmful and unsuitable; in addition to this let him
be entrusted with a sort of absolute authority over them, whether to
allow as he pleases so and so to remain at the board or to expel so and
so, and to take every precaution that each should address himself to the
viands most suited to his constitution, so that the invalid should not
kill himself by adding the fuel of what he was eating to his ailment,
while the guest in robuster health should not make himself ill with
things not good for him <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1562](#fn_1560.md) and
fall into discomfort from over-feeding <span
id="fr_1561"></span>[1563](#fn_1561.md) . Suppose, amongst these, one of
those inclined to drink is conducted out in the middle of the banquet or
even at the very beginning of it; or let him remain to the very end, it
all depending on the way that the president can secure that perfect
order shall prevail, if possible, at the board throughout, and that the
evil sights of surfeiting, tippling, and tipsiness shall be absent. It
is just so, then, as when that individual is not very pleased at being
torn away from all the savoury dainties and deprived of his favourite
liquors, but is inclined to charge the president with want of justice
and judgment, as having turned him away from the feast for envy, and not
for any forethought for him; but if he were to catch a sight of those
who were already beginning to misbehave themselves, from the long
continuance of their drinking, in the way of vomitings and putting their
heads on the table and unseemly talk, he would perhaps feel grateful to
him for having removed him, before he got into such a condition, from a
deep debauch. If our illustration <span
id="fr_1562"></span>[1564](#fn_1562.md) is understood, we can easily apply
the rule which it contains to the question before us. What, then, was
that question? Why does God, when fathers endeavour their utmost to
preserve a successor to their line, often let the son and heir be
snatched away in earliest infancy <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[1565](#fn_1563.md) ? To those who ask this, we shall
reply with the illustration of the banquet; namely, that Life’s board is
as it were crowded with a vast abundance and variety of dainties; and it
must, please, be noticed that, true to the practice of gastronomy, all
its dishes are not sweetened with the honey of enjoyment, but in some
cases an existence has a taste of some especially harsh mischances <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1566](#fn_1564.md) given to it: just as experts in the
arts of catering desire how they may excite the appetites of the guests
with sharp, or briny, or astringent dishes. Life, I say, is not in all
its circumstances as sweet as honey; there are circumstances in it in
which mere brine is the only relish, or into which an astringent, or
vinegary, or sharp pungent flavour has so insinuated itself, that the
rich sauce becomes very difficult to taste: the cups of Temptation, too,
are filled with all sorts of beverages; some by the error of pride <span
id="fr_1565"></span>[1567](#fn_1565.md) produce the vice of inflated
vanity; others lure on those who drain them to some deed of rashness;
whilst in other cases they excite a vomiting in which all the ill-gotten
acquisitions of years are with shame surrendered <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[1568](#fn_1566.md) . Therefore, to prevent one who has
indulged in the carousals to an improper extent from lingering over so
profusely furnished a table, he is early taken from the number of the
banqueters, and thereby secures an escape out of those evils which
unmeasured indulgence procures for gluttons. This is that achievement of
a perfect Providence which I spoke of; namely, not only to heal evils
that have been committed, but also to forestall them before they have
been committed; and this, we suspect, is the cause of the deaths of
new-born infants. He Who does all things upon a Plan withdraws the
materials for evil in His love to the individual, and, to a character
whose marks His Foreknowledge has read, grants no time to display by a
pre-eminence in actual vice what it is when its propensity to evil gets
free play. Often, too, the Arranger of this Feast of Life exposes by
such-like dispensations the cunning device of the “constraining cause”
of money-loving <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1569](#fn_1567.md) , so that
this vice comes to the light bared of all specious pretexts, and no
longer obscured by any misleading screen <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1570](#fn_1568.md) . For most declare that they give
play <span id="fr_1569"></span>[1571](#fn_1569.md) to their cravings for
more, in order that they may make their offspring all the richer; but
that their vice belongs to their nature, and is not caused by any
external necessity, is proved by that inexcusable avarice which is
observed in childless persons. Many who have no heir, nor any hope of
one, for the great wealth which they have laboriously gained, rear a
countless brood within themselves of wants instead of children, and they
are left without a channel into which to convey this incurable disease,
though they cannot find an excuse in any necessity for this
failing <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1572](#fn_1570.md) . But take the case
of some who, during their sojourn in life, have been fierce and
domineering <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_380"></span>in disposition, slaves to every kind of
lust, passionate to madness, refraining from no act even of the most
desperate wickedness, robbers and murderers, traitors to their country,
and, more execrable still, patricides, mother-killers, child-murderers,
mad after unnatural intercourse; suppose such characters grow old in
this wickedness; how, some one may ask, does this harmonize with the
result of our previous investigations? If that which is taken away
before its time in order that it may not continuously glut itself,
according to our illustration of the banquet, with Life’s indulgences,
is providentially removed from that carouse, what is the special design
in so and so, who is of that disposition, being allowed to continue his
revels <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1573](#fn_1571.md) to old age, steeping
both himself and his boon companions in the noxious fumes of his
debauchery? In fine, you will ask, wherefore does God in His Providence
withdraw one from life before his character can be perfected in evil,
and leave another to grow to be such a monster that it had been better
for him if he had never been born? In answer to this we will give, to
those who are inclined to receive it favourably, a reason such as
follows: viz. that oftentimes the existence of those whose life has been
a good one operates to the advantage of their offspring; and there are
hundreds of passages testifying to this in the inspired Writings, which
clearly teach us that the tender care shown by God to those who have
deserved it is shared in by their successors, and that even to have been
an obstruction, in the path to wickedness, to any one who is sure to
live wickedly, is a good result <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1574](#fn_1572.md) . But seeing that our Reason in
this matter has to grope in the dark, clearly no one can complain if its
conjecturing leads our mind to a variety of conclusions. Well, then, not
only one might pronounce that God, in kindness to the Founders of some
Family, withdraws a member of it who is going to live a bad life from
that bad life, but, even if there is no antecedent such as this in the
case of some early deaths, it is not unreasonable to conjecture that
they would have plunged into a vicious life with a more desperate
vehemence than any of those who have actually become notorious for their
wickedness.

<span id="ix.iii-p52"></span>That nothing happens without God we know
from many sources; and, reversely, that God’s dispensations have no
element of chance and confusion in them every one will allow, who
realizes that God is Reason, and Wisdom, and Perfect Goodness, and
Truth, and could not admit of that which is not good and not consistent
with His Truth <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1575](#fn_1573.md) . Whether,
then, the early deaths of infants are to be attributed to the aforesaid
causes, or whether there is some further cause of them beyond these, it
befits us to acknowledge that these things happen for the best. I have
another reason also to give which I have learnt from the wisdom of an
Apostle; a reason, that is, why some of those who have been
distinguished for their wickedness have been suffered to live on in
their self-chosen course. Having expanded a thought of this kind at some
length in his argument to the Romans <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[1576](#fn_1574.md) , and having retorted upon himself
with the counter-conclusion, which thence necessarily follows, that the
sinner could no longer be justly blamed, if his sinning is a
dispensation of God, and that he would not have existed at all, if it
had been contrary to the wishes of Him Who has the world in His power,
the Apostle meets this conclusion and solves this counter-plea by means
of a still deeper view of things. He tells us that God, in rendering to
every one his due, sometimes even grants a scope to wickedness for good
in the end. Therefore He allowed the King of Egypt, for example, to be
born and to grow up such as he was; the intention was that Israel, that
great nation exceeding all calculation by numbers, might be instructed
by his disaster. God’s omnipotence is to be recognized in every
direction; it has strength to bless the deserving; it is not inadequate
to the punishment of wickedness <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1577](#fn_1575.md) ; and so, as the complete removal
of that peculiar people out of Egypt was necessary in order to prevent
their receiving any infection from the sins of Egypt in a misguided way
of living, therefore that God-defying and infamous Pharaoh rose and
reached his maturity in the lifetime of the very people who were to be
benefited, so that Israel might acquire a just knowledge of the two-fold
energy of God, working as it did in either direction; the more
beneficent they learnt in their own persons, the sterner by seeing it
exercised upon those who were being scourged for their wickedness; for
in His consummate wisdom God can mould even evil into co-operation with
good. The artisan (if the Apostle’s argument may be confirmed by any
words of ours)—the artisan who by his skill has to fashion iron to some
instrument for daily use, has need not only of that which owing to its
natural ductility lends itself to his art, but, be the iron never so
hard, be it never so difficult to soften it in the fire, be it even
impossible owing to its adamantine resistance to mould it into any
useful implement, his art requires the co-operation even of this; he
will use it for an anvil, upon which the soft <span id="page_381">p.
381</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_381"></span>workable iron may be beaten
and formed into something useful. But some one will say, “It is not all
who thus reap in this life the fruits of their wickedness, any more than
all those whose lives have been virtuous profit while living by their
virtuous endeavours; what then, I ask, is the advantage of their
existence in the case of these who live to the end unpunished?” I will
bring forward to meet this question of yours a reason which transcends
all human arguments. Somewhere in his utterances the great David
declares that some portion of the blessedness of the virtuous will
consist in this; in contemplating side by side with their own felicity
the perdition of the reprobate. He says, “The righteous shall rejoice
when he seeth the vengeance; he shall wash his hands in the blood of the
ungodly <span id="fr_1576"></span>[1578](#fn_1576.md) ”; not indeed as
rejoicing over the torments of those sufferers, but as then most
completely realizing the extent of the well-earned rewards of virtue. He
signifies by those words that it will be an addition to the felicity of
the virtuous and an intensification of it, to have its contrary set
against it. In saying that “he washes his hands in the blood of the
ungodly” he would convey the thought that “the cleanness of his own
acting in life is plainly declared in the perdition of the ungodly.” For
the expression “wash” represents the idea of cleanness; but no one is
washed, but is rather defiled, in blood; whereby it is clear that it is
a comparison with the harsher forms of punishment that puts in a clearer
light the blessedness of virtue. We must now summarize our argument, in
order that the thoughts which we have expanded may be more easily
retained in the memory. The premature deaths of infants have nothing in
them to suggest the thought that one who so terminates his life is
subject to some grievous misfortune, any more than they are to be put on
a level with the deaths of those who have purified themselves in this
life by every kind of virtue; the more far-seeing Providence of God
curtails the immensity of sins in the case of those whose lives are
going to be so evil. That some of the wicked have lived on <span
id="fr_1577"></span>[1579](#fn_1577.md) does not upset this reason which we
have rendered; for the evil was in their case hindered in kindness to
their parents; whereas, in the case of those whose parents have never
imparted to them any power of calling upon God, such a form of the
Divine kindness <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1580](#fn_1578.md) , which
accompanies such a power, is not transmitted to their own children;
otherwise the infant now prevented by death from growing up wicked would
have exhibited a far more desperate wickedness than the most notorious
sinners, seeing that it would have been unhindered. Even granting that
some have climbed to the topmost pinnacle of crime, the Apostolic view
supplies a comforting answer to the question; for He Who does everything
with Wisdom knows how to effect by means of evil some good. Still
further, if some occupy a pre-eminence in crime, and yet for all that
have never been a metal, to use our former illustration, that God’s
skill has used for any good, this is a case which constitutes an
addition to the happiness of the good, as the Prophet’s words suggest;
it may be reckoned as not a slight element in that happiness, nor, on
the other hand, as one unworthy of God’s providing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[372:1531](2050175.htm#fr_1529.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span> This treatise is written for Hierius, in
Gregory’s old age. It has been thought to be spurious (Oudin, p. 605),
because of Fronto Ducæus’ insertion (p. 374) about the Purgatorial Fire.
But Tillemont, Semler, and Schroeckh have shown that there are no
grounds for this opinion. Anastasius Sinaita mentions it (*Quæst.*
xvi.).

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[372:1532](2050175.htm#fr_1530.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>εἴπερ ἡβῶσιν οἱ κατὰ τοὺς νῦν τοῖς λόγοις
ἀκμάζοντες</span>. The Latin translator Laurent. Sifanus, I. U. Doct.
(Basle, 1562), must have had a different text to this of the Paris
Edit.: “si quidem ita floreret ut qui nunc eloquentiâ vigent.”

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[372:1533](2050175.htm#fr_1531.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p6.1"></span>πλινθότης</span>, playing upon <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p6.2"></span>πλίνθων</span> just above; a
word seemingly peculiar to Gregory. We cannot help thinking here of
Plato’s definition of the good man, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p6.3"></span>τετράγωνος ἄνευ ψόγου</span>: though the idea
here is that of richness rather than shape.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[373:1534](2050175.htm#fr_1532.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span> *i.e.*Er the Armenian. See Plato, *Repub.*
x. §614, &c.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[373:1535](2050175.htm#fr_1533.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span> An anecdote resembling what follows, but
not quite the same, is told of Xerxes in Ælian’s *Var. Hist.* xii. 40.
Erasmus also refers to it in his *Adagia.*

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[373:1536](2050175.htm#fr_1534.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>τῇ ἀπλανεῖ περιφορᾷ</span>. This is of course
the Ptolemaic system which had already been in vogue two centuries. Sun,
and moon, and all, were “planets” round the earth as a centre: until the
8th sphere, in which the stars were fixed, was reached; and above this
was the crystalline sphere, under the *primum mobile.* Cf. Milton, *Par.
Lost*, iii. 481: “They pass the planets seven, and pass the *fix’d:*”
and see note p. 257.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[373:1537](2050175.htm#fr_1535.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>τρυφὴν</span>. The Paris Edit. has <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p10.2"></span>τύφον</span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[373:1538](2050175.htm#fr_1536.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>τὴν μύησιν</span>.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[373:1539](2050175.htm#fr_1537.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span> [Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[373:1540](2050175.htm#fr_1538.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p13.2"></span>λειτούργησε τὸ δάκρυον</span>

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[374:1541](2050175.htm#fr_1539.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span> There is introduced at these words in the
text of the Paris Edition the following “Explicatio,” in Greek. “Here it
is manifest that the father means by the ‘purging fire’ the torments and
agonies suffered by those who having sinned have not completed a worthy
and adequate repentance, according to the Gospel parable of the Rich Man
and Lazarus. For it is clear that he is thinking of this parable when he
says, ‘either purged in fire’ (*i.e.* the Rich Man), ‘or refreshed with
the dew of blessing’ (*i.e.* Lazarus). But that sentence of the
Judgment, ‘They shall go, these into everlasting punishment, but the
just into life everlasting,’ *has no place as yet* in these sufferings.”
In other words, the commentator sees here the doctrine of Purgatory, as
held by the Roman Church. And when we compare the other passages in
Gregory about the “cleansing fire,” especially that De Animâ et
Resurrectione, 247 B, we shall see that he contemplates the judgment
(“the incorruptible tribunal”) as coming not only *after* the
Resurrection, but also after the chastising process. Not till the
Judgment will the *moral* value of each life be revealed; the chastising
is a purely *natural* process. But then the belief in a Judgment coming
after everything rather contradicts the Universalism with which he has
been charged, for what necessity would there be for it, if the
chastising was successful in every instance? With regard to the nature
of this “fire,” it is spiritual or material with him according to the
context. The invisible natures will be punished with the one, the
visible (*i.e.* the World) with the other: although this destruction is
not always preserved by him. See E. Moeller (on Gregory’s *Doctrine on
Human Nature*), p. 100.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[374:1542](2050175.htm#fr_1540.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span> <span id="ix.iii-p16.1"></span>[Rom.
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.iii-p16.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[374:1543](2050175.htm#fr_1541.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[374:1544](2050175.htm#fr_1542.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span> [1 Cor. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[375:1545](2050175.htm#fr_1543.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span id="ix.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[375:1546](2050175.htm#fr_1544.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>τῶν γινομένων</span>. The Latin has overlooked
this; “Hæc autem omnia huc spectant ut,” &c. (Sifanus).

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[375:1547](2050175.htm#fr_1545.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>φύσις</span>, *i.e.* the intellectual <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p21.3"></span>φύσις</span> mentioned
above. If this were translated “Nature,” it would contradict what has
just been said about the body. It is plain that <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p21.4"></span>φύσις</span> contains a
much larger meaning always than our sole equivalent for it; <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p21.5"></span>φύσις</span> is applied
even to the Divine essence.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[376:1548](2050175.htm#fr_1546.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p21.6"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>γενεαλογεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[376:1549](2050175.htm#fr_1547.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p23.1"></span>τῶν πρός τί πως ἔχειν τὴν ψυχὴν</span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[376:1550](2050175.htm#fr_1548.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p24.1"></span>περιττή</span>. Sifanus must have had <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p24.2"></span>περί τι</span> in his Cod.;
“sed mentis circa aliquam rem actio.”

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[376:1551](2050175.htm#fr_1549.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span> S. [John i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[376:1552](2050175.htm#fr_1550.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span> For an explanation of such a restriction,
see Bingham, vol. viii. p. 109 (ed. 1720).

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[377:1553](2050175.htm#fr_1551.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p28.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p28.2"></span>πιπροσθούσης</span>

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[377:1554](2050175.htm#fr_1552.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p29"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[377:1555](2050175.htm#fr_1553.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p30"></span> [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[377:1556](2050175.htm#fr_1554.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p31.1"></span>παρὰ τὴν πρώτην</span> (*i.e.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p31.2"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p31.3"></span>ραν</span>).

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[377:1557](2050175.htm#fr_1555.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p33"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.iii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[377:1558](2050175.htm#fr_1556.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p34"></span> This mysticism of Gregory is an extension
of Origen’s view that there are direct affinities or analogies between
the visible and invisible world. Gregory here and elsewhere proposes to
find in the facts of nature nothing less than analogies with the
*energies,* and so with the essence, of the Deity. The marks stamped
upon the Creation translate these energies into language intelligible to
us: just as the energies in their turn translate the essence, as he
insists on in his treatise against Eunomius. This world, in effect,
exists only in order to manifest the Divine Being. But the human soul,
of all that is created, is the special field where analogies to the
Creator are to be sought, because we feel both by their energies alone;
both the soul and God are hid from us, in their essence. “Since,” he
says (*De Hom Opif.* c. xi.) “one of the attributes we contemplate in
the Divine nature is incomprehensibility of essence, it is clearly
necessary that in this point ‘the image’ should be able to show its
resemblance to the Archetype. For if, while the Archetype transcends
comprehension, the essence of ‘the image’ were comprehended, the
contrary character of the attributes we behold in them would prove the
defect of ‘the image’; but since the essence of our Mind eludes our
knowledge, it has an exact resemblance to the Supreme essence, figuring
as it does by its own unknowableness the incomprehensible Being.”
Therefore, Gregory goes to the interior facts of our nature for the
actual proof of theological doctrine. God is “spirit” because of the
spirituality of the soul. The “generation” of the Son is proved by the
Will emanating from the Reason. Gregory follows this line even more
resolutely than Origen. He was the first Father who sought to explain
the Trinity by the triple divisions of the soul which Platonism offered.
Cf. his treatise *De eo quod sit ad immutabilitatem,* &c., p. 26.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[378:1559](2050175.htm#fr_1557.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p35"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.iii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[378:1560](2050175.htm#fr_1558.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p36.1"></span>εἰς ἄπειρον παρατείνεται</span>. Such passages
as these must be set against others in Gregory, such as the concluding
part of the *De Animâ et Resurrectione,*in arriving at an exact
knowledge of his views about a Universal <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p36.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p36.3"></span>Αποκατάστασις</span>

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[378:1561](2050175.htm#fr_1559.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p37.1"></span>πάθη</span>.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[379:1562](2050175.htm#fr_1560.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p39"></span> Read with L. Sifanus, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p39.1"></span>μὴ καταλλήλῳ τροφῇ</span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[379:1563](2050175.htm#fr_1561.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p40.1"></span>εἰς πληθωρικὴν ἀηδίαν ἐκπίπτων</span>.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[379:1564](2050175.htm#fr_1562.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p41.1"></span>θεώρημα</span>.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[379:1565](2050175.htm#fr_1563.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p42"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p42.2"></span>ν τῷ ἀτέλει τῆς ἡλικίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[379:1566](2050175.htm#fr_1564.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p43"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p43.1"></span>συμπτωμάτων</span> (for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p43.2"></span>συμπομάτων</span>. Morell).

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[379:1567](2050175.htm#fr_1565.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p44.1"></span>τύφου</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p44.2"></span>τοῦ στύφου</span>, Paris Edit. *i.e.* “of their
astringency”)

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[379:1568](2050175.htm#fr_1566.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p45.1"></span>διὰ τῆς αἰσχρᾶς ἀποτίσεως τὸν ἔμετον
ἀνεκίνησαν</span>

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[379:1569](2050175.htm#fr_1567.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p46.1"></span>τὴν σεσοφισμένην τῆς φιλαργυρίας
ἀνάγκην</span>.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[379:1570](2050175.htm#fr_1568.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p47.1"></span>πεπλανημένῳ</span>

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[379:1571](2050175.htm#fr_1569.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p48.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p48.2"></span>πιπλατύνεσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[379:1572](2050175.htm#fr_1570.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p49.1"></span>οὐκ ἔχοντες ποῦ τὴν ἀνάγκην τῆς ἀ& 207·ῥωστίας
ταύτης ἐπανενέγκωσι</span>

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[380:1573](2050175.htm#fr_1571.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p50.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p50.2"></span>μπαροινεῖ</span>

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[380:1574](2050175.htm#fr_1572.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p51.1"></span>κεφάλαιον</span>; lit. “a sum total:” cf.
below, <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p51.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p51.3"></span>πὶ κεφαλαί& 251·
συναπτέον</span>, “we must summarize.”

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[380:1575](2050175.htm#fr_1573.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p53"></span> The text is in confusion here: but the
Latin supplies: “Nothing reasonable fails in reason; nothing wise, in
wisdom; neither virtue nor truth could admit of that which is not good,”
&c.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[380:1576](2050175.htm#fr_1574.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p54"></span> <span id="ix.iii-p54.1"></span>[Rom. iii.
3-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.iii-p54.2"></span>;
iv. 1, 2; ix. 14–24; xi. 22–36.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[380:1577](2050175.htm#fr_1575.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p55"></span> This sentence is not in the Greek of the
Paris Edition, and is not absolutely necessary to the sense.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[381:1578](2050175.htm#fr_1576.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p56"></span> [Ps. lviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[381:1579](2050175.htm#fr_1577.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p57.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p57.2"></span>πιβιῶναί τινας τῶν κακῶν</span>: or, “That some
have lived on in their sins.”

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[381:1580](2050175.htm#fr_1578.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p58"></span> *i.e.*as letting them live, and mitigating
the evil of their lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Pilgrimages.](2050176.md)
