[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050019)  [Next](2050021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Eunomius displays much folly
and fine writing, but very little seriousness about vital points.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p2"></span>In these and such like antics I allow
him to have the advantage; and to his heart’s content he may revel in
his victory there. Most willingly I forego such a competition, which can
attract those only who seek renown; if indeed any renown comes from
indulging in such methods of argumentation, considering that Paul <span
id="fr_62"></span>[64](#fn_62.md) , that genuine minister of the Word,
whose only ornament was truth, both disdained himself to lower his style
to such prettinesses, and instructs us also, in a noble and appropriate
exhortation, to fix our attention on truth alone. What need indeed for
one who is fair in the beauty of truth to drag in the paraphernalia of a
decorator for the production of a false artificial beauty? Perhaps for
those who do not possess truth it may be an advantage to varnish their
falsehoods with an attractive style, and to rub into the grain of their
argument a curious polish. When their error is taught in far-fetched
language and decked out with all the affectations of style, they have a
chance of being plausible and accepted by their hearers. But those whose
only aim is simple truth, unadulterated by any misguiding foil, find the
light of a natural beauty emitted from their words.

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p4"></span>But now that I am about to begin the
examination of all that he has advanced, I feel the same difficulty as a
farmer does, when the air is calm; I know not how to separate his wheat
from his chaff; the waste, in fact, and the chaff in this pile of words
is so enormous, that it makes one think that the residue of facts and
real thoughts in all that he has said is almost nil. It would be the
worse for speed and very irksome, it would even be beside our object, to
go into the whole of his remarks in detail; we have not the means for
securing so much leisure so as wantonly to devote it to such
frivolities; it is the duty, I think, of a prudent workman not to waste
his strength on trifles, but on that which will clearly repay his toil.

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p5"></span>As to all the things, then, in his
Introduction, how he constitutes himself truth’s champion, and fixes the
charge of unbelief upon his opponents, and declares that an abiding and
indelible hatred for them has sunk into his soul, how he struts in his
‘new discoveries,’ though he does not tell us what they are, but says
only that an examination of the debateable points in them was set on
foot, a certain ‘legal’ trial which placed on those who were daring to
act illegally the necessity of keeping quiet, or to quote his own words
in that Lydian style of singing which he has got, “the bold
law-breakers—in open courts—were forced to be quiet;” (he calls this a
“proscription” of the conspiracy against him, whatever may be meant by
that term);—all this wearisome business I pass by as quite unimportant.
On the other hand, all his special pleading for his heretical conceits
may well demand our close attention. Our own interpreter of the
principles of divinity followed this course in *his* Treatise; for
though he had plenty of ability to broaden out his argument, he took the
line of dealing only with vital points, which he selected from all the
blasphemies of that heretical book <span id="fr_63"></span>[65](#fn_63.md)
, and so narrowed the scope of the subject.

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p7"></span>If, however, any one desires that our
answer should exactly correspond to the array of his arguments, let him
tell us the utility of such a process. What gain would it be to my
readers if I were to solve the complicated riddle of his title, which he
proposes to us at the very commencement, in the manner of the sphinx of
the tragic stage; namely this ‘New Apology for the Apology,’ and all the
nonsense which he writes about that; and if I were to tell the long tale
of what he dreamt? I think that the reader is sufficiently wearied with
the petty vanity about this newness in his title already preserved in
Eunomius’ own text, and with the want of taste displayed there in the
account of his own exploits, all his labours and his trials, while he
wandered over every land and every sea, and was ‘heralded’ through the
whole world. If all that had to be written down over again,—and with
additions, too, as the refuta<span id="page_XXXVIII">p. XXXVIII</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-Page_XXXVIII"></span>tions of these falsehoods
would naturally have to expand their statement,—who would be found of
such an iron hardness as not to be sickened at this waste of labour?
Suppose I was to write down, taking word by word, an explanation of that
mad story of his; suppose I were to explain, for instance, who that
Armenian was on the shores of the Euxine, who had annoyed him at first
by having the same name as himself, what their lives were like, what
their pursuits, how he had a quarrel with that Armenian because of the
very likeness of their characters, then in what fashion those two were
reconciled, so as to join in a common sympathy with that winning and
most glorious Aetius, his master (for so pompous are his praises); and
after that, what was the plot devised against himself, by which they
brought him to trial on the charge of being surpassingly popular:
suppose, I say, I was to explain all that, should I not appear, like
those who catch opthalmia themselves from frequent contact with those
who are already suffering so, to have caught myself this malady of fussy
circumstantiality? I should be following step by step each detail of his
twaddling story; finding out who the “slaves released to liberty” were,
what was “the conspiracy <span id="fr_64"></span>[66](#fn_64.md) of the
initiated” and “the calling out <span id="fr_65"></span>[67](#fn_65.md) of
hired slaves,” what ‘Montius and Gallus, and Domitian,’ and ‘false
witnesses,’ and ‘an enraged Emperor,’ and ‘certain sent into exile’ have
to do with the argument. What could be more useless than such tales for
the purpose of one who was not wishing merely to write a narrative, but
to refute the argument of him who had written against his heresy? What
follows in the story is still more profitless; I do not think that the
author himself could peruse it again without yawning, though a strong
natural affection for his offspring *does* possess every father. He
pretends to unfold there his exploits and his sufferings; the style
rears itself into the sublime, and the legend swells into the tones of
tragedy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[XXXVII:64](2050020.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p3"></span> Cf. [1 Corinth. ii.
1-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[XXXVII:65](2050020.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p6"></span> *that heretical book,* i.e. the
first ‘Apology’ of Eunomius in 28 parts: a translation of it is given in
Whiston’s *Eunomianismus Redivivus.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[XXXVIII:66](2050020.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>σχέσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[XXXVIII:67](2050020.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>τάξιν</span>. We have no context to
explain these allusions, the treatise of Eunomius being lost, which
Gregory is *now* answering, i.e. the Apologia Apologiæ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His peculiar caricature of the bishops, Eustathius of Armenia and
Basil of Galatia, is not well drawn.](2050021.md)
