[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050029)  [Next](2050031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p1"></span> §14. *He did wrong, when mentioning
the Doctrines of Salvation, in adopting terms of his own choosing
instead of the traditional terms Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p2"></span>The reason for this invention of new
words I take to be manifest to every one—namely: that every one, when
the words father and son are spoken, at once recognizes the proper and
natural relationship to one another which they imply. This relationship
is conveyed at once by the appellations themselves. To prevent it being
understood of the Father, and the Only-begotten Son, he robs us of this
idea of relationship which enters the ear along with the words, and
abandoning the inspired terms, expounds the Faith by means of others
devised to injure the truth.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p3"></span>One thing, however, that he says is
true: that his own teaching, not the Catholic teaching, is summed up so.
Indeed any one who reflects can easily see the impiety of his statement.
It will not be out of place now to discuss in detail what his intention
is in ascribing to the being of the Father alone the highest degree of
that which is supreme and proper, while not admitting that the being of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost is supreme and proper. For my part I think
that it is a prelude to his complete denial of the ‘being’ of the
Only-begotten and of the Holy Ghost, and that this system of his is
secretly intended to effect the setting aside of all real belief in
their personality, while in appearance and in mere words confessing it.
A moment’s reflection upon his statement will enable any one to perceive
that this is so. It does not look like one who thinks that the
Only-begotten and the Holy Ghost really exist in a distinct personality
to be very particular about the names with which he thinks the greatness
of Almighty God should be expressed. To grant the fact <span
id="fr_104"></span>[106](#fn_104.md) , and then go into minute distinctions
about the appropriate phrases <span id="fr_105"></span>[107](#fn_105.md)
would be indeed consummate folly: and so in ascribing a being that is in
the highest degree supreme and proper only to the Father, he makes us
surmise by this silence respecting the other two that (to him) they do
not properly exist. How can that to which a proper being is denied be
said to really exist? When we deny proper being to it, we must perforce
affirm of it all the opposite terms. That which cannot be properly said
is improperly said, so that the demonstration of its not being properly
said is a proof of its not really subsisting: and it is at this that
Eunomius seems to aim in introducing these new names into his teaching.
For no one can say that he has strayed from ignorance into some silly
fancy of separating, locally, the supreme from that which is below, and
assigning to the Father as it were the peak of some hill, while he seats
the Son lower down in the hollows. No one is so childish as to conceive
of differences in space, when the intellectual and spiritual is under
discussion. Local position is a property of the material: but the
intellectual and immaterial is confessedly removed from the idea of
locality. What, then, is the reason why he says that the Father alone
has supreme being? For one can hardly think it is from ignorance that he
wanders off into these conceptions, being one who, in the many displays
he makes, claims to be wise, even “making himself overwise,” as the Holy
Scripture forbids us to do <span id="fr_106"></span>[108](#fn_106.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[LI:106](2050030.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p4"></span> i.e. of the equality of Persons.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[LI:107](2050030.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p5"></span> i.e. for the Persons.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[LI:108](2050030.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p6"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Eccles. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He does wrong in making the being of the Father alone proper and
supreme, implying by his omission of the Son and the Spirit that theirs
is improperly spoken of, and is inferior.](2050031.md)
