[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050165)  [Next](2050167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_362">p. 362</span>
<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-Page_362"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is only one right path. It
is narrow and contracted. It has no turnings either on the one side or
the other. No matter how we leave it, there is the same danger of
straying hopelessly away. This being so, the habit which many have got
into must be as far as possible corrected; those, I mean, who while they
fight strenuously against the baser pleasures, yet still go on hunting
for pleasure in the shape of worldly honour and positions which will
gratify their love of power. They act like some domestic who longed for
liberty, but instead of exerting himself to get away from slavery
proceeded only to change his masters, and thought liberty consisted in
that change. But all alike are slaves, even though they should not all
go on being ruled by the same masters, as long as a dominion of any
sort, with power to enforce it, is set over them. There are others again
who after a long battle against all the pleasures <span
id="fr_1449"></span>[1451](#fn_1449) , yield themselves easily on
another field, where feelings of an opposite kind come in; and in the
intense exactitude of their lives fall a ready prey to melancholy and
irritation, and to brooding over injuries, and to everything that is the
direct opposite of pleasurable feelings; from which they are very
reluctant to extricate themselves. This is always happening, whenever
any emotion, instead of virtuous reason, controls the course of a life.
For the commandment of the Lord is exceedingly far-shining, so as to
“enlighten the eyes” even of “the simple <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1452](#fn_1450) ,” declaring that good cleaveth
only unto God. But God is not pain any more than He is pleasure; He is
not cowardice any more than boldness; He is not fear, nor anger, nor any
other emotion which sways the untutored soul, but, as the Apostle says,
He is Very Wisdom and Sanctification, Truth and Joy and Peace, and
everything like that. If He is such, how can any one be said to cleave
to Him, who is mastered by the very opposite? Is it not want of reason
in any one to suppose that when he has striven successfully to escape
the dominion of one particular passion, he will find virtue in its
opposite? For instance, to suppose that when he has escaped pleasure, he
will find virtue in letting pain have possession of him; or when he has
by an effort remained proof against anger, in crouching with fear. It
matters not whether we miss virtue, or rather God Himself Who is the Sum
of virtue, in this way, or in that. Take the case of great bodily
prostration; one would say that the sadness of this failure was just the
same, whether the cause has been excessive under-feeding, or immoderate
eating; both failures to stop in time end in the same result. He
therefore who watches over the life and the sanity of the soul will
confine himself to the moderation of the truth; he will continue without
touching either of those opposite states which run along-side virtue.
This teaching is not mine; it comes from the Divine lips. It is clearly
contained in that passage where our Lord says to His disciples, that
they are as sheep wandering amongst wolves <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[1453](#fn_1451) , yet are not to be as doves only,
but are to have something of the serpent too in their disposition; and
that means that they should neither carry to excess the practice of that
which seems praiseworthy in simplicity <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[1454](#fn_1452) , as such a habit would come very
near to downright madness, nor on the other hand should deem the
cleverness which most admire to be a virtue, while unsoftened by any
mixture with its opposite; they were in fact to form another
disposition, by a compound of these two seeming opposites, cutting off
its silliness from the one, its evil cunning from the other; so that one
single beautiful character should be created from the two, a union of
simplicity of purpose with shrewdness. “Be ye,” He says, “wise as
serpents, and harmless as doves.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[362:1451](2050166.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>τὰς ἡδονὰς</span> *i.e.*the whole class.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[362:1452](2050166.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>[Ps.
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[362:1453](2050166.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p5"></span> S. [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[362:1454](2050166.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p6"></span> According to the emendation of
Livineius: <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>μήτε
τὸ κατὰ τὴν ἁπλότητα δοκοῦν ἐπαινετὸν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2050167)
