[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050240)  [Next](2050242.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>What</span>, then, is justice? We
distinctly remember what in the course of our argument <span
id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span id="xi.ii.xxiii-Page_492"></span>we
said in the commencement of this treatise; namely, that man was
fashioned in imitation of the Divine nature, preserving his resemblance
to the Deity as well in other excellences as in possession of freedom of
the will, yet being of necessity of a nature subject to change. For it
was not possible that a being who derived his origin from an alteration
should be altogether free from this liability. For the passing from a
state of non-existence into that of existence is a kind of alteration;
when being, that is, by the exercise of Divine power takes the place of
nonentity. In the following special respect, too, alteration is
necessarily observable in man, namely, because man was an imitation of
the Divine nature, and unless some distinctive difference had been
occasioned, the imitating subject would be entirely the same as that
which it resembles; but in this instance, it is to be observed, there is
a difference between that which “was made in the image” and its pattern;
namely this, that the one is not subject to change, while the other is
(for, as has been described, it has come into existence through an
alteration), and being thus subject to alteration does not always
continue in its existing state. For alteration is a kind of movement
ever advancing from the present state to another; and there are two
forms of this movement; the one being ever towards what is good, and in
this the advance has no check, because no goal of the course to be
traversed <span id="fr_1993"></span>[1995](#fn_1993.md) can be reached,
while the other is in the direction of the contrary, and of it this is
the essence, that it has no subsistence; for, as has been before stated,
the contrary state to goodness conveys some such notion of opposition,
as when we say, for instance, that that which is is logically opposed to
that which is not, and that existence is so opposed to non-existence.
Since, then, by reason of this impulse and movement of changeful
alteration it is not possible that the nature of the subject of this
change should remain self-centred and unmoved, but there is always
something towards which the will is tending, the appetency for moral
beauty naturally drawing it on to movement, this beauty is in one
instance really such in its nature, in another it is not so, only
blossoming with an illusive appearance of beauty; and the criterion of
these two kinds is the mind that dwells within us. Under these
circumstances it is a matter of risk whether we happen to choose the
real beauty, or whether we are diverted from its choice by some
deception arising from appearance, and thus drift away to the opposite;
as happened, we are told in the heathen fable, to the dog which looked
askance at the reflection in the water of what it carried in its mouth,
but let go the real food, and, opening its mouth wide to swallow the
image of it, still hungered. Since, then, the mind has been disappointed
in its craving for the real good, and diverted to that which is not
such, being persuaded, through the deception of the great advocate and
inventor of vice, that that was beauty which was just the opposite (for
this deception would never have succeeded, had not the glamour of beauty
been spread over the hook of vice like a bait),—the man, I say, on the
one hand, who had enslaved himself by indulgence to the enemy of his
life, being of his own accord in this unfortunate condition,—I ask you
to investigate, on the other hand, those qualities which suit and go
along with our conception of the Deity, such as goodness, wisdom, power,
immortality, and all else that has the stamp of superiority. As good,
then, the Deity entertains pity for fallen man; as wise He is not
ignorant of the means for his recovery; while a just decision must also
form part of that wisdom; for no one would ascribe that genuine justice
to the absence of wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[492:1995](2050241.htm#fr_1993.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> *of the course to be traversed:* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>τοῦ
διεξοδευομένου</span>. Glauber remarks that the Latin translation here,
“ejus qui transit,” gives no sense, and rightly takes the word as a
passive. Krabinger also translates, “ejus quod evolvitur.” Here again
there is unconscious Platonism: <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν</span> is eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2050242.md)
