[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050135)  [Next](2050137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He then again charges Eunomius
with having learnt his term* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p1.2"></span>γεννησία</span>*from the hieroglyphic
writings, and from the Egyptian mythology and idolatry, and with
bringing in Anubis, Osiris, and Isis to the creed of Christians, and
shows that, considered as admitting His sufferings of necessity and not
voluntarily, the Only-begotten is entitled to no gratitude from men: and
that fire has none for its warmth, nor water for its fluidity, as they
do not refer their results to self-determining power, but to necessity
of nature* <span id="fr_1058"></span>[1060](#fn_1058) .

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p3"></span>Let us once more notice the passage
cited. “If he can show,” he says, “that the God Who is over all, Who is
the Light unapproachable, was incarnate, or could be incarnate,….then
let him say that the Light is equal to the Light.” The purport of his
words is plain from the very form of the sentence, namely, that he does
not think that it was by His almighty Godhead that the Son proved strong
for such a form of loving-kindness, but that it was by being of a nature
subject to passion that He stooped to the suffering of the Cross. Well,
as I pondered and inquired how Eunomius came to stumble into such
notions about the Deity, as to think that on the one side the ungenerate
Light was <span id="page_CCXLVI">p. CCXLVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iv-Page_CCXLVI"></span>unapproachable by its contrary,
and entirely unimpaired and free from every passion and affection, but
that on the other the generate was intermediate in its nature, so as not
to preserve the Divine unsullied and pure in impassibility, but to have
an essence mixed and compounded of contraries, which at once stretched
out to partake of good, and at the same time melted away into a
condition subject to passion, since it was impossible to obtain from
Scripture premises to support so absurd a theory, the thought struck me,
whether it could be that he was an admirer of the speculations of the
Egyptians on the subject of the Divine, and had mixed up their fancies
with his views concerning the Only-begotten. For it is reported that
they say that their fantastic mode of compounding their idols, when they
adapt the forms of certain irrational animals to human limbs, is an
enigmatic symbol of that mixed nature which they call “dæmon,” and that
this is more subtle than that of men, and far surpasses our nature in
power, but has the Divine element in it not unmingled or uncompounded,
but is combined with the nature of the soul and the perceptions of the
body, and is receptive of pleasure and pain, neither of which finds
place with the “ungenerate God.” For they too use this name, ascribing
to the supreme God, as they imagine Him, the attribute of ungeneracy.
Thus our sage theologian seems to us to be importing into the Christian
creed an Anubis, Isis, or Osiris from the Egyptian shrines, all but the
acknowledgment of their names: but there is no difference in profanity
between him who openly makes profession of the names of idols, and him
who, while holding the belief about them in his heart, is yet chary of
their names. If, then, it is impossible to get out of Holy Scripture any
support for this impiety, while their theory draws all its strength from
the riddles of the hieroglyphics, assuredly there can be no doubt what
right-minded persons ought to think of this. But that this accusation
which we bring is no insulting slander, Eunomius shall testify for us by
his own words, saying as he does that the ungenerate Light is
unapproachable, and has not the power of stooping to experience
affections, but affirming that such a condition is germane and akin to
the generate: so that man need feel no gratitude to the Only-begotten
God for what He suffered, if, as they say, it was by the spontaneous
action of His nature that He slipped down to the experience of
affections, His essence, which was capable of being thus affected, being
naturally dragged down thereto, which demands no thanks. For who would
welcome as a boon that which takes place by necessity, even if it be
gainful and profitable? For we neither thank fire for its warmth nor
water for its fluidity, as we refer these qualities to the necessity of
their several natures, because fire cannot be deserted by its power of
warming, nor can water remain stationary upon an incline, inasmuch as
the slope spontaneously draws its motion onwards. If, then, they say
that the benefit wrought by the Son through His incarnation was by a
necessity of His nature, they certainly render Him no thanks, inasmuch
as they refer what He did, not to an authoritative power, but to a
natural compulsion. But if, while they experience the benefit of the
gift, they disparage the lovingkindness that brought it, I fear lest
their impiety should work round to the opposite error, and lest they
should deem the condition of the Son, that could be thus affected,
worthy of more honour than the freedom from such affections possessed by
the Father, making their own advantage the criterion of good. For if the
case had been that the Son was incapable of being thus affected, as they
affirm of the Father, our nature would still have remained in its
miserable plight, inasmuch as there would have been none to lift up
man’s nature to incorruption by what He Himself experienced;—and so it
escapes notice that the cunning of these quibblers, by the very means
which it employs in its attempt to destroy the majesty of the
Only-begotten God, does but raise men’s conceptions of Him to a grander
and loftier height, seeing it is the case that He Who has the power to
act, is more to be honoured than one who is powerless for good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[CCXLV:1060](2050136.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iv-p2"></span> The grammar of this section of the
analysis is very much confused.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then, again discussing the true Light and unapproachable Light of
the Father and of the Son, special attributes, community and essence,
and showing the relation of “generate” and “ungenerate,” as involving no
opposition in sense, but presenting an opposition and contradiction
admitting of no middle term, he ends the book.](2050137)
