[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050106)  [Next](2050108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Thereafter he discusses the
divergence of names and of things, speaking, of that which is ungenerate
as without a cause, and of that which is non-existent, as the
Scindapsus, Minotaur, Blityri, Cyclops, Scylla, which never were
generated at all, and shows that things which are essentially different,
are mutually destructive, as fire of water, and the rest in their
several relations. But in the case of the Father and the Son, as the
essence is common, and the properties reciprocally interchangeable, no
injury results to the Nature.*

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p2"></span>Since, however, after the passage
cited above, he professes that he will allege something stronger still,
let us examine this also, as well as the passage cited, lest we should
seem to be withdrawing our opposition in face of an overwhelming force.
“If, however,” he says, “I am to abandon all these positions, and fall
back upon my stronger argument, I would say this, that even if all the
terms that he advances by way of refutation were established, our
statement will none the less be manifestly shown to be true. If, as will
be admitted, the divergence of the names which are significant of
properties marks the divergence of the things, it is surely necessary to
allow that with the divergence of the names significant of essence is
also marked the divergence of the essences. And this would be found to
hold good in all cases, I mean in the case of essences, energies,
colours, figures, and other qualities. For we denote by divergent
appellations the different essences, fire and water, air and earth, cold
and heat, white and black, triangle and circle. Why need we mention the
intelligible essences, in enumerating which the Apostle marks, by
difference of names, the divergence of essence?”

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p3"></span>Who would not be dismayed at this
irresistible power of attack? The argument transcends the promise, the
experience is more terrible than the threat. “I will come,” he says, “to
my stronger argument.” What is it? That as the differences of properties
are recognized by those names which signify the special attributes, we
must of course, he says, allow that differences of essence are also
expressed by divergence of names. What then are these appellations of
essences by which we learn the divergence of Nature between the Father
and the son? He talks of fire and water, air and earth, cold and heat,
white and black, triangle and circle. His illustrations have won him the
day: his argument carries all before it: I cannot contradict the
statement that those names which are entirely incommunicable indicate
difference of natures. But our man of keen and quick-sighted intellect
has just missed seeing these points:—that in this case the Father is God
and the Son is God; that “just,” and “incorruptible,” and all those
names which belong to the Divine Nature, are used equally of the Father
and of the Son; and thus, if the divergent character of appellations
indicates difference of natures, the community of names will surely show
the common character of the essence. And if we must agree that the
Divine essence is to be expressed by names <span
id="fr_833"></span>[835](#fn_833.md) , it would behove us to apply to that
Nature these lofty and Divine names rather than the terminology of
“generate” and “ungenerate,” because “good” and “incorruptible,” “just”
and “wise,” and all such terms as these are strictly applicable only to
that Nature which passes all understanding, whereas “generated” exhibits
community of name with even the inferior forms of the lower creation.
For we call a dog, and a frog, and all things that come into the world
by way of generation, “generated.” And moreover, the term “ungenerate”
is not only employed of that which exists without a cause, but has also
a proper application to that which is nonexistent. The Scindapsus <span
id="fr_834"></span>[836](#fn_834.md) is called ungenerate, the
Blityri <span id="fr_835"></span>[837](#fn_835.md) is ungenerate, the
Minotaur is ungenerate, the Cyclops, Scylla, the Chimæra are ungenerate,
not in the sense of existing without generation, but in the sense of
never having come into being at all. If, then, the names more peculiarly
Divine are common to the Son with the Father, and if it is the others,
those which are equivocally employed either of the non-existent or of
the lower animals—if it is these, I say, which are divergent, let his
“generate and ungenerate” be so: Eunomius’ powerful argument against us
itself upholds the cause of truth in testifying that there is no
divergence in respect of nature, because no divergence can be perceived
in the names <span id="fr_836"></span>[838](#fn_836.md) . But if he asserts
the difference of essence to exist between the “generate” and the
“ungenerate,” as it does between fire and water, and is of opinion that
the names, like those which he has mentioned in his examples, are in the
same mutual relation as “fire” and “water,” the horrid character of his
blasphemy will here again be brought to light, even if we hold our
peace. For fire and <span id="page_CXCVII">p. CXCVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.ix.iii-Page_CXCVII"></span>water have a nature mutually
destructive, and each is destroyed, if it comes to be in the other, by
the prevalence of the more powerful element. If, then, he lays down the
doctrine that the Nature of the Ungenerate differs thus from that of the
Only-begotten, it is surely clear that he logically makes this
destructive opposition to be involved in the divergence of their
essences, so that their nature will be, by this reasoning, incompatible
and incommunicable, and the one would be consumed by the other, if both
should be found to be mutually inclusive or co-existent.

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p8"></span>How then is the Son “in the Father”
without being destroyed, and how does the Father, coming to be “in the
Son,” remain continually unconsumed, if, as Eunomius says, the special
attribute of fire, as compared with water, is maintained in the relation
of the Generate to the Ungenerate? Nor does their definition regard
communion as existing between earth and air, for the former is stable,
solid, resistent, of downward tendency and heavy, while air has a nature
made up of the contrary attributes. So white and black are found in
opposition among colours, and men are agreed that the circle is not the
same with the triangle, for each, according to the definition of its
figure, is precisely that which the other is not. But I am unable to
discover where he sees the opposition in the case of God the Father and
God the Only-begotten Son. One goodness, wisdom, justice, providence,
power, incorruptibility,—all other attributes of exalted significance
are similarly predicated of each, and the one has in a certain sense His
strength in the other; for on the one hand the Father makes all things
through the Son, and on the other hand the Only-begotten works all in
Himself, being the Power of the Father. Of what avail, then, are fire
and water to show essential diversity in the Father and the Son? He
calls us, moreover, “rash” for instancing the unity of nature and
difference of persons of Peter and Paul, and says we are guilty of gross
recklessness, if we apply our argument to the contemplation of the
objects of pure reason by the aid of material examples. Fitly, fitly
indeed, does the corrector of our errors reprove us for rashness in
interpreting the Divine Nature by material illustrations! Why then,
deliberate and circumspect sir, do you talk about the elements? Is earth
immaterial, fire an object of pure reason, water incorporeal, air beyond
the perception of the senses? Is your mind so well directed to its aim,
are you so keen-sighted in all directions in your promulgation of this
argument, that your adversaries cannot lay hold of, that you do not see
in yourself the faults you blame in those you are accusing? Or are we to
make concessions to you when you are establishing the diversity of
essence by material aid, and to be ourselves rejected when we point out
the kindred character of the Nature by means of examples within our
compass?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_833"></span>[CXCVI:835](2050107.htm#fr_833.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p4"></span> On this point, besides what follows
here, see the treatise against Tritheism addressed to Ablabius.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[CXCVI:836](2050107.htm#fr_834.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p5"></span> These are names applied to denote
existences purely imaginary; the other names belong to classical
mythology.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[CXCVI:837](2050107.htm#fr_835.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p6"></span> These are names applied to denote
existences purely imaginary; the other names belong to classical
mythology.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[CXCVI:838](2050107.htm#fr_836.md) <span
id="viii.i.ix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.ix.iii-p7"></span> That is, in the names more
peculiarly appropriate to the Divine Nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He says that all things that are in creation have been named by
man, if, as is the case, they are called differently by every nation, as
also the appellation of “Ungenerate” is conferred by us: but that the
proper appellation of the Divine essence itself which expresses the
Divine Nature, either does not exist at all, or is unknown to
us.](2050108.md)
