[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050149)  [Next](2050151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-Page_343"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>On Virginity.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> object of this treatise is to
create in its readers a passion for the life according to excellence.
There are many distractions <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1344](#fn_1342) ,
to use the word of the Divine Apostle, incident to the secular life; and
so this treatise would suggest, as a necessary door of entrance to the
holier life, the calling of Virginity; seeing that, while it is not easy
in the entanglements of this secular life to find quiet for that of
Divine contemplation, those on the other hand who have bid farewell to
its troubles can with promptitude, and without distraction, pursue
assiduously their higher studies. Now, whereas all advice is in itself
weak, and mere words of exhortation will not make the task of
recommending what is beneficial easier to any one, unless he has first
given a noble aspect to that which he urges on his hearer, this
discourse will accordingly begin with the praises of Virginity; the
exhortation will come at the end; moreover, as the beauty in anything
gains lustre by the contrast with its opposite, it is requisite that
some mention should be made of the vexations of everyday life. Then it
will be quite in the plan of this work to introduce a sketch of the
contemplative life, and to prove the impossibility of any one attaining
it who feel’s the world’s anxieties. In the devotee bodily desire has
become weak; and so there will follow an inquiry as to the true object
of desire, for which (and which only) we have received from our Maker
our power of desiring. When this has received all possible illustration,
it will seem to follow naturally that we should consider some method to
attain it; and the true virginity, which is free from any stain of sin,
will be found to fit such a purpose. So all the intermediate part of the
discourse, while it seems to look elsewhere, will be really tending to
the praises of this virginity. All the particular rules obeyed by the
followers of this high calling will, to avoid prolixity, be omitted
here; the exhortation in the discourse will be introduced only in
general terms, and for cases of wide application; but, in a way,
particulars will be here included, and so nothing important will be
overlooked, while prolixity is avoided. Each of us, too, is inclined to
embrace some course of life with the greater enthusiasm, when he sees
personalities who have already gained distinction in it; we have
therefore made the requisite mention of saints who have gained their
glory in celibacy. But further than this; the examples we have in
biographies cannot stimulate to the attainment of excellence, so much as
a living voice and an example which is still working for good; and so we
have alluded to that most godly bishop <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1345](#fn_1343) , our father in God, who himself
alone could be the master in such instructions. He will not indeed be
mentioned by name, but by certain indications we shall say in cipher
that he is meant. Thus, too, future readers will not think our advice
unmeaning, when the candidate for this life is told to school himself by
recent masters. But let them first fix their attention only on this:
what such a master ought to be; then let them choose for their guidance
those who have at any time by God’s grace been raised up to be champions
of this system of excellence; for either they will find what they seek,
or at all events will be no longer ignorant what it ought to be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[343:1344](2050150.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>περισπάσμων</span>. The allusion must be to
<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.3"></span>;
but the actual word is not found in the whole of the N.T., though <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.4"></span>περιεσπᾶτο</span> is
used of Martha, S. [Luke x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[343:1345](2050150.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.i-p5.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.i-p6"></span> Basil; rather than Gregory
Thaumaturgus, as some have conjectured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2050151)
