[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050227)  [Next](2050229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.x"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p2.1"></span>Nevertheless</span> one who regards only the
dissolution of the body is greatly disturbed, and makes it a hardship
that this life of ours should be dissolved by death; it is, he says, the
extremity of evil that our being should be quenched by this condition of
mortality. Let him, then, observe through this gloomy prospect the
excess of the Divine benevolence. He may by this, perhaps, be the more
induced to admire the graciousness of God’s care for the affairs of man.
To live is desirable to those who partake of life, on account of the
enjoyment of things to their mind; since, if any one lives in bodily
pain, not to be is deemed by such an one much more desirable than to
exist in pain. Let us inquire, then, whether He Who gives us our outfit
for living has any other object in view than how we may pass our life
under the fairest circumstances. Now since by a motion of our self-will
we contracted a fellowship with evil, and, owing to some sensual
gratification, mixed up this evil with our nature like some deleterious
ingredient spoiling the taste of honey, and so, falling away from that
blessedness which is involved in the thought of passionlessness, we have
been viciously transformed—for this reason, Man, like some earthen
potsherd, is resolved again into the dust of the ground, in order to
secure that he may part with the soil which he has now contracted, and
that he may, through the resurrection, be reformed anew after the
original pattern; at least if in this life that now is he has preserved
what belongs to that image. A doctrine such as this is set before us by
Moses under the disguise of an historical manner <span
id="fr_1960"></span>[1962](#fn_1960) . And yet this disguise of history
contains a teaching which is most plain. For after, as he tells us, the
earliest of mankind were brought into contact with what was forbidden,
and thereby were stripped naked of that primal blessed condition, the
Lord clothed these, His first-formed creatures, with coats of skins. In
my opinion we are not bound to take these <span id="page_483">p.
483</span> <span id="xi.ii.x-Page_483"></span>skins in their literal
meaning. For to what sort of slain and flayed animals did this clothing
devised for these humanities belong? But since all skin, after it is
separated from the animal, is dead, I am certainly of opinion that He
Who is the healer of our sinfulness, of His foresight invested man
subsequently with that capacity of dying which had been the special
attribute of the brute creation. Not that it was to last for ever; for a
coat is something external put on us, lending itself to the body for a
time, but not indigenous to its nature. This liability to death, then,
taken from the brute creation, was, provisionally, made to envelope the
nature created for immortality. It enwrapped it externally, but not
internally. It grasped the sentient part of man; but laid no hold upon
the Divine image. This sentient part, however, does not disappear, but
is dissolved. Disappearance is the passing away into non-existence, but
dissolution is the dispersion again into those constituent elements of
the world of which it was composed. But that which is contained in them
perishes not, though it escapes the cognisance of our senses.

<span id="xi.ii.x-p4"></span>Now the cause of this dissolution is
evident from the illustration we have given of it. For since the senses
have a close connection with what is gross and earthy, while the
intellect is in its nature of a nobler and more exalted character than
the movements involved in sensation, it follows that as, through the
estimate which is made by the senses, there is an erroneous judgment as
to what is morally good, and this error has wrought the effect of
substantiating a contrary condition, that part of us which has thus been
made useless is dissolved by its reception of this contrary. Now the
bearing of our illustration is as follows. We supposed that some vessel
has been composed of clay, and then, for some mischief or other, filled
with melted lead, which lead hardens and remains in a non-liquid state;
then that the owner of the vessel recovers it, and, as he possesses the
potter’s art, pounds to bits the ware which held the lead, and then
remoulds the vessel after its former pattern for his own special use,
emptied now of the material which had been mixed with it: by a like
process the maker of our vessel, now that wickedness has intermingled
with our sentient part, I mean that connected with the body, will
dissolve the material which has received the evil, and, re-moulding it
again by the Resurrection without any admixture of the contrary matter,
will recombine the elements into the vessel in its original beauty. Now
since both soul and body have a common bond of fellowship in their
participation of the sinful affections, there is also an analogy between
the soul’s and body’s death. For as in regard to the flesh we pronounce
the separation of the sentient life to be death, so in respect of the
soul we call the departure of the real life death. While, then, as we
have said before, the participation in evil observable both in soul and
body is of one and the same character, for it is through both that the
evil principle advances into actual working, the death of dissolution
which came from that clothing of dead skins does not affect the soul.
For how can that which is uncompounded be subject to dissolution? But
since there is a necessity that the defilements which sin has engendered
in the soul as well should be removed thence by some remedial process,
the medicine which virtue supplies has, in the life that now is, been
applied to the healing of such mutilations as these. If, however, the
soul remains unhealed <span id="fr_1961"></span>[1963](#fn_1961) , the
remedy is dispensed in the life that follows this. Now in the ailments
of the body there are sundry differences, some admitting of an easier,
others requiring a more difficult treatment. In these last the use of
the knife, or cauteries, or draughts of bitter medicines are adopted to
remove the disease that has attacked the body. For the healing of the
soul’s sicknesses the future judgment announces something of the same
kind, and this to the thoughtless sort is held out as the threat of a
terrible correction <span id="fr_1962"></span>[1964](#fn_1962) , in
order that through fear of this painful retribution they may gain the
wisdom of fleeing from wickedness: while by those of more intelligence
it is believed to be a remedial process ordered by God to bring back
man, His peculiar creature, to the grace of his primal condition. They
who use the knife or cautery to remove certain unnatural excrescences in
the body, such as wens or warts, do not bring to the person they are
serving a method of healing that is painless, though certainly they
apply the knife without any intention of injuring the patient. In like
manner whatever material excrescences are hardening on our souls, that
have been sensualized by fellowship with the body’s affections, are, in
the day of the judgment <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1965](#fn_1963) , as
it were cut and scraped away by the ineffable wisdom and power of Him
Who, as the Gospel says, “healeth those that are sick <span
id="fr_1964"></span>[1966](#fn_1964) .” For, as He says again, “they
that are whole have no need of <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="xi.ii.x-Page_484"></span>the physician, but they that are sick <span
id="fr_1965"></span>[1967](#fn_1965) .” Since, then, there has been
inbred in the soul a strong natural tendency to evil, it must suffer,
just as the excision of a wart <span
id="fr_1966"></span>[1968](#fn_1966) gives a sharp pain to the skin of
the body; for whatever contrary to the nature has been inbred in the
nature attaches itself to the subject in a certain union of feeling, and
hence there is produced an abnormal intermixture of our own with an
alien quality, so that the feelings, when the separation from this
abnormal growth comes, are hurt and lacerated. Thus when the soul pines
and melts away under the correction of its sins, as prophecy somewhere
tells us <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1969](#fn_1967) , there necessarily
follow, from its deep and intimate connection with evil, certain
unspeakable and inexpressible pangs, the description of which is as
difficult to render as is that of the nature of those good things which
are the subjects of our hope. For neither the one nor the other is
capable of being expressed in words, or brought within reach of the
understanding. If, then, any one looks to the ultimate aim of the Wisdom
of Him Who directs the economy of the universe, he would be very
unreasonable and narrow-minded to call the Maker of man the Author of
evil; or to say that He is ignorant of the future, or that, if He knows
it and has made him, He is not uninfluenced by the impulse to what is
bad. He knew what was going to be, yet did not prevent the tendency
towards that which actually happened. That humanity, indeed, would be
diverted from the good, could not be unknown to Him Who grasps all
things by His power of foresight, and Whose eyes behold the coming
equally with the past events. As, then, He had in sight the perversion,
so He devised man’s recall to good. Accordingly, which was the better
way?—never to have brought our nature into existence at all, since He
foresaw that the being about to be created would fall away from that
which is morally beautiful; or to bring him back by repentance, and
restore his diseased nature to its original beauty? But, because of the
pains and sufferings of the body which are the necessary accidents of
its unstable nature, to call God on that account the Maker of evil, or
to think that He is not the Creator of man at all, in hopes thereby to
prevent the supposition of His being the Author of what gives us
pain,—all this is an instance of that extreme narrow-mindedness which is
the mark of those who judge of moral good and moral evil by mere
sensation. Such persons do not understand that that only is
intrinsically good which sensation does not reach, and that the only
evil is estrangement from the good. But to make pains and pleasures the
criterion of what is morally good and the contrary, is a characteristic
of the unreasoning nature of creatures in whom, from their want of mind
and understanding, the apprehension of real goodness has no place. That
man is the work of God, created morally noble and for the noblest
destiny, is evident not only from what has been said, but from a vast
number of other proofs; which, because they are so many, we shall here
omit. But when we call God the Maker of man we do not forget how
carefully at the outset <span id="fr_1968"></span>[1970](#fn_1968) we
defined our position against the Greeks. It was there shown that the
Word of God is a substantial and personified being, Himself both God and
the Word; Who has embraced in Himself all creative power, or rather Who
is very power with an impulse to all good; Who works out effectually
whatever He wills by having a power concurrent with His will; Whose will
and work is the life of all things that exist; by Whom, too, man was
brought into being and adorned with the highest excellences after the
fashion of Deity. But since that alone is unchangeable in its nature
which does not derive its origin through creation, while whatever by the
uncreated being is brought into existence out of what was nonexistent,
from the very first moment that it begins to be, is ever passing through
change, and if it acts according to its nature the change is ever to the
better, but if it be diverted from the straight path, then a movement to
the contrary succeeds,—since, I say, man was thus conditioned, and in
him the changeable element in his nature had slipped aside to the exact
contrary, so that this departure from the good introduced in its train
every form of evil to match the good (as, for instance, on the defection
of life there was brought in the antagonism of death; on the deprivation
of light darkness supervened; in the absence of virtue vice arose in its
place, and against every form of good might be reckoned a like number of
opposite evils), by whom, I ask, was man, fallen by his recklessness
into this and the like evil state (for it was not possible for him to
retain even his prudence when he had estranged himself from prudence, or
to take any wise counsel when he had severed himself from wisdom),—by
whom was man to be recalled to the grace of his <span id="page_485">p.
485</span> <span id="xi.ii.x-Page_485"></span>original state? To whom
belonged the restoration of the fallen one, the recovery of the lost,
the leading back the wanderer by the hand? To whom else than entirely to
Him Who is the Lord of his nature? For Him only Who at the first had
given the life was it possible, or fitting, to recover it when lost.
This is what we are taught and learn from the Revelation of the truth,
that God in the beginning made man and saved him when he had fallen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[482:1962](2050228.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p3.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p3.2"></span>στορικώτερον καὶ δι᾽ αἰνιγμάτων</span>

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[483:1963](2050228.htm#fr_1961) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p5"></span> “Here,” says Semler, “our Author reveals
himself as a scholar of Origen, and other doctors, who had imbibed the
heathen thoughts of Plato, and wished to rest their system upon a future
(purely) moral improvement.” There is certainly too little room left
here for the application to the soul and body in this life of Christ’s
atonement.

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[483:1964](2050228.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p6.1"></span>σκυθρωπῶν ἐπανόρθωσις</span>, lit. “a
correction consisting in terrible (processes)” (subjective genitive).
The following passage will illustrate this: “Now this requires a deeper
investigation, before it can be decided whether some evil powers have
had assigned them…certain duties, like the State-executioners, who hold
a melancholy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p6.2"></span>τεταγμένοι ἐπὶ τῶν σκυθρωπῶν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.x-p6.3"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.x-p6.4"></span>πραγμάτων</span>) but
necessary office in the Constitution.” Origen, *c. Cels.* vii. 70.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[483:1965](2050228.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p7"></span> *in the day of the judgment.* The reading
<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.x-p7.1"></span>κτίσεως</span>, which
Hervetus has followed, must be wrong here.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[483:1966](2050228.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p8"></span> S. [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="xi.ii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[484:1967](2050228.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p9"></span> S. [Mark ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#017)<span id="xi.ii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[484:1968](2050228.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p10"></span> *of a wart;* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p10.1"></span>μυρμηκίας</span>. Gregory uses the same simile
in his treatise *On the Soul* (iii. p. 204). The following “scholium” in
Greek is found in the margin of two <span class="c22"><span
id="xi.ii.x-p10.2"></span>mss.</span> of that treatise, and in that of
one <span class="c22"><span id="xi.ii.x-p10.3"></span>ms.</span> of this
treatise: “There is an affection of the skin which is called a wart. A
small fleshy excrescence projects from the skin, which seems a part of
it, and a natural growth upon it: but this is not really so; and
therefore it requires removal for its cure. This illustration made use
of by Gregory is exceedingly appropriate to the matter in hand.”

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[484:1969](2050228.htm#fr_1967) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p10.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p11"></span> [Psa.
39.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)<span
id="xi.ii.x-p11.1"></span>[Ps.
xxxix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#000)<span id="xi.ii.x-p11.2"></span>
(xxxviii.) 11: “When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity,
thou makest his beauty to consume away” (A.V).

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[484:1970](2050228.htm#fr_1968) <span
id="xi.ii.x-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.x-p12"></span> *i.e.*Chapter 1., throughout.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2050229)
