[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050031)  [Next](2050033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p1"></span> §16. *Examination of the meaning of
‘subjection:’ in that he says that the nature of the Holy Spirit is
subject to that of the Father and the Son. It is shewn that the Holy
Spirit is of an equal, not inferior, rank to the Father and the Son.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p2"></span>Let us first, then, ascertain the
meaning of this word ‘subjection’ in Scripture. To whom is it applied?
The Creator, honouring man in his having been made in His own image,
‘hath placed’ the brute creation ‘in subjection under his feet;’ as
great David relating this favour (of God) exclaimed in the Psalms <span
id="fr_107"></span>[109](#fn_107.md) : “He put all things,” he says, “under
his feet,” and he mentions by name the creatures so subjected. There is
still another meaning of ‘subjection’ in Scripture. Ascribing to God
Himself the cause of his success in war, the Psalmist says <span
id="fr_108"></span>[110](#fn_108.md) , “He hath put peoples and nations in
subjection under our feet,” and “He that putteth peoples in subjection
under me.” This word is often found thus in Scripture, indicating a
victory. As for the future subjection of all men to the Only-begotten,
and through Him to the Father, in the passage where the Apostle with a
profound wisdom speaks of the Mediator between God and man as subject to
the Father, implying by that subjection of the Son who shares humanity
the actual subjugation of mankind—we will not discuss it now, for it
requires a full and thorough examination. But to take only the plain and
unambiguous meaning of the word subjection, how can he declare the being
of the Spirit to be subject to that of the Son and the Father? As the
Son is subject to the Father, according to the thought of the Apostle?
But in this view the Spirit is to be ranked with the Son, not below Him,
seeing that both Persons are of this lower rank. This was not his
meaning? How then? In the way the brute creation is subject to the
rational, as in the Psalm? There is then as great a difference as is
implied in the subjection of the brute creation, when compared to man.
Perhaps he will reject this explanation as well. Then he will have to
come to the only remaining one, that the Spirit, at first in the
rebellious ranks, was afterwards forced by a superior Force to bend to a
Conqueror.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p5"></span>Let him choose which he likes of
these alternatives: whichever it is I do not see how he can avoid the
inevitable crime of <span id="page_LIV">p. LIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-Page_LIV"></span>blasphemy: whether he says the
Spirit is subject in the manner of the brute creation, as fish and birds
and sheep, to man, or were to fetch Him a captive to a superior power
after the manner of a rebel. Or does he mean neither of these ways, but
uses the word in a different signification altogether to the scripture
meaning? What, then, is that signification? Does he lay down that we
must rank Him as inferior and not as equal, because He was given by our
Lord to His disciples third in order? By the same reasoning he should
make the Father inferior to the Son, since the Scripture often places
the name of our Lord first, and the Father Almighty second. “I and My
Father,” our Lord says. “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God <span id="fr_109"></span>[111](#fn_109.md) ,” and other
passages innumerable which the diligent student of Scripture testimonies
might collect: for instance, “there are differences of gifts, but it is
the same Spirit: and there are differences of administration, but it is
the same Lord: and there are differences of operations, but it is the
same God.” According to this, then, let the Almighty Father, who is
mentioned third, be made ‘subject’ to the Son and the Spirit. However we
have never yet heard of a philosophy such as this, which relegates to
the category of the inferior and the dependent that which is mentioned
second or third only for some particular reason of sequence: yet that is
what our author wants to do, in arguing to show that the order observed
in the transmission of the Persons amounts to differences of more and
less in dignity and nature. In fact he rules that sequence in point of
order is indicative of unlikeness of nature: whence he got this fancy,
what necessity compelled him to it, is not clear. Mere numerical rank
does not create a different nature: that which we would count in a
number remains the same in nature whether we count it or not. Number is
a mark only of the mere quantity of things: it does not place second
those things only which have an inferior natural value, but it makes the
sequence of the numerical objects indicated in accordance with the
intention of those who are counting. ‘Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus’
are three persons mentioned according to a particular intention. Does
the place of Silvanus, second and after Paul, indicate that he was other
than a man? Or is Timothy, because he is third, considered by the writer
who so ranks him a different kind of being? Not so. Each is human both
before and after this arrangement. Speech, which cannot utter the names
of all three at once, mentions each separately according to an order
which commends itself, but unites them by the copula, in order that the
juncture of the names may show the harmonious action of the three
towards one end.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p7"></span>This, however, does not please our
new dogmatist. He opposes the arrangement of Scripture. He separates off
that equality with the Father and the Son of His proper and natural rank
and connexion which our Lord Himself pronounces, and numbers Him with
‘subjects’: he declares Him to be a work of both Persons <span
id="fr_110"></span>[112](#fn_110.md) , of the Father, as supplying the
cause of His constitution, of the Only-begotten, as of the artificer of
His subsistence: and defines this as the ground of His ‘subjection,’
without as yet unfolding the meaning of ‘subjection.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[LIII:109](2050032.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p3"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>[Psalm viii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[LIII:110](2050032.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p4"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>[Psalm xlvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#003.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p4.2"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[LIV:111](2050032.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p6"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p6.2"></span>; [2 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p6.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[LIV:112](2050032.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xvi-p8"></span> *he declares Him to be a work of
both Persons.* With regard to Gregory’s own belief as to the procession
of the Holy Spirit, it may be said once for all that there is hardly
anything (but see p. 99, note 5) clear about it to be found in his
writings. The question, in fact, remained undecided until the 9th
century, the time of the schism of the East and West. But here, as in
other points, Origen had approached the nearest to the teaching of the
West: for he represents the procession as from Father and Son, just as
often as from one Person or the other. Athanasius does certainly say
that the Spirit ‘unites the creation to the Son, and through the Son to
the Father,’ but with him this expression is not followed up: while in
the Roman Church it led to doctrine. For why does the Holy Spirit unite
the creation with God continuously and perfectly? Because, to use
Bossuet’s words, “proceeding from the Father and the Son He is their
love and eternal union.” Neither Basil, nor Gregory Nazianzen, nor
Chrysostom, have anything definite about the procession of the Third
Person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discussion as to the exact nature of the 'energies' which, this
man declares, 'follow' the being of the Father and of the Son.](2050033.md)
