[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050206)  [Next](2050208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> XXV. *How one even of those who are
without may be brought to believe the Scripture when teaching of the
resurrection* <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1711](#fn_1709) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span>1. Some one, perhaps, having regard to
the dissolution of bodies, and judging the Deity by the measure of his
own power, asserts that the idea of the resurrection is impossible,
saying that it cannot be that both those things which are now in motion
should become stationary, and those things which are now without motion
should rise again.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span>2. Let such an one, however, take as
the first and greatest evidence of the truth touching the resurrection
the credibility of the herald who proclaims it. Now the faith of what is
said derives its certainty from the result of the other predictions: for
as the Divine Scripture delivers statements many and various, it is
possible by examining how the rest of the utterances stand in the matter
of falsehood and truth to survey also, in the light of them, the
doctrine concerning the resurrection. For if in the other <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-Page_415"></span>matters the statements are found to be
false and to have failed of true fulfilment, neither is this out of the
region of falsehood; but if all the others have experience to vouch for
their truth, it would seem logical to esteem as true, on their account,
the prediction concerning the resurrection also. Let us therefore recall
one or two of the predictions that have been made, and compare the
result with what was foretold, so that we may know by means of them
whether the idea has a truthful aspect.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p5"></span>3. Who knows not how the people of
Israel flourished of old, raised up against all the powers of the world;
what were the palaces in the city of Jerusalem, what the walls, the
towers, the majestic structure of the Temple? things that seemed worthy
of admiration even to the disciples of the Lord, so that they asked the
Lord to take notice of them, in their disposition to marvel, as the
Gospel history shows us, saying, “What works, and what buildings <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1712](#fn_1710) !” But He indicates to those who
wondered at its present state the future desolation of the place and the
disappearance of that beauty, saying that after a little while nothing
of what they saw should be left. And, again, at the time of His Passion,
the women followed, bewailing the unjust sentence against Him,—for they
could not yet see into the dispensation of what was being done:—but He
bids them be silent as to what is befalling Him, for it does not demand
their tears, but to reserve their wailing and lamentation for the true
time for tears, when the city should be compassed by besiegers, and
their sufferings reach so great a strait that they should deem him happy
who had not been born: and herein He foretold also the horrid deed of
her who devoured her child, when He said that in those days the womb
should be accounted blest that never bare <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1713](#fn_1711) . Where then are those palaces?
where is the Temple? where are the walls? where are the defences of the
towers? where is the power of the Israelites? were not they scattered in
different quarters over almost the whole world? and in their overthrow
the palaces also were brought to ruin.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p8"></span>4. Now it seems to me that the Lord
foretold these things and others like them not for the sake of the
matters themselves—for what great advantage to the hearers, at any rate,
was the prediction of what was about to happen? they would have known by
experience, even if they had not previously learnt what would come;—but
in order that by these means faith on their part might follow concerning
more important matters: for the testimony of facts in the former cases
is also a proof of truth in the latter.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p9"></span>5. For just as though, if a husbandman
were explaining the virtue of seeds, it were to happen that some person
inexperienced in husbandry should disbelieve him, it would be sufficient
as proof of his statement for the agriculturist to show him the virtue
existing in one seed of those in the bushel and make it a pledge of the
rest—for he who should see the single grain of wheat or barley, or
whatever might chance to be the contents of the bushel, grow into an ear
after being cast into the ground, would by the means of the one cease
also to disbelieve concerning the others—so the truthfulness which
confessedly belongs to the other statements seems to me to be sufficient
also for evidence of the mystery of the resurrection.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p10"></span>6. Still more, however, is this the
case with the experience of actual resurrection which we have learnt not
so much by words as by actual facts: for as the marvel of resurrection
was great and passing belief, He begins gradually by inferior instances
of His miraculous power, and accustoms our faith, as it were, for the
reception of the greater.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p11"></span>7. For as a mother who nurses her
babe with due care for a time supplies milk by her breast to its mouth
while still tender and soft; and when it begins to grow and to have
teeth she gives it bread, not hard or such as it cannot chew, so that
the tender and unpractised gums may not be chafed by rough food; but
softening it with her own teeth, she makes it suitable and convenient
for the powers of the eater; and then as its power increases by growth
she gradually leads on the babe, accustomed to tender food, to more
solid nourishment; so the Lord, nourishing and fostering with miracles
the weakness of the human mind, like some babe not fully grown, makes
first of all a prelude of the power of the resurrection in the case of a
desperate disease, which prelude, though it was great in its
achievement, yet was not such a thing that the statement of it would be
disbelieved: for by “rebuking the fever” which was fiercely consuming
Simon’s wife’s mother, He produced so great a removal of the evil as to
enable her who was already expected to be near death, to “minister <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1714](#fn_1712) ” to those present.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p13"></span>8. Next He makes a slight addition to
the power, and when the nobleman’s son lies in acknowledged danger of
death (for so the history tells us, that he was about to die, as his
father cried, “come down, ere my child die <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1715](#fn_1713) ”), He again brings about the
resurrection of one who was believed about to die; accomplishing the
miracle with a greater act of power in that He did not even approach the
place, but sent life from afar off by the force of His command.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p15"></span><span id="page_416">p. 416</span>
<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-Page_416"></span>9. Once more in what follows He
ascends to higher wonders. For having set out on His way to the ruler of
the synagogue’s daughter, he voluntarily made a halt in His way, while
making public the secret cure of the woman with an issue of blood, that
in this time death might overcome the sick. When, then, the soul had
just been parted from the body, and those who were wailing over the
sorrow were making a tumult with their mournful cries, He raises the
damsel to life again, as if from sleep, by His word of command, leading
on human weakness, by a sort of path and sequence, to greater things.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p16"></span>10. Still in addition to these acts
He exceeds them in wonder, and by a more exalted act of power prepares
for men the way of faith in the resurrection. The Scripture tells us of
a city called Nain in Judæa: a widow there had an only child, no longer
a child in the sense of being among boys, but already passing from
childhood to man’s estate: the narrative calls him “a young man.” The
story conveys much in few words: the very recital is a real lamentation:
the dead man’s mother, it says, “was a widow.” See you the weight of her
misfortune, how the text briefly sets out the tragedy of her suffering?
for what does the phrase mean? that she had no more hope of bearing
sons, to cure the loss she had just sustained in him who had departed;
for the woman was a widow: she had not in her power to look to another
instead of to him who was gone; for he was her only child; and how great
a grief is here expressed any one may easily see who is not an utter
stranger to natural feeling. Him alone she had known in travail, him
alone she had nursed at her breast; he alone made her table cheerful, he
alone was the cause of brightness in her home, in play, in work, in
learning, in gaiety, at processions, at sports, at gatherings of youth;
he alone was all that is sweet and precious in a mother’s eyes. Now at
the age of marriage, he was the stock of her race, the shoot of its
succession, the staff of her old age. Moreover, even the additional
detail of his time of life is another lament: for he who speaks of him
as “a young man” tells of the flower of his faded beauty, speaks of him
as just covering his face with down, not yet with a full thick beard,
but still bright with the beauty of his cheeks. What then, think you,
were his mother’s sorrows for him? how would her heart be consumed as it
were with a flame; how bitterly would she prolong her lament over him,
embracing the corpse as it lay before her, lengthening out her mourning
for him as far as possible, so as not to hasten the funeral of the dead,
but to have her fill of sorrow! Nor does the narrative pass this by: for
Jesus “when He saw her,” it says, “had compassion”; “and He came and
touched the bier; and they that bare him stood still;” and He said to
the dead, “Young man, I say unto thee, arise <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1716](#fn_1714) ,” “and He delivered him to his
mother” alive. Observe that no short time had intervened since the dead
man had entered upon that state, he was all but laid in the tomb; the
miracle wrought by the Lord is greater, though the command is the same.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p18"></span>11. His miraculous power proceeds to
a still more exalted act, that its display may more closely approach
that miracle of the resurrection which men doubt. One of the Lord’s
companions and friends is ill (Lazarus is the sick man’s name); and the
Lord deprecates any visiting of His friend, though far away from the
sick man, that in the absence of the Life, death might find room and
power to do his own work by the agency of disease. The Lord informs His
disciples in Galilee of what has befallen Lazarus, and also of his own
setting out to him to raise him up when laid low. They, however, were
exceedingly afraid on account of the fury of the Jews, thinking it a
difficult and dangerous matter to turn again towards Judæa, in the midst
of those who sought to slay Him: and thus, lingering and delaying, they
return slowly from Galilee: but they do return, for His command
prevailed, and the disciples were led by the Lord to be initiated at
Bethany in the preliminary mysteries of the general resurrection. Four
days had already passed since the event; all due rites had been
performed for the departed; the body was hidden in the tomb: it was
probably already swollen and beginning to dissolve into corruption, as
the body mouldered in the dank earth and necessarily decayed: the thing
was one to turn from, as the dissolved body under the constraint of
nature changed to offensiveness <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1717](#fn_1715) . At this point the doubted fact of
the general resurrection is brought to proof by a more manifest miracle;
for one is not raised from severe sickness, nor brought back to life
when at the last breath—nor is a child just dead brought to life, nor a
young man about to be conveyed to the tomb released from his bier; but a
man past the prime of life, a corpse, decaying, swollen, yea already in
a state of dissolution, so that even his own kinsfolk could not suffer
that the Lord should draw near the tomb by reason of the offensiveness
of the decayed body there enclosed, brought into life by a single call,
confirms the proclamation of the resurrection, that is to say, that
expectation of it as universal, which we learn by a par<span
id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-Page_417"></span>ticular experience to entertain. For
as in the regeneration of the universe the Apostle tells us that “the
Lord Himself will descend with a shout, with the voice of the
archangel <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1718](#fn_1716) ,” and by a trumpet
sound raise up the dead to incorruption—so now too he who is in the
tomb, at the voice of command, shakes off death as if it were a sleep,
and ridding himself from the corruption that had come upon his condition
of a corpse, leaps forth from the tomb whole and sound, not even
hindered in his egress by the bonds of the grave-cloths round his feet
and hands.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p21"></span>12. Are these things too small to
produce faith in the resurrection of the dead? or dost thou seek that
thy judgment on this point should be confirmed by yet other proofs? In
truth the Lord seems to me not to have spoken in vain to them of
Capernaum, when He said to Himself, as in the person of men, “Ye will
surely say unto me this proverb, ‘Physician, heal thyself <span
id="fr_1717"></span>[1719](#fn_1717) .’” For it behoved Him, when He had
accustomed men to the miracle of the resurrection in other bodies, to
confirm His word in His own humanity. Thou sawest the thing proclaimed
working in others—those who were about to die, the child which had just
ceased to live, the young man at the edge of the grave, the putrefying
corpse, all alike restored by one command to life. Dost thou seek for
those who have come to death by wounds and bloodshed? does any
feebleness of life-giving power hinder the grace in them? Behold Him
Whose hands were pierced with nails: behold Him Whose side was
transfixed with a spear; pass thy fingers through the print of the
nails; thrust thy hand into the spear-wound <span
id="fr_1718"></span>[1720](#fn_1718) ; thou canst surely guess how far
within it is likely the point would reach, if thou reckonest the passage
inwards by the breadth of the external scar; for the wound that gives
admission to a man’s hand, shows to what depth within the iron entered.
If He then has been raised, well may we utter the Apostle’s exclamation,
“How say some that there is no resurrection of the dead <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1721](#fn_1719) ?”

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p25"></span>13. Since, then, every prediction of
the Lord is shown to be true by the testimony of events, while we not
only have learnt this by His words, but also received the proof of the
promise in deed, from those very persons who returned to life by
resurrection, what occasion is left to those who disbelieve? Shall we
not bid farewell to those who pervert our simple faith by “philosophy
and vain deceit <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1722](#fn_1720) ,” and hold
fast to our confession in its purity, learning briefly through the
prophet the mode of the grace, by his words, “Thou shalt take away their
breath and they shall fail, and turn to their dust. Thou shalt send
forth Thy Spirit and they shall be created, and Thou shalt renew the
face of the earth <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1723](#fn_1721) ;” at which
time also he says that the Lord rejoices in His works, sinners having
perished from the earth: for how shall any one be called by the name of
sin, when sin itself exists no longer?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[414:1711](2050207.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxvi. The title in
the Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the Latin version is:—“Of
faith in the resurrection, and of the three dead persons whom the Lord
Jesus raised.”

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[415:1712](2050207.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p6"></span> Cf. S. [Mark xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#001)<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[415:1713](2050207.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p7"></span> Cf. S. [Luke xxiii.
27-29](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#027)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[415:1714](2050207.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p12"></span> S. [Luke iv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#039)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[415:1715](2050207.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p14"></span> S. [John iv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#049)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[416:1716](2050207.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p17"></span> Cf. S. [Luke vii.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#013)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[416:1717](2050207.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19"></span> Omitting, as several of Forbes’
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> do,
and as the <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.2"></span>ms.</span> employed by Dionysius seems to
have done, the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.4"></span>ποδίδοναι πάλιν τῷ ζῆν</span>. If these
words are retained, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.5"></span>βιαζομένης</span> must be taken
passively, and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.6"></span>πρᾶγμα φευκτόν</span> understood not of
the condition of the corpse, but of the *resurrection* of Lazarus.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[417:1718](2050207.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p19.7"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p20"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[417:1719](2050207.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p22"></span> S. [Luke iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[417:1720](2050207.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p23"></span> Cf. S. [John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[417:1721](2050207.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[417:1722](2050207.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p26"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[417:1723](2050207.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p27"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p27.1"></span>[Ps.
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#030)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p27.2"></span> (LXX.). Cf. also with what follows [Psa.
104.31-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxvi-p27.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the resurrection is not beyond probability.](2050208)
