[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050204)  [Next](2050206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> XXIII. *That he who confesses the
beginning of the world’s existence must necessarily also agree as to its
end* <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1706](#fn_1704) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span>But if some one, beholding the present
course of the world, by which intervals of time are marked, going on in
a certain order, should say that it is not possible that the predicted
stoppage of these moving things should take place, such a man clearly
also does not believe that in the beginning the heaven and the earth
were made by God; for he who admits a beginning of motion surely does
not doubt as to its also having an end; and he who does not allow its
end, does not admit its beginning either; but as it is by believing that
“we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God,” as the
apostle says, “so that things which are seen were not made of things
which do appear <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1707](#fn_1705) ,” we must
use the same faith as to the word of God when He foretells the necessary
stoppage of existing things.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p5"></span>2. The question of the “how” must,
however, be put beyond the reach of our meddling; for even in the case
mentioned it was “by faith” that we admitted that the thing seen was
framed from things not yet apparent, omitting the search into things
beyond our reach. And yet our reason suggests difficulties on many
points, offering no small occasions for doubt as to the things which we
believe.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p6"></span>3. For in that case too, argumentative
men might by plausible reasoning upset our faith, so that we should not
think that statement true which Holy Scripture delivers concerning the
material creation, when it asserts that all existing things have their
beginning of being from God. For those who abide by the contrary view
maintain that matter is co-eternal with God, and employ in support of
their own doctrine some such arguments as these. If God is in His nature
simple and immaterial, without quantity <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[1708](#fn_1706) , or size, or combination, and
removed from the idea of circumscription by way of figure, while all
matter is apprehended in extension measured by intervals, and does not
escape the apprehension of our senses, but becomes known to us in
colour, and figure, and bulk, and size, and resistance, and the other
attributes belonging to it, none of which it is possible to conceive in
the Divine nature,—what method is there for the production of matter
from the immaterial, or of the nature that has dimensions from that
which is unextended? for if these things are believed to have their
existence from that source, they clearly come into existence after being
in Him in some mysterious way; but if material existence was in Him, how
can He be immaterial while including matter in Himself? and similarly
with all the other marks by which the material nature is differentiated;
if quantity exists in God, how is God without quantity? if the compound
nature exists in Him, how is He simple, without parts and without
combination? so that the argument forces us to think either that He is
material, because matter has its existence from Him as a source; or, if
one avoids this, it is necessary to suppose that matter was imported by
Him *ab extra* for the making of the universe.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>4. If, then, it was external to God,
something else surely existed besides God, conceived, in respect of
eternity, together with Him Who exists ungenerately; so that the
argument supposes two eternal and unbegotten existences, having their
being concurrently with each other<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>
<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-Page_414"></span>—that of Him Who operates as an
artificer, and that of the thing which admits this skilled operation;
and if any one under pressure of this argument should assume a material
substratum for the Creator of all things, what a support will the
Manichæan find for his special doctrine, who opposes by virtue of
ungenerateness a material existence to a Good Being. Yet we do believe
that all things are of God, as we hear the Scripture say so; and as to
the question how they were in God, a question beyond our reason, we do
not seek to pry into it, believing that all things are within the
capacity of God’s power—both to give existence to what is not, and to
implant qualities at His pleasure in what is.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p9"></span>5. Consequently, as we suppose the
power of the Divine will to be a sufficient cause to the things that
are, for their coming into existence out of nothing, so too we shall not
repose our belief on anything beyond probability in referring the
World-Reformation to the same power. Moreover, it might perhaps be
possible, by some skill in the use of words, to persuade those who raise
frivolous objections on the subject of matter not to think that they can
make an unanswerable attack on our statement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[413:1706](2050205.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxiv. The Bodleian
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Latin version has a title corresponding to that of the following chapter
in the other <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>mss.</span>:—“Against those who say that
matter is co-eternal with God.”

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[413:1707](2050205.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> Cf. [Heb. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.
The <span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>mss.</span>
give somewhat the same variations which are observable in the N.T.
Codices. The reading which Forbes adopts coincides with the Textus
Receptus.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[413:1708](2050205.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7"></span> Reading, with some of Forbes’ <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>mss.</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.3"></span>ποσος</span>, which
seems on the whole the better reading so far as sense is concerned.
<span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.5"></span>ποιος</span> may be
the result of a sense of the awkwardness of employing both <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.6"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.7"></span>ποσος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.9"></span>μεγέθης</span>: but
further on in the section we find <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.10"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.11"></span>ποσος</span> where the <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.12"></span>mss.</span> seem to
agree. Further, the connecting particles seem to show a closer
connection of sense between <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.13"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.14"></span>ποσὸς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.15"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.16"></span>μεγέθης</span> than
between <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.17"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.18"></span>μεγέθης</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.19"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.20"></span>σύνθετος</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An argument against those who say that matter is co-eternal with
God.](2050206)
