[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050179)  [Next](2050181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.i"></span>

<span id="x.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="x.ii.i-Page_386"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="x.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Note on the Treatise “On the Making of
Man.”</span>

<span id="x.ii.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="x.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="x.ii.i-p3.1"></span>This</span> work was intended to supplement and
complete the Hexaëmeron of S. Basil, and presupposes an acquaintance
with that treatise. The narrative of the creation of the world is not
discussed in detail: it is referred to, but chiefly in order to insist
on the idea that the world was prepared to be the sphere of man’s
sovereignty. On the other hand, Gregory shows that man was made “with
circumspection,” fitted by nature for rule over the other creatures,
made in the likeness of God in respect of various moral attributes, and
in the possession of reason, while differing from the Divine nature in
that the human mind receives its information by means of the senses and
is dependent on them for its perception of external things. The body is
fitted to be the instrument of the mind, adapted to the use of a
reasonable being: and it is by the possession of the “rational soul,” as
well as of the “natural” or “vegetative” and the “sensible” soul, that
man differs from the lower animals. At the same time, his mind works by
means of the senses: it is incomprehensible in its nature (resembling in
this the Divine nature of which it is the image), and its relation to
the body is discussed at some length (chs. 12–15). The connection
between mind and body is ineffable: it is not to be accounted for by
supposing that the mind resides in any particular part of the body: the
mind acts upon and is acted upon by the whole body, depending on the
corporeal and material nature for one element of perception, so that
perception requires both body and mind. But it is to the rational
element that the name of “soul” properly belongs: the nutritive and
sensible faculties only borrow the name from that which is higher than
themselves. Man was first made “in the image of God:” and this
conception excludes the idea of distinction of sex. In the first
creation of man all humanity is included, according to the Divine
foreknowledge: “our whole nature extending from the first to the last”
is “one image of Him Who is.” But for the Fall, the increase of the
human race would have taken place as the increase of the angelic race
takes place, in some way unknown to us. The declension of man from his
first estate made succession by generation necessary: and it was because
this declension and its consequences were present to the Divine mind
that God “created them male and female.” In this respect, and in respect
of the need of nourishment by food, man is not “in the image of God,”
but shows his kindred with the lower creation. But these necessities are
not permanent: they will end with the restoration of man to his former
excellence (chs. 16–18). Here Gregory is led to speak (chs. 19–20) of
the food of man in Paradise, and of the “tree of the knowledge of good
and evil.” And thus, having made mention of the Fall of man, he goes on
to speak of his Restoration. This, in his view, follows from the finite
nature of evil: it is deferred until the sum of humanity is complete. As
to the mode in which the present state of things will end, we know
nothing: but that it will end is inferred from the non-eternity of
matter (chs. 21–24). The doctrine of the Resurrection is supported by
our knowledge of the accuracy with which other events have been
predicted in Scripture, by the experience given to us of like events in
particular cases, in those whom our Lord raised to life, and especially
in His own resurrection. The argument that such a restoration is
impossible is met by an appeal to the unlimited character of the Divine
power, and by inferences from parallels observed in nature (chs. 25–27).
Gregory then proceeds to deal with the question of the pre-existence of
the soul, rejecting that opinion, and maintaining that the body and the
soul come into existence together, *potentially* in the Divine will,
*actually* at the moment when each individual man comes into being by
generation (chs. 28–29). In the course of his argument on this last
point, he turns aside to discuss at some length, in the last chapter,
the structure of the human body: but he returns once more, in
conclusion, to his main position, that man “is generated as a living and
animated being,” and that the power of the soul is gradually manifested
in, and by means of, the material substratum of the body; so that man is
brought to perfection by the aid of the lower attributes of the soul.
But the true perfection of the soul is not in these, which will
ultimately be “put away,” but in the higher attributes which constitute
for man “the image of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Making of Man.](2050181)
