[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050048)  [Next](2050050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p1"></span> §33. *He declares falsely that
‘the manner of the generation is to be known from the intrinsic worth of
the generator’.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p2"></span>He goes back, for instance, to
the begetting being, and from thence takes a survey of the begotten;
“for,” says he, “the manner of the generation is to be known from the
intrinsic worth of the generator.” Again, we find this bold unqualified
generalization of his causing the thought of the inquirer to be
dissipated in every possible direction; it is the nature of such general
statements, to extend in their meanings to every instance, and allow
nothing to escape their sweeping assertion. If then ‘the manner of the
generation is to be known from the intrinsic worth of the generator,’
and there are many differences in the worth of gene<span
id="page_LXXVIII">p. LXXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-Page_LXXVIII"></span>rators according to their
many classifications <span id="fr_166"></span>[168](#fn_166) to be found
(for one may be born Jew, Greek, barbarian, Scythian, bond, free), what
will be the result? Why, that we must expect to find as many “manners of
generation” as there are differences in intrinsic worth amongst the
generators; and that their birth will not be fulfilled with all in the
same way, but that their nature will vary with the worth of the parent,
and that some peculiar manner of birth will be struck out for each,
according to these varying estimations. For a certain inalienable worth
is to be observed in the individual parent; the distinction, that is, of
being better or worse off according as there has fallen to each race,
estimation, religion, nationality, power, servitude, wealth, poverty,
independence, dependence, or whatever else constitutes the life-long
differences of worth. If then “the manner of the generation” is shown by
the intrinsic worth of the parent, and there are many differences in
worth, we shall inevitably find, if we follow this opinion-monger, that
the manners of generation are various too; in fact, this difference of
worth will dictate to Nature the manner of the birth.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p4"></span>But if he should not <span
id="fr_167"></span>[169](#fn_167) admit that such worth is natural,
because they can be put in thought outside the nature of their subject,
we will not oppose him. But at all events he will agree to this; that
man’s existence is separated by an intrinsic character from that of
brutes. Yet the manner of birth in these two cases presents no variation
in intrinsic character; nature brings man and the brute into the world
in just the same way, i.e. by generation. But if he apprehends this
native dignity only in the case of the most proper and supreme
existence, let us see what he means then. In our view, the ‘native
dignity’ of God consists in godhead itself, wisdom, power, goodness,
judgment, justice, strength, mercy, truth, creativeness, domination,
invisibility, everlastingness, and every other quality named in the
inspired writings to magnify his glory; and we affirm that everyone of
them is properly and inalienably found in the Son, recognizing
difference only in respect of unoriginateness; and even that we do not
exclude the Son from, according to *all* its meanings. But let no
carping critic attack this statement as if we were attempting to exhibit
the Very Son as ungenerate; for we hold that one who maintains that is
no less impious than an Anomœan. But since the meanings of ‘origin’ are
various, and suggest many ideas, there are some of them in which the
title ‘unoriginate’ is not inapplicable to the Son <span
id="fr_168"></span>[170](#fn_168) . When, for instance, this word has
the meaning of ‘deriving existence from no cause whatever,’ then we
confess that it is peculiar to the Father; but when the question is
about ‘origin’ in its other meanings (since any creature or time or
order has an origin), then we attribute the being superior to origin to
the Son as well, and we believe that that whereby all things were made
is beyond the origin of creation, and the idea of time, and the sequence
of order. So He, Who on the ground of His subsistence is not without an
origin, possessed in every other view an undoubted *unoriginateness*;
and while the Father is unoriginate and Ungenerate, the Son is
unoriginate in the way we have said, though not ungenerate.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p7"></span>What, then, is that native
dignity of the Father which he is going to look at in order to infer
thereby the ‘manner of the generation.’ “His not being generated, most
certainly,” he will reply. If, then, all those names with which we have
learnt to magnify God’s glory are useless and meaningless to you,
Eunomius, the mere going through the list of such expressions is a
gratuitous and superfluous task; none of these other words, you say,
expresses the intrinsic worth of the God over all. But if there is a
peculiar force fitting our conceptions of the Deity in each of these
words, the intrinsic dignities of God must plainly be viewed in
connexion with this list, and the likeness of the two beings will be
thereby proved; if, that is, the characters inalienable from the beings
are an index of the subjects of those characters. The characters of each
being are found to be the same; and so the identity on the score of
being of the two subjects of these identical dignities is shown most
clearly. For if the variation in a single name is to be held to be the
index of an alien being, how much more should the identity of these
countless names avail to prove community of nature!

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p8"></span>What, then, is the reason why the
other names should all be neglected, and generation be indicated by the
means of one alone? Why do they pronounce this ‘Ungeneracy’ to be the
only intrinsic character in the Father, and thrust all the rest aside?
It is in order that they may establish their mischievous mode <span
id="fr_169"></span>[171](#fn_169) of <span id="page_LXXIX">p.
LXXIX</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-Page_LXXIX"></span>unlikeness
of Father and Son, by this contrast as regards the begotten. But we
shall find that this attempt of theirs, when we come to test it in its
proper place, is equally feeble, unfounded, and nugatory as the
preceding attempts.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p10"></span>Still, that all his reasonings
point this way, is shown by the sequel, in which he praises himself for
having fittingly adopted this method for the proof of his blasphemy, and
yet for not having all at once divulged his intention, nor shocked the
unprepared hearer with his impiety, before the concatenation of his
delusive argument was complete, nor displayed this Ungeneracy as God’s
being in the early part of his discourse, nor to weary us with talk
about the difference of being. The following are his exact words: “Or
was it right, as Basil commands, to begin with the thing to be proved,
and to assert incoherently that the Ungeneracy is the being, and to talk
about the difference or the sameness of nature?” Upon this he has a long
intervening tirade, made up of scoffs and insulting abuse (such being
the weapons which this thinker uses to defend his own doctrines), and
then he resumes the argument, and turning upon his adversary, fixes upon
him, forsooth, the blame of what he is saying, in these words; “For your
party, before any others, are guilty of this offence; having partitioned
out this same being between Begetter and Begotten; and so the scolding
you have given is only a halter not to be eluded which you have woven
for your own necks; justice, as might have been expected, records in
your own words a verdict against yourselves. Either you first conceive
of the beings as sundered, and independent of each other <span
id="fr_170"></span>[172](#fn_170) ; and then bring down one of them, by
generation, to the rank of Son, and contend that One who exists
independently nevertheless was made by means of the Other existence; and
so lay yourselves open to your own reproaches: for to Him whom you
imagine as without generation you ascribe a generation by another:—or
else you first allow one single causeless being, and then marking this
out by an act of causation into Father and Son, you declare that this
non-generated being came into existence by means of itself.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[LXXVIII:168](2050049.htm#fr_166) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.2"></span>Επίνοια</span> is the opposite of
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.4"></span>ννοια</span>, ‘the intuitive idea.’
It means an “afterthought,” and, with the notion of unnecessary
addition, a ‘conceit.’ Here it is applied to conventional, or not purely
natural difference. See Introduction to Book XIII. for the fuller
meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p3.6"></span>Επίνοια</span>.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[LXXVIII:169](2050049.htm#fr_167) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>μὴ δέχοιτο</span>. This use of the
optative, where the subjunctive with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.3"></span>αν</span> might have been expected,
is one of the few instances in Gregory’s Greek of declension from
Classic usage; in the latter, when <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.4"></span>ει</span> with the optative does
denote subjective possibility, it is only when the condition is
conceived of as of frequent repetition, e.g. <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.5"></span>[1 Peter iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.6"></span>. The optative often in this Greek of
the fourth century invades the province of the subjunctive.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[LXXVIII:170](2050049.htm#fr_168) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p5.7"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>μὴ ἀπεμφαίνειν</span>

<span id="fn_169"></span>[LXXVIII:171](2050049.htm#fr_169) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p9"></span> See Note on <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p9.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>,
p. 100.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[LXXIX:172](2050049.htm#fr_170) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>νάρχως</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Passage where he attacks the ῾Ομοούσιον, and the contention
in answer to it.](2050050)
