[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050007)  [Next](2050009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—<span class="c22"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.2"></span>His General Character as a
Theologian</span>.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>“<span class="c22"><span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> first who sought to establish by
rational considerations the whole complex of orthodox doctrines.” So
Ueberweg (History of Philosophy, p. 326) of Gregory of Nyssa. This marks
the transition from ante-Nicene times. Then, at all events in the hands
of Origen, philosophy was identical with theology. Now, that there is a
‘complex of orthodox doctrines’ to defend, philosophy becomes the
handmaid of theology. Gregory, in this respect, has done the most
important service of any of the writers of the Church in the fourth
century. He treats each single philosophical view only as a help to
grasp the formulæ of faith; and the truth of that view consists with him
only in its adaptability to that end. Notwithstanding strong speculative
leanings he does not defend orthodoxy either in the fashion of the
Alexandrian school or in the fashion of some in modern times, who put
forth a system of philosophy to which the dogmas of the Faith are to be
accommodated.

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>If this be true, the question as to his
attitude towards Plato, which is one of the first that suggests itself,
is settled. Against polytheism he does indeed seek to defend
Christianity by connecting it apologetically with Plato’s system. This
we cannot be surprised at, considering that the definitions of the
doctrines of the Catholic Church were formed in the very place where the
last considerable effort of Platonism was made; but he by no means makes
the New Life in any way dependent on this system of philosophy. “We
cannot speculate,” he says (*De Anim. et Resurrect.*),…“we must leave
the Platonic car.” But still when he is convinced that Plato will
confirm doctrine he will, even in polemic treatises, adopt his view; for
instance, he seeks to grasp the truth of the Trinity from the Platonic
account of our internal consciousness, i.e. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>ψυχὴ, λόγος, νοῦς</span>; because such a proof
from consciousness is, to Gregory, the surest and most reliable.

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span>The “rational considerations,” then, by
which Gregory would have established Christian doctrine are not
necessarily drawn from the philosophy of the time: nor, further, does he
seek to rationalize entirely all religious truth. In fact he resigns the
hope of comprehending the Incarnation and all the great articles. This
is the very thing that distinguishes the Catholic from the Eunomian.
“Receiving the *fact* we leave untampered with the *manner* of the
creation of the Universe, as altogether secret and inexplicable <span
id="fr_7"></span>[9](#fn_7) .” With a turn resembling the view of
Tertullian, he comes back to the conclusion that for us after all
Religious Truth consists in mystery. “The Church possesses the means of
demonstrating these things: or rather, <span id="page_IX">p. IX</span>
<span id="vii.ii-Page_IX"></span>she has faith, which is surer than
demonstration <span id="fr_8"></span>[10](#fn_8) .” He developes the
truth of the Resurrection as much by the fulfilment of God’s promises as
by metaphysics: and it has been considered as one of the proofs that the
treatise *What is being ‘in the image of God’?* is not his that this
subordination of philosophical proof to the witness of the Holy Spirit
is not preserved in it.

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>Nevertheless there was a large field, larger
even than in the next century, in which rationalizing was not only
allowable, but was even required of him. In this there are three
questions which Gregory has treated with particular fulness and
originality. They are:—1. Evil; 2. The relation between the ideal and
the actual Man; 3. Spirit.

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>I. He takes, to begin with, Origen’s view of
evil. Virtue and Vice are not opposed to each other as two Existencies:
but as Being is opposed to not-Being. Vice exists only as an absence.
But how did this arise?

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>In answering this question he seems
sometimes to come very near Manicheism, and his writings must be read
very carefully, in order to avoid fixing upon him the groundless charge
that he leaves evil in too near connexion with Matter. But the
passages <span id="fr_9"></span>[11](#fn_9) which give rise to this
charge consist of comparisons found in his homilies and meditations;
just as a modern theologian might in such works make the Devil the same
as Sin and Death. The only imperfection in his view is that he is
unable <span id="fr_10"></span>[12](#fn_10) to regard evil as not only
suffered but even *permitted* by God. But this imperfection is
inseparable from his time: for Manicheism was too near and its
opposition too little overcome for such a view to be possible for him;
he could not see that it is the only one able thoroughly to resist
Dualism.

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span>Evil with Gregory is to be found in the
spontaneous proclivity of the soul towards Matter: but not in Matter
itself. Matter, therefore, in his eschatology is not to be burnt up and
annihilated: only soul and body have to be *refined*, as gold (this is a
striking comparison) is refined. He is very clear upon the relations
between the three factors, body, matter, and evil. He represents the
mind as the mirror of the Archetypal Beauty: then below the mind comes
body (φύσις which is connected with mind and pervaded by it, and when
thus transfigured and beautified by it becomes itself the mirror of this
mirror: and then this body in its turn influences and combines Matter.
The Beauty of the Supreme Being thus penetrates all things: and as long
as the lower holds on to the higher all is well. But if a rupture occurs
anywhere, then Matter, receiving no longer influence from above, reveals
its own deformity, and imparts something of it to body and, through
that, to mind: for matter is in itself ‘a shapeless unorganized
thing <span id="fr_11"></span>[13](#fn_11) .’ Thus the mind loses the
image of God. But evil began when the rupture was made: and what caused
that? When and how did the mind become separated from God?

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>Gregory answers this question by laying it
down as a principle, that *everything created is subject to change.* The
Uncreate Being is changeless, but Creation, since its very beginning was
owing to a change, i.e. a calling of the non-existent into existence, is
liable to alter. Gregory deals here with angelic equally as with human
nature, and with all the powers in both, especially with the will, whose
virtual freedom he assumes throughout. That, too, was created; therefore
that, too, could change.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>It was possible, therefore, that, first,
one of the created spirits, and, as it actually happened, he who was
entrusted with the supervision of the earth, should choose to turn his
eyes away from the Good; he thus looked at a lower good; and so began to
be envious and to have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>πάθη</span>. All evil followed in a chain from
this beginning; according to the principle that the beginning of
anything is the cause of all that follows in its train.

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="page_X">p. X</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_X"></span>So the Devil fell: and the proclivity to evil
was introduced into the spiritual world. Man, however, still looked to
God and was filled with blessings (this is the ‘ideal man’ of Gregory).
But as when the flame has got hold of a wick one cannot dim its light by
means of the flame itself, but only by mixing water with the oil in the
wick, so the Enemy effected the weakening of God’s blessings in man by
cunningly *mixing wickedness in his will*, as he had mixed it in his
own. From first to last, then, evil lies in the προαίρεσις and in
nothing else.

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span>God knew what would happen and suffered it,
that He might not destroy our freedom, the inalienable heritage of
reason and therefore a portion of His image in us.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[14](#fn_12) He ‘gave scope to evil for a nobler end.’
Gregory calls it a piece of “little mindedness” to argue from evil
either the weakness or the wickedness of God.

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>II. His remarks on the relation between the
ideal and the actual Man are very interesting. It is usual with the
other Fathers, in speaking of man’s original perfection, to take the
moment of the first man’s residence in Paradise, and to regard the
*whole* of human nature as there represented by the first two human
beings. Gregory is far removed from this way of looking at the matter.
With him human perfection is the ‘idea’ of humanity: he sees already in
the bodily-created Adam the fallen man. The present man is not to be
distinguished from that bodily Adam; both fall below the ideal type.
Gregory seems to put the Fall beyond and before the beginning of
history. ‘Under the form of narrative Moses places before us mere
doctrine <span id="fr_13"></span>[15](#fn_13) .’ The *locus classicus*
about the idea and the reality of human nature is *On the Making of
Man*, I. p. 88f. He sketches both in a masterly way. He speaks of the
division of the human race into male and female as a ‘device’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p20.2"></span>πιτέχνησις</span>),
implying that it was not the first ‘organization’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p20.3"></span>κατασκευή</span>). He hints
that the irrational element was actually provided by the Creator, Who
foresaw the Fall and the Redemption, for man to sin in; as if man
immediately upon the creation of the perfect humanity became a mixed
nature (spirit and flesh), and his fall was not a mere accident, but a
*necessary consequence of this mixed nature*. Adam must have fallen:
there was no perfect humanity in Paradise. In man’s mixed nature of
spirit and flesh nutrition is the basis of his sensation, and sensation
is the basis of his thought; and so it was inevitable that sin through
this lower yet vital side of man should enter in. So ingrained is the
spirit with the flesh in the whole history of actual humanity that all
the varieties of all the souls that ever have lived or ever shall, arise
from this very mixture; i.e. from the varying degrees of either factor
in each. But as Gregory’s view here touches, though in striking
contrast, on Origen’s, more will be said about it in the next chapter.

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span>It follows from this that Gregory, as
Clement and Basil before him, did not look upon Original Sin as the
accidental or extraordinary thing which it was afterwards regarded.
‘From a man who is a sinner and subject to passion of course is
engendered a man who is a sinner and subject to passion: sin being in a
manner born with him, and growing with his growth, and not dying with
it.’ And yet he says elsewhere, “An infant who is just born is not
culpable, nor does it merit punishment; just as he who has been baptized
has no account to give of his past sins, since they are forgiven,” and
he calls infants <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p21.2"></span>πόνηροι</span>, ‘not having in the least
admitted the disease into their soul.’ But these two views can of course
be reconciled; the infant at the moment of its physical birth starts
with sins forgotten, just as at the moment of its spiritual birth it
starts with sins forgiven. No actual sin has been committed. But then
its nature has lost the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p21.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p21.4"></span>παθεία</span>; the inevitable weakness of its
ancestry is in it.

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span>III. ‘Spirit.’ Speaking of the soul,
Gregory asks, ‘How can that which is incomposite be dissolved?’ i.e. the
soul is spirit, and spirit is incomposite and therefore indestructible.

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span>But care must be taken not to infer too
much from this his favourite expression ‘spirit’ in connexion with the
soul. ‘God is spirit’ too; and we are inclined to forget that this <span
id="page_XI">p. XI</span> <span id="vii.ii-Page_XI"></span>is no more
than a negative definition, and to imagine the human spirit of equal
prerogative with Deity. Gregory gives no encouragement to this; he
distinctly teaches that, though the soul is incomposite, it is not in
the least independent of time and space, as the Deity is.

<span id="vii.ii-p24"></span>In fact he almost entirely drops the old
Platonic division of the Universe into Intelligible (spiritual) and
Sensible, which helps to keep up this confusion between human and divine
‘spirit,’ and adopts the Christian division of Creator and Created. This
difference between Creator and Created is further figured by him as that
between

<span id="vii.ii-p25"></span>1. The Infinite and The Finite.

<span id="vii.ii-p26"></span>2. The Changeless and The Changeable.

<span id="vii.ii-p27"></span>3. The Contradiction-less and The
Contradictory.

<span id="vii.ii-p28"></span>The result of this is that the Spirit-world
itself has been divided into Uncreate and Created.

<span id="vii.ii-p29"></span>With regard, then, to this created
Spirit-world we find that Gregory, as Basil, teaches that it existed,
i.e. it had been created, *before* the work of the Six Days began. ‘God
made all that is, at once’ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p29.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p29.2"></span>θρόως</span>). This is only his translation of
the verse, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth;’ the
material for ‘heaven’ and ‘earth,’ i.e. spirits and chaos, was made in a
moment, but God had not yet spoken the successive Words of creation. The
souls of men, then, existed from the very beginning of creation, and in
a *determinate* number; for this is a necessary consequence of the
‘simultaneous creation.’ This was the case with the Angels too, the
other portion of the created Spirit-world. Gregory has treated the
subject of the Angels very fully. He considers that they are perfect:
but their perfection too is contingent: it depends on the grace of God
and their own wills; the angels are free, and therefore changeable.
Their will necessarily moves towards something: at their first creation
the Beautiful alone solicited them. Man ‘a little lower than the Angels’
was perfect too; deathless, passionless, contemplative. ‘The true and
perfect soul is single in its nature, intellectual, immaterial <span
id="fr_14"></span>[16](#fn_14) .’ He was ‘as the Angels’ and if he fell,
Lucifer fell too. Gregory will not say, as Origen did, that human souls
had a body when *first* created: rather, as we have seen, he implies the
contrary; and he came to be considered the champion that fought the
doctrine of the pre-existence of *embodied* souls. He seems to have been
influenced by Methodius’ objections to Origen’s view. But his
magnificent idea of the first man gives way at once to something more
Scriptural and at the same time more scientific; and his ideal becomes a
downright forecast of Realism.

<span id="vii.ii-p31"></span>Taking, however, the human soul as it is,
he still continues, we often find, to compare it with God. In his great
treatise *On the Soul and the Resurrection*, he rests a great deal on
the parallel between the relation of man to his body, and that of God to
the world.—‘The soul is as a cord drawn out of mud; God draws to Himself
what is His own.’—He calls the human spirit ‘an influx of the divine
in-breathing’ (*Adv. Apollin.* c. 12). Anger and desire do not belong to
the essence of the soul, he says: they are only among its varying
states. The soul, then, as separable from matter, is *like* God. But
this likeness does not extend to the point of identity.
Incomprehensible, immortal, it is not uncreated. The distinction between
the Creator and the Created cannot be obliterated. The attributes of the
Creator set down above, i.e. that He is infinite, changeless,
contradictionless, and so always good, &c., can be applied only
*catachrestically* to some men, in that they resemble their Maker as a
copy resembles its original: but still, in this connexion, Gregory does
speak of those ‘who do not need any cleansing at all <span
id="fr_15"></span>[17](#fn_15) ,’ and the context forces us to apply
these words to men. There is no irony, to him or to any Father of the
fourth century, in the words, ‘They that are whole need not a
physician.’ Although in the treatise *On Virginity*, <span
id="page_XII">p. XII</span> <span id="vii.ii-Page_XII"></span>where he
is describing the development of his own moral and religious life, he is
very far from applying them to himself, he nevertheless seems to
recognize the fact that since Christianity began there are those to whom
they might apply.

<span id="vii.ii-p33"></span>There is also need of a certain amount of
‘rational considerations’ in advancing a Defence and a Theory of
Christianity. He makes this according to the special requirements of the
time in his *Oratio Catechetica*. His reasonings do not seem to us
always convincing; but the presence of a living Hellenism and Judaism in
the world required them. These two phenomena also explain what appears
to us a great weakness in this work: namely, that he treats Hellenism as
if it were all speculation; Judaism as if it were all facts. These two
religions were too near and too practically opposed to each other for
him to see, as we can now, by the aid of a sort of science of religions,
that every religion has its *idea*, and every religion has its *facts*.
He and all the first Apologists, with the spectacle of these two
apparently opposite systems before them, thought that, in arriving at
the True Religion as well, all could be done by considering *facts*; or
all could be done by *speculation*. Gregory chose the latter method. A
Dogmatic in the modern sense, in which both the idea and the facts of
Christianity flow into one, could not have been expected of him. The
*Oratio Catechetica* is a mere philosophy of Christianity in detail
written in the philosophic language of the time. Not only does he
refrain from using the historic proofs, i.e. of prophecy and type
(except very sparingly and only to meet an adversary), but his defence
is insufficient from another point of view also; he hardly uses the
moral proofs either; he wanders persistently in metaphysics.

<span id="vii.ii-p34"></span>If he does not lean enough on these two
classes of proofs, at all events that he does not lean entirely on
either, may be considered as a guarantee of his excellence as a
theologian pure and simple. But he is on the other hand very far from
attempting a philosophic construction of Christianity, as we have seen.
Though akin to modern theologians in many things, he is unlike those of
them who would construct an *a priori* Christianity, in which the
relationship of one part to another is so close that all stands or falls
together. Philosophic deduction is with him only ‘a kind of instruction’
used in his apologetic works. On occasion he shows a clear perception of
the historic principle. “The supernatural character of the Gospel
miracles bears witness to their divine origin <span
id="fr_16"></span>[18](#fn_16) .” He points, as Origen did, to the
continued possession of miraculous powers in the Church. Again, as
regards moral proof, there had been so much attempted that way by the
Neo-Platonists that such proof could not have exactly the same degree of
weight attributed to it that it has now, at least by an adherent of the
newer Hellenism. Philostratus, Porphyry, Iamblichus had all tried to
attract attention to the holy lives of heathen sages. Yet to these,
rough sketches as they were, the Christian did oppose the Lives of the
Saints: notably Gregory himself in the *Life of Gregory Thaumaturgus*:
as Origen before him (c. Celsum, passim) had shewn in detail the
difference in kind of Christian holiness.

<span id="vii.ii-p36"></span>His treatment of the Sacraments in the
*Oratio Catechetica* is noteworthy. On Baptism he is very complete: it
will be sufficient to notice here the peculiar proof he offers that the
Holy Spirit is actually given in Baptism. It is the same proof, to start
with, as that which establishes that God came in the flesh when Christ
came. Miracles prove this; (he is not wanting here in the sense of the
importance of History). If, then, we are persuaded that God is here, we
must allow also that truth is here: for truth is the mark of Deity.
When, therefore, God has said that He will come in a particular way, if
*called in a particular way*, this must be true. He is so called in
Baptism: therefore He comes. (The vital importance of the doctrine of
the Trinity, upon which Gregory laboured for so many years, thus all
comes from Baptism.) Gregory would not confine the entire force of
Baptism to the <span id="page_XIII">p. XIII</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_XIII"></span>one ritual act. A resurrection to a new
immortal life is begun in Baptism, but owing to the weakness of nature
this complete effect is separated into stages or parts. With regard to
the necessity of Baptism for salvation, he says he does not know if the
Angels receive the souls of the unbaptized; but he rather intimates that
they wander in the air seeking rest, and entreat in vain like the Rich
Man. To him who wilfully defers it he says, ‘You are out of paradise, O
Catechumen!’

<span id="vii.ii-p37"></span>In treating the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
Gregory was the first Father who developed the view of transformation,
for which transubstantiation was afterwards substituted to suit the
mediæval philosophy; that is, he put this view already latent into
actual words. There is a *locus classicus*in the *Oratio Catechetica*,
c. 37.

<span id="vii.ii-p38"></span>“Therefore from the same cause as that by
which the bread that was transformed in that Body was changed to a
divine potency, a similar result takes place now. For as in that case,
too, the grace of the Word used to make holy the Body, the substance of
which came of the bread and was in a manner itself bread, so also in
this case the bread, as says the Apostle, ‘is sanctified by the word of
God and prayer:’ not *that it advances by the process of eating to the
stage of passing into the body of the Word, but it at once is changed
into the Body, by the Word, as the Word Himself said, ‘This is My
Body;’*” and just above he had said: “Rightly do we believe that now
also the bread which is consecrated by the word of God is changed into
the body of God the Word.” This way of explaining the mystery of the
Sacrament, i.e. from the way bread was changed into the Word when Christ
was upon earth, is compared by Neander with another way Gregory had of
explaining it, i.e. the heightened efficacy of the bread is as the
heightened efficacy of the baptismal water, the anointing oil <span
id="fr_17"></span>[19](#fn_17) , &c., a totally different idea. But
this, which may be called the *metabatic view*, is the one evidently
most present to his mind. In a fragment of his found in a Parisian <span
class="c22"><span id="vii.ii-p39.1"></span>ms. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[20](#fn_18) </span>, quoted with the Liturgies of
James, Basil, Chrysostom, we also find it; “The consecrated bread is
changed into the body of the Word; and it is needful for humanity to
partake of that.”

<span id="vii.ii-p41"></span>Again, the necessity of the Incarnation,
drawn from the words “it was necessary that Christ should suffer,”
receives a rational treatment from him. There must ever be, from a
meditation on this, two results, according as the physical or the
ethical element in Christianity prevails, i.e. 1. Propitiation; 2.
Redemption. The first theory is dear to minds fed upon the doctrines of
the Reformation, but it receives no countenance from Gregory. Only in
the book in which Moses’ Life is treated allegorically does he even
mention it. The sacrifice of Christ instead of the bloody sacrifices of
the Old Testament is not his doctrine, He develops his theory of the
Redemption or Ransom (i.e. from the Devil), in the *Oratio Catechetica*.
Strict justice to the Evil One required it. But in his hands this view
never degenerates, as with some, into a mere battle, e.g. in Gethsemane,
between the Rescuer and Enslaver.

<span id="vii.ii-p42"></span>So much has been said about Gregory’s
inconsistencies, and his apparent inconsistencies are indeed so many,
that some attempt must be made to explain this feature, to some so
repulsive, in his works. One instance at all events can show how it is
possible to reconcile even the most glaring. He is not a one-sided
theologian: he is not one of those who pass always the same judgment
upon the same subject, no matter with whom he has to deal. There could
not be a harsher contradiction than that between his statement about
human generation in the *Oratio Catechetica*, and that made in the
treatises *On Virginity* and *On the Making of Man*. In the *O.C*.
everything hateful and undignified is removed from the idea of our
birth; the idea of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p42.1"></span>πάθος</span> is not applied; “only evil brings
disgrace.” But in the other two Treatises he represents generation as a
consequence of the Fall. This contradiction arises simply from the
different standpoint in each. In the one case he is <span
id="page_XIV">p. XIV</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_XIV"></span>apologetic; and so he adopts a universally
recognised moral axiom. In the other he is the Christian theologian; the
natural process, therefore, takes its colouring from the Christian
doctrine of the Fall. This is the standpoint of most of his works, which
are polemical, not apologetic. But in the treatise *On the Soul and the
Resurrection* he introduces even a third view about generation, which
might be called that of the Christian theosophist; i.e. generation is
the means in the Divine plan for carrying Humanity to its completion.
Very similar is the view in the treatise *On Infants’ Early Deaths*;
“the design of all births is that the Power which is above the universe
may in all parts of the creation be glorified by means of intellectual
natures conspiring to the same end, by virtue of the same faculty
operating in all; I mean, that of looking upon God.” Here he is speaking
to the purely philosophic instinct. It may be remarked that on this and
all the operations of Divine foreknowledge in vast world-wide relations
he has constantly striking passages, and deserves for this especially to
be studied.

<span id="vii.ii-p43"></span>The style of Gregory is much more elegant
than that of Basil: sometimes it may be called eloquent. His occasional
digressions did not strike ancient critics as a fault. To them he is
“sweet,” “bright,” “dropping pleasure into the ears.” But his love for
splendour, combined with the lateness of his Greek, make him one of the
more difficult Church writers to interpret accurately.

<span id="vii.ii-p44"></span>His similes and illustrations are very
numerous, and well chosen. A few exceptions must, perhaps, be made. He
compares the mere professing Christian to the ape, dressed like a man
and dancing to the flute, who used to amuse the people in the theatre at
Alexandria, but once revealed during the performance its bestial nature,
at the sight of food. This is hardly worthy of a great writer, as
Gregory was <span id="fr_19"></span>[21](#fn_19) . Especially happy are
his comparisons in the treatise *On the Soul and Resurrection*, by which
metaphysical truths are expressed; and elsewhere those by which he seeks
to reach the due proportions of the truth of the Incarnation. The
chapters in his work against Eunomius where he attempts to depict the
Infinite, are striking. But what commends him most to modern taste is
his power of description when dealing with facts, situations, persons:
he touches these always with a colour which is felt to be no
exaggeration, but the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[VIII:9](2050008.htm#fr_7) <span
id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span> Cp. *Or. Cat.* c. xi.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[IX:10](2050008.htm#fr_8) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> *In verba ‘faciamus hominem,’* I. p. 140.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[IX:11](2050008.htm#fr_9) <span
id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span> *De Perf. Christiani Forma*, III. p. 294,
he calls the ‘Prince of darkness’ the author of sin and death: *In
Christi Resurrect.* III. p. 386, he calls Satan ‘the heart of the
earth:’ and p. 387 identifies him with sin. ‘And so the real wisdom
visits that arrogant heart of the earth, so that the thought great in
wickedness should vanish, and the darkness should be lightened, &c.’

<span id="fn_10"></span>[IX:12](2050008.htm#fr_10) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> As expressed by S. Thomas Aquinas Summ. I.
Qu. xix. Art. 9, Deo nec nolente, nec volente, sed permittente….Deus
neque vult fieri, neque vult non fieri, sed vult permittere mala fieri.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[IX:13](2050008.htm#fr_11) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> *De Virginit*. c. xi.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[X:14](2050008.htm#fr_12) <span
id="vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span> *On Infants’ early Deaths,* III. p. 336.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[X:15](2050008.htm#fr_13) <span
id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span> *Or. Cat.* c. viii. D.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[XI:16](2050008.htm#fr_14) <span
id="vii.ii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p30"></span> *On the Making of Man*, c. xiv.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[XI:17](2050008.htm#fr_15) <span
id="vii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p32"></span> *Or. Cat.* c. xxvi.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[XII:18](2050008.htm#fr_16) <span
id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p35"></span> *Or. Cat.* c. iii.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[XIII:19](2050008.htm#fr_17) <span
id="vii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p39"></span> In Sermon *On the Baptism of Christ.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[XIII:20](2050008.htm#fr_18) <span
id="vii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p40"></span> A. 1560 fol.; also Antwerp, p. 1562
(Latinè).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[XIV:21](2050008.htm#fr_19) <span
id="vii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p45"></span> His comparison of the hidden meaning of
the proverb or parable (III. c. Eunom. p. 236) to the ‘turned up’ side
of the peacock’s feather is beautiful in itself for language (e.g. ‘the
varied painting of nature,’ ‘the half-circle shining in the midst with
its dye of purple,’ ‘the golden mist round the circle’): but it rather
fails as a simile, when applied to the other or the literal side, which
cannot in the case of parables be said to ‘lack beauty and tint’.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Origenism.](2050009)
