[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050040)  [Next](2050042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p1"></span> §25. *He who asserts that the
Father is ‘prior’ to the Son with any thought of an interval must
perforce allow that even the Father is not without beginning*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p2"></span>But more than this: what exposes
still further the untenableness of this view is, that, besides positing
a beginning in time of the Son’s existence, it does not, when followed
out, spare the Father even, but proves that He also had his beginning in
time. For any recognizing mark that is presupposed for the generation of
the Son must certainly define as well the Father’s beginning.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p3"></span>To make this clear, it will be well
to discuss it more carefully. When he pronounces that the life of the
Father is prior to that of the Son, he places a certain interval between
the two; now, he must mean, either that this interval is infinite, or
that it is included within fixed limits. But the principle of an
intervening mean will not allow him to call it infinite; he would annul
thereby the very conception of Father and Son and the thought of
anything connecting them, as long as this infinite were limited on
neither side, with no idea of a Father cutting it short above, nor that
of a Son checking it below. The very nature of the infinite is, to be
extended in either direction, and to have no bounds of any kind.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p4"></span>Therefore if the conception of
Father and Son is to remain firm and immoveable, he will find no ground
for thinking this interval is infinite: his school must place a definite
interval of time between the Only-begotten and the Father. What I say,
then, is this: that this view of theirs will bring us to the conclusion
that the Father is not from everlasting, but from a definite point in
time. I will convey my meaning by familiar illustrations; the known
shall make the unknown clear. When we say, on the authority of the text
of Moses, that man was made the fifth day after the heavens, we tacitly
imply that before those same days the heavens did not exist either; a
subsequent event goes to define, by means of the interval which precedes
it, the occurrence also of a previous event. If this example does not
make our contention plain, we can give others. We say that ‘the Law
given by Moses was four hundred and thirty years later than the Promise
to Abraham.’ If after traversing, step by step upwards <span
id="fr_145"></span>[147](#fn_145) , the anterior time we reach <span
id="page_LXVIII">p. LXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-Page_LXVIII"></span>this end of that number of years,
we firmly grasp as well the fact that, before that date, God’s Promise
was not either. Many such instances could be given, but I decline to be
minute and wearisome.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p6"></span>Guided, then, by these examples, let
us examine the question before us. Our adversaries conceive of the
existences of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as involving elder and
younger, respectively. Well then; if, at the bidding of this heresy, we
journey up beyond the generation of the Son, and approach that
intervening duration which the mere fancy of these dogmatists supposes
between the Father and the Son, and then reach that other and supreme
point of time by which they close that duration, there we find the life
of the Father fixed as it were upon an apex; and thence we must
necessarily conclude that before it the Father is not to be believed to
have existed always.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p7"></span>If you still feel difficulties about
this, let us again take an illustration. It shall be that of two rulers,
one shorter than the other. If we fit the bases of the two together we
know from the tops the extra length of the one; from the end of the
lesser lying alongside of it we measure this excess, supplementing the
deficiency of the shorter ruler by a calculation, and so bringing it up
to the end of the longer; a cubit for instance, or whatever be the
distance of the one end from the other. So, if there is, as our
adversaries say, an excess of some kind in the Father’s life as compared
with the Son’s, it must needs consist in some definite interval of
duration: and they will allow that this interval of excess cannot be in
the future, for that Both are imperishable, even the foes of the truth
will grant. No; they conceive of this difference as in the past, and
instead of equalizing the life of the Father and the Son there, they
extend the conception of the Father by an interval of living. But every
interval must be bounded by two ends: and so for this interval which
they have devised we must grasp the two points by which the ends are
denoted. The one portion takes its beginning, in their view, from the
Son’s generation; and the other portion must end in some other point,
from which the interval starts, and by which it limits itself. What this
is, is for them to tell us; unless, indeed, they are ashamed of the
consequences of their own assumptions.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p8"></span>It admits not of a doubt, then, that
they will not be able to find at all the other portion, corresponding to
the first portion of their fancied interval, except they were to suppose
some beginning of their Ungenerate, whence the middle, that connects
with the generation of the Son, may be conceived of as starting. We
affirm, then, that when he makes the Son later than the Father by a
certain intervening extension of life, he must grant a fixed beginning
to the Father’s existence also, regulated by this same interval of his
devising; and thus their much-vaunted “Ungeneracy” of the Father will be
found to be undermined by its own champions’ arguments; and they will
have to confess that their Ungenerate God did once not exist, but began
from a starting-point: indeed, that which has a beginning of being is
not inoriginate. But if we must at all risks confess this absence of
beginning in the Father, let not such exactitude be displayed in fixing
for the life of the Son a point which, as the term of His existence,
must cut Him off from the life on the other side of it; let it suffice
on the ground of causation only to conceive of the Father as before the
Son; and let not the Father’s life be thought of as a separate and
peculiar one before the generation of the Son, lest we should have to
admit the idea inevitably associated with this of an interval before the
appearance of the Son which measures the life of Him Who begot Him, and
then the necessary consequence of this, that a beginning of the Father’s
life also must be supposed by virtue of which their fancied interval may
be stayed in its upward advance so as to set a limit and a beginning to
this previous life of the Father as well: let it suffice for us, when we
confess the ‘coming from Him,’ to admit also, bold as it may seem, the
‘living along with Him;’ for we are led by the written oracles to such a
belief. For we have been taught by Wisdom to contemplate the
brightness <span id="fr_146"></span>[148](#fn_146) of the everlasting
light in, and together with, the very everlastingness of that primal
light, joining in one idea the brightness and its cause, and admitting
no priority. Thus shall we save the theory of our Faith, the Son’s life
not failing in the upward view, and the Father’s everlastingness being
not trenched upon by supposing any definite beginning for the Son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[LXVII:147](2050041.htm#fr_145) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5"></span> *step by step upwards.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>δι᾽
ἀναλύσεως</span>. This does not seem to be used in the Platonic
(dialectic) sense, but in the N.T. sense of “return” or “retrogression,”
cf. [Luke xii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.2"></span>. Gregory elsewhere *De Hom. Opif.*
xxv.), uses <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.4"></span>ναλύειν</span> in this sense: speaking
of the three examples of Christ’s power of raising from the dead, he
says, ‘you see…all these equally at the command of one and the same
voice returning (ἀ<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.5"></span>ναλύοντας</span>) to life.’ ᾽Αναλύσις
thus also came to mean “death,” as a ‘return.’ Cf. [Ecclesiastes xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p5.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[LXVIII:148](2050041.htm#fr_146) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p9"></span> *brightness.* [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p9.1"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxv-p9.3"></span>παύγασμα τῆς δόξης</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: It will not do to apply this conception, as drawn out above, of
the Father and Son to the Creation, as they insist on doing: but we must
contemplate the Son apart with the Father, and believe that the Creation
had its origin from a definite point.](2050042)
