[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050232)  [Next](2050234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>But</span>, it is said, to be born and to die
are conditions peculiar to the fleshly nature. I admit it. But what went
before that Birth and what came after that Death escapes the mark of our
common humanity. If we look to either term of our human life, we
understand both from what we take our beginning, and in what we end. Man
commenced his existence in a weakness and in a weakness completes it.
But in the instance of the Incarnation neither did the birth begin with
a weakness, nor in a weakness did the death terminate; for neither did
sensual pleasure go before the birth, nor did corruption follow upon the
death. Do you disbelieve this marvel? I quite welcome your incredulity.
You thus entirely admit that those marvellous facts are supernatural, in
the very way that you think that what is related is above belief. Let
this very fact, then, that the proclamation of the mystery did not
proceed <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xv-Page_487"></span>in terms that are natural, be a proof to
you of the manifestation of the Deity. For if what is related of Christ
were within the bounds of nature, where were the Godhead? But if the
account surpasses nature, then the very facts which you disbelieve are a
demonstration that He who was thus proclaimed was God. A man is begotten
by the conjunction of two persons, and after death is left in
corruption. Had the Gospel comprised no more than this, you certainly
would not have deemed *him* to be God, the testimony to whom was
conveyed in terms peculiar only to our nature. But when you are told
that He was born, and yet transcended our common humanity both in the
manner of His birth, and by His incapacity of a change to corruption, it
would be well if, in consequence of this, you would direct your
incredulity upon the other point, so as to refuse to suppose Him to be
one of those who have manifestly existed as mere men; for it follows of
necessity that a person who does not believe that such and such a being
is mere man, must be led on to the belief that He is God. Well, he who
has recorded that He was born *has* related also that He was born of a
Virgin. If, therefore, on the evidence stated, the fact of His being
born is established as a matter of faith, it is altogether incredible,
on the same evidence, that He was not born in the manner stated. For the
author who mentions His birth adds also, that it was of a Virgin; and in
recording His death bears further testimony to His resurrection from the
dead. If, therefore, from what you are told, you grant that He both was
born and died, on the same grounds you must admit that both His birth
and death were independent of the conditions of human weakness,—in fact,
were above nature. The conclusion, therefore, is that He Who has thus
been shown to have been born under supernatural circumstances was
certainly Himself not limited by nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](2050234)
