[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050279)  [Next](2050281.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xv-p1.1"></span>Letter XIV <span
id="fr_2220"></span>[2222](#fn_2220.md) </span>.—*To the Bishop of
Melitene*.

<span id="xiii.xv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xv-p3.1"></span>How</span> beautiful are the likenesses of
beautiful objects, when they preserve in all its clearness the impress
of the original beauty! For of your soul, so truly beautiful, I saw a
most clear image in the sweetness of your letter, which, as the Gospel
says, “out of the abundance of the heart” you filled with honey. And for
this reason I fancied I saw you in person, and enjoyed your cheering
company, from the affection expressed in your letter; and often taking
your letter into my hands and going over it again from beginning to end,
I only came more vehemently to crave for the enjoyment, and there was no
sense of satiety. Such a feeling can no more put an end to my pleasure,
than it can to that derived from anything that is by nature beautiful
and precious. For neither has our constant participation of the benefit
blunted the edge of our longing to behold the sun, nor does the unbroken
enjoyment of health prevent our desiring its continuance; and we are
persuaded that it is equally impossible for our enjoyment of your
goodness, which we have often experienced face to face and now by
letter, ever to reach the point of satiety. But our case is like that of
those who from some circumstance are afflicted with unquenchable thirst;
for just in the same way, the more we taste your kindness, the more
thirsty we become. But unless you suppose our language to be mere
blandishment and unreal flattery—and assuredly you will not so suppose,
being what you are in all else, and to us especially good and staunch,
if any one ever was,—you will certainly believe what I say; that the
favour of your letter, applied to my eyes like some medical
prescription, stayed my ever-flowing “fountain of tears,” and that
fixing our hopes on the medicine of your holy prayers, we expect that
soon and completely the disease of our soul will be healed: though, for
the present at any rate, we are in such a case, that we spare the ears
of one who is fond of us, and bury the truth in silence, that we may not
drag those who loyally love us into partnership with our troubles. For
when we consider that, bereft of what is dearest to us, we are involved
in wars, and that it is our children that we were compelled to leave
behind, our children whom we were counted worthy to bear to God in
spiritual pangs, closely joined to us by the law of love, who at the
time of their own trials amid their afflictions extended their affection
to us; and over and above these, a fondly-loved <span
id="fr_2221"></span>[2223](#fn_2221.md) home, brethren, kinsmen,
companions, intimate associates, friends, hearth, table, cellar, bed,
seat, sack, converse, tears—and how sweet these are, and how dearly
prized from long habit, I need not write to you who know full well—but
not to weary you further, consider for yourself what I have in exchange
for those blessings. Now that I am at the end of my life, I begin to
live again, and am compelled to learn the graceful versatility of
character which is now in vogue: but we are late learners in the shifty
school of knavery; <span id="fr_2222"></span>[2224](#fn_2222.md) so that we
are constantly constrained to blush at our awkwardness and inaptitude
for this new study. But our adversaries, equipped with all the training
of this wisdom, are well able to keep what they have learned, and to
invent what they have not learned. Their method of warfare accordingly
is to skirmish at a distance, and then at a preconcerted signal to form
their phalanx in solid order; they utter by way of prelude <span
id="fr_2223"></span>[2225](#fn_2223.md) whatever suits their interests,
they execute surprises by means of exaggerations, they surround
themselves with allies from every quarter. But a vast amount of cunning
invincible in power <span id="fr_2224"></span>[2226](#fn_2224.md)
accompanies them, advanced before them to lead their host, like some
right-and-left-handed combatant, fighting with both hands in front of
his army, on one side levying tribute upon his subjects, on the other
smiting those who come in his way. But if you care to inquire into the
state of our internal affairs, you will find other troubles to match; a
stifling hut, abundant in cold, gloom, confinement, and all such
advantages; a life the mark of every one’s censorious observation, the
voice, the look, the way of wearing one’s cloak, the movement of the
hands, the position of one’s feet, and everything else, all a subject
for busy-bodies. And unless one from time to time emits a deep
breathing, and unless a continuous groaning is uttered with the
breathing, and unless the tunic passes gracefully through the girdle
(not to mention the very disuse of the girdle itself), and unless our
cloak flows aslant down our backs—the omission of anyone of these
niceties is a pretext for war against <span id="page_539">p. 539</span>
<span id="xiii.xv-Page_539"></span>us. And on such grounds as these,
they gather together to battle against us, man by man <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2227](#fn_2225.md) , township by township, even down
to all sorts of out-of-the-way places. Well, one cannot be always faring
well or always ill, for every one’s life is made up of contraries. But
if by God’s grace your help should stand by us steadily, we will bear
the abundance of annoyances, in the hope of being always a sharer in
your goodness. May you, then, never cease bestowing on us such favours,
that by them you may refresh us, and prepare for yourself in ampler
measure the reward promised to them that keep the commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[538:2222](2050280.htm#fr_2220.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p2"></span> To Otreius, Bishop of Melitene (in eastern
Cappadocia, on or near the upper Euphrates), to whose successor Letoius
Gregory addressed his *Canonical Epistle* about Penitents (Cod. Medic.).
Written when Gregory was in exile under Valens. Zacagni thinks that the
“war,” and the carping criticisms here complained of, refer to the
followers of Eustathius of Sebasteia or of Macedonius, who had plenty to
find fault with, even in the gestures and dress of the Catholics (cf.
Basil, *De Spirit. S.,* end).

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[538:2223](2050280.htm#fr_2221.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xv-p4.1"></span>κεχαριτωμένος</span>

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[538:2224](2050280.htm#fr_2222.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p5"></span> This passage is very corrupt, and I have
put the best sense I could on the fragmentary words preserved to us (H.
C. O.).

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[538:2225](2050280.htm#fr_2223.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xv-p6.1"></span>προλογίζοντας</span>. But <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p6.2"></span>προλοχίζοντας</span> would
suit the context better; *i.e.* “they lay an ambush wherever their
interests are concerned” (H. C. O.).

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[538:2226](2050280.htm#fr_2224.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p7"></span> Or “accompanies their power:” <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p7.1"></span>τῇ δυνάμει</span> may go
with <span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p7.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p7.3"></span>μαρτεῖ</span>, or with
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p7.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p7.5"></span>καταγώνιστος</span> (H. C.
O.).

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[539:2227](2050280.htm#fr_2225.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p7.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xv-p8.1"></span>κατ᾽ ἄνδρας, καὶ δήμους, καὶ ἐσχατίας</span>.
But the Latin, having “solitudines,” shows that <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p8.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p8.3"></span>ρήμους</span> was read for
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xv-p8.4"></span>δήμους</span>. We
seem to get here a glimpse of Gregory’s activity during his exile
(376–78). Rupp thinks that Macrina’s words to her brother also refer to
this period: “Thee the Churches call to help them and correct them.” He
moved from place to place to strengthen the Catholic cause; “we,” he
says in the longer *Antirrhetic,* “who have sojourned in many spots, and
have had serious conversation upon the points in dispute both with those
who hold and those who reject the Faith.” Gregory of Nazianzum consoles
him during these journeys, so exhausting and discouraging to one of his
spirit, by comparing him to the comet which is ruled while it seems to
wander, and of seeing in the seeming advance of heresy only the last
hiss of the dying snake. His travels probably ended in a visit to
Palestine: for his Letter *On Pilgrimages* certainly presupposes former
visits in which he had learnt the manners of Jerusalem. His love of
Origen, too, makes it likely that he made a private pilgrimage (distinct
from the visit of 379) to the land where Origen had chiefly studied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Adelphius the Lawyer.](2050281.md)
