[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050044)  [Next](2050046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxix-p1"></span> §29. *He vainly thinks that the
doubt about the energies is to be solved by the beings, and reversely.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxix-p2"></span>Now let us see what comes next.
‘The doubt about the energies is to be solved by the beings.’ What way
is there of bringing this man out of his vain fancies down to common
sense? If he thinks that it is possible thus to solve doubts about the
energies by comprehending the beings themselves, how, if these last are
not comprehended, can he change this doubt to any certainty? If the
being has been comprehended, what need to make the energy of this
importance, as if *it* was going to lead us to the comprehension of the
being. But if this is the very thing that makes an examination of the
energy necessary, viz., that we may be thereby guided to the
understanding of the being that exerts it, how can this as yet unknown
nature solve the doubt about the energy? The proof of anything that is
doubted must be made by means of well-known truths; but when there is an
equal uncertainty about both the objects of our search, how can Eunomius
say that they are comprehended by means of each other, both being in
themselves beyond our knowledge? When the Father’s being is under
discussion, he tells us that the question may be settled by means of the
energy which follows Him and of the work which this energy accomplishes;
but when the inquiry is about the being of the Only-begotten, whether
Eunomius calls Him an energy or a product of the energy (for he does
both), then he tells us that the question may be easily solved by
looking at the being of His producer!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: There is no Word of God that commands such investigations: the
uselessness of the philosophy which makes them is thereby
proved.](2050046.md)
