[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050235)  [Next](2050237.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p2"></span>“<span class="c22"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>But</span>,” it is said, “this change in
our body by birth is a weakness, and one born under such condition is
born in weakness. Now the Deity is free from weakness. It is, therefore,
a strange idea in connection with God,” they say, “when people declare
that one who is essentially free from weakness thus comes into
fellowship with weakness.” Now in reply to this let us adopt the same
argument as before, namely that the word “weakness” is used partly in a
proper, partly in an adapted sense. Whatever, that is, affects the will
and perverts it from virtue to vice is really and truly a weakness; but
whatever in nature is to be seen proceeding by a chain peculiar to
itself of successive stages would be more fitly called a work than a
weakness. As, for instance, birth, growth, the continuance of the
underlying substance through the influx and efflux of the aliments, the
meeting together of the component elements of the body, and, on the
other hand, the dissolution of its component parts and their passing
back into the kindred elements. Which “weakness,” then, does our Mystery
assert that the Deity came in contact with? That which is properly
called weakness, which is vice, or that which is the result of natural
movements? Well, if our Faith affirmed that the Deity was born under
forbidden circumstances, then it would be our duty to shun a statement
which gave this profane and unsound description of the Divine Being. But
if it asserts that God laid hold on this nature of ours, the production
of which in the first instance and the subsistence afterwards had its
origin in Him, in what way does this our preaching fail in the reverence
that befits Him? Amongst our notions of God no disposition tending to
weakness goes along with our belief in Him. We do not say that a
physician is in weakness when he is employed in healing one who is
so <span id="fr_1980"></span>[1982](#fn_1980.md) . For though he touches
the infirmity he is himself unaffected by it. If birth is not regarded
in itself as a weakness, no one can call life such. But the feeling of
sensual pleasure does go before the human birth, and as to the impulse
to vice in all living men, this *is* a disease of our nature. But then
the Gospel mystery asserts that He Who took our nature was pure from
both these feelings. If, then, His birth had no connection with sensual
pleasure, and His life none with vice, what “weakness” is there left
which the mystery of our religion asserts that God participated in? But
should any one call the separation of body and soul a weakness <span
id="fr_1981"></span>[1983](#fn_1981.md) , far more justly might he term the
<span id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xviii-Page_489"></span>meeting together of these two elements
such. For if the severance of things that have been connected is a
weakness, then is the union of things that are asunder a weakness also.
For there is a feeling of movement in the uniting of things sundered as
well as in the separation of what has been welded into one. The same
term, then, by which the final movement is called, it is proper to apply
to the one that initiated it. If the first movement, which we call
birth, is not a weakness, it follows that neither the second, which we
call death, and by which the severance of the union of the soul and body
is effected, is a weakness. Our position is, that God was born subject
to both movements of our nature; first, that by which the soul hastens
to join the body, and then again that by which the body is separated
from the soul; and that when the concrete humanity was formed by the
mixture of these two, I mean the sentient and the intelligent element,
through that ineffable and inexpressible conjunction, this result in the
Incarnation followed, that after the soul and body had been once united
the union continued for ever. For when our nature, following its own
proper course, had even in Him been advanced to the separation of soul
and body, He knitted together again the disunited elements, cementing
them, as it were, together with the cement of His Divine power, and
recombining what has been severed in a union never to be broken. And
this is the Resurrection, namely the return, after they have been
dissolved, of those elements that had been before linked together, into
an indissoluble union through a mutual incorporation; in order that thus
the primal grace which invested humanity might be recalled, and we
restored to the everlasting life, when the vice that has been mixed up
with our kind has evaporated through our dissolution, as happens to any
liquid when the vessel that contained it is broken, and it is spilt and
disappears, there being nothing to contain it. For as the principle of
death took its rise in one person and passed on in succession through
the whole of human kind, in like manner the principle of the
Resurrection-life extends from one person to the whole of humanity. For
He Who reunited to His own proper body the soul that had been assumed by
Himself, by virtue of that power which had mingled with both of these
component elements at their first framing, then, upon a more general
scale as it were <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1984](#fn_1982.md) , conjoined
the intellectual to the sentient nature, the new principle freely
progressing to the extremities by natural consequence. For when, in that
concrete humanity which He had taken to Himself, the soul after the
dissolution returned to the body, then this uniting of the several
portions passes, as by a new principle, in equal force upon the whole
human race. This, then, is the mystery of God’s plan with regard to His
death and His resurrection from the dead; namely, instead of preventing
the dissolution of His body by death and the necessary results of
nature, to bring both back to each other in the resurrection; so that He
might become in Himself the meeting-ground both of life and death,
having re-established in Himself that nature which death had divided,
and being Himself the originating principle of the uniting those
separated portions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[488:1982](2050236.htm#fr_1980.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p3"></span> So Origen (*c. Cels.* iv. 15)
illustrates the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>κένωσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> of
Christ: “Nor was this change one from the heights of excellence to the
depths of baseness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p3.3"></span>τὸ πονηρότατον</span>), for how can
goodness and love be baseness? If they were, it would be high time to
declare that the surgeon who inspects or touches grievous and unsightly
cases in order to heal them undergoes such a change from good to bad.”

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[488:1983](2050236.htm#fr_1981.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p4"></span> There is no one word in English which
would represent the full meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>πάθος</span>. “Sufferance” sometimes comes
nearest to it, but not here, where Gregory is attempting to express that
which in no way whatever attached to the Saviour, *i.e.* moral weakness,
as opposed to physical infirmity.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[489:1984](2050236.htm#fr_1982.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p5"></span> *upon a more general scale as it
were.* The Greek here is somewhat obscure; the best reading is
Krabinger’s; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>γενικωτέρῳ τινι λόγῳ τὴν νοερὰν οὐσίαν τῇ
αἰσθητῇ συγκατέμιξεν</span>. Hervetus’ translation is manifestly wrong;
“Is generosiorem quandam intelligentem essentiam commiscuit sensili
principio.”—Soul and body have been reunited by the Resurrection, on a
larger scale and to a wider extent (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.2"></span>λόγῳ</span>), than in the former instance
of a single Person (in the Incarnation), the new principle of life
progressing to the extremities of humanity by natural consequence: <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.3"></span>γενικωτέρῳ</span> will
thus refer by comparison to “the *first* framing of these component
elements.” Or else it contrasts the amount of life with that of death:
and is to be explained by [Rom. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015.md)<span id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.4"></span>,
“But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the
offence of one many be dead, *much more* the grace of God, and the gift
by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath *abounded* unto many.”
Krabinger’s translation, “generaliori quâdam ratione,” therefore seems
correct. The mode of the union of soul and body is described in
Gregory’s Treatise on the Soul as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.5"></span>κρείττων λόγος</span>, and in his *Making
of Man* as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.6"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xviii-p5.7"></span>φραστος λόγος</span>, but in neither is
there any comparison but with other less perfect modes of union; *i.e.*
the reference is to *quality,* not to *quantity,* as here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII](2050237.md)
