[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050173)  [Next](2050175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>It</span> would therefore be to their
profit, for the young to refrain from laying down <span
id="fr_1517"></span>[1519](#fn_1517) *for themselves* their future
course in this profession; and indeed, examples of holy lives for them
to follow are not wanting in the living generation <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[1520](#fn_1518) . Now, if ever before, saintliness
abounds and penetrates our world; by gradual advances it has reached the
highest mark of perfectness; and one who follows such footsteps in his
daily rounds may catch this halo; one who tracks the scent of this
preceding perfume may be drenched in the sweet odours of Christ Himself.
As, when one torch has been fired, flame is transmitted to all the
neighbouring candlesticks, without either the first light being lessened
or blazing with unequal brilliance on the other points where it has been
caught; so the saintliness of a life is transmitted from him who has
achieved it, to those who come within his circle; for there <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-Page_370"></span>is
truth in the Prophet’s saying <span id="fr_1519"></span>[1521](#fn_1519)
, that one who lives with a man who is “holy” and “clean” and “elect,”
will become such himself. If you would wish to know the sure signs,
which will secure you the real model, it is not hard to take a sketch
from life. If you see a man so standing between death and life, as to
select from each helps for the contemplative course, never letting
death’s stupor paralyze his zeal to keep all the commandments, nor yet
placing both feet in the world of the living, since he has weaned
himself from secular ambitions;—a man who remains more insensate than
the dead themselves to everything that is found on examination to be
living for the flesh, but instinct with life and energy and strength in
the achievements of virtue, which are the sure marks of the spiritual
life;—then look to that man for the rule of your life; let him be the
leading light of your course of devotion, as the constellations that
never set are to the pilot; imitate his youth and his gray hairs: or,
rather, imitate the old man and the stripling who are joined in him; for
even now in his declining years time has not blunted the keen activity
of his soul, nor was his youth active in the sphere of youth’s
well-known employments; in both seasons of life he has shown a wonderful
combination of opposites, or rather an exchange of the peculiar
qualities of each; for in age he shows, in the direction of the good, a
young man’s energy, while, in the hours of youth, in the direction of
evil, his passions were powerless. If you wish to know what were the
passions of that glorious youth of his, you will have for your imitation
the intensity and glow of his godlike love of wisdom, which grew with
him from his childhood, and has continued with him into his old age. But
if you cannot gaze upon him, as the weak-sighted cannot gaze upon the
sun, at all events watch that band of holy men who are ranged beneath
him, and who by the illumination of their lives are a model for this
age. God has placed them as a beacon for us who live around; many among
them have been young men there in their prime, and have grown gray in
the unbroken practice of continence and temperance; they were old in
reasonableness before their time, and in character outstripped their
years. The only love they tasted was that of wisdom; not that their
natural instincts were different from the rest; for in all alike “the
flesh lusteth against the spirit <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[1522](#fn_1520) ;” but they listened to some
purpose to him who said that Temperance “is a tree of life to them that
lay hold upon her <span id="fr_1521"></span>[1523](#fn_1521) ;” and they
sailed across the swelling billows of existence upon this tree of life,
as upon a skiff; and anchored in the haven of the will of God; enviable
now after so fair a voyage, they rest their souls in that sunny
cloudless calm. They now ride safe themselves at the anchor of a good
hope, far out of reach of the tumult of the billows; and for others who
will follow they radiate the splendour of their lives as beacon-fires on
some high watch-tower. We have indeed a mark to guide us safely over the
ocean of temptations; and why make the too curious inquiry, whether some
with such thoughts as these have not fallen nevertheless, and why
therefore despair, as if the achievement was beyond your reach? Look on
him who has succeeded, and boldly launch upon the voyage with confidence
that it will be prosperous, and sail on under the breeze of the Holy
Spirit with Christ your pilot and with the oarage of good cheer <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[1524](#fn_1522) . For those who “go down to the sea
in ships and occupy their business in great waters” do not let the
shipwreck that has befallen some one else prevent their being of good
cheer; they rather shield their hearts in this very confidence, and so
sweep on to accomplish their successful feat. Surely it is the most
absurd thing in the world to reprobate him who has slipped in a course
which requires the greatest nicety, while one considers those who all
their lives have been growing old in failures and in errors, to have
chosen the better part. If one single approach to sin is such an awful
thing that you deem it safer not to take in hand at all this loftier
aim, how much more awful a thing it is to make sin the practice of a
whole life, and to remain thereby absolutely ignorant of the purer
course! How can you in your full life obey the Crucified? How can you,
hale in sin, obey Him Who died to sin? How can you, who are not
crucified to the world, and will not accept the mortification of the
flesh, obey Him Who bids you follow after Him, and Who bore the Cross in
His own body, as a trophy from the foe? How can you obey Paul when he
exhorts you “to present your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God <span id="fr_1523"></span>[1525](#fn_1523) ,” when you are
“conformed to this world,” and not transformed by the renewing of your
mind, when you are not “walking” in this “newness of life,” but still
pursuing the routine of “the old man”? How can you be a priest unto
God <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1526](#fn_1524) , anointed though you are
for this very office, to offer a gift to God; a gift in no way
another’s, no counterfeited gift from sources outside yourself, but a
gift that is really your own, namely, “the inner man <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1527](#fn_1525) ,” who must be perfect and
blameless, as it is required of a lamb to be without spot or blemish?
How can you offer this to God, when you do not listen to the law
forbidding the <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-Page_371"></span>unclean to offer sacrifices? If you
long for God to manifest Himself to you, why do you not hear Moses, when
he commands the people to be pure from the stains of marriage, that they
may take in the vision of God. <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1528](#fn_1526) If this all seems little in your
eyes, to be crucified with Christ, to present yourself a sacrifice to
God, to become a priest unto the most high God, to make yourself worthy
of the vision of the Almighty, what higher blessings than these can we
imagine for you, if indeed you make light of the consequences of these
as well? And the consequence of being crucified with Christ is that we
shall live with Him, and be glorified with Him, and reign with Him; and
the consequence of presenting ourselves to God is that we shall be
changed from the rank of human nature and human dignity to that of
Angels; for so speaks Daniel, that “thousand thousands stood before
him <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1529](#fn_1527) .” He too who has taken
his share in the true priesthood and placed himself beside the Great
High Priest remains altogether himself a priest for ever, prevented for
eternity from remaining any more in death. To say, again, that one makes
oneself worthy to see God, produces no less a result than this; that one
is made worthy to see God. Indeed, the crown of every hope, and of every
desire, of every blessing, and of every promise of God, and of all those
unspeakable delights which we believe to exist beyond our perception and
our knowledge,—the crowning result of them all, I say, is this. Moses
longed earnestly to see it, and many prophets and kings have desired to
see the same: but the only class deemed worthy of it are the pure in
heart, those who are, and are named “blessed,” for this very reason,
that “they shall see God <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1530](#fn_1528) .”
Wherefore we would that you too should become crucified with Christ, a
holy priest standing before God, a pure offering in all chastity,
preparing yourself by your own holiness for God’s coming; that you also
may have a pure heart in which to see God, according to the promise of
God, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[369:1519](2050174.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p3"></span> The negative (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>μὴ νομοθετεῖν</span>)
is found in Codd. Reg. and Morell.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[369:1520](2050174.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p4.1"></span>τὴν ζωὴν</span>. So <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p4.2"></span>βίος</span> also is
used in Greek after 2nd century. “They (the monks) make little show in
history before the reign of Valens (<span class="c22"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> 364). Paul of Thebes, Hilarion
of Gaza, and even the great Antony, are only characters in the novels of
the day. Now, however, there was in the East a real movement towards
monasticism. All parties favoured it. The Semi-arians were busy inside
Mt. Taurus; and though Acacians and Anomœans held more aloof, they could
not escape an influence which even Julian felt. But the Nicene party was
the home of the ascetics.” Gwatkin’s *Arians.*

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[370:1521](2050174.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p5"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>[Ps.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p5.2"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[370:1522](2050174.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p6"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[370:1523](2050174.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p7"></span> [Prov. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p7.1"></span>; but said of *Wisdom.*

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[370:1524](2050174.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p8.1"></span>τῷ πηδαλί& 251· τῆς εὐφροσύνης</span>

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[370:1525](2050174.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p9"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p9.1"></span>[Rom.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p9.2"></span>; vi. 4.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[370:1526](2050174.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p10"></span> Gregory alludes to [Rev. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p10.1"></span>: <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p10.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p10.3"></span>ποίησεν ἡμᾶς βασιλεῖς καὶ ἱερεῖς τῷ θεῷ
καὶ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[370:1527](2050174.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p11"></span> [Eph. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[371:1528](2050174.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p12"></span> [Exod. xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[371:1529](2050174.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p13"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[371:1530](2050174.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p14"></span> S. [Matt.
v](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#000)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Infants' Early Deaths.](2050175)
