[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050034)  [Next](2050036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p1"></span> §19. *His acknowledgment that the
Divine Being is ‘single’ is only verbal.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p2"></span>“Each Being has, in fact and in
conception, a nature unmixed, single, and absolutely one as estimated by
its dignity; and as the works are bounded by the energies of each
operator, and the energies by the works, it is inevitable that the
energies which follow each Being are greater in the one case than the
other, some being of the first, others of the second rank.” The
intention that runs through all this, however verbosely expressed, is
one and the same; namely, to establish that there is no connexion
between the Father and the Son, or between the Son and the Holy Ghost,
but that these Beings are sundered from each other, and possess natures
foreign and unfamiliar to each other, and differ not only in that, but
also in magnitude and in subordination of their dignities, so that we
must think of one as greater than the other, and presenting every other
sort of difference.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p3"></span>It may seem to many useless to
linger over what is so obvious, and to attempt a discussion of that
which to them is on the face of it false and abominable and groundless:
nevertheless, to avoid even the appearance of having to let these
statements pass for want of counter-arguments, we will meet them with
all our might. He says, “each being amongst them is unmixed, single, and
absolutely one, as estimated by its dignity, both in fact and in
conception.” Then premising this very doubtful statement as an axiom and
valuing his own ‘ipse dixit’ as a sufficient substitute for any proof,
he thinks he has made a point. “There are three Beings:” for he implies
this when he says, ‘each being amongst them:’ he would not have used
these words, if he meant only one. Now if he speaks thus of the mutual
difference between the Beings in order to avoid complicity with the
heresy of Sabellius, who applied three titles to one subject, we would
acquiesce in his statement: nor would any of the Faithful contradict his
view, except so far as he seems to be at fault in his names, and his
mere form of expression in speaking of ‘beings’ instead of ‘persons:’
for things that are identical on the score of being will not all agree
equally in definition on the score of personality. For instance, Peter,
James, and John are the same viewed as beings, each was a man: but in
the characteristics of their respective personalities, they were not
alike. If, then, he were only proving that it is not right to confound
the Persons, and to fit all the three names on to one Subject, his
‘saying’ would be, to use the Apostle’s words, ‘faithful, and worthy of
all acceptation <span id="fr_112"></span>[114](#fn_112) .’ But this is
not his object: he speaks so, not because he divides the Persons only
from each other by their recognized characteristics, but because he
makes the actual substantial being of each different from that of the
others, or rather from itself: and so he speaks of a plurality of beings
with distinctive differences which alienate them from each other. I
therefore declare that his view is unfounded, and lacks a principle: it
starts from data that are not granted, and then it constructs by mere
logic a blasphemy upon them. It at<span id="page_LVII">p. LVII</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-Page_LVII"></span>tempts no demonstration that
could attract towards such a conception of the doctrine: it merely
contains the statement of an unproved impiety, as if it were telling us
a dream. While the Church teaches that we must not divide our faith
amongst a plurality of beings, but must recognize no difference of being
in three Subjects or Persons, whereas our opponents posit a variety and
unlikeness amongst them as Beings, this writer confidently assumes as
already proved what never has been, and never can be, proved by
argument: maybe he has not even yet found hearers for his talk: or he
might have been informed by one of them who was listening intelligently
that every statement which is made at random, and without proof, is ‘an
old woman’s tale,’ and powerless to prove the question, in itself,
unaided by any plea whatever fetched from the Scriptures, or from human
reasonings. So much for this.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p5"></span>But let us still scrutinize his
words. He declares each of these Beings, whom he has shadowed forth in
his exposition, to be single and absolutely one. We believe that the
most boorish and simple-minded would not deny that the Divine Nature,
blessed and transcendent as it is, was ‘single.’ That which is viewless,
formless, and sizeless, cannot be conceived of as multiform and
composite. But it will be clear, upon the very slightest reflection,
that this view of the supreme Being as ‘simple,’ however finely they may
talk of it, is quite inconsistent with the system which they have
elaborated. For who does not know that, to be exact, simplicity in the
case of the Holy Trinity admits of no degrees. In this case there is no
mixture or conflux of qualities to think of; we comprehend a potency
without parts and composition; how then, and on what grounds, could any
one perceive there any differences of less and more. For he who marks
differences there must perforce think of an incidence of certain
qualities in the subject. He must in fact have perceived differences in
largeness and smallness therein, to have introduced this conception of
quantity into the question: or he must posit abundance or diminution in
the matter of goodness, strength, wisdom, or of anything else that can
with reverence be associated with God: and neither way will he escape
the idea of composition. Nothing which possesses wisdom or power or any
other good, not as an external gift, but rooted in its nature, can
suffer diminution in it; so that if any one says that he detects Beings
greater and smaller in the Divine Nature, he is unconsciously
establishing a composite and heterogeneous Deity, and thinking of the
Subject as one thing, and the quality, to share in which constitutes as
good that which was not so before, as another. If he had been thinking
of a Being really single and absolutely one, identical with goodness
rather than possessing it, he would not be able to count a greater and a
less in it at all. It was said, moreover, above that good can be
diminished by the presence of evil alone, and that where the nature is
incapable of deteriorating, there is no limit conceived of to the
goodness: the unlimited, in fact, is not such owing to any relation
whatever, but, considered in itself, escapes limitation. It is, indeed,
difficult to see how a reflecting mind can conceive one infinite to be
greater or less than another infinite. So that if he acknowledges the
supreme Being to be ‘single’ and homogenous, let him grant that it is
bound up with this universal attribute of simplicity and infinitude. If,
on the other hand, he divides and estranges the ‘Beings’ from each
other, conceiving that of the Only-begotten as another than the
Father’s, and that of the Spirit as another than the Only-begotten, with
a ‘more’ and ‘less’ in each case, let him be exposed now as granting
simplicity in appearance only to the Deity, but in reality proving the
composite in Him.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p6"></span>But let us resume the examination of
his words in order. “Each Being has in fact and conception a nature
unmixed, single, and absolutely one, as estimated by its dignity.” Why
“as estimated by its dignity?” If he contemplates the Beings in their
common dignity, this addition is unnecessary and superfluous, and dwells
upon that which is obvious: although a word so out of place might be
pardoned, if it was any feeling of reverence which prompted him not to
reject it. But here the mischief really is not owing to a mistake about
a phrase (that might be easily set right): but it is connected with his
evil designs. He says that each of the three beings is ‘single, as
estimated by its dignity,’ in order that, on the strength of his
previous definitions of the first, second, and third Being, the idea of
their simplicity also may be marred. Having affirmed that the being of
the Father alone is ‘Supreme’ and ‘Proper,’ and having refused both
these titles to that of the Son and of the Spirit, in accordance with
this, when he comes to speak of them all as ‘simple,’ he thinks it his
duty to associate with them the idea of simplicity in proportion only to
their essential worth, so that the Supreme alone is to be conceived of
as at the height and perfection of simplicity, while the second, in
proportion to its declension from supremacy, receives also a diminished
measure of simplicity, and in the case of the third Being also, there is
<span id="page_LVIII">p. LVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xix-Page_LVIII"></span>as much variation from the perfect
simplicity, as the amount of worth is lessened in the extremes: whence
it results that the Father’s being is conceived as of pure simplicity,
that of the Son as not so flawless in simplicity, but with a mixture of
the composite, that of the Holy Spirit as still increasing in the
composite, while the amount of simplicity is gradually lessened. Just as
imperfect goodness must be owned to share in some measure in the reverse
disposition, so imperfect simplicity cannot escape being considered
composite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[LVI:114](2050035.htm#fr_112) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xix-p4"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>[1 Timothy i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xix-p4.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He does wrong in assuming, to account for the existence of the
Only-Begotten, an 'energy' that produced Christ's Person.](2050036)
