[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050251)  [Next](2050253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>What</span> other objection is alleged by
our adversaries? This; that (to take the preferable view <span
id="fr_2012"></span>[2014](#fn_2012) ) it was altogether needless that
that transcendent Being should submit to the experience of death, but He
might independently of this, through the superabundance of His power,
have wrought with ease His purpose; still, if for some ineffable reason
or other it was absolutely necessary that so it should be, at least He
ought not to have been subjected to the contumely of such an ignominious
kind of death. What death, they ask, could be more ignominious than that
by crucifixion? What answer can we make to this? Why, that the death is
rendered necessary by the birth, and that He Who had determined once for
all to share the nature of man must pass through all the peculiar
conditions of that nature. Seeing, then, that the life of man is
determined between two boundaries, had He, after having passed the one,
not touched the other that follows, His proposed design would have
remained only half fulfilled, from His not having touched that second
condition of our nature. Perhaps, however, one who exactly understands
the mystery would be justified rather in saying that, instead of the
death occurring in consequence of the birth, the birth on the contrary
was accepted by Him for the sake of the death; for He Who lives for ever
did not sink down into the conditions of a bodily birth from any need to
live, but to call us back from death to life. Since, then, there was
needed a lifting up from death for the whole of our nature, He stretches
forth a hand as it were to prostrate man, and stooping down to our dead
corpse He came so far within the grasp of death as to touch a state of
deadness, and then in His own body to bestow on our nature the principle
of the resurrection, raising as He did by His power along with Himself
the whole man. For since from no other source than from the concrete
lump of our nature <span id="fr_2013"></span>[2015](#fn_2013) had come
that flesh, which was the receptacle of the Godhead and in the
resurrection was raised up together with that Godhead, therefore just in
the same way as, in the instance of this body of ours, the operation of
one of the organs of sense is felt at once by the whole system, as one
with that member, so also the resurrection principle of this Member, as
though the whole of mankind was a single living being, passes through
the entire race, being imparted from the Member to the whole by virtue
of the continuity and oneness of the nature. What, then, is there beyond
the bounds of probability in what this Revelation teaches us; viz. that
He Who stands upright stoops to one who has fallen, in order to lift him
up from his prostrate condition? And as to the Cross, whether it
possesses some other and deeper meaning, those who are skilled in
mysticism may explain; but, however that may be, the traditional
teaching which has reached us is as follows. Since all things in the
Gospel, both <span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-Page_500"></span>deeds and words, have a sublime and
heavenly meaning, and there is nothing in it which is not such, that is,
which does not exhibit a complete mingling of the human with the Divine,
where the utterance exerted and the deeds enacted are human but the
secret sense represents the Divine, it would follow that in this
particular as well as in the rest we must not regard only the one
element and overlook the other; but in the *fact* of this death we must
contemplate the human feature, while in the *manner* of it we must be
anxious to find the Divine <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2016](#fn_2014) .
For since it is the property of the Godhead to pervade all things, and
to extend itself through the length and breadth of the substance of
existence in every part—for nothing would continue to be if it remained
not within the existent; and that which is this existent properly and
primarily is the Divine Being, Whose existence in the world the
continuance of all things that are forces us to believe in,—this is the
very thing we learn from the figure of the Cross; it is divided into
four parts, so that there are the projections, four in number, from the
central point where the whole converges upon itself; because He Who at
the hour of His pre-arranged death was stretched upon it is He Who binds
together all things into Himself, and by Himself brings to one
harmonious agreement the diverse natures of actual existences. For in
these existences there is the idea either of something above, or of
something below, or else the thought passes to the confines sideways.
If, therefore, you take into your consideration the system of things
above the heavens or of things below the earth, or of things at the
boundaries of the universe on either side, everywhere the presence of
Deity anticipates your thought as the sole observable power that in
every part of existing things holds in a state of being all those
things. Now whether we ought to call this Existence Deity, or Mind, or
Power, or Wisdom, or any other lofty term which might be better able to
express Him Who is above all, our argument has no quarrel with the
appellation or name or form of phrase used. Since, then, all creation
looks to Him, and is about and around Him, and through Him is coherent
with itself, things above being through Him conjoined to things below
and things lateral to themselves, it was right that not by hearing only
we should be conducted to the full understanding of the Deity, but that
sight also should be our teacher in these sublime subjects for thought;
and it is from sight that the mighty Paul starts when he initiates <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2017](#fn_2015) the people of Ephesus in the
mysteries, and imbues them through his instructions with the power of
knowing what is that “depth and height and breadth and length.” In fact
he designates each projection of the Cross by its proper appellation.
The upper part he calls height, the lower depth, and the side extensions
breadth and length; and in another passage <span
id="fr_2016"></span>[2018](#fn_2016) he makes his thought still clearer
to the Philippians, to whom he says, “that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth.” In that passage he includes in one appellation the
centre and projecting arms <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2019](#fn_2017) ,
calling “things in earth” all that is in the middle between things in
heaven and things under the earth. Such is the lesson we learn in regard
to the mystery of the Cross. And the subsequent events which the
narrative contains follow so appropriately that, as even unbelievers
must admit, there is nothing in them adverse to the proper conceptions
of the Deity. That He did not abide in death, that the wounds which His
body had received from the iron of the nails and spear offered no
impediment to His rising again, that after His resurrection He showed
Himself as He pleased to His disciples, that when He wished to be
present with them He was in their midst without being seen, as needing
no entrance through open doors, and that He strengthened the disciples
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and that He promised to be amongst
them, and that no partition wall should intervene between them and Him,
and that to the sight He ascended to Heaven while to the mind He was
everywhere; all these, and whatever like facts the history of Him
comprises, need no assistance from arguments to show that they are signs
of deity and of a sublime and supereminent power. With regard to them
therefore I do not deem it necessary to go into any detail, inasmuch as
their description of itself shows the supernatural character. But since
the dispensation of the washing (whether we choose to call it baptism,
or illumination, or regeneration; for we make the name no subject of
controversy) is a part of our revealed doctrines, it may be as well to
enter on a short discussion of this as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[499:2014](2050252.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>μάλιστα μεν</span>.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[499:2015](2050252.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4"></span> Cf. [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>:
<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>φύραμα</span> is
used for the human body often in the Greek Fathers, *i.e.* Athanasius,
Chrysostom, John Damascene: by all of whom Christ is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>παρχὴ τοῦ ἡμετέρου
φυράματος</span>. Cf. <span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.5"></span>[Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.6"></span>;
[Job x. 9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009)<span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.7"></span>: Epictetus also calls the human body <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.8"></span>πηλοω κομψῶς
πεφυραμένον.</span>

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[500:2016](2050252.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.9"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>ν μὲν τῷ θανάτῳ καθορᾷν τὸ ἀνθρώπινον, ἐν
δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ πολυπραγμονεῖν τὸ θειότερον</span>. This is Krabinger’s
reading (for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.4"></span>ν τῳ ἀθανάτῳ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.5"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.7"></span>ν δὲ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ</span>)
on the authority of Theodoret’s quotation and two Codd. for the first,
and of all his Codd. for the second. Hervetus also seems to have read
the same, “in *morte* quidem quod est humanum intueri, in *modo* autem
perscrutari quod est divinius.” Glauber, however, translates the common
text, “Man muss *bei dem Unsterblichen* zwar das Menschliche betrachten,
aber *bei dem Menschen* auch das Göttliche hervorsuchen:”
notwithstanding that he hints his preference for another reading, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.8"></span>σκοπῷ</span> for this
last; cf. just above, “but the secret sense represents the Divine,”
which would then be parallel to this last sentence.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[500:2017](2050252.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.9"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p6"></span> [Eph. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[500:2018](2050252.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p7"></span> <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>[Philip. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[500:2019](2050252.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>κεραίαν</span>. The Fathers were fond of
tracing similitudes to the form of the Cross, in nature and art: in the
sail-yards of a ship, as here, and in the flight of birds on the wing.
This is the reading of Codd. Morell., Reg., and three of Krabinger’s:
but <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>γαῖαν</span>
in the margin of that of J. Vulcobius (Abbot of Belpré) has got into the
text of both Paris Editt., though the second asterisks it. Hervetus (“et
fastigium”) seems to have read <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxiv-p8.3"></span>καὶ ἄκραν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](2050253)
