[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050208)  [Next](2050210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_418">p. 418</span>
<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-Page_418"></span>XXVII. *That it is possible,
when the human body is dissolved into the elements of the universe, that
each should have his own body restored from the common source* <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1726](#fn_1724) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p3"></span>1. Yet it may be thou thinkest,
having regard to the elements of the universe, that it is a hard thing
when the air in us has been resolved into its kindred element, and the
warmth, and moisture, and the earthy nature have likewise been mingled
with their own kind, that from the common source there should return to
the individual what belongs to itself.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p4"></span>2. Dost thou not then judge by human
examples that even this does not surpass the limits of the Divine power?
Thou hast seen surely somewhere among the habitations of men a common
herd of some kind of animals collected from every quarter: yet when it
is again divided among its owners, acquaintance with their homes and the
marks put upon the cattle serve to restore to each his own. If thou
conceivest of thyself also something like to this, thou wilt not be far
from the right way: for as the soul is disposed to cling to and long for
the body that has been wedded to it, there also attaches to it in secret
a certain close relationship and power of recognition, in virtue of
their commixture, as though some marks had been imprinted by nature, by
the aid of which the community remains unconfused, separated by the
distinctive signs. Now as the soul attracts again to itself that which
is its own and properly belongs to it, what labour, I pray you, that is
involved for the Divine power, could be a hindrance to concourse of
kindred things when they are urged to their own place by the unspeakable
attraction of nature, whatever it may be? For that some signs of our
compound nature remain in the soul even after dissolution is shown by
the dialogue in Hades <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1727](#fn_1725) , where
the bodies had been conveyed to the tomb, but some bodily token still
remained in the souls by which both Lazarus was recognized and the rich
man was not unknown.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p6"></span>3. There is therefore nothing beyond
probability in believing that in the bodies that rise again there will
be a return from the common stock to the individual, especially for any
one who examines our nature with careful attention. For neither does our
being consist altogether in flux and change—for surely that which had by
nature no stability would be absolutely incomprehensible—but according
to the more accurate statement some one of our constituent parts is
stationary while the rest goes through a process of alteration: for the
body is on the one hand altered by way of growth and diminution,
changing, like garments, the vesture of its successive statures, while
the form, on the other hand, remains in itself unaltered through every
change, not varying from the marks once imposed upon it by nature, but
appearing with its own tokens of identity in all the changes which the
body undergoes.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p7"></span>4. We must except, however, from
this statement the change which happens to the form as the result of
disease: for the deformity of sickness takes possession of the form like
some strange mask, and when this is removed by the word <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1728](#fn_1726) , as in the case of Naaman the
Syrian, or of those whose story is recorded in the Gospel, the form that
had been hidden by disease is once more by means of health restored to
sight again with its own marks of identity.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p9"></span>5. Now to the element of our soul
which is in the likeness of God it is not that which is subject to flux
and change by way of alteration, but this stable and unalterable element
in our composition that is allied: and since various differences of
combination produce varieties of forms (and combination is nothing else
than the mixture of the elements—by elements we mean those which furnish
the substratum for the making of the universe, of which the human body
also is composed), while the form necessarily remains in the soul as in
the impression of a seal, those things which have received from the seal
the impression of its stamp do not fail to be recognized by the soul,
but at the time of the World-Reformation, it receives back to itself all
those things which correspond to the stamp of the form: and surely all
those things would so correspond which in the beginning were stamped by
the form; thus it is not beyond probability that what properly belongs
to the individual should once more return to it from the common
source <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1729](#fn_1727) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p11"></span>6. It is said also that
quicksilver, if poured out from the vessel that contains it down a dusty
slope, forms small globules and scatters itself over the ground,
mingling with none of those bodies with which it meets: but if one
should collect at one place the substance dispersed in many directions,
it flows back to its kindred substance, if not hindered by anything
intervening from mixing with its own kind. Something of the same sort, I
think, we ought to understand also of the composite nature of <span
id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-Page_419"></span>man, that if only the power were
given it of God, the proper parts would spontaneously unite with those
belonging to them, without any obstruction on their account arising to
Him Who reforms their nature.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p12"></span>7. Furthermore, in the case of
plants that grow from the ground, we do not observe any labour on the
part of nature spent on the wheat or millet or any other seed of grain
or pulse, in changing it into stalk or spike or ears; for the proper
nourishment passes spontaneously, without trouble, from the common
source to the individuality of each of the seeds. If, then, while the
moisture supplied to all the plants is common, each of those plants
which is nourished by it draws the due supply for its own growth, what
new thing is it if in the doctrine of the resurrection also, as in the
case of the seeds, it happens that there is an attraction on the part of
each of those who rise, of what belongs to himself?

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p13"></span>8. So that we may learn on all
hands, that the preaching of the resurrection contains nothing beyond
those facts which are known to us experimentally.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p14"></span>9. And yet we have said nothing of
the most notable point concerning ourselves; I mean the first beginning
of our existence. Who knows not the miracle of nature, what the maternal
womb receives—what it produces? Thou seest how that which is implanted
in the womb to be the beginning of the formation of the body is in a
manner simple and homogeneous: but what language can express the variety
of the composite body that is framed? and who, if he did not learn such
a thing in nature generally, would think that to be possible which does
take place—that that small thing of no account is the beginning of a
thing so great? Great, I say, not only with regard to the bodily
formation, but to what is more marvellous than this, I mean the soul
itself, and the attributes we behold in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[418:1726](2050209.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxviii. The title
in the Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the Latin version
is:—“That although bodies rise together they will yet receive their own
souls.”

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[418:1727](2050209.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p5"></span> Cf. S. [Luke xvi.
24-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[418:1728](2050209.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p8"></span> The word, that is of the Prophet,
or of the Saviour, as in the cases cited.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[418:1729](2050209.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p10"></span> The “form” seems to be regarded as
a seal, which, while taking its pattern from the combination of
elements, yet marks those elements which have been grouped together
under it; and which at the same time leaves an impression of itself upon
the soul. The soul is thus enabled to recognize the elemental particles
which make up that body which belonged to it, by the <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>τύπος</span>
imprinted on them as well as on itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To those who say that souls existed before bodies, or that bodies
were formed before souls; wherein there is also a refutation of the
fables concerning transmigration of souls.](2050210)
