[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050172)  [Next](2050174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Now</span> the details of the life of him
who has chosen to live in such a philosophy as this, the things to be
avoided, the exercises to be engaged in, the rules of temperance, the
whole method of the training, and all the daily regimen which
contributes towards this great end, has been dealt with in certain
written manuals of instruction for the benefit of those who love
details. Yet there is a plainer guide to be found than verbal
instruction; and that is practice: and there is nothing vexatious in the
maxim that when we are undertaking a long journey or voyage we should
get an instructor. “But,” says the Apostle <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1505](#fn_1503) , “the word is nigh thee;” the
grace begins at home; there is the manufactory of all the virtues; there
this life has become exquisitely refined by a continual progress towards
consummate perfection; there, whether men are silent or whether they
speak, there is large opportunity for being instructed in this heavenly
citizenship through the actual practice of it. Any theory divorced from
living examples, however admirably it may be dressed out, is like the
unbreathing statue, with its show of a blooming complexion impressed in
tints and colours; but the man who acts as well as teaches, as the
Gospel tells us, he is the man who is truly living, and has the bloom of
beauty, and is efficient and stirring. It is to him that we must go, if
we mean, according to the saying <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[1506](#fn_1504) of Scripture, to “retain”
virginity. One who wants to learn a foreign language is not a competent
instructor of himself; he gets himself taught by experts, and can then
talk with foreigners. So, for this high life, which does not advance in
nature’s groove, but is estranged from her by the novelty of its course,
a man cannot be instructed thoroughly unless he puts himself into the
hands of one who has himself led it in perfection; and indeed in all the
other professions of life the candidate is more likely to achieve
success if he gets from tutors a scientific knowledge of each part of
the subject of his choice, than if he undertook to study it by himself;
and this particular profession <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1507](#fn_1505) is not one where everything is so
clear that judgment as to our best course in it is necessarily left to
ourselves; it is one where to hazard a step into the unknown at once
brings us into danger. The science of medicine once did not exist; it
has come into being by the experiments which men have made, and has
gradually been revealed through their various observations; the healing
and the harmful drug became known from the attestation of those who had
tried them, and this distinction was adopted into the theory of the art,
so that the close observation of former practitioners became a precept
for those who succeeded; and now any one who studies to attain this art
is under no necessity to ascertain at his own peril the power of any
drug, whether it be a poison or a medicine; he has only to learn from
others the known facts, and may then practise with success. It is so
also with that medicine of the soul, philosophy, from which we learn the
remedy for every weakness that can touch the soul. We need not hunt
after a knowledge of these remedies by dint of guess-work and
surmisings; we have abundant means of learning them from him who by a
long and rich experience has gained the possession which we seek. In any
matter youth is generally a giddy <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1508](#fn_1506) guide; and it would not be easy to
<span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-Page_369"></span>find anything of importance
succeeding, in which gray hairs have not been called in to share in the
deliberations. Even in all other undertakings we must, in proportion to
their greater importance, take the more precaution against failure; for
in them too the thoughtless designs of youth have brought loss; on
property, for instance; or have compelled the surrender of a position in
the world, and even of renown. But in this mighty and sublime ambition
it is not property, or secular glory lasting for its hour, or any
external fortune, that is at stake;—of such things <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1509](#fn_1507) , whether they settle themselves
well or the reverse, the wise take small account;—here rashness can
affect the soul itself; and we run the awful hazard, not of losing any
of those other things whose recovery even may perhaps be possible, but
of ruining our very selves and making the soul a bankrupt. A man who has
spent or lost his patrimony does not despair, as long as he is in the
land of the living, of perchance coming again through contrivances into
his former competence; but the man who has ejected himself from this
calling, deprives himself as well of all hope of a return to better
things. Therefore, since most embrace virginity while still young and
unformed in understanding, this before anything else should be their
employment, to search out a fitting guide and master of this way, lest,
in their present ignorance, they should wander from the direct route,
and strike out new paths of their own in trackless wilds <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[1510](#fn_1508) . “Two are better than one,” says
the Preacher <span id="fr_1509"></span>[1511](#fn_1509) ; but a single
one is easily vanquished by the foe who infests the path which leads to
God; and verily “woe to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath
not another to help him up <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1512](#fn_1510) .”
Some ere now in their enthusiasm for the stricter life have shown a
dexterous alacrity; but, as if in the very moment of their choice they
had already touched perfection, their pride has had a shocking
fall <span id="fr_1511"></span>[1513](#fn_1511) , and they have been
tripped up from madly deluding themselves into thinking that that to
which their own mind inclined them was the true beauty. In this number
are those whom Wisdom calls the “slothful ones <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1514](#fn_1512) ,” who bestrew their “way” with
“thorns”; who think it a moral loss to be anxious about keeping the
commandments; who erase from their own minds the Apostolic teaching, and
instead of eating the bread of their own honest earning fix on that of
others, and make their idleness itself into an art of living. From this
number, too, come the Dreamers, who put more faith in the illusions of
their dreams <span id="fr_1513"></span>[1515](#fn_1513) than in the
Gospel teaching, and style their own phantasies “revelations.” Hence,
too, those who “creep into the houses”; and again others who suppose
virtue to consist in savage bearishness, and have never known the fruits
of long-suffering and humility of spirit. Who could enumerate all the
pitfalls into which any one might slip, from refusing to have recourse
to men of godly celebrity? Why, we have known ascetics of this class who
have persisted in their fasting even unto death, as if “with such
sacrifices God were well pleased <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1516](#fn_1514) ;” and, again, others who rush off
into the extreme diametrically opposite, practising celibacy in name
only and leading a life in no way different from the secular; for they
not only indulge in the pleasures of the table, but are openly known to
have a woman in their houses <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1517](#fn_1515)
; and they call such a friendship a brotherly affection, as if,
forsooth, they could veil their own thought, which is inclined to evil,
under a sacred term. It is owing to them that this pure and holy
profession of virginity is “blasphemed amongst the Gentiles <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1518](#fn_1516) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[368:1505](2050173.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> [Rom. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>: <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.3"></span>λλύς σου τὸ ῥ& 210·μά ἐστιν, ἐν τῷ
στόματί σου καὶ ἐν τῇ καρδί& 139· σου</span>. Cf. [Deut. xxx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[368:1506](2050173.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p3.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>κατὰ τὸν ἐροῦντα λόγον</span> (Codd. Reg.
and Mor. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>αἱροῦντα</span>). This alludes to [Prov.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018), [Prov.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.3"></span>[Prov. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.4"></span>, rather than [Prov. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[368:1507](2050173.htm#fr_1505) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>οὐ γὰρ ἐναργές ἐστι τὸ ἐπιτήδευμα τοῦτο,
ὥστε κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην, κ.τ.λ.</span> The alternative reading is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.3"></span>ν ἀρχαῖς</span>. It
has been suggested to read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.5"></span>τε γὰρ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.6"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.7"></span>τότε</span> (for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.8"></span>τοῦτο</span>), and
understand an aposiopesis in the next sentence; thus—“For when our
undertaking is clear and simple, then we must entrust to ourselves the
decision of what is best. But when the attempt at the unknown is not
unattended with risk—(then we want a guide).” Billius. But this is very
awkward.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[368:1508](2050173.htm#fr_1506) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p5.9"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> Livineius had conjectured that <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p6.2"></span>πισφαλὴς</span> must
be supplied, from a quotation of this passage in Antonius Monachus,
*Sententiæ, serm.* 20, and in Abbas Maximus, *Capita, serm.* 41; and
this is confirmed by Codd. Reg. and Morell.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[369:1509](2050173.htm#fr_1507) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>ὧ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>ν καὶ κατὰ γνώμην καὶ ὡς ἑτέρως
διοικουμένων ὀλίγος τοῖς σωφρονοῦσιν ὁ λόγος</span>. The Latin here has
“quas quidem res ego sane despicio, exiguamque harum tanquam extrinsecus
venientium)” &c.; evidently <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.3"></span>καταγνοίην</span> must have been in the
text used.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[369:1510](2050173.htm#fr_1508) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>νοδίας τινὰς καινοτομήσωσιν</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8.4"></span>νοδί& 139·,
ἀνοδίαις</span>, is frequent in Polybius; the word is not found
elsewhere in other cases).

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[369:1511](2050173.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p8.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p9"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>[Ecclesiastes iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[369:1512](2050173.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p10"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[Ecclesiastes iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p10.2"></span>. Gregory supports the Vulgate, which
has “quia cum ceciderit, non habet sublevantem se.”

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[369:1513](2050173.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p11.2"></span>τερῷ πτώματι</span>, euphemistically.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[369:1514](2050173.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p12"></span> [Prov. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#019)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[369:1515](2050173.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13"></span> The alternative reading is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>τῶν θηρίων</span>;
but <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.2"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.3"></span>νείρων</span> is confirmed by three of
the Codd. Cf. Theodoret, lib. 4, *Hæretic. fab.,* of the Messaliani; and
lib. 4, *Histor.* c. 10, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.4"></span>ὕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.5"></span>πνῳ δὲ σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐκδίδοντες τὰς τῶν
ὀνείρων φαντασίας προφητείας ἀποκαλοῦσι</span>

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[369:1516](2050173.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p13.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p14"></span> [Heb. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[369:1517](2050173.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p15"></span> See Chrysostom, Lib. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>Πρὸς τοὺς
συνεισάκτους ἔχοντας</span>.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[369:1518](2050173.htm#fr_1516) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>τῶν ἔξωθεν</span>. Cf. [Rom. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xxiv-p16.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](2050174)
