[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050129)  [Next](2050131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *After this, fearing to extend
his reply to great length, he passes by most of his adversary’s
statements as already refuted. But the remainder, for the sake of those
who deem them of much force, he briefly summarizes, and refutes the
blasphemy of Eunomius, who says of the Lord also that He is what animals
and plants in all creation are, non-existent before their own
generation; and so with the production of frogs; alas for the
blasphemy!*

<span id="viii.i.xiii.iv-p2"></span>But I must hasten on, for I see that
my treatise has already extended beyond bounds, and I fear that I may be
thought garrulous and inordinate in my talk, if I prolong my answer to
excess, although I have intentionally passed by many parts of my
adversary’s treatise, that my argument might not be spun out to many
myriads of words. For to the more studious even the want of conciseness
gives an occasion for disparagement; but as for those whose mind looks
not to what is of use, but to the fancy of those who are idle and not in
earnest, their wish and prayer is to get over as much of the journey as
they can in a few steps. What then ought we to do when Eunomius’
profanity draws us on? Are we to track his every turn? or is it perhaps
superfluous and merely garrulous to spend our energies over and over
again on similar encounters? For all their argument that follows is in
accordance with what we have already investigated, and presents no fresh
point in addition to what has gone before. If then we have succeeded in
completely overthrowing his previous statements, the remainder fall
along with them. But in case the contentious and obstinate should think
that the strongest part of their case is in what I have omitted, for
this reason it may perhaps be necessary to touch briefly upon what
remains.

<span id="viii.i.xiii.iv-p3"></span>He says that the Lord did not exist
before His own generation—he who cannot prove that He was in anything
separated from the Father. And this he says, not quoting any Scripture
as a warrant for his assertion, but maintaining his proposition by
arguments of his own. But this characteristic has been shown to be
common to all parts of the creation. Not a frog, not a worm, not a
beetle, not a blade of grass, nor any other of the most insignificant
objects, existed before its own formation: so that what by aid of his
dialectic skill he tries with great labour and pains to establish to be
the case with the Son, has previously been acknowledged to be true of
any chance portions of the creation, and our author’s mighty labour is
to show that the Only-begotten God, by participation of attributes, is
on a level with the lowest of created things. Accordingly the fact of
the coincidence of their opinions concerning the Only-begotten God, and
their view of the mode in which frogs come into being, is a sufficient
indication of their doctrinal pravity. Next he urges that not to be
before His generation, is equivalent in fact and meaning to not being
ungenerate. Once more the same argument will fit my hand in dealing with
this too,—that a man would not be wrong in saying the same thing of a
dog, or a flea, or a snake, or any one you please of the meanest
creatures, since for a dog not to exist before his generation is
equivalent in fact and meaning to his not being ungenerate. But if, in
accord with the definition they have so often laid down, all things that
share in attributes share also in nature, and if it is an attribute of
the dog, and of the rest severally, not to exist before generation,
which is what Eunomius thinks fit to maintain also of the Son, the
reader will by logical process see for himself the conclusion of this
demonstration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eunomius again speaks of the Son as Lord and God, and Maker of
all creation intelligible and sensible, having received from the Father
the power and the commission for creation, being entrusted with the task
of creation as if He were an artizan commissioned by some one hiring
Him, and receiving His power of creation as a thing adventitious, ab
extra, as a result of the power allotted to Him in accordance with such
and such combinations and positions of the stars, as destiny decrees
their lot in life to men at their nativity. Thus, passing by most of
what Eunomius had written, he confutes his blasphemy that the Maker of
all things came into being in like manner with the earth and with
angels, and that the subsistence of the Only-begotten differs not at all
from the genesis of all things, and reproaches Him with reverencing
neither the Divine mystery nor the custom of the Church, nor following
in his attempt to discover godliness any teacher of pious doctrine, but
Manichæus, Colluthus, Arius, Aetius, and](2050131)
