[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050203)  [Next](2050205.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> XXII. *To those who say, “If the
resurrection is a thing excellent and good, how is it that it has not
happened already, but is hoped for in some periods of time?”* <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1689](#fn_1687.md)

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>1. Let us give our attention,
however, to the next point of our discussion. It may be that some one,
giving his thought wings to soar towards the sweetness of our hope,
deems it a burden and a loss that we are not more speedily placed in
that good state which is above man’s sense and knowledge, and is
dissatisfied with the extension of the time that intervenes between him
and the object of his desire. Let him cease to vex himself like a child
that is discontented at the brief delay of something that gives him
pleasure; for since all things are governed by reason and wisdom, we
must by no means suppose that anything that happens is done without
reason itself and the wisdom that is therein.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p4"></span>2. You will say then, What is this
reason, in accordance with which the change of our painful life to that
which we desire does not take place at once, but this heavy and
corporeal existence of ours waits, extended to some determinate time,
for the term of the consummation of all things, that then man’s life may
be set free as it were from the reins, and revert once more, released
and free, to the life of blessedness and impassibility?

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p5"></span>3. Well, whether our answer is near
the truth of the matter, the Truth Itself may clearly know; but at all
events what occurs to our intelligence is as follows. I take up then
once more in my argument our first text:—God says, “Let us make man in
our image, after our likeness, and God created man, in the image of God
created He him <span id="fr_1688"></span>[1690](#fn_1688.md) .”
Accordingly, the Image of God, which we behold in universal humanity,
had its consummation then <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1691](#fn_1689.md) ;
but Adam as yet was not; for the thing formed from the earth is called
Adam, by etymological nomenclature, as those tell us who are acquainted
with the Hebrew tongue—wherefore also the apostle, who was specially
learned in his native tongue, the tongue of the Israelites, calls the
man “of the earth <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1692](#fn_1690.md) ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>χοϊκός</span>, as
though translating the name Adam into the Greek word.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p9"></span>4. Man, then, was made in the image
of God; that is, the universal nature, the thing like God; not part of
the whole, but all the fulness of the nature together was so made by
omnipotent wisdom. He saw, Who holds all limits in His grasp, as the
Scripture tells us which says, “in His hand are all the corners of the
earth <span id="fr_1691"></span>[1693](#fn_1691.md) ,” He saw, “Who knoweth
all things” even “before they be <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[1694](#fn_1692.md) ,” comprehending them in His
knowledge, how great in number humanity will be in the sum of its
individuals. But as He perceived in our created nature the bias towards
evil, and the fact that after its voluntary fall from equality with the
angels it would acquire a fellowship with the lower <span
id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-Page_412"></span>nature, He mingled, for this reason,
with His own image, an element of the irrational (for the distinction of
male and female does not exist in the Divine and blessed
nature);—transferring, I say, to man the special attribute of the
irrational formation, He bestowed increase upon our race not according
to the lofty character of our creation; for it was not when He made that
which was in His own image that He bestowed on man the power of
increasing and multiplying; but when He divided it by sexual
distinctions, then He said, “Increase and multiply, and replenish the
earth <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1695](#fn_1693.md) .” For this belongs not
to the Divine, but to the irrational element, as the history indicates
when it narrates that these words were first spoken by God in the case
of the irrational creatures; since we may be sure that, if He had
bestowed on man, before imprinting on our nature the distinction of male
and female, the power for increase conveyed by this utterance, we should
not have needed this form of generation by which the brutes are
generated.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p13"></span>5. Now seeing that the full number
of men pre-conceived by the operation of foreknowledge will come into
life by means of this animal generation, God, Who governs all things in
a certain order and sequence,—since the inclination of our nature to
what was beneath it (which He Who beholds the future equally with the
present saw before it existed) made some such form of generation
absolutely necessary for mankind,—therefore also foreknew the time
coextensive with the creation of men, so that the extent of time should
be adapted for the entrances of the pre-determined souls, and that the
flux and motion of time should halt at the moment when humanity is no
longer produced by means of it; and that when the generation of men is
completed, time should cease together with its completion, and then
should take place the restitution of all things, and with the
World-Reformation humanity also should be changed from the corruptible
and earthly to the impassible and eternal.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p14"></span>6. And this it seems to me the
Divine apostle considered when he declared in his epistle to the
Corinthians the sudden stoppage of time, and the change of the things
that are now moving on back to the opposite end where he says, “Behold,
I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1696](#fn_1694.md) .” For when, as I
suppose, the full complement of human nature has reached the limit of
the pre-determined measure, because there is no longer anything to be
made up in the way of increase to the number of souls, he teaches us
that the change in existing things will take place in an instant of
time, giving to that limit of time which has no parts or extension the
names of “a moment,” and “the twinkling of an eye”; so that it will no
more be possible for one who reaches the verge of time (which is the
last and extreme point, from the fact that nothing is lacking to the
attainment of its extremity) to obtain by death this change which takes
place at a fixed period, but only when the trumpet of the resurrection
sounds, which awakens the dead, and transforms those who are left in
life, after the likeness of those who have undergone the resurrection
change, at once to incorruptibility; so that the weight of the flesh is
no longer heavy, nor does its burden hold them down to earth, but they
rise aloft through the air—for, “we shall be caught up,” he tells us,
“in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with
the Lord <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1697](#fn_1695.md) .”

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p17"></span>7. Let him therefore wait for that
time which is necessarily made co-extensive with the development of
humanity. For even Abraham and the patriarchs, while they had the desire
to see the promised good things, and ceased not to seek the heavenly
country, as the apostle says, are yet even now in the condition of
hoping for that grace, “God having provided some better thing for us,”
according to the words of Paul, “that they without us should not be made
perfect <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1698](#fn_1696.md) .” If they, then,
bear the delay who by faith only and by hope saw the good things “afar
off” and “embraced them <span id="fr_1697"></span>[1699](#fn_1697.md) ,” as
the apostle bears witness, placing their certainty of the enjoyment of
the things for which they hoped in the fact that they “judged Him
faithful Who has promised <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1700](#fn_1698.md) ,”
what ought most of us to do, who have not, it may be, a hold upon the
better hope from the character of our lives? Even the prophet’s soul
fainted with desire, and in his psalm he confesses this passionate love,
saying that his “soul hath a desire and longing to be in the courts of
the Lord <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1701](#fn_1699.md) ,” even if he must
needs be rejected <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1702](#fn_1700.md) to a place
amongst the lowest, as it is a greater and more desirable thing to be
last there than to be first among the ungodly tents of this life;
nevertheless he was patient of the delay, deeming, indeed, the life
there blessed, and accounting a brief participation in it more desirable
than “thousands” of time—for he says, “one day in Thy courts is better
than thousands <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1703](#fn_1701.md) ”—yet he did
not repine at the necessary dispensation concerning existing things, and
thought it sufficient bliss for man to have those good things even by
way of hope; wherefore he says at the end of the <span id="page_413">p.
413</span> <span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-Page_413"></span>Psalm, “O Lord of
hosts, blessed is the man that hopeth in Thee <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1704](#fn_1702.md) .”

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p25"></span>8. Neither, then, should we be
troubled at the brief delay of what we hope for, but give diligence that
we may not be cast out from the object of our hopes; for just as though,
if one were to tell some inexperienced person beforehand, “the gathering
of the crops will take place in the season of summer, and the stores
will be filled, and the table abundantly supplied with food at the time
of plenty,” it would be a foolish man who should seek to hurry on the
coming of the fruit-time, when he ought to be sowing seeds and preparing
the crops for himself by diligent care; for the fruit-time will surely
come, whether he wishes or not, at the appointed time; and it will be
looked on differently by him who has secured for himself beforehand
abundance of crops, and by him who is found by the fruit-time destitute
of all preparation. Even so I think it is one’s duty, as the
proclamation is clearly made to all that the time of change will come,
not to trouble himself about times (for He said that “it is not for us
to know the times and the seasons <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1705](#fn_1703) ”.md), nor to pursue calculations by
which he will be sure to sap the hope of the resurrection in the soul;
but to make his confidence in the things expected as a prop to lean on,
and to purchase for himself, by good conversation, the grace that is to
come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[411:1689](2050204.htm#fr_1687.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxiii. The title in
the Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the Latin version is:—“That
when the generation of man is finished, time also will come to an end.”
Some <span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>mss.</span>
of the Latin version make the first few words part of the preceding
chapter.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[411:1690](2050204.htm#fr_1688.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p6"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[Gen.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[411:1691](2050204.htm#fr_1689.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p7"></span> This Realism is expressed even more
strongly in the *De Animâ et Resurrectione.*

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[411:1692](2050204.htm#fr_1690.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[411:1693](2050204.htm#fr_1691.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p10"></span> [Ps. xcv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[411:1694](2050204.htm#fr_1692.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p11"></span> Cf. [Sus.
42](../../../bib/apo/sus001.htm#042.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[412:1695](2050204.htm#fr_1693.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p12"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[412:1696](2050204.htm#fr_1694.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p15"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[412:1697](2050204.htm#fr_1695.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p16"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[412:1698](2050204.htm#fr_1696.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p18"></span> [Heb. xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[412:1699](2050204.htm#fr_1697.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p19"></span> [Heb. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[412:1700](2050204.htm#fr_1698.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p20"></span> [Heb. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[412:1701](2050204.htm#fr_1699.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p21"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[412:1702](2050204.htm#fr_1700.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p22"></span> [Ps.
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p22.2"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[412:1703](2050204.htm#fr_1701.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p23"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[413:1704](2050204.htm#fr_1702.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p24"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[413:1705](2050204.htm#fr_1703.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p26"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007.md)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That he who confesses the beginning of the world's existence must
necessarily also agree as to its end.](2050205.md)
