[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050199)  [Next](2050201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p1"></span> XVIII. *That our irrational passions
have their rise from kindred with irrational nature.* <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1665](#fn_1663)

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p3"></span>1. For I think that from this beginning
all our passions issue as from a spring, and pour their flood over man’s
life; and an evidence of my words is the kinship of passions which
appears alike in ourselves and in the brutes; for it is not allowable to
ascribe the first beginnings of our constitutional liability to passion
to that human nature which was fashioned in the Divine likeness; but as
brute life first entered into the world, and man, for the reason already
mentioned, took something of their nature (I mean the mode of
generation), he accordingly took at the same time a share of the other
<span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-Page_408"></span>attributes contemplated in that nature;
for the likeness of man to God is not found in anger, nor is pleasure a
mark of the superior nature; cowardice also, and boldness, and the
desire of gain, and the dislike of loss, and all the like, are far
removed from that stamp which indicates Divinity.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p4"></span>2. These attributes, then, human nature
took to itself from the side of the brutes; for those qualities with
which brute life was armed for self-preservation, when transferred to
human life, became passions; for the carnivorous animals are preserved
by their anger, and those which breed largely by their love of pleasure;
cowardice preserves the weak, fear that which is easily taken by more
powerful animals, and greediness those of great bulk; and to miss
anything that tends to pleasure is for the brutes a matter of pain. All
these and the like affections entered man’s composition by reason of the
animal mode of generation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p5"></span>3. I may be allowed to describe the
human image by comparison with some wonderful piece of modelling. For,
as one may see in models those carved <span
id="fr_1664"></span>[1666](#fn_1664) shapes which the artificers of such
things contrive for the wonder of beholders, tracing out upon a single
head two forms of faces; so man seems to me to bear a double likeness to
opposite things—being moulded in the Divine element of his mind to the
Divine beauty, but bearing, in the passionate impulses that arise in
him, a likeness to the brute nature; while often even his reason is
rendered brutish, and obscures the better element by the worse through
its inclination and disposition towards what is irrational; for whenever
a man drags down his mental energy to these affections, and forces his
reason to become the servant of his passions, there takes place a sort
of conversion of the good stamp in him into the irrational image, his
whole nature being traced anew after that design, as his reason, so to
say, cultivates the beginnings of his passions, and gradually multiplies
them; for once it lends its co-operation to passion, it produces a
plenteous and abundant crop of evils.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p7"></span>4. Thus our love of pleasure took its
beginning from our being made like to the irrational creation, and was
increased by the transgressions of men, becoming the parent of so many
varieties of sins arising from pleasure as we cannot find among the
irrational animals. Thus the rising of anger in us is indeed akin to the
impulse of the brutes; but it grows by the alliance of thought: for
thence come malignity, envy, deceit, conspiracy, hypocrisy; all these
are the result of the evil husbandry of the mind; for if the passion
were divested of the aid it receives from thought, the anger that is
left behind is short-lived and not sustained, like a bubble, perishing
straightway as soon as it comes into being. Thus the greediness of swine
introduces covetousness, and the high spirit of the horse becomes the
origin of pride; and all the particular forms that proceed from the want
of reason in brute nature become vice by the evil use of the mind.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p8"></span>5. So, likewise, on the contrary, if
reason instead assumes sway over such emotions, each of them is
transmuted to a form of virtue; for anger produces courage, terror
caution, fear obedience, hatred aversion from vice, the power of love
the desire for what is truly beautiful; high spirit in our character
raises our thought above the passions, and keeps it from bondage to what
is base; yea, the great Apostle, even, praises such a form of mental
elevation when he bids us constantly to “think those things that are
above <span id="fr_1665"></span>[1667](#fn_1665) ;” and so we find that
every such motion, when elevated by loftiness of mind, is conformed to
the beauty of the Divine image.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p10"></span>6. But the other impulse is greater,
as the tendency of sin is heavy and downward; for the ruling element of
our soul is more inclined to be dragged downwards by the weight of the
irrational nature than is the heavy and earthy element to be exalted by
the loftiness of the intellect; hence the misery that encompasses us
often causes the Divine gift to be forgotten, and spreads the passions
of the flesh, like some ugly mask, over the beauty of the image.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p11"></span>7. Those, therefore, are in some sense
excusable, who do not admit, when they look upon such cases, that the
Divine form is there; yet we may behold the Divine image in men by the
medium of those who have ordered their lives aright. For if the man who
is subject to passion, and carnal, makes it incredible that man was
adorned, as it were, with Divine beauty, surely the man of lofty virtue
and pure from pollution will confirm you in the better conception of
human nature.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p12"></span>8. For instance (for it is better to
make our argument clear by an illustration), one of those noted for
wickedness—some Jechoniah, say, or some other of evil memory—has
obliterated the beauty of his nature by the pollution of wickedness; yet
in Moses and in men like him the form of the image was kept pure. Now
where the beauty of the form has not been obscured, there is made plain
the faithfulness of the saying that man is an image of God.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p13"></span>9. It may be, however, that some one
feels <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-Page_409"></span>shame at the fact that our life, like
that of the brutes, is sustained by food, and for this reason deems man
unworthy of being supposed to have been framed in the image of God; but
he may expect that freedom from this function will one day be bestowed
upon our nature in the life we look for; for, as the Apostle says, “the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[1668](#fn_1666) ;” and the Lord declared that “man
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of
the mouth of God <span id="fr_1667"></span>[1669](#fn_1667) .” Further,
as the resurrection holds forth to us a life equal with the angels, and
with the angels there is no food, there is sufficient ground for
believing that man, who will live in like fashion with the angels, will
be released from such a function.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[407:1665](2050200.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xix. The Bodleian
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Latin version has the title:—“That our other passions also are common to
us and to the irrational animals, and that by the restraint of them we
are said to be like to God.”

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[408:1666](2050200.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p6"></span> Reading with Forbes <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p6.1"></span>διαγλύφους</span>. The
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p6.2"></span>διγλύφους</span> of the earlier editt.
gives a better sense, but is not supported by any of Forbes’ <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p6.3"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[408:1667](2050200.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p9"></span> [Col. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[409:1668](2050200.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p14"></span> [Rom. xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[409:1669](2050200.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p15"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="x.ii.ii.xix-p15.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To those who say that the enjoyment of the good things we look
for will again consist in meat and drink, because it is written that by
these means man at first lived in Paradise.](2050201)
