[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050063)  [Next](2050065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.v"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.v-p1"></span> §5. *He next marvellously overthrows
the unintelligible statements of Eunomius which assert that the essence
of the Father is not separated or divided, and does not become anything
else.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.v-p2"></span>“We believe in God,” he tells us, “not
separ<span id="page_CVI">p. CVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.v-Page_CVI"></span>ated as regards the essence wherein He
is one, into more than one, or becoming sometimes one and sometimes
another, or changing from being what He is, or passing from one essence
to assume the guise of a threefold personality: for He is always and
absolutely one, remaining uniformly and unchangeably the only God.” From
these citations the discreet reader may well separate first of all the
idle words inserted in the statement without any meaning from those
which appear to have some sense, and afterwards examine the meaning that
is discoverable in what remains of his statement, to ascertain whether
it is compatible with due reverence towards Christ.

<span id="viii.i.iv.v-p3"></span>The first, then, of the statements
cited is completely divorced from any intelligible meaning, good or bad.
For what sense there is in the words, “not separated, as regards the
essence wherein He is one, into more than one, or becoming sometimes one
and sometimes another, or changing from being what He is,” Eunomius
himself could not tell us, and I do not think that any of his allies
could find in the words any shadow of meaning. When he speaks of Him as
“not separated in regard to the essence wherein He is one,” he says
either that He is not separated from His own essence, or that His own
essence is not divided from Him. This unmeaning statement is nothing but
a random combination of noise and empty sound. And why should one spend
time in the investigation of these meaningless expressions? For how does
any one remain in existence when separated from his own essence? or how
is the essence of anything divided and displayed apart? Or how is it
possible for one to depart from that wherein he is, and become another,
getting outside himself? But he adds, “not passing from one essence to
assume the guise of three persons: for He is always and absolutely one,
remaining uniformly and unchangeably the only God.” I think the absence
of meaning in his statement is plain to every one without a word from
me: against this let any one argue who thinks there is any sense or
meaning in what he says: he who has an eye to discern the force of words
will decline to involve himself in a struggle with unsubstantial
shadows. For what force has it against our doctrine to say “not
separated or divided into more than one as regards the essence wherein
He is one, or becoming sometimes one and sometimes another, or passing
from one essence to assume the guise of three persons?”—things that are
neither said nor believed by Christians nor understood by inference from
the truths we confess. For who ever said or heard any one else say in
the Church of God, that the Father is either separated or divided as
regards His essence, or becomes sometimes one, sometimes another, coming
to be outside Himself, or assumes the guise of three persons? These
things Eunomius says to himself, not arguing with us but stringing
together his own trash, mixing with the impiety of his utterances a
great deal of absurdity. For we say that it is equally impious and
ungodly to call the Lord of the creation a created being and to think
that the Father, in that He is, is separated or split up, or departs
from Himself, or assumes the guise of three persons, like clay or wax
moulded in various shapes.

<span id="viii.i.iv.v-p4"></span>But let us examine the words that
follow: “He is always and absolutely one, remaining uniformly and
unchangeably the only God.” If he is speaking about the Father, we agree
with him, for the Father is most truly one, alone and always absolutely
uniform and unchangeable, never at any time present or future ceasing to
be what He is. If then such an assertion as this has regard to the
Father, let him not contend with the doctrine of godliness, inasmuch as
on this point he is in harmony with the Church. For he who confesses
that the Father is always and unchangeably the same, being one and only
God, holds fast the word of godliness, if in the Father he sees the Son,
without Whom the Father neither is nor is named. But if he is inventing
some other God besides the Father, let him dispute with the Jews or with
those who are called Hypsistiani, between whom and the Christians there
is this difference, that they acknowledge that there is a God Whom they
term the Highest <span id="fr_287"></span>[289](#fn_287) or Almighty,
but do not admit that he is Father; while a Christian, if he believe not
in the Father, no Christian at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[CVI:289](2050064.htm#fr_287) <span
id="viii.i.iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.v-p5.1"></span>ὕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.v-p5.2"></span>ψιστον</span>, whence the name of the sect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then shows the unity of the Son with the Father and Eunomius'
lack of understanding and knowledge in the Scriptures.](2050065)
