[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050064)  [Next](2050066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p1"></span> §6. *He then shows the unity of the
Son with the Father and Eunomius’ lack of understanding and knowledge in
the Scriptures.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p2"></span>What he adds next after this is as
follows:—“Having no sharer,” he says, “in His Godhead, no divider of His
glory, none who has lot in His power, or part in His royal throne: for
He is the one and only God, the Almighty, God of Gods, King of Kings,
Lord of Lords.” I know not to whom Eunomius refers when he protests that
the Father admits none to share His Godhead with Himself. For if he uses
such expressions with reference to vain idols and to the erroneous
conceptions of those who worship them (even as Paul assures us that
there is no agreement between Christ and Belial, and no fellowship
between the temple <span id="page_CVII">p. CVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-Page_CVII"></span>of God and idols <span
id="fr_288"></span>[290](#fn_288) ) we agree with him. But if by these
assertions he means to sever the Only-begotten God from the Godhead of
the Father, let him be informed that he is providing us with a dilemma
that may be turned against himself to refute his own impiety. For either
he denies the Only-begotten God to be God at all, that he may preserve
for the Father those prerogatives of deity which (according to him) are
incapable of being shared with the Son, and thus is convicted as a
transgressor by denying the God Whom Christians worship, or if he were
to grant that the Son also is God, yet not agreeing in nature with the
true God, he would be necessarily obliged to acknowledge that he
maintains Gods sundered from one another by the difference of their
natures. Let him choose which of these he will,—either to deny the
Godhead of the Son, or to introduce into his creed a plurality of Gods.
For whichever of these he chooses, it is all one as regards impiety: for
we who are initiated into the mystery of godliness by the Divinely
inspired words of the Scripture do not see between the Father and the
Son a partnership of Godhead, but unity, inasmuch as the Lord hath
taught us this by His own words, when He saith, “I and the Father are
one <span id="fr_289"></span>[291](#fn_289) ,” and “he that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father <span id="fr_290"></span>[292](#fn_290) .” For if
He were not of the same nature as the Father, how could He either have
had in Himself that which was different <span
id="fr_291"></span>[293](#fn_291) ? or how could He have shown in
Himself that which was unlike, if the foreign and alien nature did not
receive the stamp of that which was of a different kind from itself? But
he says, “nor has He a divider of His glory.” Herein he speaks in
accordance with the fact, even though he does not know what he is
saying: for the Son does not divide the glory with the Father, but has
the glory of the Father in its entirety, even as the Father has all the
glory of the Son. For thus He spake to the Father “All Mine are Thine
and Thine are Mine <span id="fr_292"></span>[294](#fn_292) .” Wherefore
also He says that He will appear on the Judgment Day “in the glory of
the Father <span id="fr_293"></span>[295](#fn_293) ,” when He will
render to every man according to his works. And by this phrase He shows
the unity of nature that subsists between them. For as “there is one
glory of the sun and another glory of the moon <span
id="fr_294"></span>[296](#fn_294) ,” because of the difference between
the natures of those luminaries (since if both had the same glory there
would not be deemed to be any difference in their nature), so He Who
foretold of Himself that He would appear in the glory of the Father
indicated by the identity of glory their community of nature.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p10"></span>But to say that the Son has no part
in His Father’s royal throne argues an extraordinary amount of research
into the oracles of God on the part of Eunomius, who, after his extreme
devotion to the inspired Scriptures, has not yet heard, “Seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of
God <span id="fr_295"></span>[297](#fn_295) ,” and many similar
passages, of which it would not be easy to reckon up the number, but
which Eunomius has never learnt, and so denies that the Son is enthroned
together with the Father. Again the phrase, “not having lot in his
power,” we should rather pass by as unmeaning than confute as ungodly.
For what sense is attached to the term “having lot” is not easy to
discover from the common use of the word. Those cast lots, as the
Scripture tells us, for the Lord’s vesture, who were unwilling to rend
His garment, but disposed to make it over to that one of their number in
whose favour the lot should decide <span
id="fr_296"></span>[298](#fn_296) . They then who thus cast lots among
themselves for the “coat” may be said, perhaps, to “have had lot” in it.
But here in the case of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
inasmuch as Their power resides in Their nature (for the Holy Spirit
breathes “where He listeth <span id="fr_297"></span>[299](#fn_297) ,”
and “worketh all in all as He will <span
id="fr_298"></span>[300](#fn_298) ,” and the Son, by Whom all things
were made, visible and invisible, in heaven and in earth, “did all
things whatsoever He pleased <span id="fr_299"></span>[301](#fn_299) ,”
and “quickeneth whom He will <span id="fr_300"></span>[302](#fn_300) ,”
and the Father put “the times in His own power <span
id="fr_301"></span>[303](#fn_301) ,” while from the mention of “times”
we conclude that all things done in time are subject to the power of the
Father), if, I say, it has been demonstrated that the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit alike are in a position of power to do what They
will, it is impossible to see what sense there can be in the phrase
“having lot in His power.” For the heir of all things, the maker of the
ages <span id="fr_302"></span>[304](#fn_302) , He Who shines with the
Father’s glory and expresses in Himself the Father’s person, has all
things that the Father Himself has, and is possessor of all His power,
not that the right is transferred from the Father to the Son, but that
it at once remains in the Father and resides in the Son. For He Who is
in the Father is manifestly in the Father with all His own might, and He
Who has the Father in Himself includes all the power and might of the
Father. For He has in Himself all the Father, and not merely a part of
Him: and He Who has Him entirely assuredly has His power as well. With
what meaning, then, Eunomius asserts that the Father has “none who has
lot in His power,” those <span id="page_CVIII">p. CVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-Page_CVIII"></span>perhaps can tell who are disciples
of his folly: one who knows how to appreciate language confesses that he
cannot understand phrases divorced from meaning. The Father, he says,
“has none Who has lot in His power.” Why, who is there that says that
the Father and Son contend together for power and cast lots to decide
the matter? But the holy Eunomius comes as mediator between them and by
a friendly agreement without lot assigns to the Father the superiority
in power.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p19"></span>Mark, I pray you, the absurdity and
childishness of this grovelling exposition of his articles of faith.
What! He Who “upholds all things by the word of His power <span
id="fr_303"></span>[305](#fn_303) ,” Who says what He wills to be done,
and does what He wills by the very power of that command, He Whose power
lags not behind His will and Whose will is the measure of His power (for
“He spake the word and they were made, He commanded and they were
created <span id="fr_304"></span>[306](#fn_304) ”), He Who made all
things by Himself, and made them consist in Himself <span
id="fr_305"></span>[307](#fn_305) , without Whom no existing thing
either came into being or remains in being,—He it is Who waits to obtain
His power by some process of allotment! Judge you who hear whether the
man who talks like this is in his senses. “For He is the one and only
God, the Almighty,” he says. If by the title of “Almighty” he intends
the Father, the language he uses is ours, and no strange language: but
if he means some other God than the Father, let our patron of Jewish
doctrines preach circumcision too, if he pleases. For the Faith of
Christians is directed to the Father. And the Father is all
these—Highest, Almighty, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and in a word
all terms of highest significance are proper to the Father. But all that
is the Father’s is the Son’s also; so that, on this understanding <span
id="fr_306"></span>[308](#fn_306) , we admit this phrase too. But if,
leaving the Father, he speaks of another Almighty, he is speaking the
language of the Jews or following the speculations of Plato,—for they
say that that philosopher also affirms that there exists on high a maker
and creator of certain subordinate gods. As then in the case of the
Jewish and Platonic opinions he who does not believe in God the Father
is not a Christian, even though in his creed he asserts an Almighty God,
so Eunomius also falsely pretends to the name of Christian, being in
inclination a Jew, or asserting the doctrines of the Greeks while
putting on the guise of the title borne by Christians. And with regard
to the next points he asserts the same account will apply. He says He is
“God of Gods.” We make the declaration our own by adding the name of the
Father, knowing that the Father is God of Gods. But all that belongs to
the Father certainly belongs also to the Son. “And Lord of Lords.” The
same account will apply to this. “And Most High over all the earth.”
Yes, for whichever of the Three Persons you are thinking of, He is Most
High over all the earth, inasmuch as the oversight of earthly things
from on high is exercised alike by the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. So, too, with what follows the words above, “Most High in the
heavens, Most High in the highest, Heavenly, true in being what He is,
and so continuing, true in words, true in works.” Why, all these things
the Christian eye discerns alike in the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. If Eunomius does assign them to one only of the Persons
acknowledged in the creed, let him dare to call Him “not true in words”
Who has said, “I am the Truth <span id="fr_307"></span>[309](#fn_307) ,”
or to call the Spirit of truth “not true in words,” or let him refuse to
give the title of “true in works” to Him Who doeth righteousness and
judgment, or to the Spirit Who worketh all in all as He will. For if he
does not acknowledge that these attributes belong to the Persons
delivered to us in the creed, he is absolutely cancelling the creed of
Christians. For how shall any one think Him a worthy object of faith Who
is false in words and untrue in works.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p25"></span>But let us proceed to what follows.
“Above all rule, subjection and authority,” he says. This language is
ours, and belongs properly to the Catholic Church,—to believe that the
Divine nature is above all rule, and that it has in subordination to
itself everything that can be conceived among existing things. But the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost constitute the Divine nature. If he
assigns this property to the Father alone, and if he affirms Him alone
to be free from variableness and change, and if he says that He alone is
undefiled, the inference that we are meant to draw is plain, namely,
that He who has not these characteristics is variable, corruptible,
subject to change and decay. This, then, is what Eunomius asserts of the
Son and the Holy Spirit: for if he did not hold this opinion concerning
the Son and the Spirit, he would not have employed this opposition,
contrasting the Father with them. For the rest, brethren, judge whether,
with these sentiments, he is not a persecutor of the Christian faith.
For who will allow it to be right to deem that a fitting object of
reverence which varies, changes, and <span id="page_CIX">p. CIX</span>
<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-Page_CIX"></span>is subject to decay? So then the
whole aim of one who flames such notions as these,—notions by which he
makes out that neither the Truth nor the Spirit of Truth is undefiled,
unvarying, or unchangeable,—is to expel from the Church the belief in
the Son and in the Holy Spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[CVII:290](2050065.htm#fr_288) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p3"></span> Cf. [2 Cor.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[CVII:291](2050065.htm#fr_289) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p4"></span> S. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_290"></span>[CVII:292](2050065.htm#fr_290) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p5"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_291"></span>[CVII:293](2050065.htm#fr_291) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p6"></span> S. [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[CVII:294](2050065.htm#fr_292) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p7"></span> S. [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[CVII:295](2050065.htm#fr_293) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p8"></span> S. [Mark viii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[CVII:296](2050065.htm#fr_294) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[CVII:297](2050065.htm#fr_295) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p11"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[CVII:298](2050065.htm#fr_296) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p12"></span> Cf. S. [John
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[CVII:299](2050065.htm#fr_297) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p13"></span> S. [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_298"></span>[CVII:300](2050065.htm#fr_298) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p14"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p14.2"></span>
and 11.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[CVII:301](2050065.htm#fr_299) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p15"></span> [Ps. cxxxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[CVII:302](2050065.htm#fr_300) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p16"></span> S. [John v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="fn_301"></span>[CVII:303](2050065.htm#fr_301) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p17"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[CVII:304](2050065.htm#fr_302) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p18"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_303"></span>[CVIII:305](2050065.htm#fr_303) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p20"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[CVIII:306](2050065.htm#fr_304) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p21"></span> [Ps.
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004), [Ps.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p21.2"></span>, or xxxiii. 9 in LXX.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[CVIII:307](2050065.htm#fr_305) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p22"></span> Cf. [Col.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[CVIII:308](2050065.htm#fr_306) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p23"></span> “If this is so:” i.e. if Eunomius
means his words in a Christian sense.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[CVIII:309](2050065.htm#fr_307) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p24"></span> S. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.iv.vi-p24.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gregory further shows that the Only-Begotten being begotten not
only of the Father, but also impassibly of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost,
does not divide the substance; seeing that neither is the nature of men
divided or severed from the parents by being begotten, as is ingeniously
demonstrated from the instances of Adam and Abraham.](2050066)
