[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050275)  [Next](2050277.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>Letter X <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2193](#fn_2191.md) </span> .—*To Libanius*.

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>I once</span> heard a medical man tell of a
wonderful freak of nature. And this was his story. A man was ill of an
unmanageable complaint, and began to find fault with the medical
faculty, as being able to do far less than it professed; for everything
that was devised for his cure was ineffectual. Afterwards when some good
news beyond his hopes was brought him, the occurrence did the work of
the healing art, by putting an end to his disease. Whether it were that
the soul by the overflowing sense of release from anxiety, and by a
sudden rebound, disposed the body to be in the same condition as itself,
or in some other way, I cannot say: for I have no leisure to enter upon
such disquisitions, and the person who told me did not specify the
cause. But I have just called to mind the story very seasonably, as I
think: for when I was not as well as I could wish—now I need not tell
you exactly the causes of all the worries which befel me from the time I
was with you to the present,—after some one told me all at once of the
letter which had arrived from your unparalleled Erudition, as soon as I
got the epistle and ran over what you had written, forthwith, first my
soul was affected in the same way as though I had been proclaimed before
all the world as the hero of most glorious achievements—so highly did I
value the testimony which you favoured me with in your letter,—and then
also my bodily health immediately began to improve: and I afford an
example of the same marvel as the story which I told you just now, in
that I was ill when I read one half of the letter, and well when I read
the other half of the same. Thus much for those matters. But now, since
Cynegius was the occasion of that favour, you are able, in the
overflowing abundance of your ability to do good, not only to benefit
us, but also our benefactors; and he is a benefactor of ours, as has
been said before, by having been the cause and occasion of our having a
letter from you; and for this reason he well deserves both our good
offices. But if you ask who are our teachers,—if indeed we are thought
to have learned anything,—you will find that they are Paul and John, and
the rest of the Apostles and Prophets; if I do not seem to speak too
boldly in claiming any knowledge of that art in which you so excel, that
competent judges declare <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2194](#fn_2192.md) that
the rules of oratory stream down from you, as from an overflowing
spring, upon all who have any pretensions to excellence in that
department. This I have heard the admirable Basil say to everybody,
Basil, who was your disciple, but my father and teacher. But be assured,
first, that I found no rich nourishment in the precepts of my
teachers <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2195](#fn_2193.md) , inasmuch as I
enjoyed my brother’s society only for a short time, and got only just
enough polish from his diviner tongue to be able to discern the
ignorance of those who are uninitiated in oratory; next, however, that
whenever I had leisure, I devoted my time and energies to this study,
and so became enamoured of your beauty, though I never yet obtained the
object of my passion. If, then, on the one side we never had a teacher,
which I deem to have been our case, and if on the other it is improper
to suppose that the opinion which you entertain of us is other than the
true one—nay, you are correct in your statement, and we are not quite
contemptible in your judgment,—give me leave to presume to attribute to
you the cause of such proficiency as we may have attained. For if Basil
was the author of our oratory, and if his wealth came from your
treasures, then what we possess is yours, even though we received it
through others. But if our attainments are scanty, so is the water in a
jar; still it comes from the Nile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[533:2193](2050276.htm#fr_2191.md) <span
id="xiii.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span> This and the following letter appear to
have been written when Gregory still publicly professed *belles
lettres.* They are addressed to one of the masters whom Basil had had at
Athens. For these see Socrates, *H. E.* iv. 26: it was probably
Libanius; rather than Prohæresius, who did not live in Asia Minor, or
Himærius who (according to Eunapius, *Philosoph. Vit.* p. 126) had
become a Christian before the reign of Julian, and it is clear that this
Letter is written to a pagan. The Cod. Medic. has Libanius’ name as a
title to both Letters. No Letter to Gregory certainly is to be found
amongst Libanius’ unpublished Letters in the Vatican Library, as Zacagni
himself testifies: but no conclusion can be drawn from this.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[533:2194](2050276.htm#fr_2192.md) <span
id="xiii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span> This passage as it stands is unmanageable.
The Latin translator appears to give the sense required, but it is hard
to see how it can be got out of the words (H. C. O.).

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[533:2195](2050276.htm#fr_2193.md) <span
id="xiii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xi-p5.1"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xi-p5.2"></span>σθι με μηδὲν ἔχοντα λιπαρὸν</span> (<span
class="c22"><span id="xiii.xi-p5.3"></span>ms.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xi-p5.4"></span>λυπρὸν</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xi-p5.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xi-p5.6"></span>ν τοῖς τῶν διδασκάλων
διηγήμασιν</span>: but <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xi-p5.7"></span>τοῦ διδασκάλου</span> perhaps should be read
instead of <span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xi-p5.8"></span>τῶν
διδασκάλων</span> (H. C. O.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Libanius.](2050277.md)
