[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050122)  [Next](2050124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_CCXXII">p.
CCXXII</span> <span id="viii.i.xii.ii-Page_CCXXII"></span>§2. *He then
wonderfully displays the Eternal Life, which is Christ, to those who
confess Him not, and applies to them the mournful lamentation of
Jeremiah over Jehoiakim, as being closely allied to Montanus and
Sabellius.*

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p2"></span>But now that I have surveyed what
remains of his treatise I shrink from conducting my argument further, as
a shudder runs through my heart at his words. For he wishes to show that
the Son is something different from eternal life, while, unless eternal
life is found in the Son, our faith will be proved to be idle, and our
preaching to be vain, baptism a superfluity, the agonies of the martyrs
all for nought, the toils of the Apostles useless and unprofitable for
the life of men. For why did they preach Christ, in Whom, according to
Eunomius, there does not reside the power of eternal life? Why do they
make mention of those who had believed in Christ, unless it was through
Him that they were to be partakers of eternal life? “For the
intelligence,” he says, “of those who have believed in the Lord,
overleaping all sensible and intellectual existence, cannot stop even at
the generation of the Son, but speeds beyond even this in its yearning
for eternal life, eager to meet the First.” What ought I most to bewail
in this passage? that the wretched men do not think that eternal life is
in the Son, or that they conceive of the Person of the Only-begotten in
so grovelling and earthly a fashion, that they fancy they can mount in
their reasonings upon His beginning, and so look by the power of their
own intellect beyond the life of the Son, and, leaving the generation of
the Lord somewhere beneath them, can speed onward beyond this in their
yearning for eternal life? For the meaning of what I have quoted is
nothing else than this, that the human mind, scrutinizing the knowledge
of real existence, and lifting itself above the sensible and
intelligible creation, will leave God the Word, Who was in the
beginning, below itself, just as it has left below it all other things,
and itself comes to be in Him in Whom God the Word was not, treading, by
mental activity, regions which lie beyond the life of the Son, there
searching for eternal life, where the Only-begotten God is not. “For in
its yearning for eternal life,” he says, “it is borne in thought, beyond
the Son”—clearly as though it had not in the Son found that which it was
seeking. If the eternal life is not in the Son, then assuredly He Who
said, “I am the life <span id="fr_937"></span>[939](#fn_937) ,” will be
convicted of falsehood, or else He is life, it is true, but not eternal
life. But that which is not eternal is of course limited in duration.
And such a kind of life is common to the irrational animals as well as
to men. Where then is the majesty of the very life, if even the
irrational creation share it? and how will the Word or Divine
Reason <span id="fr_938"></span>[940](#fn_938) be the same as the Life,
if this finds a home, in virtue of the life which is but temporary, in
irrational creatures? For if, according to the great John, the Word is
Life <span id="fr_939"></span>[941](#fn_939) , but that life is
temporary and not eternal, as their heresy holds, and if, moreover, the
temporary life has place in other creatures, what is the logical
consequence? Why, either that irrational animals are rational, or that
the Reason must be confessed to be irrational. Have we any further need
of words to confute their accursed and malignant blasphemy? Do such
statements even pretend to conceal their intention of denying the Lord?
For if the Apostle plainly says that what is not eternal is
temporary <span id="fr_940"></span>[942](#fn_940) , and if these people
see eternal life in the essence of the Father alone, and if by
alienating the Son from the Nature of the Father they also cut Him off
from eternal life, what is this but a manifest denial and rejection of
the faith in the Lord? while the Apostle clearly says that those who “in
this life only have hope in Christ are of all men most miserable <span
id="fr_941"></span>[943](#fn_941) .” If then the Lord is life, but not
eternal life, assuredly the life is temporal, and but for a day, that
which is operative only for the present time, or else <span
id="fr_942"></span>[944](#fn_942) the Apostle bemoans those who have
hope, as having missed the true life.

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p9"></span>However, they who are enlightened in
Eunomius’ fashion pass the Son by, and are carried in their reasonings
beyond Him, seeking eternal life in Him Who is contemplated as outside
and apart from the Only-begotten. What ought one to say to such evils as
these,—save whatever calls forth lamentation and weeping? Alas, how can
we groan over this wretched and pitiable generation, bringing forth a
crop of such deadly mischiefs? In days of yore the zealous Jeremiah
bewailed the people of Israel, when they gave an evil consent to
Jehoiakim who led the way to idolatry, and were condemned to captivity
under the Assyrians in requital for their unlawful worship, exiled from
the sanctuary and banished far from the inheritance of their fathers.
Yet more fitting does it seem to me that these lamentations be chanted
when the imitator of Jehoiakim draws away those whom he deceives to this
new kind of idolatry, banishing them from their ancestral inheritance,—I
mean the Faith. They too, in a way corresponding to the Scriptural
record, are <span id="page_CCXXIII">p. CCXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-Page_CCXXIII"></span>carried away captive to Babylon
from Jerusalem that is above,—that is from the Church of God to this
confusion of pernicious doctrines,—for <span
id="fr_943"></span>[945](#fn_943) Babylon means “confusion.” And even as
Jehoiakim was mutilated, so this man, having voluntarily deprived
himself of the light of the truth, has become a prey to the Babylonian
despot, never having learned, poor wretch, that the Gospel enjoins us to
behold eternal life alike in the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, inasmuch as the Word has thus spoken concerning the Father, that
to know Him is life eternal <span id="fr_944"></span>[946](#fn_944) ,
and concerning the Son, that every one that believeth on Him hath
eternal life <span id="fr_945"></span>[947](#fn_945) , and concerning
the Holy Spirit, that to Him that hath received His grace it shall be a
well of water springing up unto eternal life <span
id="fr_946"></span>[948](#fn_946) . Accordingly every one that yearns
for eternal life when he has found the Son,—I mean the true Son, and not
the Son falsely so called—has found in Him in its entirety what he
longed for, because He is life and hath life in Himself <span
id="fr_947"></span>[949](#fn_947) . But this man, so subtle in mind, so
keen-sighted of heart, does not by his extreme acuteness of vision
discover life in the Son, but, having passed Him over and left Him
behind as a hindrance in the way to that for which he searches he there
seeks eternal life where he thinks the true Life not to be! What could
we conceive more to be abhorred than this for profanity, or more
melancholy as an occasion of lamentation? But that the charge of
Sabellianism and Montanism should be repeatedly urged against our
doctrines, is much the same as if one should lay to our charge the
blasphemy of the Anomœans. For if one were carefully to investigate the
falsehood of these heresies, he would find that they have great
similarity to the error of Eunomius. For each of them affects the Jew in
his doctrine, admitting neither the Only-begotten God nor the Holy
Spirit to share the Deity of the God Whom they call “Great,” and
“First.” For Whom Sabellius calls God of the three names, Him does
Eunomius term unbegotten: but neither contemplates the Godhead in the
Trinity of Persons. Who then is really akin to Sabellius let the
judgment of those who read our argument decide. Thus far for these
matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_937"></span>[CCXXII:939](2050123.htm#fr_937) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p3"></span> S. [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_938"></span>[CCXXII:940](2050123.htm#fr_938) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p4.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p4.2"></span>λόγος</span>: the idea of “reason” must
be expressed to convey the force required for the argument following.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[CCXXII:941](2050123.htm#fr_939) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p5"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_940"></span>[CCXXII:942](2050123.htm#fr_940) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p6"></span> The reference is perhaps to [2 Cor.
iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[CCXXII:943](2050123.htm#fr_941) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p7"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[CCXXII:944](2050123.htm#fr_942) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p8"></span> If we might read <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p8.1"></span>ᾑ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p8.2"></span>ἢ</span> the sense of
the passage would be materially simplified:—“His life is temporal, that
life which operates only for the present time, whereon those who hope
are the objects of the Apostle’s pity.”

<span id="fn_943"></span>[CCXXIII:945](2050123.htm#fr_943) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p10"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[CCXXIII:946](2050123.htm#fr_944) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_945"></span>[CCXXIII:947](2050123.htm#fr_945) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p12"></span> Cf. S. [John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_946"></span>[CCXXIII:948](2050123.htm#fr_946) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p13"></span> Cf. S. [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_947"></span>[CCXXIII:949](2050123.htm#fr_947) <span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.ii-p14"></span> Cf. S. [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="viii.i.xii.ii-p14.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then shows the eternity of the Son's generation, and the
inseparable identity of His essence with Him that begat Him, and likens
the folly of Eunomius to children playing with sand.](2050124)
