[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050175)  [Next](2050177.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span
id="ix.iv-Page_382"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>On Pilgrimages. <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1581](#fn_1579.md) </span>

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.iv-p4.1"></span>Since</span>, my friend, you ask me a question in
your letter, I think that it is incumbent upon me to answer you in their
proper order upon all the points connected with it. It is, then, my
opinion that it is a good thing for those who have dedicated themselves
once for all to the higher life to fix their attention continually upon
the utterances in the Gospel, and, just as those who correct their work
in any given material by a rule, and by means of the straightness of
that rule bring the crookedness which their hands detect to
straightness, so it is right that we should apply to these questions a
strict and flawless measure as it were,—I mean, of course, the Gospel
rule of life <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1582](#fn_1580.md) ,—and in
accordance with that, direct ourselves in the sight of God. Now there
are some amongst those who have entered upon the monastic and hermit
life, who have made it a part of their devotion to behold those spots at
Jerusalem where the memorials of our Lord’s life in the flesh are on
view; it would be well, then, to look to this Rule, and if the finger of
its precepts points to the observance of such things, to perform the
work, as the actual injunction of our Lord; but if they lie quite
outside the commandment of the Master, I do not see what there is to
command any one who has become a law of duty to himself to be zealous in
performing any of them. When the Lord invites the blest to their
inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, He does not include a pilgrimage
to Jerusalem amongst their good deeds; when He announces the Beatitudes,
He does not name amongst them that sort of devotion. But as to that
which neither makes us blessed nor sets us in the path to the kingdom,
for what reason it should be run after, let him that is wise consider.
Even if there were some profit in what they do, yet even so, those who
are perfect would do best not to be eager in practising it; but since
this matter, when closely looked into, is found to inflict upon those
who have begun to lead the stricter life a moral mischief, it is so far
from being worth an earnest pursuit, that it actually requires the
greatest caution to prevent him who has devoted himself to God from
being penetrated by any of its hurtful influences. What is it, then,
that is hurtful in it? The Holy Life is open to all, men and women
alike. Of that contemplative Life the peculiar mark is Modesty <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1583](#fn_1581.md) . But Modesty is preserved in
societies that live distinct and separate, so that there should be no
meeting and mixing up of persons of opposite sex; men are not to rush to
keep the rules of Modesty in the company of women, nor women to do so in
the company of men. But the necessities of a journey are continually apt
to reduce this scrupulousness to a very indifferent observance of such
rules. For instance, it is impossible for a woman to accomplish so long
a journey without a conductor; on account of her natural weakness she
has to be put upon her horse and to be lifted down again; she has to be
supported <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1584](#fn_1582.md) in difficult
situations. Whichever we suppose, that she has an acquaintance to do
this yeoman’s service, or a hired attendant to perform it, either way
the proceeding cannot escape being reprehensible; whether she leans on
the help of a stranger, or on that of her own servant, she fails to keep
the law of correct conduct; and as the inns and hostelries and cities of
the East present many examples of licence and of indifference to vice,
how will it be possible for one passing through such smoke to escape
<span id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span
id="ix.iv-Page_383"></span>without smarting eyes? Where the ear and the
eye is defiled, and the heart too, by receiving all those foulnesses
through eye and ear, how will it be possible to thread without infection
such seats of contagion? What advantage, moreover, is reaped by him who
reaches those celebrated spots themselves? He cannot imagine that our
Lord is living, in the body, there at the present day, but has gone away
from us foreigners; or that the Holy Spirit is in abundance at
Jerusalem, but unable to travel as far as us. Whereas, if it is really
possible to infer God’s presence from visible symbols, one might more
justly consider that He dwelt in the Cappadocian nation than in any of
the spots outside it. For how many Altars <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1585](#fn_1583.md) there are there, on which the name
of our Lord is glorified! One could hardly count so many in all the rest
of the world. Again, if the Divine grace was more abundant about
Jerusalem than elsewhere, sin would not be so much the fashion amongst
those that live there; but as it is, there is no form of
uncleanness <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1586](#fn_1584.md) that is not
perpetrated amongst them; rascality, adultery, theft, idolatry,
poisoning, quarrelling, murder, are rife; and the last kind of evil is
so excessively prevalent, that nowhere in the world are people so ready
to kill each other as there; where kinsmen attack each other like wild
beasts, and spill each other’s blood, merely for the sake of lifeless
plunder. Well, in a place where such things go on, what proof, I ask,
have you of the abundance of Divine grace? But I know what many will
retort to all that I have said; they will say, “Why did you not lay down
this rule for yourself as well? If there is no gain for the godly
pilgrim in return for having been there, for what reason did you undergo
the toil of so long a journey?” Let them hear from me my plea for this.
By the necessities of that office in which I have been placed by the
Dispenser of my life to live, it was my duty, for the purpose of the
correction which the Holy Council had resolved upon, to visit the places
where the Church in Arabia is; secondly, as Arabia is on the confines of
the Jerusalem district, I had promised that I would confer also with the
Heads of the Holy Jerusalem Churches, because matters with them were in
confusion, and needed an arbiter; thirdly, our most religious Emperor
had granted us facilities for the journey, by postal conveyance, so that
we had to endure none of those inconveniences which in the case of
others we have noticed; our waggon was, in fact, as good as a church or
monastery to us, for all of us were singing psalms and fasting in the
Lord during the whole journey. Let our own case therefore cause
difficulty to none; rather let our advice be all the more listened to,
because we are giving it upon matters which came actually before our
eyes. We confessed that the Christ Who was manifested is very God, as
much before as after our sojourn at Jerusalem; our faith in Him was not
increased afterwards any more than it was diminished. Before we saw
Bethlehem we knew His being made man by means of the Virgin; before we
saw His Grave we believed in His Resurrection from the dead; apart from
seeing the Mount of Olives, we confessed that His Ascension into heaven
was real. We derived only thus much of profit from our travelling
thither, namely that we came to know by being able to compare them, that
our own places are far holier than those abroad. Wherefore, O ye who
fear the Lord, praise Him in the places where ye now are. Change of
place does not effect any drawing nearer unto God, but wherever thou
mayest be, God will come to thee, if the chambers of thy soul be found
of such a sort that He can dwell in thee and walk in thee. But if thou
keepest thine inner man full of wicked thoughts, even if thou wast on
Golgotha, even if thou wast on the Mount of Olives, even if thou
stoodest on the memorial-rock of the Resurrection, thou wilt be as far
away from receiving Christ into thyself, as one who has not even begun
to confess Him. Therefore, my beloved friend, counsel the brethren to be
absent from the body to go to our Lord, rather than to be absent from
Cappadocia to go to Palestine; and if any one should adduce the command
spoken by our Lord to His disciples that they should not quit Jerusalem,
let him be made to understand its true meaning. Inasmuch as the gift and
the distribution of the Holy Spirit had not yet passed upon the
Apostles, our Lord commanded them to remain in the same place, until
they should have been endued with power from on high. Now, if that which
happened at the beginning, when the Holy Spirit was dispensing each of
His gifts under the appearance of a flame, continued until now, it would
be right for all to remain in that place where that dispensing took
place; but if the Spirit “bloweth” where He “listeth,” those, too, who
have become believers here are made partakers of that gift; and that
according to the proportion of their faith, not in consequence of their
pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[382:1581](2050176.htm#fr_1579.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span> The modern history of this Letter is
curious. Its genuineness though suspected by Bellarmine, is admitted by
Tillemont, and even by Cæsar Baronius. After having been edited by Morel
in Greek and Latin, 1551, it was omitted from his son’s edition of the
works of Gregory by the advice of Fronto Ducæus, lest it should seem to
reflect upon the practice of pilgrimages. But in 1607 it was again
edited (Hannov.) by Du Moulin, with a defence of it, and a translation
into French by R. Stephen: this is the only instance of a vernacular
version of Gregory at this time, and shows the importance attached to
this Letter. It appears in the second Paris Edition, but with the
vehement protests, printed in the notes, of the Jesuit Gretser, against
Du Moulin’s interpretation of its scope, and even against its
genuineness. He makes much of its absence from the Bavarian (Munich)
Cod., and of the fact that even “heretical printers” had omitted it from
the Basle Edition of 1562: and he is very angry with Du Moulin for not
having approached the Royal Library while in Paris, and while he had
leisure from his “Calvinistic evening communions.” But why should he,
when the Librarian, no less a person than I. Casaubon (appointed 1598),
had assured him that the Letter was in the Codex Regius? It is in
*Migne* iii. col. 1009. See *Letter to Eustathia,* &c.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[382:1582](2050176.htm#fr_1580.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>πολιτείαν</span>, “vivendi rationem.” Cf. Basil,
*Homil*. xiii.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[382:1583](2050176.htm#fr_1581.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p6.2"></span>εὐσχημοσύνη</span>

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[382:1584](2050176.htm#fr_1582.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p7.1"></span>παρακρατουμένη</span>; cf. Epict. (cited by
Diosc.) <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv-p7.2"></span>τὰς τρίχας
ῥεούσας παρακρατεῖν</span>, “to stop the hair from falling off.”

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[383:1585](2050176.htm#fr_1583.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>θυσιαστήρια</span>, the sanctuaries (with the
Altar), into which at this time no layman except the Emperor might enter
(Balsamon’s note to decrees of Council of Laodicæa).

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[383:1586](2050176.htm#fr_1584.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span> Cyril’s Catecheses in the year 348 had
combated the practical immorality of the Holy City.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philosophical Works.](2050177.md)
