[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050101)  [Next](2050103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He then gives a notable
explanation of the saying of the Lord to Philip, “He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father;” and herein he excellently discusses the suffering
of the Lord in His love to man, and the impassibility, creative power,
and providence of the Father, and the composite nature of men, and their
resolution into the elements of which they were composed.*

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p2"></span>Sufficient defence has been offered
on these points, and as for that which Eunomius says by way of calumny
against our doctrine, that “Christ was emptied to become Himself” there
has been sufficient discussion in what has been said above, where he has
been shown to be attributing to our doctrine his own blasphemy. <span
id="fr_778"></span>[780](#fn_778) For it is not one who confesses that
the immutable Nature has put on the created and perishable, who speaks
of the transition from like to like, but one who conceives that there is
no change from the majesty of Nature to that which is more lowly. For
if, as their doctrine asserts, He is created, and man is created also,
the wonder of the doctrine disappears, and there is nothing marvellous
in what is alleged, since the created nature comes to be in itself <span
id="fr_779"></span>[781](#fn_779) . But we who have learnt from prophecy
of “the change of the right hand of the Most High <span
id="fr_780"></span>[782](#fn_780) ,”—and by the “Right Hand” of the
Father we understand that Power of God, which made all things, which is
the Lord (not in the sense of depending upon Him as a part upon a whole,
but as being indeed from Him, and yet contemplated in individual
existence),—say thus: that neither does the Right Hand vary from Him
Whose Right Hand It is, in regard to the idea of Its Nature, nor can any
other change in It be spoken of besides the dispensation of the Flesh.
For verily the Right Hand of God was God Himself; manifested in the
flesh, seen through that same flesh by those whose sight was clear; as
He did the work of the Father, being, both in fact and in thought, the
Right Hand of God, yet being changed, in respect of the veil of the
flesh by which He was surrounded, as regarded that which was seen, from
that which He was by Nature, as a subject of contemplation. Therefore He
says to Philip, who was gazing only at that which was changed, “Look
through that which is changed to that which is unchangeable, and if thou
seest this, thou hast seen that Father Himself, Whom thou seekest to
see; for he that hath seen Me—not Him Who appears in a state of change,
but My very self, Who am in the Father—will have seen that Father
Himself in Whom I am, because the very same character of Godhead is
beheld in both <span id="fr_781"></span>[783](#fn_781) .” If, then, we
believe that the immortal and impassible and uncreated Nature came to be
in the passible Nature of the creature, and conceive the “change” to
consist in this, on what grounds are we charged with saying that He “was
emptied to become Himself,” by those who keep prating their own
statements about our doctrines? For the participation of the created
with the created is no “change of the Right Hand.” To say that the Right
Hand of the uncreated Nature is created belongs to Eunomius alone, and
to those who adopt such opinions as he holds. For the man with an eye
that looks on the truth will discern the <span id="page_CLXXXVI">p.
CLXXXVI</span> <span id="viii.i.viii.iii-Page_CLXXXVI"></span>Right Hand
of the Highest to be such as he sees the Highest to be,—Uncreated of
Uncreated, Good of Good, Eternal of Eternal without prejudice to Its
eternity by Its being in the Father by way of generation. Thus our
accuser has unawares been employing against us reproaches that properly
fall upon himself.

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p7"></span>But with reference <span
id="fr_782"></span>[784](#fn_782) to those who stumble at the idea of
“passion,” and on this ground maintain the diversity of the
Essences,—arguing that the Father, by reason of the exaltation of His
Nature, does not admit passion, and that the Son on the other hand
condescended, by reason of defect and divergence, to the partaking of
His sufferings,—I wish to add these remarks to what has been already
said:—That nothing is truly “passion” which does not tend to sin, nor
would one strictly call by the name of “passion” the necessary routine
of nature, regarding the composite nature as it goes on its course in a
kind of order and sequence. For the mutual concurrence of heterogeneous
elements in the formation of our body is a kind of a combination
harmoniously conjoined out of several dissimilar elements; but when, at
the due time, the tie is loosed which bound together this concurrence of
the elements, the combined nature is once more dissolved into the
elements of which it was composed. This then is rather a work than a
passion of the nature <span id="fr_783"></span>[785](#fn_783) . For we
give the name of “passion” only to that which is opposed to the virtuous
unimpassioned state and of this we believe that He Who granted us
salvation was at all times devoid, Who “was in all points tempted like
as we are yet without sin <span id="fr_784"></span>[786](#fn_784) .” Of
that, at least, which is truly passion, which is a diseased condition of
the will, He was not a partaker; for it says “He did no sin, neither was
guile found in His mouth <span id="fr_785"></span>[787](#fn_785) ”; but
the peculiar attributes of our nature, which, by a kind of customary
abuse of terms, are called by the same name of “passion,”—of these, we
confess, the Lord did partake,—of birth, nourishment, growth, of sleep
and toil, and all those natural dispositions which the soul is wont to
experience with regard to bodily inconveniences,—the desire of that
which is lacking, when the longing passes from the body to the soul, the
sense of pain, the dread of death, and all the like, save only such as,
if followed, lead to sin. As, then, when we perceive His power extending
through all things in heaven, and air, and earth, and sea, whatever
there is in heaven, whatever there is beneath the earth, we believe that
He is universally present, and yet do not say that He is any of those
things in which He is (for He is not the Heaven, Who has marked it out
with His enfolding span, nor is He the earth, Who upholds the circle of
the earth, nor yet is He the water, Who encompasses the liquid nature),
so neither do we say that in passing through those sufferings of the
flesh of which we speak He was “subject to passion,” but, as we say that
He is the cause of all things that are, that He holds the universe in
His grasp, that He directs all that is in motion and keeps upon a
settled foundation all that is stationary, by the unspeakable power of
His own majesty, so we say that He was born among us for the cure of the
disease of sin, adapting the exercise of His healing power in a manner
corresponding to the suffering, applying the healing in that way which
He knew to be for the good of that part of the creation which He knew to
be in infirmity. And as it was expedient that He should heal the
sufferings by touch, we say that He so healed it; yet is He not, because
He is the Healer of our infirmity, to be deemed on this account to have
been Himself passible. For even in the case of men, ordinary use does
not allow us to affirm such a thing. We do not say that one who touches
a sick man to heal him is himself partaker of the infirmity, but we say
that he does give the sick man the boon of a return to health, and does
not partake of the infirmity: for the suffering does not touch him, it
is he who touches the disease. Now if he who by his art works any good
in men’s bodies is not called dull or feeble, but is called a lover of
men and a benefactor and the like, why do they slander the dispensation
to usward as being mean and inglorious, and use it to maintain that the
essence of the Son is “divergent by way of inferiority,” on the ground
that the Nature of the Father is superior to sufferings, while that of
the Son is not pure from passion? Why, if the aim of the dispensation of
the Incarnation was not that the Son should be subject to suffering, but
that He should be manifested as a lover of men, while the Father also is
undoubtedly a lover of men, it follows that if one will but regard the
aim, the Son is in the same case with the Father. But if it was not the
Father Who wrought the destruction of death, marvel not,—for all
judgment also He hath committed unto the Son, Himself judging no
man <span id="fr_786"></span>[788](#fn_786) ; not doing all things by
the Son for the reason that He is unable either to save the lost or
judge the sinner, but because He does these things too by His own Power,
by which He works all things. Then they who were saved by the Son were
saved by the Power of the Father, and they who are judged by Him undergo
judgment by the <span id="page_CLXXXVII">p. CLXXXVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-Page_CLXXXVII"></span>Righteousness of God. For
“Christ,” as the Apostle says, “is the Righteousness of God <span
id="fr_787"></span>[789](#fn_787) ,” which is revealed by the Gospel;
and whether you look at the world as a whole, or at the parts of the
world which make up that complete whole, all these are works of the
Father, in that they are works of His Power; and thus the word which
says both that the Father made all things, and that none of these things
that are came into being without the Son, speaks truly on both points;
for the operation of the Power bears relation to Him Whose Power It is.
Thus, since the Son is the Power of the Father, all the works of the Son
are works of the Father. That He entered upon the dispensation of the
Passion not by weakness of nature but by the power of His will, one
might bring countless passages of the Gospel to show; but these, as the
matter is clear, I will pretermit, that my discourse may not be
prolonged by dwelling on points that are admitted. If, then, that which
comes to pass is evil, we have to separate from that evil not the Father
only, but the Son also; but if the saving of them that were lost is
good, and if that which took place is not “passion <span
id="fr_788"></span>[790](#fn_788) ,” but love of men, why do you
alienate from our thanksgiving for our salvation the Father, Who by His
own Power, which is Christ, wrought for men their freedom from death?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_778"></span>[CLXXXV:780](2050102.htm#fr_778) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p3"></span> See above, Book V. §4.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[CLXXXV:781](2050102.htm#fr_779) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p4"></span> That is, in a nature created like
itself.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[CLXXXV:782](2050102.htm#fr_780) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p5"></span> <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ps. lxxvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p5.2"></span> (LXX.). This application of the
passage is also made by Michael Ayguan (the “Doctor Incognitus”), who is
the only commentator mentioned by Neale and Littledale as so
interpreting the text.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[CLXXXV:783](2050102.htm#fr_781) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p6"></span> Cf. S. [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[CLXXXVI:784](2050102.htm#fr_782) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p8"></span> Oehler’s punctuation, while it
does not exactly follow that of the earlier editions, still seems to
admit of emendation here.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[CLXXXVI:785](2050102.htm#fr_783) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p9"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p9.1"></span>πάθος</span>, like the English word
“passion,” has a double sense: in one sense it connotes a tendency to
evil action or evil habit—and in this sense Christ was not subject to
passion. In another sense it has no such connotation, and it is in this
sense (a sense, Gregory would say, somewhat inexact), that the term is
used to express the sufferings of Christ:—to this case, it may be said,
the inexact use of the English word is for the most part restricted.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[CLXXXVI:786](2050102.htm#fr_784) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p10"></span> [Heb. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[CLXXXVI:787](2050102.htm#fr_785) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p11"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[CLXXXVI:788](2050102.htm#fr_786) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p12"></span> Cf. S. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_787"></span>[CLXXXVII:789](2050102.htm#fr_787) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p13"></span> [Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[CLXXXVII:790](2050102.htm#fr_788) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p14"></span> That is, “passion” in the sense
defined above, as something with evil tendency. If the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.viii.iii-p14.1"></span>γινόμενον</span>
(*i.e.* the salvation of men) is evil, then Father and Son alike must be
“kept clear” from any participation in it. If it is good, and if,
therefore, the means (the actual events) are not “passion” as not
tending to evil, while, considered in regard to their aim, they are
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p14.2"></span>φιλανθρωπία</span>, then there is no
reason why a share in their fulfilment should be denied to the Father,
Who, as well as the Son, is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.viii.iii-p14.3"></span>φιλάνθρωπος</span>, and Who by His own
Power (that is, by Christ) wrought the salvation of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then returning to the words of Peter, “God made Him Lord and
Christ,” he skilfully explains it by many arguments, and herein shows
Eunomius as an advocate of the orthodox doctrine, and concludes the book
by showing that the Divine and Human names are applied, by reason of the
commixture, to either Nature.](2050103)
