[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050183)  [Next](2050185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.iii-p1"></span> II. *Why man appeared last, after the
creation* <span id="fr_1592"></span>[1594](#fn_1592)

<span id="x.ii.ii.iii-p3"></span>1. For not as yet had that great and
precious thing, man, come into the world of being; it was not to be
looked for that the ruler should appear before the subjects of his rule;
but when his dominion was prepared, the next step was that the king
should be manifested. When, then, the Maker of all had prepared
beforehand, as it were, a royal lodging for the future king (and this
was the land, and islands, and sea, and the heaven arching like a roof
over them), and when all kinds of wealth had been stored in this palace
(and by wealth I mean the whole creation, all that is in plants and
trees, and all that has sense, and breath, and life; and—if we are to
account materials also as wealth—all that for their beauty are reckoned
precious in the eyes of men, as gold and silver, and the substances of
your jewels which men delight in—having concealed, I say, abundance of
all these also in the bosom of the earth as in a royal treasure-house),
he thus manifests man in the world, to be the beholder of some of the
wonders therein, and the lord of others; that by his enjoyment he might
have knowledge of the Giver, and by the beauty and majesty of the things
he saw might trace out that power of the Maker which is beyond speech
and language.

<span id="x.ii.ii.iii-p4"></span>2. For this reason man was brought into
the world last after the creation, not being rejected to the last as
worthless, but as one whom it behoved to be king over his subjects at
his very birth. And as a good host does not bring his guest to his house
before the preparation of his feast, but, when he has made all due
preparation, and decked with their proper adornments his house, his
couches, his table, brings his guest home when things suitable for his
refreshment are in readiness,—in the same manner the rich and munificent
Entertainer of our nature, when He had decked the habitation with
beauties of every kind, and prepared this great and varied banquet, then
introduced man, assigning to him as his task not the acquiring of what
was not there, but the enjoyment of the things which were there; and for
this reason He gives him as foundations the instincts of a twofold
organization, blending the Divine with the earthy, that by means of both
he may be naturally and properly disposed to each enjoyment, enjoying
God by means of his more divine nature, and the good things of earth by
the sense that is akin to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[390:1594](2050184.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="x.ii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.iii-p2"></span> The title in the Bodleian Latin <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> is:—“That it
was reasonable that man should be created last of the creatures.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the nature of man is more precious than all the visible
creation.](2050185)
