[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050053)  [Next](2050055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p1"></span> §38. *Several ways of
controverting his quibbling syllogisms*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p2"></span>Let us, if you please, examine
his irrefragable syllogisms, and his subtle transpositions <span
id="fr_195"></span>[197](#fn_195.md) of the terms in his own false
premisses, by which he hopes to shake that argument; though, indeed, I
fear lest the miserable quibbling in what he says may in a measure raise
a prejudice also against the remarks that would correct it. When
striplings challenge to a fight, men get more blame for pugnaciousness
in closing with such foes, than honour for their show of victory.
Nevertheless, what we want to say is this. We think, indeed, that the
things said by him, with that well-known elocution now familiar to us,
only for the sake of being insolent, are better buried in silence and
oblivion; they may suit him; but to us they afford only an exercise for
much-enduring patience. Nor would it be proper, I think, to insert his
ridiculous expressions in the midst of our own serious controversy, and
so to make this zeal for the truth evaporate in coarse, vulgar laughter;
for indeed to be within hearing, and to remain unmoved, is an
impossibility, when he says with such sublime and magnificient
verbosity, “Where additional words amount to additional blasphemy, it is
by half as much more tranquillizing to be silent than to speak.” Let
those laugh at these expressions who know which of them are fit to be
believed, and which only to be laughed at; while we scrutinize the
keenness of those syllogisms with which he tries to tear our system to
pieces.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p10"></span>He says, “If ‘Father’ is the
same in meaning as ‘Ungenerate,’ and words which have the same meaning
naturally have in every respect the same force, and Ungenerate signifies
by their confession that God comes from nothing, it follows necessarily
that Father signifies the fact of God being of none, and not the having
generated the Son.” Now what is this logical necessity which prevents
the having generated a Son being signified by the title “Father,” if so
be that that same title does in itself express to us as well the absence
of beginning in the Father? If, indeed, the one idea was totally
destructive of the other, it would certainly follow, from the very
nature of contradictories <span id="fr_196"></span>[198](#fn_196.md) , that
the affirming of the one would involve the denial of the other. But if
there is nothing in the world to prevent the <span id="page_LXXXVII">p.
LXXXVII</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_LXXXVII"></span>same
Existence from being Father and also Ungenerate, when we try to think,
under this title of Father, of the quality of not having been generated
as one of the ideas implied in it, what necessity prevents the relation
to a Son being any longer marked by the word Father? Other names which
express mutual relationship are not always confined to those ideas of
relationship; for instance, we call the emperor <span
id="fr_197"></span>[199](#fn_197.md) autocrat and masterless, and we call
the same the ruler of his subjects; and, while it is quite true that the
word emperor signifies also the being masterless, it is not therefore
necessary that this word, because signifying autocratic and unruled,
must cease to imply the having power over inferiors; the word emperor,
in fact, is midway between these two conceptions, and at one time
indicates masterlessness, at another the ruling over lower orders. In
the case before us, then, if there is some other Father conceivable
besides the Father of Our Lord, let these men who boast of their
profound wisdom show him to us, and then we will agree with him that the
idea of the Ungenerate cannot be represented by the title “Father.” But
if the First Father has no cause transcending His own state, and the
subsistence of the Son is invariably implied in the title of Father, why
do they try to scare us, as if we were children, with these professional
twistings of premisses, endeavouring to persuade or rather to decoy us
into the belief that, if the property of not having been generated is
acknowledged in the title of Father, we must sever from the Father any
relation with the Son.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p13"></span>Despising, then, this silly
superficial attempt of theirs, let us manfully own our belief in that
which they adduce as a monstrous absurdity, viz., that not only does the
‘Father’ mean the same as Ungenerate and that this last property
establishes the Father as being of none, but also that the word ‘Father’
introduces with itself the notion of the Only-begotten, as a relative
bound to it. Now the following passage, which is to be found in the
treatise of our Teacher, has been removed from the context by this
clever and invincible controversialist; for, by suppressing that part
which was added by Basil by way of safeguard, he thought he would make
his own reply a much easier task. The passage runs thus verbatim. “For
my part I should be inclined to say that this title of the Ungenerate,
however readily it may seem to fall in with our own ideas, yet, as
nowhere found in Scripture, and as forming the alphabet of Eunomius’
blasphemy, may very well be suppressed, when we have the word Father
meaning the same thing, in addition to <span
id="fr_198"></span>[200](#fn_198.md) its introducing with itself, as a
relative bound to it, the notion of the Son.” This generous champion of
the truth, with innate good feeling <span
id="fr_199"></span>[201](#fn_199.md) , has suppressed this sentence which
was added by way of safeguard, I mean, “in addition to introducing with
itself, as a relative bound to it, the notion of the Son;” after this
garbling, he comes to close quarters with what remains, and having
severed the connection of the living whole <span
id="fr_200"></span>[202](#fn_200.md) , and thus made it, as he thinks, a
more yielding and assailable victim of his logic, he misleads his own
party with the frigid and feeble paralogism, that “that which has a
common meaning, in one single point, with something else retains that
community of meaning in every possible point;” and with this he takes
their shallow intelligences by storm. For while we have only affirmed
that the word Father in a *certain* signification yields the same
meaning as Ungenerate, this man makes the coincidence of meanings
complete in every point, quite at variance therein with the common
acceptation of either word; and so he reduces the matter to an
absurdity, pretending that this word Father can no longer denote any
relation to the Son, if the idea of not having been generated is
conveyed by it. It is just as if some one, after having acquired two
ideas about a loaf,—one, that it is made of flour, the other, that it is
food to the consumer—were to contend with the person who told him this,
using against him the same kind of fallacy as Eunomius does, viz., that
‘the being made of flour is one thing, but the being food is another;
if, then, it is granted that the loaf is made of flour, this quality in
it can no longer strictly be called food.’ Such is the thought in
Eunomius’ syllogism; “if the not having been generated is implied by the
word Father, this word can no longer convey the idea of having generated
the Son.” But I think it is time that we, in our turn, applied to this
argument of his that magnificently rounded period of his own (already
quoted). In reply to such words, it would be suitable to say that he
would have more claim to be considered in his sober senses, if he had
put the limit to such argumentative safeguards at absolute silence. For
“where additional words amount to additional blasphemy,” or, rather,
indicate that he has utterly lost his reason, it is not only “by half as
much more,” but by the whole as much more “tranquillizing to be silent
than to speak.”

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p17"></span><span id="page_LXXXVIII">p.
LXXXVIII</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_LXXXVIII"></span>But
perhaps a man would be more easily led into the true view by personal
illustrations; so let us leave this looking backwards and forwards and
this twisting of false premisses <span id="fr_201"></span>[203](#fn_201.md)
, and discuss the matter in a less learned and more popular way. Your
father, Eunomius, was certainly a human being; but the same person was
also the author of your being. Did you, then, ever use in his case too
this clever quibble which you have employed; so that your own ‘father,’
when once he receives the true definition of his being, can no longer
mean, because of being a ‘man,’ any relationship to yourself; ‘for he
must be one of two things, either a man, or Eunomius’ father?’—Well,
then, you must not use the names of intimate relationship otherwise than
in accordance with that intimate meaning. Yet, though you would indict
for libel any one who contemptuously scoffed against yourself, by means
of such an alteration of meanings, are you not afraid to scoff against
God; and are you safe when you laugh at these mysteries of our faith? As
‘your father’ indicates relationship to yourself, and at the same time
humanity is not excluded by that term, and as no one in his sober senses
instead of styling him who begat you ‘your father’ would render his
description by the word ‘man,’ or, reversely, if asked for his genus and
answering ‘man,’ would assert that that answer prevented him from being
your father; so in the contemplation of the Almighty a reverent mind
would not deny that by the title of Father is meant that He is without
generation, as well as that in another meaning it represents His
relationship to the Son. Nevertheless Eunomius, in open contempt of
truth, does assert that the title cannot mean the ‘having begotten a
son’ any longer, when once the word has conveyed to us the idea of
‘never having been generated.’

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p25"></span>Let us add the following
illustration of the absurdity of his assertions. It is one that all must
be familiar with, even mere children who are being introduced under a
grammar-tutor to the study of words. Who, I say, does not know that some
nouns are absolute and out of all relation, others express some
relationship. Of these last, again, there are some which incline,
according to the speaker’s wish, either way; they have a simple
intention in themselves, but can be turned so as to become nouns of
relation. I will not linger amongst examples foreign to our subject. I
will explain from the words of our Faith itself.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p26"></span>God is called Father and King
and other names innumerable in Scripture. Of these names one part can be
pronounced absolutely, i.e. simply as they are, and no more: viz..
“imperishable,” “everlasting,” “immortal,” and so on. Each of these,
without our bringing in another thought, contains in itself a complete
thought about the Deity. Others express only relative usefulness; thus,
Helper, Champion, Rescuer, and other words of that meaning; if you
remove thence the idea of one in need of the help, all the force
expressed by the word is gone. Some, on the other hand, as we have said,
are both absolute, and are also amongst the words of relation; ‘God,’
for instance, and ‘good,’ and many other such. In these the thought does
not continue always within the absolute. The Universal God often becomes
the property of him who calls upon Him; as the Saints teach us, when
they make that independent Being their own. ‘The Lord God is Holy;’ so
far there is no relation; but when one adds the Lord *Our* God, and so
appropriates the meaning in a relation towards oneself, then one causes
the word to be no longer thought of absolutely. Again; “Abba, Father” is
the cry of the Spirit; it is an utterance free from any partial
reference. But we are bidden to call the Father in heaven, ‘Our Father;’
this is the relative use of the word. A man who makes the Universal
Deity his own, does not dim His supreme dignity; and in the same way
there is nothing to prevent us, when we point out the Father and Him who
comes from Him, the Firstborn before all creation, from signifying by
that title of Father at one and the same time the having begotten that
Son, and also the not being from any more transcendent Cause. For he who
speaks of the First Father means Him who is presupposed before all
existence, Whose is the beyond <span id="fr_202"></span>[204](#fn_202.md) .
This is He, Who has nothing previous to Himself to behold, no end in
which He shall cease. Whichever way we look, He is equally existing
there for ever; He transcends the limit of any end, the idea of any
beginning, by the infinitude of His life; whatever be His title,
eternity must be implied with it.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p28"></span>But Eunomius, versed as he is
in the contemplation of that which eludes thought, rejects this view of
unscientific minds; he will not admit a double meaning in the word
‘Father,’ the one, that from Him are all things and in the front of all
things the Only-begotten Son, the other, that He Himself has no superior
Cause. He <span id="page_LXXXIX">p. LXXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_LXXXIX"></span>may scorn the statement; but
we will brave his mocking laugh, and repeat what we have said already,
that the ‘Father’ is the same as that Ungenerate One, and both signifies
the having begotten the Son, and represents the being from nothing.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p29"></span>But Eunomius, contending with
this statement of ours, says (the very contrary now of what he said
before), “If God is Father because He has begotten the Son, and ‘Father’
has the same meaning as Ungenerate, God is Ungenerate because He has
begotten the Son, but before He begat Him He was not Ungenerate.”
Observe his method of turning round; how he pulls his first quibble to
pieces, and turns it into the very opposite, thinking even so to entrap
us in a conclusion from which there is no escape. His first syllogism
presented the following absurdity, “If ‘Father’ means the coming from
nothing, then necessarily it will no longer indicate the having begotten
the Son.” But this last syllogism, by turning (a premiss) into its
contrary, threatens our faith with another absurdity. How, then, does he
pull to pieces his former conclusion <span
id="fr_203"></span>[205](#fn_203.md) ? “If He is ‘Father’ because He has
begotten a Son.” His first syllogism gave us nothing like that; on the
contrary, its logical inference purported to show that if the Father’s
not having been generated was meant by the word Father, that word could
*not* mean as well the having begotten a Son <span
id="fr_204"></span>[206](#fn_204.md) . Thus his first syllogism contained
no intimation whatever that God was Father because He had begotten a
Son. I fail to understand what this argumentative and shrewdly
professional reversal means.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p42"></span>But let us look to the thought
in it below the words. ‘If God is Ungenerate because He has begotten a
Son, He was not Ungenerate before He begat Him.’ The answer to that is
plain; it consists in the simple statement of the Truth that ‘the word
Father means both the having begotten a Son, and also that the Begetter
is not to be thought of as Himself coming from any cause.’ If you look
at the effect, the Person of the Son is revealed in the word Father; if
you look for a previous Cause, the absence of any beginning in the
Begetter is shown by that word. In saying that ‘Before He begat a Son,
the Almighty was not Ungenerate,’ this pamphleteer lays himself open to
a double charge; i.e. of misrepresentation of us, and of insult to the
Faith. He attacks, as if there was no mistake about it, something which
our Teacher never said, neither do we now assert, viz., that the
Almighty became in process of time a Father, having been something else
before. Moreover in ridiculing the absurdity of this fancied doctrine of
ours, he proclaims his own wildness as to doctrine. Assuming that the
Almighty was once something else, and then by an advance became entitled
to be called Father, he would have it that before this He was not
Ungenerate either, since Ungeneracy is implied in the idea of Father.
The folly of this hardly needs to be pointed out; it will be abundantly
clear to anyone who reflects. If the Almighty was something else before
He became Father, what will the champions of this theory say, if they
were asked in what state they propose to contemplate Him? What name are
they going to give Him in that stage of existence; child, infant, babe,
or youth? Will they blush at such flagrant absurdity, and say nothing
like that, and concede that He was perfect from the first? Then how can
He be perfect, while as yet unable to become Father? Or will they not
deprive Him of this power, but say only that it was *not fitting* that
there should be Fatherhood simultaneously with His existence. But if it
was not good nor fitting that He should be from the very beginning
Father of such a Son, how did He go on to acquire that which was not
good?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p43"></span>But, as it is, it is good and
fitting to God’s majesty that He should become Father of such a Son. So
they will make out that at the beginning He had no share in this good
thing, and as long as He did not have this Son they must assert (may God
forgive me for saying it!) that He had no Wisdom, nor Power, nor Truth,
nor any of the other glories which from various points of view the
Only-begotten Son is and is called.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p44"></span>But let all this fall on the
heads of those who started it. We will return whence we digressed. He
says, “if God is Father because of having begotten a Son, and if Father
means the being Ungenerate, then God was not this last, before He
begat.” Now if he could speak here as it is customary to speak about
human life, where it is inconceivable that any should acquire possession
of many accomplishments all at once, instead of winning each of the
objects sought after in a certain order and sequence <span
id="page_XC">p. XC</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_XC"></span>of time—if I say we could reason
like that in the case of the Almighty, so that we could say He possessed
His Ungeneracy at one time, and after that acquired His power, and then
His imperishability, and then His Wisdom, and advancing so became
Father, and after that Just and then Everlasting, and so came into all
that enters into the philosophical conception of Him, in a certain
sequence—then it would not be so manifestly absurd to think that one of
His names has precedence of another name, and to talk of His being first
Ungenerate, and after that having become Father.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p45"></span>As it is, however, no one is so
earth-bound in imagination, so uninitiated in the sublimities of our
Faith, as to fail, when once he has apprehended the Cause of the
universe, to embrace in one collective and compact whole all the
attributes which piety can give to God; and to conceive instead of a
primal and a later attribute, and of another in between, supervening in
a certain sequence. It is not possible, in fact, to traverse in thought
one amongst those attributes and then reach another, be it a reality or
a conception, which is to transcend the first in antiquity. Every name
of God, every sublime conception of Him, every utterance or idea that
harmonizes with our general ideas with regard to Him, is linked in
closest union with its fellow; all such conceptions are massed together
in our understanding into one collective and compact whole namely, His
Fatherhood, and Ungeneracy, and Power, and Imperishability, and
Goodness, and Authority, and everything else. You cannot take one of
these and separate it in thought from the rest by any interval of time,
as if it preceded or followed something else; no sublime or adorable
attribute in Him can be discovered, which is not simultaneously
expressed in His everlastingness. Just, then, as we cannot say that God
was ever not good, or powerful, or imperishable, or immortal, in the
same way it is a blasphemy not to attribute to Him Fatherhood always,
and to say that that came later. He Who is truly Father is always
Father; if eternity was not included in this confession, and if a
foolishly preconceived idea curtailed and checked retrospectively our
conception of the Father, true Fatherhood could no longer be properly
predicated of Him, because that preconceived idea about the Son would
cancel the continuity and eternity of His Fatherhood. How could that
which He is now called be thought of something which came into existence
subsequent to these other attributes? If being first Ungenerate He then
became Father, and received that name, He was not always altogether what
He is now called. But that which the God now existing is He always is;
He does not become worse or better by any addition, He does not become
altered by taking something from another source. He is always identical
with Himself. If, then, He was not Father at first, He was not Father
afterwards. But if He is confessed to be Father (now), I will recur to
the same argument, that, if He is so now, He always was so; and that if
He always was, He always will be. The Father therefore is always Father;
and seeing that the Son must always be thought of along with the Father
(for the title of father cannot be justified unless there is a son to
make it true), all that we contemplate in the Father is to be observed
also in the Son. “All that the Father hath is the Son’s; and all that is
the Son’s the Father hath.” The words are, ‘The Father *hath* that which
is the Son’s <span id="fr_205"></span>[207](#fn_205.md) ,’ and so a carping
critic will have no authority for finding in the contents of the word
“all” the ungeneracy of the Son, when it is said that the Son has all
that the Father has, nor on the other hand the generation of the Father,
when all that is the Son’s is to be observed in the Father. For the Son
*has* all the things of the Father; but He *is* not Father: and again,
all the things of the Son are to be observed in the Father, but He *is*
not a Son.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p47"></span>If, then, all that is the
Father’s is in the Only-begotten, and He is in the Father, and the
Fatherhood is not dissociated from the ‘not having been generated,’ I
for my part cannot see what there is to think of in connexion with the
Father, by Himself, that is parted by any interval so as to precede our
apprehension of the Son. Therefore we may boldly encounter the
difficulties started in that quibbling syllogism; we may despise it as a
mere scare to frighten children, and still assert that God is Holy, and
Immortal, and Father, and Ungenerate, and Everlasting, and everything
all at once; and that, if it could be supposed possible that you could
withhold one of these attributes which devotion assigns to Him, all
would be destroyed along with that one. Nothing, therefore, in Him is
older or younger; else He would be found to be older or younger than
Himself. If God is not all His attributes always, but something in Him
is, and something else only becoming, following some order of sequence
(we must remember God is not a compound; whatever He is is the whole of
Him), and if according to this heresy He is first Ungenerate and
afterwards becomes Father, then, seeing that we cannot think of Him in
connexion with a heaping together of qualities, <span id="page_XCI">p.
XCI</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_XCI"></span>there is no
alternative but that the whole of Him must be both older and younger
than the whole of Him, the former by virtue of His Ungeneracy, the
latter by virtue of His Fatherhood. But if, as the prophet says of
God <span id="fr_206"></span>[208](#fn_206.md) , He “is the same,” it is
idle to say that before He begat He was not Himself Ungenerate; we
cannot find either of these names, the Father and the Ungenerate One,
parted from the other; the two ideas rise together, suggested by each
other, in the thoughts of the devout reasoner. God is Father from
everlasting, and everlasting Father, and every other term that devotion
assigns to Him is given in a like sense, the mensuration and the flow of
time having no place, as we have said, in the Eternal.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p49"></span>Let us now see the remaining
results of his expertness in dealing with words; results, which he
himself truly says, are at once ridiculous and lamentable. Truly one
must laugh outright at what he says, if a deep lament for the error that
steeps his soul were not more fitting. Whereas Father, as we teach,
includes, according to one of its meanings, the idea of the Ungenerate,
he transfers the full signification of the word Father to that of the
Ungenerate, and declares “If Father is the same as Ungenerate, it is
allowable for us to drop it, and use Ungenerate instead; thus, the
Ungenerate of the Son is Ungenerate; for as the Ungenerate is Father of
the Son, so reversely the Father is Ungenerate of the Son.” After this a
feeling of admiration for our friend’s adroitness steals over me, with
the conviction that the many-sided subtlety of his theological training
is quite beyond the capacity of most. What our Teacher said was embraced
in one short sentence, to the effect that it was possible that by the
title ‘Father’ the Ungeneracy could be signified; but Eunomius’ words
depend for their number not on the variety of the thoughts, but on the
way that anything within the circuit of similar names can be turned
about <span id="fr_207"></span>[209](#fn_207.md) . As the cattle that run
blindfold round to turn the mill remain with all their travel in the
same spot, so does he go round and round the same topic, and never
leaves it. Once he said, ridiculing us, that ‘Father’ does not signify
the having begotten, but the being from nothing. Again he wove a similar
dilemma, “If Father signifies Ungeneracy, before He begat He was not
ungenerate.” Then a third time he resorts to the same trick. “It is
allowable for us to drop Father, and to use Ungenerate instead;” and
then directly he repeats the logic so often vomited. “For as the
Ungenerate is Father of the Son, so reversely the Father is Ungenerate
of the Son.” How often he returns to his vomit; how often he blurts it
out again! Shall we not, then, annoy most people, if we drag about our
argument in company with this foolish display of words? It would be
perhaps more decent to be silent in a case like this; still, lest any
one should think that we decline discussion because we are weak in
pleas, we will answer thus to what he has said. ‘You have no authority,
Eunomius, for calling the Father the Ungenerate of the Son, even though
the title Father *does* signify that the Begetter was from no cause
Himself. For as, to take the example already cited, when we hear the
word ‘Emperor’ we understand two things, both that the one who is
pre-eminent in authority is subject to none, and also that he controls
his inferiors, so the title Father supplies us with two ideas about the
Deity, one relating to His Son, the other to His being dependent on no
preconceivable cause. As, then, in the case of ‘Emperor’ we cannot say
that because the two things are signified by that term, viz., the ruling
over subjects and the not having any to take precedence of him, there is
any justification for speaking of the ‘Unruled of subjects,’ instead of
the ‘Ruler of the nation,’ or allowing so much, that we may use such a
juxtaposition of words, in imitation of king of a nation, as kingless of
a nation, in the same way when ‘Father’ indicates a Son, and also
represents the idea of the Ungenerate, we may not unduly transfer this
latter meaning, so as to attach this idea of the Ungenerate fast to a
paternal relationship, and absurdly say ‘the Ungenerate is Ungenerate of
the Son.’

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p51"></span>He treads on the ground of
truth, he thinks, after such utterances; he has exposed the absurdity of
his adversaries’ position; how boastfully he cries, “And what sane
thinker, pray, ever yet wanted the natural thought to be suppressed, and
welcomed the paradoxical?” No sane thinker, most accomplished sir; and
therefore our argument neither, which teaches that while the term
Ungenerate does suit our thoughts, and we ought to guard it in our
hearts intact, yet the term Father is an adequate substitute for the one
which you have perverted, and leads the mind in that direction. Remember
the words which you yourself quoted; Basil did not ‘want the natural
thought to be suppressed, and welcome the paradoxical,’ as you phrase
it; but he advised us to avoid all danger by suppressing the mere word
Ungenerate, that is, the expression in so many syllables, as one which
had been evilly interpreted, and besides was not to be found in
Scripture; as for its meaning he declares that it does most completely
suit our thoughts.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p52"></span><span id="page_XCII">p.
XCII</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-Page_XCII"></span>Thus far for
our statement. But this reviler of all quibblers, who completely arms
his own argument with the truth, and arraigns our sins in logic, does
not blush in any of his arguing on doctrines to indulge in very pretty
quibbles; on a par with those exquisite jokes which are cracked to make
people laugh at dessert. Reflect on the weight of reasoning displayed in
that complicated syllogism; which I will now again repeat. “If ‘Father’
is the same as Ungenerate, it is allowable for us to drop it, and use
Ungenerate instead; thus, the Ungenerate is Ungenerate of the Son; for
as the Ungenerate is Father of the Son, so, reversely, the Father is
Ungenerate of the Son.” Well, this is very like another case such as the
following. Suppose some one were to state the right and sound view about
Adam; namely, that it mattered not whether we called him “father of
mankind” or “the first man formed by God” (for both mean the same
thing), and then some one else, belonging to Eunomius’ school of
reasoners, were to pounce upon this statement, and make the same
complication out of it, viz.: If “first man formed by God” and “father
of mankind” are the same things, it is allowable for us to drop the word
“father” and use “first formed” instead; and say that Adam was the
“first formed,” instead of the “father,” of Abel; for as the first
formed was the father of a son, so, reversely, that father is the first
formed of that son. If this had been said in a tavern, what laughter and
applause would have broken from the tippling circle over so fine and
exquisite a joke! These are the arguments on which our learned
theologian leans; when he assails our doctrine, he really needs himself
a tutor and a stick to teach him that all the things which are
predicated of some one do not necessarily, in their meaning, have
respect to one single object; as is plain from the aforesaid instance of
Abel and Adam. That one and the same Adam is Abel’s father and also
God’s handiwork is a truth; nevertheless it does not follow that,
because he is both, he is both with respect to Abel. So the designation
of the Almighty as Father has both the special meaning of that word,
i.e., the having begotten a son, and also that of there being no
preconceivable cause of the Very Father; nevertheless it does not follow
that when we mention the Son we must speak of the Ungenerate, instead of
the Father, of that Son; nor, on the other hand, if the absence of
beginning remains unexpressed in reference to the Son, that we must
banish from our thoughts about God that attribute of Ungeneracy. But he
discards the usual acceptations, and like an actor in comedy, makes a
joke of the whole subject, and by dint of the oddity of his quibbles
makes the questions of our faith ridiculous. Again I must repeat his
words: “If Father is the same as Ungenerate, it is allowable for us to
drop it, and use Ungenerate instead; thus, the Ungenerate is Ungenerate
of the Son; for as the Ungenerate is Father of the Son, so, reversely,
the Father is Ungenerate of the Son.” But let us turn the laugh against
him, by reversing his quibble; thus: If Father is not the same as
Ungenerate, the Son of the Father will not be Son of the Ungenerate; for
having relation to the Father only, he will be altogether alien in
nature to that which is other than Father, and does not suit that idea;
so that, if the Father is something other than the Ungenerate, and the
title Father does not comprehend that meaning, the Son, being One,
cannot be distributed between these two relationships, and be at the
same time Son both of the Father and of the Ungenerate; and, as before
it was an acknowledged absurdity to speak of the Deity as Ungenerate of
the Son, so in this converse proposition it will be found an absurdity
just as great to call the Only-begotten Son of the Ungenerate. So that
he must choose one of two things; either the Father is the same as the
Ungenerate (which is necessary in order that the Son of the Father may
be Son of the Ungenerate as well); and then our doctrine has been
ridiculed by him without reason; or, the Father is something different
to the Ungenerate, and the Son of the Father is alienated from all
relationship to the Ungenerate. But then, if it is thus to hold that the
Only-begotten is not the Son of the Ungenerate, logic inevitably points
to a “generated Father;” for that which exists, but does not exist
without generation, must have a generated substance. If, then, the
Father, being according to these men other than Ungenerate, is therefore
generated, where is their much talked of Ungeneracy? Where is that basis
and foundation of their heretical castle-building? The Ungenerate, which
they thought just now that they grasped, has eluded them, and vanished
quite beneath the action of a few barren syllogisms; their would-be
demonstration of the *Unlikeness*, like a mere dream about something,
slips away at the touch of criticism, and takes its flight along with
this Ungenerate.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p53"></span>Thus it is that whenever a
falsehood is welcomed in preference to the truth, it may indeed flourish
for a little through the illusion which it creates, but it will soon
collapse; its own methods of proof will dissolve it. But we bring this
forward only to raise a smile at the very pretty revenge we might take
on their *Unlikeness*. We must now resume the main thread of our
discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[LXXXVI:197](2050054.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p3"></span> *Transpositions of the terms in
his own false premises;* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>τῶν σοφισμάτων ἀντιστροφὰς</span>.
The same as “the professional twisting of premisses,” and “the hooking
backward and forward and twisting of premisses” below. The terms Father
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p3.3"></span>Αγέννητος</span> are transposed or
twisted into each other’s place in this ‘irrefragable syllogism.’ It is
‘a reductio ad absurdum’ thus:—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p4"></span>Father means <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>
(Basil’s premiss),

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p5"></span>∴ <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> means Father.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p6"></span>The fallacy of Eunomius consists
in making ‘Father’ universal in his own premiss, when it was only
particular in Basil’s. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> means the *whole*
contents of the word Father,” which therefore cannot mean having
generated a son. It is a False Conversion.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p7"></span>This Conversion or <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>ντιοτροφὴ</span>
is illustrated in Aristotle’s *Analytics, Prior.* I. iii. 3. It is
legitimate thus:—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p8"></span>*Some* B is A

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p9"></span>∴ Some A is (some) B.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[LXXXVI:198](2050054.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>κατὰ τὴν τῶν ἀντικειμένων
φύσιν</span>. If <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.3"></span>Αγέννητος</span> means *not* having
a son, then to affirm ‘God is always <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.5"></span>Αγέννητος</span>’ is even to deny
(its logical contradictory) ‘God once had a Son.’

<span id="fn_197"></span>[LXXXVII:199](2050054.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p11.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>τὸν βασιλέα</span>.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[LXXXVII:200](2050054.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>πρὸς τῷ</span>. Cod. Ven., surely
better than the common <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p14.2"></span>πρὸς τὸ</span>, which Oehler has in
his text.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[LXXXVII:201](2050054.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>λευθερία</span>; late Greek, for
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15.4"></span>λευθεριότης</span>

<span id="fn_200"></span>[LXXXVII:202](2050054.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p16"></span> “*the living whole.”* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>σώματος</span>:
this is the radical meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>σῶμα</span>, and also the
classical. Viger. (Idiom. p. 143 note) distinguishes four meanings under
this. 1. Safety. 2. Individuality. 3. Living presence. 4. Life: and
adduces instances of each from the Attic orators.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[LXXXVIII:203](2050054.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>τὸ κατηγκυλωμένον τῆς τῶν
συφισμάτων πλοκῆς</span>. See c. 38, note 7. The false premisses in the
syllogisms have been—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p19"></span>1. Father (partly) means <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p20"></span>Things which mean the same in
part, mean the same in all (false premiss).

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p21"></span>∴ Father means <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p21.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> (false).

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p22"></span>2. Father means <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p22.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> (false).

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p23.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> does not mean
‘having a Son.’

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p24"></span>∴ Father does not mean ‘having
a Son’ (false).

<span id="fn_202"></span>[LXXXVIII:204](2050054.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>νεδείξατο, οὗ τὸ ἐπέκεινα</span>.
This is the reading of the Turin Cod., and preferable to that of the
Paris edition.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[LXXXIX:205](2050054.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p30"></span> The first syllogism was—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p31"></span>‘Father’ means the ‘coming from
nothing;’

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p32"></span>(‘Coming from nothing’ does not
mean ‘begetting a Son’)

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p33"></span>∴ Father does not mean
begetting a Son.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p34"></span>He “pulls to pieces” this
conclusion by taking its logical ‘contrary’ as the first premiss of his
second syllogism; thus—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p35"></span>Father means begetting a Son;

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p36"></span>(Father means <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p36.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p36.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>)

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p37"></span>∴ <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p37.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p37.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span> means begetting a
Son.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p38"></span>From which it follows that
before that begetting the Almighty was not <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p38.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p38.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p39"></span>The conclusion of the last
syllogism also involves the contrary of the 2nd premiss of the first.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p40"></span>It is to be noticed that both
syllogisms are aimed at Basil’s doctrine, ‘Father’ means ‘coming from
nothing.’ Eunomius strives to show that, in both, such a premiss leads
to an absurdity. But Gregory ridicules both for contradicting each
other.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[LXXXIX:206](2050054.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p41.1"></span>τὸ μὲν μὴ δύνασθαι</span>. The
negative, absent in Oehler, is recovered from the Turin Cod.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[XC:207](2050054.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46"></span> [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.1"></span>. Oehler conjectures these words
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.2"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.3"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.4"></span>χει ὁ πατὴρ</span>) are to be
repeated; and thus obtains a good sense, which the common reading, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.5"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p46.6"></span>πατὴρ
εἶπον</span>, does not give.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[XCI:208](2050054.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p48"></span> [Psalm cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027.md)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[XCI:209](2050054.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p50.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxviii-p50.2"></span>ν τῇ περιόδῳ καὶ ἀναστροφῇ τῶν
ὁμοίων ῥημάτων</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Answer to the question he is always asking, “Can He who is be
begotten?”](2050055.md)
