[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050154)  [Next](2050156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>Now</span> we declare that Virginity is
man’s “fellow-worker” and helper in achieving the aim of this lofty
passion. In other sciences men have devised certain practical methods
for cultivating the particular subject; and so, I take it, virginity is
the practical method in the science of the Divine life, furnishing men
with the power of assimilating themselves with spiritual natures. The
constant endeavour in such a course is to prevent the nobility of the
soul from being lowered by those sensual outbreaks, in which the mind no
longer maintains its heavenly thoughts and upward gaze, but sinks down
to the emotions belonging to the flesh and blood. How can the soul which
is riveted <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1375](#fn_1373.md) to the pleasures
of the flesh and busied with merely human longings turn a disengaged eye
upon its kindred intellectual light? This evil, ignorant, and prejudiced
bias towards material things will prevent it. The eyes of swine, turning
naturally downward, have no glimpse of the wonders of the sky; no more
can the soul whose body drags it down look any longer upon the beauty
above; it must pore perforce upon things which though natural are low
and animal. To look with a free devoted gaze upon heavenly delights, the
soul will turn itself from earth; it will not even partake of the
recognized indulgences of the secular life; it will transfer all its
powers of affection from material objects to the intellectual
contemplation of immaterial beauty. Virginity of the body is devised to
further such a disposition of the soul; it aims at creating in it a
complete forgetfulness of natural emotions; it would prevent the
necessity of ever descending to the call of fleshly needs. Once freed
from such, the soul runs no risk of becoming, through a growing habit of
indulging in that which seems to a certain extent conceded by nature’s
law, inattentive and ignorant of Divine and undefiled delights. Purity
of the heart, that master of our lives, alone can capture them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[351:1375](2050155.htm#fr_1373.md) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.vi-p3"></span> Cf. De Anim⟧ et Resurr., p. 225, D.
for the metaphor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2050156.md)
