[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050234)  [Next](2050236.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Even</span> to this objection we are not at
a loss for an answer consistent with our idea of God. You ask the reason
why God was born among men. If you take away from life the benefits that
come to us from God, you would not be able to tell me what means you
have of arriving at any knowledge of Deity. In the kindly treatment of
us we recognize the benefactor; that is, from observation of that which
happens to us, we conjecture the disposition of the person who operates
it. If, then, love of man be a special characteristic of the Divine
nature, here is the reason for which you are in search, here is the
cause of the presence of God among men. Our diseased nature needed a
healer. Man in his fall needed one to set him upright. He who had lost
the gift of life stood in need of a life-giver, and he who had dropped
away from his fellowship with good wanted one who would lead him back to
good. He who was shut up in darkness longed for the presence of the
light. The captive sought for a ransomer, the fettered prisoner for some
one to take his part, and for a deliverer he who was held in the bondage
of slavery. Were these, then, trifling or unworthy wants to importune
the Deity to come down and take a survey of the nature of man, when
mankind was so miserably and pitiably conditioned? “But,” it is replied,
“man might have been benefited, and yet God might have continued in a
passionless state. Was it not possible for Him Who in His wisdom framed
the universe, and by the simple impulse of His will brought into
subsistence that which was not, had it so pleased Him, by means of some
direct Divine command to withdraw man from the reach of the opposing
power, and bring him back to his primal state? Whereas He waits for long
periods of time to come round, He submits Himself to the condition of a
human body, He enters upon the stage of life by being born, and after
passing through each age of life in succession, and then tasting death,
at last, only by the rising again of His own body, accomplishes His
object,—as if it was not optional to Him to fulfil His purpose without
leaving the height of His Divine glory, and to save man by a single
command <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1978](#fn_1976.md) , letting those long
periods of time alone.” <span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xvii-Page_488"></span>Needful, therefore, is it that in answer
to objections such as these we should draw out the counter-statement of
the truth, in order that no obstacle may be offered to the faith of
those persons who will minutely examine the reasonableness of the gospel
revelation. In the first place, then, as has been partially discussed
before <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1979](#fn_1977.md) , let us consider what
is that which, by the rule of contraries, is opposed to virtue. As
darkness is the opposite of light, and death of life, so vice, and
nothing else besides, is plainly the opposite of virtue. For as in the
many objects in creation there is nothing which is distinguished by its
opposition to light or life, but only the peculiar ideas which are their
exact opposites, as darkness and death—not stone, or wood, or water, or
man, or anything else in the world,—so, in the instance of virtue, it
cannot be said that any created thing can be conceived of as contrary to
it, but only the idea of vice. If, then, our Faith preached that the
Deity had been begotten under vicious circumstances, an opportunity
would have been afforded the objector of running down our belief, as
that of persons who propounded incongruous and absurd opinions with
regard to the Divine nature. For, indeed, it were blasphemous to assert
that the Deity, Which is very wisdom, goodness, incorruptibility, and
every other exalted thing in thought or word, had undergone change to
the contrary. If, then, God is real and essential virtue, and no mere
existence <span id="fr_1978"></span>[1980](#fn_1978.md) of any kind is
logically opposed to virtue, but only vice is so; and if the Divine
birth was not into vice, but into human existence; and if only vicious
weakness is unseemly and shameful—and with such weakness neither was God
born, nor had it in His nature to be born,—why are they scandalized at
the confession that God came into touch with human nature, when in
relation to virtue no contrariety whatever is observable in the
organization of man? For neither Reason, nor Understanding <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1981](#fn_1979.md) , nor Receptivity for science, nor
any other like quality proper to the essence of man, is opposed to the
principle of virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[487:1978](2050235.htm#fr_1976.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p3"></span> Origin answering the same objections
says, “I know not what sort of alteration of mankind it is that Celsus
wants, when he doubts whether it were not possible to improve man by a
display of Divine power, without any one being sent in the course of
nature (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>φύσει</span>) for that purpose. Does he want
this to take place among mankind by a sudden appearance of God
destroying evil in their hearts at a blow, and causing virtue to spring
up there? One might well inquire if it were fitting or possible that
such a thing should happen. But we will suppose that it is so. What
then? How will our assent to the truth be (in that case) praiseworthy?
You yourself profess to recognize a special Providence: therefore you
ought just as much to have told *us,* as we you, why it is that God,
knowing the affairs of men, does not correct them, and by a single
stroke of His power rid Himself of the whole family of evil. But we
confidently assert that He does send messengers for this very purpose:
for His words appealing to men’s noblest emotions are amongst them. But
whereas there had been already great differences between the various
ministers of the Word, the reformation of Jesus went beyond them all in
greatness; for He did not mean to heal the men of one little corner only
of the world, but He came to save all;” *c. Cels.* iv. 3, 4.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[488:1979](2050235.htm#fr_1977.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p4"></span> Ch. v.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[488:1980](2050235.htm#fr_1978.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>φύσις</span>.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[488:1981](2050235.htm#fr_1979.md) <span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>τὸ διανοητικὸν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI](2050236.md)
