[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050181)  [Next](2050183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.i-Page_387"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="x.ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>On the Making of Man.</span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p3"></span>Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, to his brother
Peter, the servant of God.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p4"></span>If we had to honour with rewards of money
those who excel in virtue, the whole world of money, as Solomon
says <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1587](#fn_1585) , would seem but small
to be made equal to your virtue in the balance. Since, however, the debt
of gratitude due to your Reverence is greater than can be valued in
money, and the holy Eastertide demands the accustomed gift of love, we
offer to your greatness of mind, O man of God, a gift too small indeed
to be worthy of presentation to you, yet not falling short of the extent
of our power. The gift is a discourse, like a mean garment, woven not
without toil from our poor wit, and the subject of the discourse, while
it will perhaps be generally thought audacious, yet seemed not
unfitting. For he alone has worthily considered the creation of God who
truly was created after God, and whose soul was fashioned in the image
of Him Who created him,—Basil, our common father and teacher,—who by his
own speculation made the sublime ordering of the universe generally
intelligible, making the world as established by God in the true Wisdom
known to those who by means of his understanding are led to such
contemplation: but we, who fall short even of worthily admiring him, yet
intend to add to the great writer’s speculations that which is lacking
in them, not so as to interpolate his work by insertion <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1588](#fn_1586) (for it is not to be thought of
that that lofty mouth should suffer the insult of being given as
authority for our discourses), but so that the glory of the teacher may
not seem to be failing among his disciples.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p7"></span>For if, the consideration of man being
lacking in his Hexaëmeron, none of those who had been his disciples
contributed any earnest effort to supply the defect, the scoffer would
perhaps have had a handle against his great fame, on the ground that he
had not cared to produce in his hearers any habit of intelligence. But
now that we venture according to our powers upon the exposition of what
was lacking, if anything should be found in our work such as to be not
unworthy of his teaching, it will surely be referred to our teacher:
while if our discourse does not reach the height of his sublime
speculation, he will be free from this charge and escape the blame of
seeming not to wish that his disciples should have any skill at all,
though we perhaps may be answerable to our censurers as being unable to
contain in the littleness of our heart the wisdom of our instructor.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p8"></span>The scope of our proposed enquiry is not
small: it is second to none of the wonders of the world,—perhaps even
greater than any of those known to us, because no other existing thing,
save the human creation, has been made like to God: thus we shall
readily find that allowance will be made for what we say by kindly
readers, even if our discourse is far behind the merits of the subject.
For it is our business, I suppose, to leave nothing unexamined of all
that concerns man,—of what we believe to have taken place previously, of
what we now see, and of the results which are expected afterwards to
appear (for surely our effort would be convicted of failing of its
promise, if, when man is proposed for contemplation, any of the
questions which bear upon the subject were to be omitted); and,
moreover, we must fit together, according to the explanation of
Scripture and to that derived from reasoning, those statements
concerning him which seem, by a kind of necessary sequence, to be
opposed, so that our whole subject may be consistent in train of thought
and in order, as the statements that seem to be contrary are brought (if
the Divine power so discovers a hope for what is beyond hope, and a way
for what is inextricable) to one and the same end: and for clearness’
sake I think it well to set forth to you the discourse by chapters, that
you may be able briefly to know the force of the several arguments of
the whole work.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p9"></span>1. Wherein is a partial inquiry into the
nature of the world, and a more minute exposition of the things which
preceded the genesis of man.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p10"></span><span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.i-Page_388"></span>2. Why man appeared last, after the
creation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p11"></span>3. That the nature of man is more
precious than all the visible creation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p12"></span>4. That the construction of man
throughout signifies his ruling power.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p13"></span>5. That man is a likeness of the Divine
sovereignty.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p14"></span>6. An examination of the kindred of mind
to nature: wherein by way of digression is refuted the doctrine of the
Anomœans.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p15"></span>7. Why man is destitute of natural
weapons and covering.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p16"></span>8. Why man’s form is upright, and that
hands were given him because of reason; wherein also is a speculation on
the difference of souls.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p17"></span>9. That the form of man was framed to
serve as an instrument for the use of reason.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p18"></span>10. That the mind works by means of the
senses.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p19"></span>11. That the nature of mind is
invisible.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p20"></span>12. An examination of the question where
the ruling principle is to be considered to reside; wherein also is a
discussion of tears and laughter, and a physiological speculation as to
the interrelation of matter, nature, and mind.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p21"></span>13. A rationale of sleep, of yawning,
and of dreams.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p22"></span>14. That the mind is not in a part of
the body; wherein also is a distinction of the movements of the body and
of the soul.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p23"></span>15. That the soul proper, in fact and
name, is the rational soul, while the others are called so equivocally:
wherein also is this statement, that the power of the mind extends
throughout the whole body in fitting contact with every part.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p24"></span>16. A contemplation of the Divine
utterance which said,—“Let us make man after our image and likeness;”
wherein is examined what is the definition of the image, and how the
passible and mortal is like to the Blessed and Impassible, and how in
the image there are male and female, seeing these are not in the
Prototype.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p25"></span>17. What we must answer to those who
raise the question—“If procreation is after sin, how would souls have
come into being if the first of mankind had remained sinless?”

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p26"></span>18. That our irrational passions have
their rise from kindred with irrational nature.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p27"></span>19. To those who say that the enjoyment
of the good things we look for will again consist in meat and drink,
because it is written that by these means man at first lived in
Paradise.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p28"></span>20. What was the life in Paradise, and
what was the forbidden tree.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p29"></span>21. That the resurrection is looked for
as a consequence, not so much from the declaration of Scripture as from
the very necessity of things.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p30"></span>22. To those who say, “If the
resurrection is a thing excellent and good, how is it that it has not
happened already, but is hoped for in some periods of time?”

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p31"></span>23. That he who confesses the beginning
of the world’s existence must necessarily agree also as to its end.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p32"></span>24. An argument against those who say
that matter is co-eternal with God.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p33"></span>25. How one even of those who are
without may be brought to believe the Scripture when teaching of the
resurrection.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p34"></span>26. That the resurrection is not beyond
probability.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p35"></span>27. That it is possible, when the human
body is dissolved into the elements of the universe, that each should
have his own body restored from the common source.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p36"></span>28. To those who say that souls existed
before bodies, or that bodies were formed before souls: wherein there is
also a refutation of the fables concerning transmigrations of souls.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p37"></span>29. An establishment of the doctrine
that the cause of existence of soul and body is one and the same.

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p38"></span>30. A brief consideration of the
construction of our bodies from a medical point of view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[387:1587](2050182.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="x.ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p5"></span> [Prov. xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>
(LXX.). The clause is not found in the English version.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[387:1588](2050182.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="x.ii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.i-p6"></span> Reading (with Forbes’ marginal note),
<span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>ποβολῆς</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2050183)
