[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050045)  [Next](2050047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxx"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxx-p1"></span> §30. *There is no Word of God that
commands such investigations: the uselessness of the philosophy which
makes them is thereby proved.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxx-p2"></span>I should like also to ask him this.
Does he mean that energies are explained by the beings which produced
them only in the case of the Divine Nature, or does he recognize the
nature of the produced by means of the being of the producer with regard
to anything whatever that possesses an effective force? If in the case
of the Divine Nature only he holds this view, let him show us how he
settles questions about the works of God by means of the nature of the
Worker. Take an undoubted work of God,—the sky, the earth, the sea, the
whole universe. Let it be the being of one of these that, according to
our supposition, is being enquired into, and let ‘sky’ be the subject
fixed for our speculative reasoning. It is a question what the substance
of the sky is; opinions have been broached about it varying widely
according to the lights of each natural philosopher. How will the
contemplation of the Maker of the sky procure a solution of the
question, immaterial, invisible, formless, ungenerate, everlasting,
incapable of decay and change and alteration, and all such things, as He
is. How will anyone who entertains this conception of the Worker be led
on to the knowledge of the nature of the sky? How will he get an idea of
a thing which is visible from the Invisible, of the perishable from the
imperishable, of that which has a date for its existence from that which
never had any generation, of that which has duration but for a time from
the everlasting; in fact, of the object of his search from everything
which is the very opposite to it. Let this man who has accurately probed
the secret of things tell us how it is possible that two unlike things
should be known from each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The observations made by watching Providence are sufficient to
give us the knowledge of sameness of Being.](2050047)
