[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050211)  [Next](2050213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p1"></span> XXX. *A brief examination of the
construction of our bodies from a medical point of view.* <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1741](#fn_1739)

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>Now</span> the exact structure of our body
each man teaches himself by his experiences of sight and light and
perception, having his own nature to instruct him; any one too may learn
everything accurately who takes up the researches which those skilled in
such matters have worked out in books. And of these writers some learnt
by dissection the position of our individual organs; others also
considered and expounded the reason for the existence of all the parts
of the body; so that the knowledge of the human frame which hence
results is sufficient for students. But if any one further seeks that
the Church should be his teacher on all these points, so that he may not
need for anything the voice of those without (for this is the wont of
the spiritual sheep, as the Lord says, that they hear not a strange
voice <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1742](#fn_1740) ), we shall briefly
take in hand the account of these matters also.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p5"></span>2. We note concerning our bodily
nature three things, for the sake of which our particular parts were
formed. Life is the cause of some, good life of others, others again are
adapted with a view to the succession of descendants. All things in us
which are of such a kind that without them it is not possible that human
life should exist, we consider as being in three parts; in the brain,
the heart, and the liver. Again, all that are a sort of additional
blessings, nature’s liberality, whereby she bestows on man the gift of
living well, are the organs of sense; for such things do not constitute
our life, since even where some of them are wanting man is often none
the less in a condition of life; but without these forms of activity it
is impossible to enjoy participation in the pleasures of life. The third
aim regards the future, and the succession of life. There are also
certain other organs besides these, which help, in common with all the
others, to subserve the continuance of life, importing by their own
means the proper supplies, as the stomach and the lungs, the latter
fanning by respiration the fire at the heart, the former introducing the
nourishment for the internal organs.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p6"></span>3. Our structure, then, being thus
divided, we have carefully to mark that our faculty for life is not
supported in any one way by some single organ, but nature, while
distributing the means for our existence among several parts, makes the
contribution of each individual necessary for the whole; just as the
things which nature contrives for the security and beauty of life are
also numerous, and differ much among themselves.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p7"></span><span id="page_423">p. 423</span>
<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-Page_423"></span>4. We ought, however, I think,
first to discuss briefly the first beginnings of the things which
contribute to the constitution of our life. As for the material of the
whole body which serves as a common substratum for the particular
members, it may for the present be left without remark; for a discussion
as to natural substance in general will not be of any assistance to our
purpose with regard to the consideration of the parts.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p8"></span>5. As it is then acknowledged by all
that there is in us a share of all that we behold as elements in the
universe—of heat and cold, and of the other pair of qualities of
moisture and dryness—we must discuss them severally.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p9"></span>6. We see then that the powers which
control life are three, of which the first by its heat produces general
warmth, the second by its moisture keeps damp that which is warmed, so
that the living being is kept in an intermediate condition by the equal
balance of the forces exerted by the quality of each of the opposing
natures (the moist element not being dried up by excess of heat, nor the
hot element quenched by the prevalence of moisture); and the third power
by its own agency holds together the separate members in a certain
agreement and harmony, connecting them by the ties which it itself
furnishes, and sending into them all that self-moving and determining
force, on the failure of which the member becomes relaxed and deadened,
being left destitute of the determining spirit.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p10"></span>7. Or rather, before dealing with
these, it is right that we should mark the skilled workmanship of nature
in the actual construction of the body. For as that which is hard and
resistent does not admit the action of the senses (as we may see in the
instance of our own bones, and in that of plants in the ground, where we
remark indeed a certain form of life in that they grow and receive
nourishment, yet the resistent character of their substance does not
allow them sensation), for this reason it was necessary that some
wax-like formation, so to say, should be supplied for the action of the
senses, with the faculty of being impressed with the stamp of things
capable of striking them, neither becoming confused by excess of
moisture (for the impress would not remain in moist substance), nor
resisting by extraordinary solidity (for that which is unyielding would
not receive any mark from the impressions), but being in a state between
softness and hardness, in order that the living being might not be
destitute of the fairest of all the operations of nature—I mean the
motion of sense.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p11"></span>8. Now as a soft and yielding
substance, if it had no assistance from the hard parts, would certainly
have, like molluscs, neither motion nor articulation, nature accordingly
mingles in the body the hardness of the bones, and uniting these by
close connection one to another, and knitting their joints together by
means of the sinews, thus plants around them the flesh which receives
sensations, furnished with a somewhat harder and more highly-strung
surface than it would otherwise have had.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p12"></span>9. While resting, then, the whole
weight of the body on this substance of the bones, as on some columns
that carry a mass of building, she did not implant the bone undivided
through the whole structure: for in that case man would have remained
without motion or activity, if he had been so constructed, just like a
tree that stands on one spot without either the alternate motion of legs
to advance its motion or the service of hands to minister to the
conveniences of life: but now we see that she contrived that the
instrument should be rendered capable of walking and working by this
device, after she had implanted in the body, by the determining spirit
which extends through the nerves, the impulse and power for motion. And
hence is produced the service of the hands, so varied and multiform, and
answering to every thought. Hence are produced, as though by some
mechanical contrivance, the turnings of the neck, and the bending and
raising of the head, and the action of the chin, and the separation of
the eyelids, that takes place with a thought, and the movements of the
other joints, by the tightening or relaxation of certain nerves. And the
power that extends through these exhibits a sort of independent impulse,
working with the spirit of its will by a sort of natural management, in
each particular part; but the root of all, and the principle of the
motions of the nerves, is found in the nervous tissue that surrounds the
brain.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p13"></span>10. We consider, then, that we need
not spend more time in inquiring in which of the vital members such a
thing resides, when the energy of motion is shown to be here. But that
the brain contributes to life in a special degree is shown clearly by
the result of the opposite conditions: for if the tissue surrounding it
receives any wound or lesion, death immediately follows the injury,
nature being unable to endure the hurt even for a moment; just as, when
a foundation is withdrawn, the whole building collapses with the part;
and that member, from an injury to which the destruction of the whole
living being clearly follows, may properly be acknowledged to contain
the cause of life.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p14"></span>11. But as furthermore in those who
have ceased to live, when the heat that is implanted in our nature is
quenched, that which has become dead grows cold, we hence recognize the
<span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-Page_424"></span>vital cause also in heat: for we must
of necessity acknowledge that the living being subsists by the presence
of that, which failing, the condition of death supervenes. And of such a
force we understand the heart to be as it were the fountain-head and
principle, as from it pipe-like passages, growing one from another in
many ramifications, diffuse in the whole body the warm and fiery spirit.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p15"></span>12. And since some nourishment must
needs also be provided by nature for the element of heat—for it is not
possible that the fire should last by itself, without being nourished by
its proper food—therefore the channels of the blood, issuing from the
liver as from a fountainhead, accompany the warm spirit everywhere in
its way throughout the body, that the one may not by isolation from the
other become a disease and destroy the constitution. Let this instruct
those who go beyond the bounds of fairness, as they learn from nature
that covetousness is a disease that breeds destruction.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p16"></span>13. But since the Divinity alone is
free from needs, while human poverty requires external aid for its own
subsistence, nature therefore, in addition to those three powers by
which we said that the whole body is regulated, brings in imported
matter from without, introducing by different entrances that which is
suitable to those powers.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p17"></span>14. For to the fount of the blood,
which is the liver, she furnishes its supply by food: for that which
from time to time is imported in this way prepares the springs of blood
to issue from the liver, as the snow on the mountain by its own moisture
increases the springs in the low ground, forcing its own fluid deep down
to the veins below.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p18"></span>15. The breath in the heart is
supplied by means of the neighbouring organ, which is called the lungs,
and is a receptacle for air, drawing the breath from without through the
windpipe inserted in it, which extends to the mouth. The heart being
placed in the midst of this organ (and itself also moving incessantly in
imitation of the action of the ever-moving fire), draws to itself,
somewhat as the bellows do in the forges, a supply from the adjacent
air, filling its recesses by dilatation, and while it fans its own fiery
element, breathes upon the adjoining tubes; and this it does not cease
to do, drawing the external air into its own recesses by dilatation, and
by compression infusing the air from itself into the tubes.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p19"></span>16. And this seems to me to be the
cause of this spontaneous respiration of ours; for often the mind is
occupied in discourse with others, or is entirely quiescent when the
body is relaxed in sleep, but the respiration of air does not cease,
though the will gives no co-operation to this end. Now I suppose, since
the heart is surrounded by the lungs, and in the back part of its own
structure is attached to them, moving that organ by its own dilatations
and compressions, that the inhaling and exhaling <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1743](#fn_1741) of the air is brought about by the
lungs: for as they are a lightly built and porous body, and have all
their recesses opening at the base of the windpipe, when they contract
and are compressed they necessarily force out by pressure the air that
is left in their cavities; and, when they expand and open, draw the air,
by their distention, into the void by suction.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p21"></span>17. This then is the cause of this
involuntary respiration—the impossibility that the fiery element should
remain at rest: for as the operation of motion is proper to heat, and we
understand that the principle of heat is to be found in the heart, the
continual motion going on in this organ produces the incessant
inspiration and exhalation of the air through the lungs: wherefore also
when the fiery element is unnaturally augmented, the breathing of those
fevered subjects becomes more rapid, as though the heart were
endeavouring to quench the flame implanted in it by more violent <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1744](#fn_1742) breathing.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p23"></span>18. But since our nature is poor and
in need of supplies for its own maintenance from all quarters, it not
only lacks air of its own, and the breath which excites heat, which it
imports from without for the preservation of the living being, but the
nourishment it finds to fill out the proportions of the body is an
importation. Accordingly, it supplies the deficiency by food and drink,
implanting in the body a certain faculty for appropriating that which it
requires, and rejecting that which is superfluous, and for this purpose
too the fire of the heart gives nature no small assistance.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p24"></span>19. For since, according to the
account we have given, the heart which kindles by its warm breath the
individual parts, is the most important of the vital organs, our Maker
caused it to be operative with its efficacious power at all points, that
no part of it might be left ineffectual or unprofitable for the
regulation of the whole organism. Behind, therefore, it enters the
lungs, and, by its continuous motion, drawing that organ to itself, it
expands the passages to inhale the air, and compressing them again it
brings about the exspiration of the imprisoned air; while in front,
attached to the space at the upper extremity of the stomach, it warms it
and makes it respond by motion to its own activity, rousing it, not to
inhale air, but to receive its appropriate food: for the entrances for
breath <span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-Page_425"></span>and food are near one another,
extending lengthwise one alongside the other, and are terminated in
their upper extremity by the same boundary, so that their mouths are
contiguous and the passages come to an end together in one mouth, from
which the entrance of food is effected through the one, and that of the
breath through the other.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p25"></span>20. Internally, however, the
closeness of the connection of the passages is not maintained
throughout; for the heart intervening between the base of the two,
infuses in the one the powers for respiration, and in the other for
nutriment. Now the fiery element is naturally inclined to seek for the
material which serves as fuel, and this necessarily happens with regard
to the receptacle of nourishment; for the more it becomes penetrated by
fire through the neighbouring warmth, the more it draws to itself what
nourishes the heat. And this sort of impulse we call appetite.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p26"></span>21. But if the organ which contains
the food should obtain sufficient material, not even so does the
activity of the fire become quiescent: but it produces a sort of melting
of the material just as in a foundry, and, dissolving the solids, pours
them out and transfers them, as it were from a funnel, to the
neighbouring passages: then separating the coarser from the pure
substance, it passes the fine part through certain channels to the
entrance of the liver, and expels the sedimentary matter of the food to
the wider passages of the bowels, and by turning it over in their
manifold windings retains the food for a time in the intestines, lest if
it were easily got rid of by a straight passage it might at once excite
the animal again to appetite, and man, like the race of irrational
animals, might never cease from this sort of occupation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p27"></span>22. As we saw, however, that the
liver has especial need of the co-operation of heat for the conversion
of the fluids into blood, while this organ is in position distant from
the heart (for it would, I imagine, have been impossible that, being one
principle or root of the vital power, it should not be hampered by
vicinity with another such principle), in order that the system may
suffer no injury by the distance at which the heat-giving substance is
placed, a muscular passage (and this, by those skilled in such matters,
is called the artery) receives the heated air from the heart and conveys
it to the liver, making its opening there somewhere beside the point at
which the fluids enter, and, as it warms the moist substance by its
heat, blends with the liquid something akin to fire, and makes the blood
appear red with the fiery tint it produces.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p28"></span>23. Issuing thence again, certain
twin channels, each enclosing its own current like a pipe, disperse air
and blood (that the liquid substance may have free course when
accompanied and lightened by the motion of the heated substance) in
divers directions over the whole body, breaking at every part into
countless branching channels; while as the two principles of the vital
powers mingle together (that alike which disperses heat, and that which
supplies moisture to all parts of the body), they make, as it were, a
sort of compulsory contribution from the substance with which they deal
to the supreme force in the vital economy.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p29"></span>24. Now this force is that which is
considered as residing in the cerebral membranes and the brain, from
which it comes that every movement of a joint, every contraction of the
muscles, every spontaneous influence that is exerted upon the individual
members, renders our earthen statue active and mobile as though by some
mechanism. For the most pure form of heat and the most subtle form of
liquid, being united by their respective forces through a process of
mixture and combination, nourish and sustain by their moisture the
brain, and hence in turn, being rarefied to the most pure condition, the
exhalation that proceeds from that organ anoints the membrane which
encloses the brain, which, reaching from above downwards like a pipe,
extending through the successive vertebræ, is (itself and the marrow
which is contained in it) conterminous with the base of the spine,
itself giving like a charioteer the impulse and power to all the
meeting-points of bones and joints, and to the branches of the muscles,
for the motion or rest of the particular parts.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p30"></span>25. For this cause too it seems to me
that it has been granted a more secure defence, being distinguished, in
the head, by a double shelter of bones round about, and in the vertebræ
of the neck by the bulwarks formed by the projections of the spine as
well as by the diversified interlacings of the very form of those
vertebræ, by which it is kept in freedom from all harm, enjoying safety
by the defence that surrounds it.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p31"></span>26. So too one might suppose of the
heart, that it is itself like some safe house fitted with the most solid
defences, fortified by the enclosing walls of the bones round about; for
in rear there is the spine, strengthened on either side by the
shoulder-blades, and on each flank the enfolding position of the ribs
makes that which is in the midst between them difficult to injure; while
in front the breast-bone and the juncture of the collar-bone serve as a
defence, that its safety may be guarded at all points from external
causes of danger.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p32"></span>27. As we see in husbandry, when the
rain fall from the clouds or the overflow from the river channels causes
the land beneath it to be saturated with moisture (let us suppose for
<span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-Page_426"></span>our argument a garden, nourishing
within its own compass countless varieties of trees, and all the forms
of plants that grow from the ground, and whereof we contemplate the
figure, quality, and individuality in great variety of detail); then, as
these are nourished by the liquid element while they are in one spot,
the power which supplies moisture to each individual among them is one
in nature; but the individuality of the plants so nourished changes the
liquid element into different qualities; for the same substance becomes
bitter in wormwood, and is changed into a deadly juice in hemlock, and
becomes different in different other plants, in saffron, in balsam, in
the poppy: for in one it becomes hot, in another cold, in another it
obtains the middle quality: and in laurel and mastick it is scented, and
in the fig and the pear it is sweetened, and by passing through the vine
it is turned into the grape and into wine; while the juice of the apple,
the redness of the rose, the radiance of the lily, the blue of the
violet, the purple of the hyacinthine dye, and all that we behold in the
earth, arise from one and the same moisture, and are separated into so
many varieties in respect of figure and aspect and quality; the same
sort of wonder is wrought in the animated soil of our being by Nature,
or rather by Nature’s Lord. Bones, cartilages, veins, arteries, nerves,
ligatures, flesh, skin, fat, hair, glands, nails, eyes, nostrils,
ears,—all such things as these, and countless others in addition, while
separated from one another by various peculiarities, are nourished by
the one form of nourishment in ways proper to their own nature, in the
sense that the nourishment, when it is brought into close relation with
any of the subjects, is also changed according to that to which it
approaches, and becomes adapted and allied to the special nature of the
part. For if it should be in the neighbourhood of the eye, it blends
with the visual part and is appropriately distributed by the difference
of the coats round the eye, among the single parts; or, if it flow to
the auditory parts, it is mingled with the auscultatory nature, or if it
is in the lip, it becomes lip; and it grows solid in bone, and grows
soft in marrow, and is made tense with the sinew, and extended with the
surface, and passes into the nails, and is fined down for the growth of
the hair, by correspondent exhalations, producing hair that is somewhat
curly or wavy if it makes its way through winding passages, while, if
the course of the exhalations that go to form the hair lies straight, it
renders the hair stiff and straight.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p33"></span>28. Our argument, however, has
wandered far from its purpose, going deep into the works of nature, and
endeavouring to describe how and from what materials our particular
organs are formed, those, I mean, intended for life and for good life,
and any other class which we included with these in our first division.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p34"></span>29. For our purpose was to show that
the seminal cause of our constitution is neither a soul without body,
nor a body without soul, but that, from animated and living bodies, it
is generated at the first as a living and animate being, and that our
humanity takes it and cherishes it like a nursling with the resources
she herself possesses, and it thus grows on both sides and makes its
growth manifest correspondingly in either part:—for it at once displays,
by this artificial and scientific process of formation, the power of
soul that is interwoven in it, appearing at first somewhat obscurely,
but afterwards increasing in radiance concurrently with the perfecting
of the work.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p35"></span>30. And as we may see with
stone-carvers—for the artist’s purpose is to produce in stone the figure
of some animal; and with this in his mind, he first severs the stone
from its kindred matter, and then, by chipping away the superfluous
parts of it, advances somehow by the intermediate step of his first
outline to the imitation which he has in his purpose, so that even an
unskilled observer may, by what he sees, conjecture the aim of his art;
again, by working at it, he brings it more nearly to the semblance of
the object he has in view; lastly, producing in the material the perfect
and finished figure, he brings his art to its conclusion, and that which
a little before was a shapeless stone is a lion, or a man, or whatsoever
it may be that the artist has made, not by the change of the material
into the figure, but by the figure being wrought upon the material. If
one supposes the like in the case of the soul he is not far from
probability; for we say that Nature, the all-contriving, takes from its
kindred matter the part that comes from the man, and moulds her statue
within herself. And as the form follows upon the gradual working of the
stone, at first somewhat indistinct, but more perfect after the
completion of the work, so too in the moulding of its instrument the
form of the soul is expressed in the substratum, incompletely in that
which is still incomplete, perfect in that which is perfect; indeed it
would have been perfect from the beginning had our nature not been
maimed by evil. Thus our community in that generation which is subject
to passion and of animal nature, brings it about that the Divine image
does not at once shine forth at our formation, but brings man to
perfection by a certain method and sequence, through those attributes of
the soul which are material, and belong rather to the animal creation.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p36"></span>31. Some such doctrine as this the
great apostle also teaches us in his Epistle to the <span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-Page_427"></span>Corinthians, when he says, “When I was
a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child; but when I became a man I put away childish things <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1745](#fn_1743) ”; not that the soul which arises
in the man is different from that which we know to be in the boy, and
the childish intellect fails while the manly intellect takes its being
in us; but that the same soul displays its imperfect condition in the
one, its perfect state in the other.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p38"></span>32. For we say that those things are
alive which spring up and grow, and no one would deny that all things
that participate in life and natural motion are animate, yet at the same
time one cannot say that such life partakes of a perfect soul,—for
though a certain animate operation exists in plants, it does not attain
to the motions of sense; and on the other hand, though a certain further
animate power exists in the brutes, neither does this attain perfection,
since it does not contain in itself the grace of reason and
intelligence.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p39"></span>33. And even so we say that the true
and perfect soul is the human soul, recognized by every operation; and
anything else that shares in life we call animate by a sort of customary
misuse of language, because in these cases the soul does not exist in a
perfect condition, but only certain parts of the operation of the soul,
which in man also (according to Moses’ mystical account of man’s origin)
we learn to have accrued when he made himself like this sensuous world.
Thus Paul, advising those who were able to hear him to lay hold on
perfection, indicates also the mode in which they may attain that
object, telling them that they must “put off the old man,” and put on
the man “which is renewed after the image of Him that created him <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1746](#fn_1744) .”

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p41"></span>34. Now may we all return to that
Divine grace in which God at the first created man, when He said, “Let
us make man in our image and likeness”; to Whom be glory and might for
ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[422:1741](2050212.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxxi. The Bodleian
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Latin version gives the title:—“Of the threefold nature of the body.”

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[422:1742](2050212.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p4"></span> Cf. S. [John x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[424:1743](2050212.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p20"></span> Reading (with Forbes’ marginal
suggestion) <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p20.2"></span>κπνοήν</span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[424:1744](2050212.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p22"></span> Or perhaps “fresher,” the heart
seeking as it were for fresher and cooler air, and the breath being thus
accelerated in the effort to obtain it.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[427:1745](2050212.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p37"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p37.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p37.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[427:1746](2050212.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p40"></span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p40.1"></span>[Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="x.ii.ii.xxxi-p40.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Soul and the Resurrection.](2050213)
