[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050202)  [Next](2050204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p1"></span> XXI. *That the resurrection is looked
for as a consequence, not so much from the declaration of Scripture as
from the very necessity of things* <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1688](#fn_1686.md) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p3"></span>1. Wickedness, however, is not so
strong as to prevail over the power of good; nor is the folly of our
nature more powerful and more abiding than the wisdom of God: for it is
impossible that that which is always mutable and variable should be more
firm and more abiding than that which always remains the same and is
firmly fixed in goodness: but it is absolutely certain that the Divine
counsel possesses immutability, while the changeableness of our nature
does not remain settled even in evil.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p4"></span>2. Now that which is always in motion,
if its progress be to good, will never cease moving onwards to what lies
before it, by reason of the infinity of the course to be traversed:—for
it will not find any limit of its object such that when it has
apprehended it, it will at last cease <span id="page_411">p. 411</span>
<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-Page_411"></span>its motion: but if its bias be
in the opposite direction, when it has finished the course of wickedness
and reached the extreme limit of evil, then that which is ever moving,
finding no halting point for its impulse natural to itself when it has
run through the lengths that can be run in wickedness, of necessity
turns its motion towards good: for as evil does not extend to infinity,
but is comprehended by necessary limits, it would appear that good once
more follows in succession upon the limit of evil; and thus, as we have
said, the ever-moving character of our nature comes to run its course at
the last once more back towards good, being taught the lesson of
prudence by the memory of its former misfortunes, to the end that it may
never again be in like case.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p5"></span>3. Our course, then, will once more
lie in what is good, by reason of the fact that the nature of evil is
bounded by necessary limits. For just as those skilled in astronomy tell
us that the whole universe is full of light, and that darkness is made
to cast its shadow by the interposition of the body formed by the earth;
and that this darkness is shut off from the rays of the sun, in the
shape of a cone, according to the figure of the sphere-shaped body, and
behind it; while the sun, exceeding the earth by a size many times as
great as its own, enfolding it round about on all sides with its rays,
unites at the limit of the cone the concurrent streams of light; so that
if (to suppose the case) any one had the power of passing beyond the
measure to which the shadow extends, he would certainly find himself in
light unbroken by darkness;—even so I think that we ought to understand
about ourselves, that on passing the limit of wickedness we shall again
have our conversation in light, as the nature of good, when compared
with the measure of wickedness, is incalculably superabundant.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p6"></span>4. Paradise therefore will be
restored, that tree will be restored which is in truth the tree of
life;—there will be restored the grace of the image, and the dignity of
rule. It does not seem to me that our hope is one for those things which
are now subjected by God to man for the necessary uses of life, but one
for another kingdom, of a description that belongs to unspeakable
mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[410:1688](2050203.htm#fr_1686.md) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p2"></span> Otherwise Chap. xxii. The Bodleian
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Latin version gives as the title:—“That the Divine counsel is
immutable.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To those who say, “If the resurrection is a thing excellent and
good, how is it that it has not happened already, but is hoped for in
some periods of time?”](2050204.md)
