[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050036)  [Next](2050038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxi-p1"></span> §21. *The blasphemy of these
heretics is worse than the Jewish unbelief.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxi-p2"></span>But let us assume that this is not
so: for they allow, forsooth, in theoretic kindness towards humanity,
that the Only-begotten and the Holy Spirit have some personal existence:
and if, in allowing this, they had granted too the consequent
conceptions about them, they would not have been waging battle about the
doctrine of the Church, nor cut themselves off from the hope of
Christians. But if they have lent an existence to the Son and the
Spirit, only to furnish a material on which to erect their blasphemy,
perhaps it might have been better for them, though it is a bold thing to
say, to abjure the Faith and apostatize to the Jewish religion, rather
than to insult the name of Christian by this mock assent. The Jews at
all events, though they have persisted hitherto in rejecting the Word,
carry their impiety only so far as to deny that Christ has come, but to
hope that He will come: we do not hear from them any malignant or
destructive conception of the glory of Him Whom they expect. But this
school of the new circumcision <span id="fr_114"></span>[116](#fn_114) ,
or rather of “the concision,” while they own that He has come, resemble
nevertheless those who insulted our Lord’s bodily presence by their
wanton unbelief. They wanted to stone our Lord: these men stone Him with
their blasphemous titles. They urged His humble and obscure origin, and
rejected His divine birth before the ages: these men in the same way
deny His grand, sublime, ineffable generation from the Father, and would
prove that He owes His existence to a creation, just as the human race,
and all that is born, owe theirs. In the eyes of the <span
id="page_LX">p. LX</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxi-Page_LX"></span>Jews
it was a crime that our Lord should be regarded as Son of the Supreme:
these men also are indignant against those who are sincere in making
this confession of Him. The Jews thought to honour the Almighty by
excluding the Son from equal reverence: these men, by annihilating the
glory of the Son, think to bestow more honour on the Father. But it
would be difficult to do justice to the number and the nature of the
insults which they heap upon the Only-begotten: they invent an ‘energy’
prior to the personality of the Son and say that He is its work and
product: a thing which the Jews hitherto have not dared to say. Then
they circumscribe His nature, shutting Him off within certain limits of
the power which made Him: the amount of this productive energy is a sort
of measure within which they enclose Him: they have devised it as a sort
of cloak to muffle Him up in. We cannot charge the Jews with doing this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[LIX:116](2050037.htm#fr_114) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxi-p3"></span> *this school of the new
circumcision.* This accusation is somewhat discounted by Gregory’s
comparison of Eunomius elsewhere to Bardesanes and Marcion, to the
Manichees, to Nicholaus, to Philo (see Book XI. 691, 704, VI. 607, and
especially VII. 645), and by his putting him down a scholar of Plato.
But a momentary advantage, calculated in accordance with the character
and capacities of the great mass of Gregory’s audience, could not be
lost. The lessons of Libanius, the rhetorician, had not been thrown away
on Gregory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He has no right to assert a greater and less in the Divine being.
A systematic statement of the teaching of the Church.](2050038)
