[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050018)  [Next](2050020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *We see nothing remarkable in
logical force in the treatise of Eunomius, and so embark on our Answer
with a just confidence.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p2"></span>Let no one think, that in saying
this I exaggerate and make an idle boast of doing something which is
beyond my strength. I shall not be led by any boyish ambition to descend
to his vulgar level in a contest of mere arguments and phrases. Where
victory is a useless and profitless thing, we yield it readily to those
who wish to win; besides, we have only to look at this man’s long
practice in controversy, to conclude that he is quite a
word-practitioner, and, in addition, at the fact that he has spent no
small portion of his life on the composition of this treatise, and at
the supreme joy of his intimates over these labours, to conclude that he
has taken particular trouble with this work. It was not improbable that
one who had laboured at it for so many Olympiads would produce something
better than the work of extempore scribblers. Even the vulgar profusion
of the figures he uses in concocting his work is a further indication of
this laborious care in writing <span id="fr_61"></span>[63](#fn_61) . He
has got a great mass of newly assorted terms, for which he has put
certain other books under contribution, and he piles this immense
congeries of words on a very slender nucleus of thought; and so he has
elaborated this highly-wrought production, which his pupils in error are
lost in the admiration of;—no doubt, because their deadness on the vital
points deprives them of the power of feeling the distinction between
beauty and the reverse:—but which is ridiculous, and of no value at all
in the judgment of those, whose hearts’ insight is not dimmed with any
soil of unbelief. How in the world can it contribute to the proof (as he
hopes) of what he says and the establishment of the truth of his
speculations, to adopt these absurd devices in his forms of speech, this
new-fangled and peculiar arrange<span id="page_XXXVII">p. XXXVII</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-Page_XXXVII"></span>ment, this fussy conceit,
and this conceited fussiness, which works with no enthusiasm for any
previous model? For it would be indeed difficult to discover who amongst
all those who have been celebrated for their eloquence he has had his
eye on, in bringing himself to this pitch; for he is like those who
produce effects upon the stage, adapting his argument to the tune of his
rhythmical phrases, as they their song to their castenets, by means of
parallel sentences of equal length, of similar sound and similar ending.
Such, amongst many other faults, are the nerveless quaverings and the
meretricious tricks of his Introduction; and one might fancy him
bringing them all out, not with an unimpassioned action, but with
stamping of the feet and sharp snapping of the fingers declaiming to the
time thus beaten, and then remarking that there was no need of other
arguments and a second performance after that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[XXXVI:63](2050019.htm#fr_61) <span
id="viii.i.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p3"></span> Photius reports very much the same
as to his style, i.e. he shows a ‘prodigious ostentation:’ uses ‘words
difficult to pronounce, and abounding in many consonants, and that in a
poetic, or rather a dithyrambic style:’ he has ‘periods inordinately
long:’ he is ‘obscure,’ and seeks ‘to hide by this very obscurity
whatever is weak in his perceptions and conceptions, which indeed is
often.’ He ‘attacks others for their logic, and is very fond of using
logic himself:’ but ‘as he had taken up this science late in life, and
had not gone very deeply into it, he is often found making mistakes.’

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p4"></span>The book of Eunomius which Photius
had read is still extant: it is his ‘Apologeticus’ in 28 sections, and
has been published by Canisius (*Lectiones Antiquæ*, I. 172 ff.). His
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>κθεοις τῆς
τίστεως</span>, presented to the emperor Theodosius in the year 383, is
also extant. This last is found in the Codex Theodosius and in the <span
class="c22"><span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p4.3"></span>mss.</span> which
Livineius of Ghent used for his Greek and Latin edition of Gregory,
1574: it follows the Books against Eunomius. His ‘Apologia Apologiæ,’
which he wrote in answer to Basil’s 5 (or 3) books against him, is *not*
extant: nor the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.iii-p4.4"></span>δευτερὸς λόγος</span> which Gregory
answered in his second 12th Book.

<span id="viii.i.iii.iii-p5"></span>Most of the quotations, then, from
Eunomius, in these books of Gregory cannot be verified, in the case of a
doubtful reading, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eunomius displays much folly and fine writing, but very little
seriousness about vital points.](2050020)
