[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050056)  [Next](2050058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p1"></span> §41. *The thing that follows is not
the same as the thing that it follows.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p2"></span>He first says, “the attribute of
being ungenerate follows the Deity.” By that we understood him to mean
that this Ungeneracy is one of the things external to God. Then he says,
“Or rather this Ungeneracy is His actual being.” We fail to understand
the ‘sequitur’ of this; we notice in fact something very queer and
incongruous about it. If Ungeneracy follows God, and yet also
constitutes His being, two beings will be attributed to one and the same
subject in this view; so that God will be in the same way as He was
before and has always been believed to be <span
id="fr_221"></span>[223](#fn_221) , but besides that will have another
being accompanying, which <span id="page_XCVII">p. XCVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-Page_XCVII"></span>they style Ungeneracy, quite
distinct from Him Whose ‘following’ it is, as our Master puts it. Well,
if he commands us to think so, he must pardon our poverty of ideas, in
not being able to follow out such subtle speculations.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p4"></span>But if he disowns this view, and
does not admit a double being in the Deity, one represented by the
godhead, the other by the ungeneracy, let our friend, who is himself
neither ‘rash’ nor ‘malignant,’ prevail upon himself not to be over
partial to invective while these combats for the truth are being fought,
but to explain to us, who are so wanting in culture, how that which
follows is not one thing and that which leads another, but how both
coalesce into one; for, in spite of what he says in defence of his
statement, the absurdity of it remains; and the addition of that handful
of words <span id="fr_222"></span>[224](#fn_222) does not correct, as he
asserts, the contradiction in it. I have not yet been able to see that
any explanation at all is discoverable in them. But we will give what he
has written verbatim. “We say, ‘or rather the Ungeneracy is His actual
being,’ without meaning to *contract* into the being <span
id="fr_223"></span>[225](#fn_223) that which we have proved to follow
it, but applying ‘follow’ to the title, but *is* to the being.”
Accordingly when these things are taken together, the whole resulting
argument would be, that the title Ungenerate follows, because to be
Ungenerate is His actual being. But what expounder of this expounding
shall we get? He says “without meaning to contract into the being that
which we have proved to follow it.” Perhaps some of the guessers of
riddles might tell us that by ‘contract into’ he means ‘fastening
together.’ But who can see anything intelligible or coherent in the
rest? The results of ‘following’ belong, he tells us, not to the being,
but to the title. But, most learned sir, what is the title? Is it in
discord with the being, or does it not rather coincide with it in the
thinking? If the title is inappropriate to the being, then how can the
being be represented by the title; but if, as he himself phrases it, the
being is fittingly defined by the title of Ungenerate, how can there be
any parting of them after that? You make the name of the being follow
one thing and the being itself another. And what then is the
‘construction of the entire view?’ “The title Ungenerate follows God,
seeing that He Himself is Ungenerate.” He says that there ‘follows’ God,
Who is something other than that which is Ungenerate, this very title.
Then how can he place the definition of Godhead within the Ungeneracy?
Again, he says that this title ‘follows’ God as existing without a
previous generation. Who will solve us the mystery of such riddles?
‘Ungenerate’ preceding and then following; first a fittingly attached
title of the being, and then following like a stranger! What, too, is
the cause or this excessive flutter about this name; he gives to it the
whole contents of godhead <span id="fr_224"></span>[226](#fn_224) ; as
if there will be nothing wanting in our adoration, if God be so named;
and as if the whole system of our faith will be endangered, if He is
not? Now, if a brief statement about this should not be deemed
superfluous and irrelevant, we will thus explain the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[XCVI:223](2050057.htm#fr_221) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p3.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p3.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p3.3"></span>εἶναι μὲν τὸν Θεὸν κατὰ ταὐτὸν ὡς εἶναί
ποτε</span>(infinitive by attraction to preceding) <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p3.4"></span>καὶ εἶναι
πεπίστευται</span>

<span id="fn_222"></span>[XCVII:224](2050057.htm#fr_222) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p5.2"></span>υαριθμήτων ῥηματων</span>. But it is
possible that the true reading may be <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p5.3"></span>εὐρύθμων</span>, alluding to the
‘rhythm’ in the form of abuse with which Eunomius connected his
arguments (preceding section).

<span id="fn_223"></span>[XCVII:225](2050057.htm#fr_223) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p5.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p6.1"></span>οὐκ εἰς τὸ εἶναι συναιροῦντες</span>

<span id="fn_224"></span>[XCVII:226](2050057.htm#fr_224) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7"></span> *He gives to it the whole contents
of godhead.* It was the central point in Eunomius’ system that by the
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.2"></span>Αγεννησία</span> we
can comprehend the Divine Nature; he trusts entirely to the Aristotelian
divisions (logical) and sub-divisions. A mere word (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.3"></span>γέννητος</span>) was
thus allowed to destroy the equality of the Son. It was almost
inevitable, therefore, that his opponent, as a defender of the
Homoousion, should occasionally fall back so far upon Plato, as to
maintain that opposites are joined and are identical with each other,
i.e. that <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.4"></span>γέννησις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xli-p7.6"></span>γεννησία</span> are
not truly opposed to each other. Another method of combating this
excessive insistence on the physical and logical was, to bring forward
the ethical realities; and this Gregory does constantly throughout this
treatise. We are to know God by Wisdom, and Truth, and Righteousness.
Only occasionally (as in the next section) does he speak of the
‘eternity’ of God: and here only because Eunomius has obliged him, and
in order to show that the idea is made up of two negations, and nothing
more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Explanation of 'Ungenerate,' and a 'study' of Eternity.](2050058)
