<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ms108)  [Next](ms110.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Magic Songs of the West Finns, Vol. I*, by John Abercromby, \[1898\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### THE PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION OF THE FINNS

<span class="smallcaps">Having</span> reviewed some of the
craniological, archæological, and historical facts that bear more or
less directly on the Finns, we have now to turn to comparative
ethnography and philology for any help they may afford towards enabling
us to form a slight picture of their prehistoric condition.
Theoretically the prehistoric past may be divided into two divisions,
hereafter to be mentioned as the first and second periods. To the first
belong words that are common to the Ugrian and the various Finnish
groups; these originated in Asia, when Finns and Ugrians seem to have
lived in close contact, for the physical and craniological differences
between the Finns and Ugrians are too great to allow us to suppose they
are descended from a common stock. But they were neighbours, living
under conditions of life precisely similar. Though we have to believe
that once the remotest ancestors of the Finnish peoples lived in Asia,
it is, I think, impossible to trace them there; the inference is made
purely on linguistic grounds. In the craniological chapter we have found
that the crania at Volósovo, and at the Ladogan station seem to have
analogies with existing Eastern Finnish skulls. So there is ground for
assuming that the earliest neolithic inhabitants of Central Russia were

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

ancestors of Finns that had somehow reached Europe and settled on the
Oká. Having done so, it is difficult to imagine any external cause that
could oblige them to leave it. For though they had nomadic instincts,
like all other nomads they did not roam at large, but over a certain
more or less defined district, which they regarded as their own. They
were so isolated from the rest of the world that no direct outside
pressure could be brought to bear upon them. The only influences that
could touch them and induce some of them to move were of an internal
nature: the natural increase of population, famine, pestilence. Of these
the most efficient factor would be the first; to a people living only on
fish, shell-fish, and wild animals, famine of a very severe kind would
probably be of rare occurrence; but when too many members of a clan died
at one time the remainder would very likely abandon the locality, at any
rate for a time, and migrate elsewhither. I assume, therefore, for the
present—the reasons can best be brought forward at the end of this
chapter,—that at the end of the first period the undivided Finns had
entered Europe, bringing with them, of course, various simple notions
embodied in the language they had acquired in Asia; and that the
earliest neolithic settlements in the Volga region of Central Russia
belong to this time. As the settlements on Lake Ladoga and the Upper
Volkhov are later than those on the Oká, the movement of the Finns was
evidently westward, and the finds at Fatiánovo and Galič seem to show
that, even on European soil, Finns and Ugrians lived at no great
distance from each other for part of the second period.

The second period embraces the time between the first settlements in
Europe and the first contact with an Iranian

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

civilisation, which may have taken place from four hundred to six
hundred years before the present era. It covers a long lapse of time,
and may be divided into an earlier and later half. The first half is
characterised by a series of words common to all, or nearly all, the
East and West Finnish groups, and we have to suppose they had not yet
split into different linguistic groups, though various fractions of the
united body may have lived at very considerable distances apart. The
second half is marked by words that are confined to two or three members
of the Finnish family. As all know, numerous words in every language die
out and are replaced by others for reasons that can only be guessed at.
So it would be wrong to maintain that all new additions to a language
exactly coincide with the new ideas conveyed by these new words. For
instance, the Lapps have borrowed a word for 'moon' from the
Scandinavians, the Finns a word for 'neck' from the Lithuanians, and yet
these new words conveyed no new ideas. Sometimes in certain classes of
words, such as the names of spirits, divinities, sacred animals, animals
and fish caught for food, we can perceive a reason for borrowing a new
term from a foreign language. There was a distinct reluctance, amounting
to fear, that prevented a native from using these names, so that either
an epithet or allusive term was employed, or a word borrowed from a
foreigner. Hence we readily understand how it came to pass that to
certain powerful spirits, whose real name the Lapps were afraid to use,
were given the Norwegian name of *Stor Junkare*, and why the Finns gave
a name of Scandinavian origin to their spirits of nature—*haltia*. It is
probably some such reason that has caused the want of common terms for
sun, moon, sky, spirits, and for most of the

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

common wild animals among the Eastern and Western Finns. But
nevertheless on the whole the new words of the second period must be
taken to mean increase of experience, modification of the ancient mode
of life, and a slight forward development of the different groups made
independently of each other during the latter half of it. They are also
to be considered as older than the first contact with an Iranian or
European civilisation. But of many genuine words confined to the West
Finns alone we cannot always be quite sure whether they came into use
before or after this event in the history of their civilisation.

The late Professor Ahlqvist has already drawn us a picture of the
prehistoric civilisation of the Finns that has often been referred to,
but now I propose to supplement it in some respects by drawing upon the
existing customs and beliefs of the Eastern Finns, and laying more
emphasis on the psychological element. But in doing so it must be borne
in mind that they too are more or less civilised, for the most part
Christianised, and living under conditions very different from those of
their prehistoric ancestors. From about the eighth to the thirteenth
century they were exposed to the civilising influence of Bolgars and
Turks, who have left many traces of their superior civilisation and
higher religion in a series of loan words. All that is known of their
sacrificial rites, their divinities, their ideas about the phenomena of
nature, cannot therefore be accepted without considerable reduction and
allowance for subsequent growth and accretion. The mere passage from a
hunting and fishing stage to one that is almost purely agricultural, the
change from a nomad to a settled mode of life, undoubtedly affected the
class of gods to whom they paid especial worship. To a hunting nomad the
idea

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of a great and benevolent earth-mother that gave forth of the fruits of
the earth in due season, of a beneficent sun-god that ripened them,
could never occur. Hence all notice of gods whose being and worship
entirely depends on the practice of agriculture by their worshippers may
be excluded from our survey. The beliefs, customs, and so forth, of the
Ostiaks, Voguls, Samoyedes, and Altaian Turks are on the whole more
likely to tally with those of the prehistoric Finns than any other
people on the globe, though they too have been subjected to various
civilising influences for which allowance must be made.

#### THE GODS AND DIVINITIES.

Had the Finns of the first and second periods any notion of the
supernatural? This question, as it seems to me, must be answered in the
negative. At the first beginning of humanity on the globe there could
have been no such notion, for before it can be formed at all some idea
must exist of nature and the natural. As an idea, Nature is so complex
that a long time must have elapsed before man could form the least
conception of it. Yet at a very early period the human mind, working
unconsciously, must have framed categories and separated the phenomena
of nature into those of daily occurrence and those that happen at longer
or shorter intervals. Under the first category would fall the relative
weights of common things, such as stones and feathers, the fact that if
a thing dropped from one's hand it fell to the ground, the recurrence of
night and day, the heat of the sun, etc. These being facts of daily
experience excited no astonishment. Under the second category would come
the distinction between a hot and cold or dry

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

and wet portion of the year; the phases of the moon; the fact that fish
run up rivers at a certain season and return at another; that certain
animals frequent particular parts of the country at one time more than
other. These and many other similar observations that they made would
seem to them, no doubt, what we should now call natural; that is to say,
these phenomena excited no astonishment. But others of uncertain
periodicity, and recurring at long intervals, such as eclipses,
earthquakes, comets, famines, and the like, would certainly create
wonder, sometimes fear, and might therefore be termed wonders, marvels,
or miracles in the old sense of the word, but not supernatural, for they
had no conception of nature as a starting-point from which the idea of
supernatural could be deduced. Their gods even, conceived probably as
invisible beings with purely human attributes, the attributes of
humanity at a very slow stage, could in no sense be considered
supernatural. Men could also render themselves invisible. The gods too
were so human that they could be forced to act in accordance with the
wishes of their worshippers, and could likewise be punished. But in
course of time, though not everywhere at the same time, to the worship
of the older gods, that resided chiefly in trees, wells, rivers, and
animals, was added the worship of a higher order of divinity whose seat
was in the sky. This was the result of the gradual development of a new
order of ideas. Just as a man in need of anything applies first to his
friends or neighbours nearest at hand before turning to a distant
stranger, so man in the early stages of his history had recourse, when
in danger or trouble, to the helpers that seemed nearest at hand, that
dwelt, as he believed, in the trees and waters at his very door, rather
than to the distant

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

heaven, to which no human voice could be expected to reach.

At last a change took place in this respect. Some men, resolving to
leave no stone unturned, ventured to seek aid from the sky-god, who in
time would gain a large circle of worshippers. The intellectual energy
and development of these adherents of the new god would no doubt be
superior to that of the adherents of the older gods. Yet to them the
sky-god was not supernatural, though a step was taken in that direction;
he was now supermundane. Partly from his elevated position, partly
perhaps from regarding the sun as his eye, the sky-god would in time
acquire the attribute of omniscence; though at first this would merely
be superhuman, not supernatural knowledge; it would exceed the knowledge
of any one man, but would only be equal to the sum of knowledge of all
men, what each man knew of his own actions. Again, instead of
attributing storms, thunder, lightning, rain, and drought to the anger
of witches, sorcerers, or of the inferior order of gods that dwelt in
trees and stones, these phenomena were now ascribed to the will of the
god in the sky above. This tended to produce the impression that he was
all-powerful as well as omniscient. Still, with all this, his power was
merely superhuman in the sense that it exceeded the capacity of any one
man or body of men. The idea of his being a supernatural personage could
only arise when his omnipotence was raised to such a pitch that he
became thought of as the creator of the world, of nature as we perceive
it. As the creator is necessarily greater than the created, it now for
the first time became possible to regard him as a being transcending
nature in every conceivable way—as supernatural, in fact. The notion of
a supernatural

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

being or god, wielding supernatural power, must, if this view is
correct, be of late origin. It never could develop among a people in
whose pantheon there was no creator of the world. If such a people
possess a notion of the supernatural they must have borrowed it.

It cannot be doubted that the prehistoric Finns, when they stood in the
open air and gazed around, were under the impression that nearly every
object in nature was the habitation of a spirit. This cosmological
theory naturally accounted for the life and movement they perceived
around them; even inanimate objects, like rocks and stones, required an
active cause to account for their presence, for their difference in
size, and for their often strange shapes. Of course, all spirits were
not of equal value or of equal strength: that would depend in some
measure on the size of their habitation. The spirit of the sky was
greater than an ordinary tree, stone, or house spirit. So a Samoyede
wizard in addressing his familiar spirit says: 'I cannot approach Num'
(the god or spirit of the sky), he is too far away; if I could reach him
I should not beseech thee, but should go myself, but I cannot.' <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_120.md) The Samoyedes of the government of
Tomsk, who are partly Christianised, fear Num to such an extent that
they pronounce his name with evident trembling, and prefer the use of an
epithet meaning 'the watcher over reindeer.' <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_121.md) Tūrm, the sky-god of the Northern
Ostiaks, who only speaks in thunder and the angry voice of the storm, is
an inexorable being whom no prayers can reach, whom no offerings can
propitiate. He is therefore not the object of any worship, and Ostiaks
in need of help must turn to a spirit of lower degree. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_122.md) Here we see that the physical remoteness
of

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

the sky from the earth gave rise to the idea of an inaccessible god.
Like the Ostiaks, the Turks of the Altai do not turn for help to the
highest god, but to deities of lower rank. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_123.md) Some Votiaks allege another reason for
not paying full honour to Inmar, the god of the sky. He is very good,
and so they do not fear him, worshipping him with prayers, but not with
sacrifices. <span id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_124.md) Though, in the above
instances, the sky is conceived mainly as a spirit, the latter was not
quite incorporeal. To the Samoyede the rainbow is 'Num's mantle'; to a
Čeremis it is 'the bow of Jumo' (sky, god), the thunderbolt is his stone
(*Jumon ki*); to a Vogul the lightning is 'the arrow of Tārim.' Compared
with the Northern Ostiaks, the Voguls have greatly modified their view
of the sky-god Numi Tārim. He is a great hunter, the bear is his dear
daughter, and they pray to him as 'our father' to let down fish and wild
animals from above. <span id="fr_127"></span>[3](#fn_125.md) He is
therefore no longer inaccessible to direct entreaty, which shows a later
stage in religious development; the fear of using his name has passed
away, and the feeling of distance from him is removed or lessened. The
ascription of the epithet 'father' is not, as might be supposed, the
result of Christian influence, for in the heroic poems of the Irtịš
Ostiaks, which go back to about the thirteenth or fourteenth century, a
prince who is hard pressed in battle calls to his god in the following
terms: 'Is it possible the Golden Light (the Sky-god), my father, has
decreed that common soldiers should take my iridescent scalp?' <span
id="fr_128"></span>[4](#fn_126.md) Judging from their poetry, the Tūrim of
the Southern Ostiaks on the Irtịš was very different from the Tūrm of
the Northern Ostiaks described by Castrén. The former is rather a

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

mild god; 'father' is his constant epithet, and he dispenses good solely
from his merciful nature and his love for man. And judging from the epic
poetry he does not seem to have demanded any worship, sacrifice, or
prayers. Even animals in danger cry for help to him, and never in
vain. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_127.md) It would be interesting to
know whether this revolution of ideas with respect to the character of
the sky-god was independent of all foreign influence; it is difficult to
believe that it could have taken place spontaneously,

*Num*, like the Turk. *teñri*, means 'sky' and 'god,' and among the
Finns we find the same confluence of two distinct ideas in a single
word.

<span id="img_15500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/15500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15500.jpg.md)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Though F. *jumala*
now means 'god,' the corresponding word in Čeremis also means 'sky,' and
the Mordvin for 'lightning,' *jondol*, stands for *jom-dol*, 'the fire
of *jom*,' <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_128.md) On the other hand, the
F. *ilma*, 'air,' corresponds with the Permian words for 'air,' 'sky,'
'god,' and the proper name *Ilmari*, L. *Ilmaris*, who is sometimes
substituted for the native wind-god, is formally the equivalent of V.
*inmar*, 'sky,' 'god.' It can hardly be doubted that sky is the older
meaning, though it may always have been associated with the idea of
'sky-spirit,' and that 'god' is secondary. It would be interesting to
know at what stage in the history

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

of the Finns this differentiation of meaning took place. With the
Western Finns it seems to have taken place as early as the fourth
period, for otherwise it is unintelligible why they should have borrowed
from the Lithuanians a word for the physical sky, *taivas*, unless
Jumala had ceased to bear this meaning, and meant only the sky-spirit,
the personality that seemed to be behind all aërial phenomena. At first,
there was only one god, *jumala*, *jumo*, *inmar*, the spirit of the
sky, but in course of time these words were used in the plural, and
employed as epithets to a number of deities. As god of the sky, Jumala,
like Num, no doubt sent forth thunder, rain, snow, and wind on luckless
mortals, but whether he received worship is doubtful; at any rate, most
of the worship appears to have been reserved for deities that seemed
nearer at hand.

The question may be raised whether all aërial phenomena, such as
thunder, lightning, wind, snow, and rain, were originally attributed to
the will of the one sky-spirit, or whether the earlier belief was that
they were due to the action of separate and independent spirits. At
present the Eastern Finns specialise most of these phenomena, so that
each has its father, mother, ruler, or other functionary who directs its
activity. They also specialise their domestic tutelary deities in the
minutest way; there is one for the hearth, another for the courtyard,
one for the cowhouse, another for the stable, for the sheep-pen, etc. As
the names for these buildings are for the most part loan words of
comparatively recent origin, the specialisation of guardian spirits goes
hand in hand with the increase of civilisation. But the Samoyedes, whose
lack of culture is much greater than that of the most backward of the
Eastern Finns, take the above phenomena *en bloc*, and

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

refer all to the will of a single spirit. Hence there is reason to
assume that in prehistoric times the Finns generally attributed these
diverse operations of nature to the active will of a single being, the
spirit that dwelt in the sky. In fact, to some of them, such as rain and
wind, short of a hurricane, they must have been from their mode of life
comparatively indifferent.

What conception the prehistoric Finns had of the spirits of nature we do
not know, and there is no common term by which they were designated. By
the Eastern Finns at present they are simply called the 'father, mother,
uncle, aunt, ruler, prince, or god' of each particular element, which
shows that they are generally thought of as anthropomorphic, and they do
sometimes appear in human shape. Once when a Votiak shot a water-spirit,
*vu-murt*, the water was tinged with his blood. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) And if the blood of a forest spirit,
known as *pales murt*, is shed, from each drop a fresh spirit comes into
existence. <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_130.md) The Mordvins sometimes
picture to themselves the water-mother as a beautiful woman with silky
hair and girt with a silver girdle; but sometimes she is seen in the
shape of a huge fish, surrounded by much smaller fish, which she sends
away to different rivers and lakes. At times her children fall into the
fisherman's net, and if he has pity on the weeping water-spirit he will
be rewarded with a good catch of fish. At other times she has been seen
as a bird skimming over the surface of the water. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_131.md) The 'forest-wife' of the Mordvins may
appear as a beautiful woman, but she can change her shape and become
manifest in the form of fire or a whirlwind; occasionally she comes to a

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

village as a cat, dog, horse, or wolf. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_132.md) By the Votiaks the *vu-murt* or
water-spirit is sometimes seen as a huge pike, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_133.md) a fish that is held sacred by the
Voguls, <span id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_134.md) and was probably sacred to
the prehistoric Finns. But these anthropomorphic and animal shapes
assumed by spirits may be later developments, for originally spirits
seem to have been invisible. Transition forms of the belief are seen in
the Votiak house-spirit, *korka murt*, who is an aged man in a sheepskin
coat, whom it is possible to feel and to seize, and who yet is
invisible; <span id="fr_137"></span>[4](#fn_135.md) as also in the Lapp
belief that the spirits of the dead are visible, but not in corporeal
form; and that they cannot be squeezed or tired, and move at a terrible
rate. <span id="fr_138"></span>[5](#fn_136.md) The Permian superstition
that a man can steal without being seen, if he provide himself first
with the hand, tooth, or shirt of a dead man, is only explicable by a
belief that the spirits of the dead are invisible. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[6](#fn_137.md) But the Samoyede belief is that spirits,
for which there are several names, are only visible to wizards, not to
ordinary mortals, except so far that some of them have their habitations
in queer-looking stones, trees, natural objects, or in rude dolls
dressed like a Samoyede. <span id="fr_140"></span>[7](#fn_138.md) To a
certain extent it would seem that all spirits were not considered
immortal, for the Samoyedes in the government of Tomsk have each a
special idol god, who, at the death of his worshipper, is supposed to
die too, and at any rate is thrown into the river. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[8](#fn_139.md) So too the household and clan gods of
the Ostiaks are to all appearance merely artificial dolls, decked out in
their best. But that originally the spirit was thought of as

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

distinct from the stone, branch, or idol in which he was located, is
shown by the belief of the Voguls. According to this, the ghosts or
manes of the heroes dwell in the place of their former exploits, where
they are represented under the form of images. These images are called
*pupy*, while the indwelling spirit, which appears with lightning speed
when summoned by the magic power of an incantation, is termed *aatir*,
'the prince,' or *nai*, 'the princess.' The images of the gods are often
replaced by a natural stone or rock formation, which the people believe
to be transformations of the heroes. And when the Voguls are preparing a
place of sacrifice, they set up in the front part of it a birch sapling
to serve as a sacred resting-place for the god who is to be
invoked. <span id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_140.md) So too the Votiak
household god, *voršud*, 'the giver of luck,' is supposed to live either
in a special chest or basket, in which the offerings are laid, or in
branches of fir specially strewn in a particular place, but is otherwise
invisible. The household spirit of the Čeremis is also embodied in a
fagot of sticks, <span id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_141.md) and the *seita*
of the Lapps, as a rule, are only to be seen in a pile of stones or in a
human figure rudely blocked on a wooden post. Yet in spite of the
invisibility of the spirits, they were so far cast in a human mould that
they needed to be fed, though not with the same regularity as human
beings. The Samoyedes, Ostiaks, Voguls, and Lapps all smear the mouths
of their idols with blood and fat. If the spirit was not embodied in an
idol, the food-offerings had to be made in other ways. For instance,
when the fishing on the Ob is bad, the Ostiaks throw a reindeer into it
to propitiate the spirit. Generally speaking, when an animal is
sacrificed, most of the flesh is eaten by the worshippers,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

though some is set aside for the god. The sacrifice is in the nature of
a feast, at which the god is an invited guest. Among the Southern
Ostiaks, when a god has received an offering he is bound to fulfil the
request of the Ostiak. If he refuses he must be chastised by man. Thus
the shaman exhorts the tribal god to be compliant, and its owner does
the same to his house-god. If the warning is of no avail, and the god
remains obdurate, he is threatened with punishment, and this is executed
forthwith. The image is thrown on the ground, beaten, and trampled under
foot; sometimes it is burnt and replaced by a new one that has witnessed
the chastisement. <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_142.md) Little wonder
then that prayers and offerings were made by preference to the lower
divinities who could thus be coerced by worshippers, whose actions were
regulated by the Bismarckian maxim, *do ut des*.

To a people that lives by fishing and hunting the elements are clearly
of far less importance than to an agricultural people. To the former
wind, snow, and rain come as a matter of course, and are regarded with
stoicism and indifference. The spirit that lives in a large river, that
gives or withholds fish; the spirit of the forest that owns the wild
animals with which it abounds; the household spirit that looks after the
welfare of the family;—these are the divinities the hunter and fisherman
is most inclined to worship with sacrifices and offerings. So it is not
surprising the Ostiaks should esteem the river Ob above all other gods,
should address it with their warmest prayers, and approach it with their
richest offerings. <span id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_143.md) The Lapps made
prayers and offerings to the water-spirits, *čačče olbmak*, to obtain
fish, though in East Finmark there was a special

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

fish-god, *guli ibmel*, <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_144.md) a term
which is evidently of later date. As the household god looked after the
general interests of the family he could be prayed to give so important
an article of food as fish, and accordingly the Samoyedes turn to their
*hahe* when they want a good haul. <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_145.md)
But a water-spirit can be looked upon from another point of view: he it
is that causes people to be drowned. To the Ostiaks, the water-spirit,
*Kul´*, is an evil and destructive being; <span
id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_146) to the Votiaks the *vu-murt* (water-man.md)
is a thoroughly evil spirit. <span id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_147.md) The
water-spirits, *vu-murt*, *vu-kužo*, who live in rivers, brooks, and
lakes, are a numerous family, and their number is increased by men that
are drowned, who subsequently become their servants <span
id="fr_150"></span>[5](#fn_148.md) or have to act as their horses. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[6](#fn_149.md) After bathing the Mordvins say: 'Thanks
to the *Ved at´a* (water-father), the silver-bearded,' and in a story he
is represented as seizing by the beard a man who was drinking, and not
releasing him till he had promised to give his son to his
assailant. <span id="fr_152"></span>[7](#fn_150.md)

The forest-god of the Lapps, *Lœib olmai*, ruled over all forest
animals, which were regarded as his herds, and luck in hunting, or the
reverse, depended on his will. His favour was so important that,
according to one author, they made prayers and offerings to hire every
morning and evening. Under his special protection was the bear. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[8](#fn_151.md) The 'forest men' of the Votiaks send
game to the hunter and food to cattle. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[9](#fn_152.md) All the forest animals are in the power
of the 'forest-uncle' or the 'forest-man.' He is of human shape, and is
inclined to be bad-tempered; to see him brings misfortune,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

usually sickness or death. In time of old sacrifices were made to him
oftener than now, but in the district of Sarapul they are still made in
autumn under a pine in the forest. The offerings consist of brandy,
bread, a bull, and a grey ram. In some places the bread is placed on the
branches of a tree for the master of the forest, and he is implored to
give of his forest animals, his squirrels, foxes, or wild boars. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_153.md) The Čeremis bring offerings to the
forest-spirit that he shall not entangle them in the forest. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_154.md)

Like the Samoyedes, the Ostiaks are divided into many small clans
(*slägt*), each composed of a number of families, having a common
ancestry, that do not intermarry. Each clan has a common cult, and from
time immemorial has had its own images, which are worshipped by the clan
with offerings and other religious ceremonies. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_155.md) The separate families, and even
individuals, have also their little wooden images, rudely representing a
male or female personage, but not differing from the clan images, except
in being less elaborately dressed. The clan keeps its images in a house
or a tent, or on some remote hill in the forest. The private and family
gods, however, are not always small wooden images with a human face and
a pointed head. They are sometimes odd-looking stones, or some other
natural object. Every family and individual owns one or more such idols,
which serve as tutelary gods, and when on the march they are transported
on a special sleigh. Often each image is credited with a special
function: one protects the reindeer, another provides a good haul of
fish, others care for the health, the wedded life, etc., of the family.
When wanted they are set up in the tent, on the pasture-ground, or at
the

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

places where animals and fish are caught. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_156.md) Professor De Harlez thinks it possible
that the small domestic idols of felt and rags, used by the Mongols, and
mentioned as early as the year 1200 by Armenian authors, may have been
introduced by the Buddhist preachers, as Vartan states without
hesitation. <span id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_157.md) Household gods of this
description may have passed from the Mongols to the Ostiaks. But, be
this as it may, the doll-like idols of the Ostiaks are certainly of
later date than the queer stones and other natural objects that serve
the same purpose. The household gods, hake, of the Samoyedes are
curious-looking stones, trees, or other natural objects, or they may
consist of rude images. Of these they ask help in all undertakings,
especially when they want a good catch of fish, and the idols follow the
migrations of the family on a sleigh. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_158.md)

The clan and family gods of the Lapps seem to have been known in
different parts of the country under the name of *Seita* or
*Storjunkare*. Each family or clan (*slägt*) had its *Storjunkare*
standing in the district where it lived. Every Lapp settlement had its
*seita*, which had no regular shape, and might consist of smooth or
odd-looking stones picked out of a stream, of a small pile of stones, of
a tree-stump, or of a simple post. They were set up on a high, prominent
place, or in a rich meadow. Under and round such *seitas* they strewed
green fir twigs in winter, and in summer green leaves. The *seitas*
protected their worshippers against misfortune to the herds of reindeer,
gave instructions how to catch wild reindeer, and in return offerings
were made to them of the hides and hoofs of

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

reindeer, calves, and sometimes of a dog. But a private person might
also have his own *seita*, to whom he prayed for good luck. The
Storjunkare are described sometimes as stones, having some likeness to a
man or an animal, that were set up on a mountain top, or in a cave, or
near rivers and lakes. Honour was done to them by spreading fresh twigs
under them in winter, and in summer leaves or grass. The Storjunkare had
power over all animals, fish, and birds, and gave luck to those that
hunted or fished for them. Reindeer were offered up to them, and every
clan and family had its own hill of sacrifice. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_159.md)

The Votiaks have a family and clan god, known generically as the
*Voršud*, or 'protector of good luck,' who protects the fortunes of the
family. His clan character is shown by the fact that two persons bearing
the same *Voršud* name cannot marry, or, what comes to the same thing,
if they worship in the same large *kuala* or hut where the clan *voršud*
is kept. <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_160.md) The *voršud* is
represented in different places in different ways. In one place it is
described as an idol placed on a shelf or raised place in the front
corner of the *kuala* or outhouse used in summer for cooking purposes.
The idol itself is a roughly made wooden head, with a beard of marsh
grass. In another *kuala* it is a box, with a small opening like a
window on one side, in which stands an image made of dough, the box
being placed on a table or stand. <span id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_161.md)
Elsewhere it is a small quadrangular basket, containing a bundle of
birch or fir twigs, a few bits of money, squirrel-skins, a pie, honey,
etc., and sometimes the box is laid upon fresh branches of pine. The
bundle of birch

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

twigs, and sometimes the squirrel-skins and the pie, are changed
annually in spring. <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_162.md) It is evident
that the wooden head and the dough image are later modifications: the
*voršud* was originally thought of as an invisible spirit, but residing
in the bundle of twigs instead of in a stone, like the house gods of the
Lapps, Ostiaks, and Samoyedes. By the Ufimsk Čeremis the term *kuda
vodịž*, or 'house-spirit,' is applied to a fagot of twigs kept in the
front corner of the house. By the Viátkan Čeremis the twigs are renewed
annually. Towards evening on a fixed day in spring all the men of the
village mount their horses, and carry away from each house in the place
the old fagot, and transport it separately to a certain field, where it
is left. A new fagot is cut and taken home. The master of the house then
says: 'Old one, go away! let another, a good one, come! Whenever
anything happens, preserve me, do not bring evil!' <span
id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_163.md) But to return to the Votiaks: the most
important family sacrifices are those held in the *kuala* which each
family possesses, and is the home of the *voršud*. Besides the family
*kuala* there is a clan *kuala* in every village. If there is more than
one clan in a village, an event of rare occurrence, there is a
corresponding number of additional *kualas*. The clan *kuala* forms part
of the farm-buildings of the oldest man directly descended from the
ancestor of the clan, but differs in nothing from a family *kuala*.
Sacrifices in these buildings are held on fixed and on accidental
occasions. The family and clan sacrifices are held regularly twice a
year, at the beginning of summer, and autumn when the field-work is
over. The offerings consist of bread, groats, beer, spirits,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

and a duck. The man on whose farm the clan sacrifice is made acts as
priest, and the office is hereditary. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_164.md) Though these facts seem clear enough
there is much uncertainty as to the origin of the *voršud* names. Only a
few of them can now be explained by the modern Votiak and Zịrian
languages, which is not surprising if they are family or clan names. Out
of a short list given by Gavrilov, *Bigra* might be explained as the
adjective of *Biger*, 'a Tatar,' 'a Bolgar.' *Durga* is a 'beetle,'
*Selta* might be a derivative of *selt*, 'a horse-hobble,' *Ul´a*, of
*ul´* 'a branch'; *Purga* is (1) a tributary of the Vičegda, (2) the
name of a village, (3) a snowstorm. The other names he gives are
inexplicable. Out of a list of Votiak patronymics written down at the
end of the last century occur Birgin, Z´um´in, Kibin, Šudzin, derived
from the still existing Voršud names Birga, Z´um´a, Kib´a, Šudz´a. Some
river-names are identical with *voršud* names, such as Lekma, Yumia,
Čabia, Dokia, Niria, Možga, which last is also a village name. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_165.md) As rivers were worshipped by the
Votiaks, it is possible that the spirits of these rivers had been
adopted as tutelary spirits, and so became clan names, though other
equally plausible reasons might be urged for other explanations. And as
village names are often called after their founder, there is no
difficulty in explaining the similarity of village and *voršud* names.
But still it remains uncertain whether the *voršud* took its name from
the clan that worshipped it, or whether it gave its name to the clan.

The Mordvins being more civilised than the other Eastern Finns, seem to
have no tutelary family and clan gods corresponding to those above
mentioned, though they have several divinities that protect the house,
the hearth,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the threshing-floor, the corn-kiln, etc., to whom small sacrifices are
made.

From the above examples of existing beliefs among the Ugrians and
Eastern Finns, we may safely assume that the prehistoric Finns also had
gods of the family and the clan, who were supposed to be domiciled in
quaint-looking stones, in small stone piles, in fagots of twigs, and in
sacred trees. Further, that they worshipped the spirit that inhabited
and personified every large river. Whether they revered a god of the
forest is not certain, for, as we have seen, all that he could bestow
could also be given by the personal or family god.

As in the course of the second period the Finns became acquainted with
domestic animals, to which grass is essential, and practised a little
agriculture, it is possible they occasionally paid homage and made
sacrifices to the sun. The Samoyedes at dawn and sunset turn towards the
sun and utter a few words of prayer, though otherwise they do not seem
to pay any special regard to it. <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_166.md)
But the Lapps offered white male animals to it so that it should shine
and promote the growth of grass. Every year the sun ought to have the
so-called 'sun's groats,' which both sexes ate in honour of the sun when
they prayed it to cast a gracious sunshine on their reindeer. After the
feast they fell a second time on their knees, and begged the sun to give
them a good milking year, and to let their herds of reindeer thrive. It
was only to the sun that burnt-offerings were made, and, being a male
deity, only male animals were sacrificed to him. The moon was also a
male divinity, for to him likewise only male animals were offered. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_167.md) The Votiaks pray to the 'sun-mother' to
give warm days; but

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

she is not an important divinity. On the other hand, to the purely
agricultural Mordvins the sun-god, E.M. *Čipaz*, M.M. *Ši bavas*, is the
supreme deity. <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_168.md)

#### BELIEFS, WIZARDS.

A brief mention of some of the beliefs of the Ugrians and Eastern Finns
will help to show what the general mental attitude of the prehistoric
Finns might have been when face to face with the incidents and
vicissitudes of daily life. The Samoyedes think that if a hunter eat
bear's flesh he would run the risk of being eaten himself. At any rate
fish and bear's meat must not be eaten at the same meal, or all the fish
would disappear from the river. <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_169.md)
The Ostiaks suppose that any one who has been eaten by a bear, who has
been drowned, injured by fire, or has met with any accident, most likely
has committed perjury, a crime always punished during a man's
lifetime. <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_170.md) The Votiaks say that the
bear originated from man, and so understands human speech, though he
cannot speak himself. In their opinion the dog is so tenacious of life
that if you kill one with a stick, and do not leave the weapon upon its
body, it will come to life again. And if it were not for the milky way,
the wild geese flying from west to north, and *vice versâ*, would lose
their way and perish. <span id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_171.md) The
Samoyedes are of opinion that sickness can be sent by an evilly disposed
man as well as by God. <span id="fr_174"></span>[5](#fn_172.md) The Votiaks
hold that fever and ague are sent by an evil spirit, *Perkịno*, who has
to be appeased with offerings of bread, butter, and gruel, and is
entreated not to be angry. <span id="fr_175"></span>[6](#fn_173.md) The
Čeremis imagine that

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

the spirits that cause illness, especially fever and ague, are
continually recruited on the death of old maids, murderers, and those
that have died a violent death. <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_174.md)
The Mordvins suppose that sterility, or the sickness of a member of the
family without apparent cause, results from having neglected his
ancestors. Plague among the cattle is attributed to the same
cause. <span id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_175.md) When any one becomes
dangerously ill the Lapps feel sure that one of his deceased relatives
wants his company in the region of the dead, *Jabmi aimo*, either from
affection or to punish him for some trespass. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_176.md) The Turks of the Altai have a similar
belief. The soul after death willingly lingers for some time in the
house, leaves it unwillingly, and often takes with it other members of
the family or some of the cattle. <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_177.md)

The Votiaks of Sarapul say that the body after being committed to the
earth sees visions, as persons that are asleep do. <span
id="fr_180"></span>[5](#fn_178.md) A dead Votiak is believed to hear all
that is said around him till he has been washed and buried. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[6](#fn_179.md) The Čeremis imagine that the dead still
preserve the sensations of heat and cold, and can see until lowered into
the grave. If a lad or a girl dies unmarried, it is thought they can
marry in the next world. <span id="fr_182"></span>[7](#fn_180.md) When a
respected Ostiak dies his nearest relations make a figure of him, which
is kept in the tent of the deceased, and enjoys the same honour as
himself when alive. At every meal the figure is brought in; every
evening it is undressed and put to bed; every morning it is dressed and
set in the usual seat of the deceased. The figure is honoured in this
way for three

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

or four years and then thrown into the grave. By that time the corpse is
supposed to have mouldered into dust, and when that is accomplished even
immortality comes to an end. <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_181.md)

The prehistoric Finns, judging from the beliefs of their descendants and
successors, were a simple folk. By them, no doubt, sudden sickness was
attributed to any cause but the right one,—to the ill wishes of a
neighbour, to the violation of an oath or a taboo, to inattention to the
legitimate needs of deceased ancestors. When a man was dead they
probably supposed, knowing nothing to the contrary, that he continued to
see, hear, and feel for a considerable time. Something of the man lived
on, but not for ever. When his memory was forgotten, when food supplies
failed, or when the body had turned into dust and ashes, the spirit was
thought to perish likewise, and nothing of the man remained. It would
seem too that the stuff of which spirits were composed was much the same
whether they were human spirits or the spirits that give apparent
vitality to the phenomena of nature. After death some human spirits
increased the host of spirits of disease, or became the servants of
water-spirits, and when a worshipper died his private tutelary spirit
became functionless and ceased to exist.

Believing as they did in various supernatural, invisible powers who were
inaccessible to ordinary men, the prehistoric Finns no doubt had
recourse to wizards and exorcists, who were credited with possessing the
power of communicating with the unseen world, and of interpreting and
explaining the will of the gods and the invisible spirits. The reason
why this power was attributed to

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

certain men was simply the fact that they were partially demented, were
queer in their behaviour and appearance, and when young were subject to
fits, spasms, hysteria, incoherent raving, and other signs that clearly
showed they were possessed by a spirit, and therefore fit and natural
interpreters of the invisible world of spirits. Such are the signs by
which the Buriats, the Turks of the Altai, and the Yakuts know that a
youth has been specially chosen by the gods to act as a *šaman*, a
*kam*, or an *ojun*. <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_182.md) As partial
mental alienation is apt to run in families, the wizard's power would
generally be handed down from father to son, as is the case with the
above-mentioned Siberian peoples; and judging from what is related of
it, the amount of education given to the young *šaman* was not very
great. But he had to be a good mimic; he must know how to imitate the
screech of the eagle, the cackle of the goose, the croak of the raven,
the hissing of the snake, the neighing of the horse, and many other
natural sounds, when pretending to ascend to the sky or to descend to
the lower regions. For such journeys were not related in mere words;
they were vivid dramatic representations of a primitive kind, in which
the *šaman* played the part of many invisible characters and animals,
changing his voice to suit each part. Such a performance could not fail
to leave on the simple unquestioning minds of the spectators a deep
impression of the reality of the whole affair. These exhibitions are
best preserved by the Turks of the Altai, but considerable traces of
similar performances were to be found among the Lapps a couple of
centuries ago.

Originally the wizards and seers were not what we should nowadays call
magicians: they did not employ magic

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

means to thwart the will of a god, or even to exert external force upon
him. From their own point of view, their actions were perfectly
rational, and their words both natural and harmless in themselves. Their
functions were to find out why any one had been taken ill; whether a
certain animal destined for sacrifice would be acceptable to the god,
where lost animals were to be found, and practical questions of that
sort. To fulfil their tasks they had at their beck and call certain
friendly familiar spirits who could inquire of the higher spirits with
whom even the wizard was unable to converse. To summon the familiar
spirits who lived a long way off a drum had to be used, and when they
arrived they were supposed to place themselves inside the drum. It was a
most important instrument, and in the hands of a skilful wizard produced
a variety of tones: hollow, muffled sounds that seemed to come from the
depths of the earth; sharp incisive raps showing that a decisive point
had been reached in the dramatic performance; loud, rapid, tumultuous
sounds that pictured a terrible conflict. But the drum, perhaps only in
later times, was also used as a divining instrument, and so the Altaian
Turks, the Ostiaks, and the Lapps drew rude designs in red on the
surface of their drums. The figures on the upper part pictured the gods
and the sky, those in the lower part referred to the lower world, while
a central horizontal band represented the earth. By causing a ring or
something of the sort to move freely over the surface of the drum, and
observing on what figure it stopped, a wizard could manage to give
information about persons and things both above, below, or upon the
surface of the earth. Speaking of the Samoyedes, Castrén tells us that
the wizard can do little of himself, he is only the interpreter of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

the spirit-world, and his whole power consists in being able to place
himself in correspondence with certain spirits, and receive from them
the necessary information. At the same time he must be young and strong,
or the spirits will make a fool of him. His office is hereditary, and
the sound of his drum penetrates to the world of spirits, and awakens
them from sleep. <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_183.md)

The clan gods of the Ostiaks are often kept in a certain house which is
under the charge of a spiritual man, who is at once seer, priest,
doctor, and enjoys a religious respect. The advice of such seers or
shamans is taken in all doubtful cases, but the seer answers no question
directly. He refers it first to the decision of the gods, and explains
the reply to the interrogator. Questions however cannot be put to Tūrm,
who is inaccessible to mortals. In the event of a general sacrifice to
the gods, or when their advice is asked, a shaman is necessary, as he
alone can open the hearts of the gods and converse with them. The drum
is indispensable, for an ordinary voice does not reach the ear of the
gods. Sometimes the image of the god, placed in front of the seer,
speaks, but only the seer can understand what is said. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_184.md)

When the Voguls desire to sacrifice to a divinity, the sort and quality
of the offerings are determined by the wizard (*nájt* = F. *noita*), who
serves as a medium between god and man. He is prepared for his office
from earliest childhood, not only by strict observance of religious
precepts, and taking, part in ceremonies, but also by learning religious
songs, legends, and the proper conjurations. In all important religious
acts he is the leader, and among the instruments he uses are the drum
(*koip*, cf.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> L. *kobdas*,
*komdas*, F. *kannus*&gt;\**kamdus*), the drumstick, swords, arrows, and
other weapons. His hardest work is conjuring the gods. It is he that
leads out the animal to be sacrificed and cries forth his entreaties
towards the sky, though the actual slaughter of the animal is performed
by assistants on his giving the sign. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_185.md)

In very important matters the Lapps summoned a wizard (*noaide* = F.
*noita*), who, using his drum as a divining apparatus, explained the
will of the gods and answered different questions. But when necessary he
was also able to make a journey to the house of the dead, *Jabmi aimo*,
to appease its inhabitants, and engage them not to pursue a sick man
down to the grave, or to get a deceased relative to come up to the earth
again to tend the reindeer. Striking his drum, and singing as loud as he
could, he began to summon his *saivvo* followers or helpful spirits.
First he summoned the *saivvo* bird, and told it to bring from that
region some of its inhabitants, but first of all the *saivvo* fish or
snake. When all who intended to assist at the ceremony had arrived, the
wizard took off his cap, loosened his belt, placed his hands on his
face, knelt down, swayed to and fro on his knees, and began, drum in
hand, to run round on his knees with wonderful rapidity and with curious
gestures. Now and then he cried out: 'Harness the reindeer! launch the
boat!' Then he threw hot ashes from the fire with his naked hands,
pretending fire did not hurt him, drank brandy, and struck himself on
the knee with an axe. Finally, from the effects of previous fasting and
his violent exertions he fell into a swoon, during which no one might
touch him, for his spirit

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

was now travelling on the *saivvo* fish to Saivvo or to *Jabmi aimo*.
When he came to himself he related what he had seen, what arrangements
he had made with the dead, and announced in an oracular manner what
ought to be done. <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_186.md)

Among some Votiaks the seer (*tuno*) enjoys great authority; the animals
to be sacrificed are selected on his recommendation; he shows the spot
where the sacrifice to each god is to be made; where an illness has
seized a sick man, who is guilty of it, who it was that damaged the
invalid, what he is like and the colour of his hair, etc. And in general
he is respected by the people. <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_187.md) In
other places he has a bad reputation, is a habitual sot, and is
therefore despised. Of less importance is the exorcist, *pell´askis´*,
so called because while pronouncing his exorcisms he accompanies the
words with blowing, *pell´askon*. <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_188.md)

As regards the Samoyedes and Ostiaks, it does not seem certain who or
what the spirits were that assisted and protected the wizards. Among the
Lapps, however, these spirits were called *saivvo* people, who lived in
a *saivvo* home, which was said to lie close under the surface of the
ground. Directly after death souls were believed to pass into *saivvo
aibmo*, the inhabitants of which lived exactly as on earth, but in a
higher degree of prosperity and happiness, and they became the guardian
spirits of the living. Every adult Lapp, especially *noaides*, could
have several *saivvo* people as tutelary spirits. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_189.md) If this is correct, the helpful spirits
of the Lapp wizards were really those of their deceased ancestors,
though perhaps

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

the *Saivvo* people were not wholly composed of human spirits, and
certainly not of all human souls, for most of the dead went to *Jabmi
aibmo*, which is sometimes confused with *saivvo aibmo*, though the
places were different. It seems to have been the same with the Altaian
Turks. The intermediaries between the *kam* or wizard and the lower
spirits, the *Jär-su*, are the spirits of ancestors. But not all can
give help; only shamans that transmit their power from father to son are
able through the power of their ancestors to invoke these lower spirits
of nature, the *Jär-su*. <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_190.md) So too
with the Jakuts, the *emekhet* or helpful spirit of the wizard, *ojun*,
is generally a defunct shaman, though occasionally a secondary deity,
who comes at call, helps, defends, and gives him advice. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_191.md)

#### ANCESTRAL WORSHIP.

There is reason to believe that at any rate to some extent the
prehistoric Finns worshipped their deceased ancestors. Castrén mentions
that the Ostiaks and Samoyedes make offerings to the dead, and that this
service is founded on the belief that the dead retain the same needs and
follow the same occupations as in life. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_192.md) Among the Lapps the dead were held in
great honour. The relatives sacrificed reindeer in memory of them for
several years, and believed themselves to be still in such close
relations that the luck they enjoyed was regarded as a gift from the
deceased. <span id="fr_195"></span>[4](#fn_193.md) At the annual
commemoration the Votiak priest invites the deceased to take part, in
the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

following words: 'Thy anniversary has arrived, we give thee a bloody
sacrifice, a roan stallion with a thick mane. Don't be angry; look well
after our good cattle, and do not lay hold of us from before or behind.
Gather all the dead around thyself. Be healthy. Come forward to eat and
drink with the people around thee. Your grandfathers and grandmothers
came forth to eat and drink.' <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_194.md) The
Permians in the district of Glazov bring food in birch baskets to the
cemetery, hang them on branches of the trees there, and call to the
deceased to come and eat. <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_195.md)

Among the Mordvins, on the eve of the day for commemorating the
deceased, forty or forty-nine days after death, the nearest relative who
most resembles the defunct is asked to personify him on the following
day. Next day he comes to the house, puts on the clothes in which the
dead man died, and sits on the bed on which he breathed his last. All
the relations assemble to welcome him. Each brings a present of flour,
bread, pancakes, or mutton, lays it with a bow on the table in front of
the impersonator, and inquires how he is getting on in the other world.
At night a very noisy feast is held, during which the personator tells
of the life beyond the grave, and about the crops there. To the visitors
that inquire after their dead relatives he gives the most circumstantial
news. 'Your relation keeps good horses, and drives about the forest in a
carriage'; 'Yours ruined himself'; 'Yours keeps bees'; 'Yours is given
to drink'; 'Yours has married a beautiful wife.' About midnight all
gather round to listen to the wishes of the dead man. His personifier
then advises them to live peacefully, to look after the cattle, not to
thieve, and hopes they will have

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

abundance of beer and brandy. Later on a bull is slaughtered with some
ceremony, its flesh is boiled in kettles, and the whole is consumed by
the guests. When this repast is over the personator announces it is time
to re-enter the grave. All present kneel down and beg his blessing. A
cart is made ready, on which is placed a vat containing viands of
various kinds. The personifier, after being embraced by the old women,
is laid on the bed, which is now placed in the cart, and the whole
company goes off to the cemetery. Here they set him and the bed on the
grave, then lay a variety of food before hire, and beg him to eat for
the last time. To keep him company the escort also partakes. They then
take leave of the impersonator and invite him to return in summer when
the corn is ripe and they will reap his share. The ceremony is now over;
the personifier makes a bow, suddenly springs up from the grave, throws
the bed upon the cart, and vanishes from the scene. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_196.md) The Mordvins ask the deceased ancestors
to give them a long life, to increase their prosperity, to give a good
harvest, increase of cattle, etc.—in fact, to accomplish all that is
usually the function of the gods. Sometimes it happens that the
ancestors are neglected and left to starve. Such conduct is not left
unpunished. They warn the relations in a dream, and, taking the hint,
the latter bake pancakes, kill a hen and make a feast, the greater part
of which they eat themselves, but the remains are taken to a place near
the cemetery. <span id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_197.md) The ascription by
the Mordvins of what may be called divine power to their ancestors, such
as the ability to dispense prosperity, health, increase of cattle, etc.,
is closely paralleled by the capabilities in this respect of the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

family and clan gods of the Ostiaks and Lapps mentioned above. It opens
up the question whether the latter are not, at any rate partly, the
spirits of ancestors, though there is not enough evidence to arrive at a
definite conclusion.

#### THE FAMILY.

Though the Eastern and Western Finns seem to have no word for 'clan,'
'tribe,' we have already found reason to believe that the prehistoric
Finns were acquainted with these ideas, and it must be supposed that the
words, being no longer wanted, have fallen into disuse, and are buried
in oblivion. Georgi, in the last century, says the Votiaks were formerly
divided into tribes, and we have already seen that those that worship
the same *voršud* cannot intermarry, and that the Ostiaks are divided
into many small clans, composed of several families descended from a
common ancestor. Unfortunately Castrén nowhere gives the Ostiak word
which he translates by *slägt*. There is also no word for 'family'
common to the Eastern and Western Finns. The latter use *perhe*, which
has been adopted by the Lapps, while the Permian group and the other
eastern groups generally employ loan words from Russian or Tatar. In
fact there is a great difference at present between the two branches in
the constitution of the family. The usual conception of a family among
the West Finns is a household consisting of a man and wife with their
children, as in Western Europe. But among the East Finns it is
different. With them the family is large, consisting of from twenty to
forty, and even sixty, persons living under the same roof and governed
by a single head. Among the Votiaks it is not uncommon to find ten or

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

more adults in a single family, not including children; for there may be
three or four married brothers living with their parents in one large
family. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_198.md) A family of from
twenty-five to thirty persons in one house is not uncommon, and north of
the Čeptsa, in the government of Viátka, there are families of even
forty persons. <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_199.md) Among the Mordvins
several families live together in one house, though this is composed of
several buildings, and constitute a large family. Though households
consisting of a single family are to be found, they are still uncommon,
and are the result of Russian influence. Not long ago there were
families among the Erza of from fifty to sixty souls. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_200.md) Although there are obvious economic
reasons that may account for the enormous size of some Mordvin families
that live entirely on agriculture, these would hardly hold good for the
smaller but still large families of the Votiaks on the Čeptsa, where
soil and climate place agriculture in a subordinate position as a means
of subsistence. The modern practice of several married sons living
together as one family must be referred to an older instinctive feeling
of greater security that kept all those of the same stock together. It
is not too much to assume that in prehistoric times the family was also
large, consisting of three or four generations, living, if not under one
roof, yet in huts so contiguous as to form a single homestead.

At the present time the family is everywhere on a patriarchal basis.
Though the head of a Votiak family has unlimited power over the other
members of it, we are told that the natural good-nature of the people is
such

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

that his authority is wielded in a milder fashion than we should expect,
and the members of the family, even the women, enjoy greater freedom
than in a Russian family. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_201.md) Among
the Mordvins, too, there are, properly speaking, no bounds to the power
of the husband over the wife, so that he can beat her at pleasure and no
one blame him for doing so as a punishment. Though the power of the
father over his children is specially great, it never exceeds certain
bounds. A Mordvin takes great care that no member of the family shall
become estranged, but, on the contrary, shall feel solidarity with it,
and he reluctantly eliminates members really guilty of crimes. Nor is
the parental authority of short duration. Even among the Erza it lasts
till a son is thirty years of age, for a father can always make himself
so respected that sons of that age do not usually think of evading his
wishes. And the Mordvin like the Votiak father does not misuse his
authority. <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_202.md)

The position of women among the prehistoric Finns could have been
neither high nor enviable. An Ostiak woman is a slave in the strictest
sense of the word; she is regarded as unclean, and lives in the deepest
degradation. She gives no expression to her own will, but must humbly
submit to every caprice of her husband. Her wishes are never consulted;
she is treated like a piece of goods, and can never inherit
property. <span id="fr_205"></span>[3](#fn_203.md) Vogul women in general
may not approach idols or holy places. If a woman treads upon or steps
over a man's clothes, weapons, or instruments of any sort, they are
rendered unclean, and must be purified by fumigation with
castoreum. <span id="fr_206"></span>[4](#fn_204.md) Among the Lapps woman
still takes a very low place in the social organisation.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Formerly she might
not touch a *noaid's* drum, or eat the least bit of any offering made to
the thunder-god, Horagales; nor might she look in the direction of the
*seita* on the holy places. <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_205.md)
Similarly a Votiak woman may not be present at the sacrifices made to
the *lud*, or evil spirit that dwells in certain groves, nor may she
approach such a grove. <span id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_206.md) Even with
the more civilised Mordvins the power of the house-mother while her
husband is alive is not very great; when he dies it ceases
altogether. <span id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_207.md) And as late as the
eighteenth century there was a lively recollection of a time when a man
could sell his wife and the children begotten by her, if she ceased to
please him. <span id="fr_210"></span>[4](#fn_208.md)

At present the Eastern and Western Finns, as well as the Ostiaks, are
exogamous, though Mainov argues that, as the gods of the Mordvins marry
their own daughters, the nearest relationship was no bar to marriage,
and that only a deficient supply of women led the Mordvins to seek wives
among strange clans. <span id="fr_211"></span>[5](#fn_209.md) Among the
Erza of the district of Sergatčsk in the government of Nižegorod, as
well as in the government of Simbirsk, a tradition is preserved that in
the old days a brother could marry a sister. Not long ago there lived in
the village of Dubensk a very pretty and hard-working girl. Her parents
were reluctant to part with her and give her in marriage to a stranger.
So they sent her to pay a long visit to her relatives at a distance, and
on her return they received her as a complete stranger. From that day
forth they obliged her to consider her brother as her husband. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[6](#fn_210.md) In answer to a direct question, a
heathen Čeremis told Professor Smirnov

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

that it was possible to marry a sister, though it was not done, from
which he draws the conclusion that formerly the Čeremis were endogamous,
there being no formal prohibition against marrying sisters. He also
quotes a custom that forbids a Čeremis marrying a girl from a place
where the women wear a costume different from that worn in his own
village. He finds traces, too, of endogamy in some of the marriage
customs. <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_211.md) With regard to the
Permians, one author states that in out-of-the-way places cases occur of
brothers and sisters cohabiting, and another writer mentions that in the
district of Glazov sexual relations between very near kindred are not
uncommon, while it is not considered blameworthy to have children
begotten in incest. <span id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_212.md) Among the
Votiaks in some places there is a custom that forbids a girl walking
with a lad from another village. <span id="fr_215"></span>[3](#fn_213.md)
Yet, in spite of these exceptions, the probability is great that in the
main the prehistoric Finns were exogamous, though under stress of
circumstances the nearest relationship as no bar to cohabitation.

Before attempting to discover the constitution of the Finnish family in
prehistoric times by an examination of the words that denote
relationship, it may be mentioned that not one of these ranges through
all the groups. Some are widely diffused, but none universally. Still,
from this it would be erroneous to argue that in the second period
something like group-marriage or general hetairism prevailed. The
absence of common terms for natural phenomena like 'sun' and 'moon,'
etc., are enough to show that old words could be discarded and new terms
substituted. It may also be noted that as a rule no distinction is drawn
between boy and son, girl and daughter, woman and wife,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

woman and mother; each doublet is usually expressed by a single word. As
a rule, too, there is no word for brother or sister, only for elder
brother, elder sister, and these are nearly always coupled with the
connotations of uncle and aunt. Native words, too, for nephew, grandson,
and first-cousin are generally absent. Professor Smirnov maintains that
these facts can only be explained by assuming the existence of communal
marriage or general hetairism as the basis of the family, and
presupposes a state of society in which every adult woman of a group was
the concubine or potential wife of every adult man in it; the children
being children of the group, no distinction could be drawn between boy
and son, girl and daughter, woman and wife. In his opinion, the absence
of a word for 'widow' shows that a woman was never left without a
husband, while the want of a juridical term for 'adultery' proves that
regular marriage did not exist. He finds a corroboration of his theory
in the freedom of sexual relations that exists between lads and girls
before marriage in all branches of the Eastern Finns. But Darwin, Dr.
Westermarck, and others, have pointed out and laid stress on the fact
that jealousy, especially in sexual matters, is and always must have
been a very strong passion in man, as it in all the higher gregarious
animals. The strongest men in each small group would therefore always
keep their women to themselves so long as they were able to do so. Their
children would therefore have a known father as well as a mother, and
could not be regarded as merely children of a group. As the supply of
women became restricted by the action of the stronger men, the weaker
ones were forced to have recourse to various expedients, and thus
polyandrous types of marriage or concubinage, and incestuous

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

intercourse, would arise simultaneously with the polygamy of the
stronger men.

The oldest type of family that we can trace among the Finns is one
composed of several adult males, probably related by blood, living with
several women and their children in one hut. With the exception of his
two parents, to any member of the dwelling all male and female members
older than himself were his elder brothers and sisters; all younger than
himself were younger brothers or sisters, or some analogous term, Traces
of a classificatory system, founded on seniority, are still found among
the Eastern Finns. It is best displayed among the Čeremis. Exclusive of
the father and mother, all blood-relations are divided, with regard to
oneself or to a given person, into two categories of older and younger
persons.

*Iz´a* designates and is the term of address for an uncle younger than
one's father, an elder brother, his son if older than oneself, and a
first cousin if also older.

*šolö* is a younger brother, a nephew, a grand-nephew, a younger first
cousin, and the son of a first cousin.

*aka* is an aunt younger than one's father, an elder sister, a niece,
and a first cousin older than oneself.

*šušar* is a younger sister, a niece, a grand-niece, a first cousin
younger than oneself, and the daughter of a first cousin.

The wife of an *iz´a* is addressed as *engai*; of a *šolö*—*šeške*.

The husband of an *aka* is called *kurska*; of a *šušar*—*veñge*. <span
id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_214.md)

As it stands this nomenclature is probably not very

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

ancient, for some of the terms seem to be loan words of no very ancient
date; but the principle on which it is based is undoubtedly old.

The nomenclature of the modern Čeremis exactly fits the case of a
father, mother, and their married sons with their families, living under
a single roof and numbering say twenty persons. It may be illustrated by
the following diagram

<span id="img_18600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/18600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18600.jpg.md)</span>

Here A *A´* represents a man and wife with their three sons b, c, d. In
course of time their wives *b´*, *c´*, *d´*, bear families, shown in
three columns to the right and lettered from *e*—*q*, the italics
marking the girls. It is possible, and we therefore suppose that niece
*e* is older than her uncle d; that i is older than his first cousin h,
and that n is older than his first cousins h, m. Then with regard to d,
we see that b, c are his elder brothers (*iz´a*), his niece e is his
elder sister (*aka*), and his remaining nephews and nieces from f—*g*
are younger brothers (*šolö*) and younger sisters (*šušar*). With regard
to h his two uncles c, d, and his fast cousins i, n are his elder
brothers, his full sisters *e*, *g* are his elder sisters, and his first
cousins *k*, *o*, *q* are his younger sisters. In conversation *b´*
would be addressed as *engai´*, and *c´*, *d´* as *šeške*. As there is
no native term for grandson in the Finnish groups, the father must have
called his grandsons 'sons,' but all the grandchildren from *e*—*g* 

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

address A, *A´* as the 'great father,' the 'great mother.' In a family
circle of this description the terminology of the family may be reduced
to a minimum, though in course of time it will gradually enlarge; we
see, too, that words for nephew, niece, grandson, granddaughter, first
cousin, and even younger sister—younger aunt answers the purpose,—can
easily be dispensed with, and need only develop after a long period of
time, or after contact with a more civilised people. It is manifest, of
course, that the above diagram can be adapted to a stage of family life
far less advanced than that of the modern Čeremis, and at the beginning
of the second period no doubt the relations between the sexes was
different from what now holds. Very likely when the head of the
household died, or became infirm, if he was ever allowed to reach that
stage, his eldest or strongest son inherited his wife or wives, if young
enough. And until the sons were strong enough for each to keep a wife to
himself, they may have kept one in common, so that for a season polygyny
and polyandry might exist under the same roof. The girls, too, in a
household, till appropriated by a single man, may often have had
intercourse with the younger men who had no households of their own. But
the principle always remained that there was a head of each household,
however humble the dwelling might be, and any children born under his
roof were regarded as his and formed his family.

Hitherto we have only found in the prehistoric family a certain number
of males living with a certain number of females, but we have not learnt
how the women were acquired, whether by violence or in some peaceful
manner, such as exchange, early betrothal, purchase, or personal

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

service; or what sort of relations existed between the families of the
husband and wife. If we could find widespread terms for any of the
bride's relations, that imply marriage of some sort, we might reasonably
infer that after taking a wife the relations between the husband and
wife's families were not hostile, implying that she had been obtained on
the whole by pacific means. There are two words that point in this
direction, those for 'son-in-law' and 'father-in-law,' though the latter
is a dubious term meaning 'wife's father' and 'husband's father':—

<span id="img_18800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/18800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18800.jpg.md)</span>

In the above equations, though four of the words for father-in-law are
used in the double sense, yet to the Voguls and Ostiaks the word *up*
only means 'wife's father,' hence there is the presumption that this was
the original meaning of the others. It is evident that to a household
framed on the Čeremisian system there could never be occasion for one
member to address another as 'son-in-law,' though there might be several
in the family. The term could only be used by a man or woman in a
different dwelling—by the father and mother, in fact, of one of the
wives in the first-mentioned household. The fact that the word for
'son-in-law' covers nearly the same area as that for 'father-in-law,'
and that the first necessarily connotes the existence of a wife and her
parents, immensely increase

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the probability that the words for 'father-in-law' once meant 'wife's
father' and nothing else, for then both words point in the same
direction, towards the old home of the wife. If this is so, we find
terms for 'wife's father' and 'son-in-law' among the Western Finns, the
Lapps, some of the Eastern or rather Central Finns, and the Ugrian
groups in what at first sight seems to be the first period, though
probably, for reasons that will be exhibited at the close of the
chapter, not before the middle of the second period. Now if the method
of obtaining a wife had been solely by hostile capture it seems hardly
likely she would ever see her father again, even if he had not been
killed in the affray, and so her husband's family would have no occasion
to give him a special name; and as he would have no occasion to speak of
his son-in-law, such a term would never arise. The probability is,
therefore, that in prehistoric times wives were largely, though not
exclusively, obtained without fighting. So far as can be learnt from
language, the mother-in-law was subordinate to the father-in-law, for in
Vogul and Ostiak the bride's mother is merely known as the 'wife of the
*up* (father of the bride),' and in N. Ostiak the bridegroom's mother is
distinguished as the 'great woman,' showing that the young husband's
mother was regarded with greater respect than the bride's. So too the
Finnish *anoppi*, 'mother-in-law,' seems to mean 'wife of the *oppi*
(father-in-law),' or something of the sort, and so to indicate a
position in the family that derived all its authority from the man. In
fact, there is nothing in these words for 'father- and mother-in-law,'
or in the other terms used by the East Finnish groups, to lead us to
suppose that the headship of the family rested in other hands than those
of a male.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

Another word with a wide range is that for daughter-in-law,' 'bride':—

<div align="center">

|         |         |             |           |       |           |        |
|---------|---------|-------------|-----------|-------|-----------|--------|
| Fin.    | Lapp.   | Votiak.     | Zịr.      | Ost.  | Vog.      | Magy.  |
| *miniä* | *maṅṅa* | *itsi mon´* | *is mon´* | *men* | *ič man´* | *meny* |

</div>

There is a remarkable difference in the distribution of this word
compared with the terms for father- and son-in-law. It is unknown to the
Mordvins and Čeremis, and retained by the Permian groups, unless indeed
they have borrowed from the Voguls (*ič*, *itsi* = little), as I think
is probable, for reasons to be stated hereafter. The next to be noticed
has several meanings: (1) wife of brother, (2) wife of husband's
brother, (3) sister of wife, (4) daughter-in-law:—

<div align="center">

|             |         |            |          |                    |          |
|-------------|---------|------------|----------|--------------------|----------|
| Fin.        | M.M.    | Erza.      | Votiak.  | Zịrian.            | Ost.     |
| *Käly* 1, 3 | *Kel* 2 | *Kijalo* 2 | *Kali* 4 | *Kel* 1, *Kelja* 2 | *Kili* 3 |

</div>

Here the third meaning is interesting, as it implies that friendly
relations were maintained between the families of the husband and of the
wife, so that a term of address for her sisters had to be formed, which
is identical with that for a 'brother's wife' or the 'wife of a
husband's brother.' Yet this meaning, though found in groups so widely
separated as the West Finns and Ostiaks, cannot reach back to the first
period, for the Mordvins, Ostiaks, and Zịrians have borrowed an
expression for 'wife's sister' from the Turkish, Čuvaš, and Russian
respectively. Though F. *Käly* can also be used in the sense of
'husband's sister,' it is a later usage, for the West Finns and the
Čeremis have a special term for this: F. *nato*, Č. *nuda*. A

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

term for 'uncle' is widely distributed, though it does not extend to the
Ugrians:—

<div align="center">

|        |         |        |        |         |                                             |
|--------|---------|--------|--------|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| Fin.   | Lapp.   | Erza.  | Čer.   | Votiak. | Zịr.                                        |
| *setä* | *čacce* | *čiče* | *čüči* | *čuž*   | *čoz* <span id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_215.md) |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The first three
mean 'father's brother,' the 'last mother's brother,' and the remaining
two refer to either uncle.

Not much light is thrown on the method of obtaining a wife by examining
the various verbs for 'to marry' in the Finno-Ugrian groups, for on the
whole they are ambiguous. The Voguls say 'to take a wife,' the Ostiaks
'to take as wife,' which might mean after paying for her, or after
capture, or after her parents’ consent. In the epic poetry of the
Ostiaks the word for 'to marry a daughter' is *ōmdem*, literally 'to
cause to sit, to seat,' a meaning which Mr. Patkanov believes may have
arisen from the father seating his daughter in the boat or sleigh of his
son-in-law when taking her home after the marriage feast. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_216.md) For 'to marry' the Zịrians use several
verbs derived from the nouns 'woman, wife, bride,' which do not in the
least explain the mode in which the action takes place; 'to marry a
daughter' is 'to give behind a man,' and when a woman marries she is
said 'to go behind or after a man.' When a Votiak parent marries his
daughter he is said 'to give (her) to a man,' and of a woman marrying
she is said 'to go away to a man,' or 'to run away to a man,' or simply
*bizinị*, 'to run away.' Here, at any rate, there is no trace of
capture; a girl flies to her lover's arms and saves him all further
trouble. For a man marrying, the Erza and the Mokša Mordvins use a
derivative of the noun 'wife, woman,' which gives us no information; for
a woman, the Erza use

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

the expression to go out or away to a man or to go to a man.' The
Western Finns also use a colourless derivative of *nai*-, 'woman,' when
speaking of a man marrying, but of a woman they say *mennä miehelle*,
'to go to a man or husband.' Though not much enlightened by this survey,
it seems on the whole to corroborate the view expressed above, that in
the second period wives were obtained by pacific means.

Though of course monogamy is now the rule among the Eastern and Western
Finns, the Čeremis in certain districts of the governments of Perm and
Ufá, when circumstances permit, are polygamous, and take two, more
rarely three, wives. With the wealthy each wife has a separate house;
the position of the wives is identical, and in their rights no
distinction is made between the children of the different wives. For
though those of the eldest wife enjoy greater respect, in the matter of
inheritance they have no privilege. In the eighteenth century polygamy
was the custom among the Čeremis, and it still happens with them that
several sisters live with one husband. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_217.md) In an indirect manner polygamy was also
practised by the Čeremis, Votiaks, Zịrians, Mordvins, and Ostiaks, for
it was not unusual as late as the last century for a father to acquire
for his infant son an adult wife who lived in the same house as himself.
This of course led to concubinage with the father-in-law, for which the
Russians have a special term—*snokhačestvo*. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_218.md) The levirate also existed, for in the
year 1501 Bishop Simon reprehended the newly converted Zịrians for
breaking the ecclesiastical law, and instances that a brother married
his deceased brother's wife. <span id="fr_221"></span>[3](#fn_219.md)

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

The usual mode of obtaining a wife among the Eastern Finns at present is
by purchase, for which the Mordvins have a native word, though some of
the Eastern Finns have borrowed the word *kalịm* from the Turks. This
loan word, however, is insufficient to prove that the custom was first
introduced with the new word. In the thirteenth or fourteenth century,
before the Ostiaks came in contact with the Tatars, marriage by purchase
was a recognised institution, and forcible capture was only resorted to
when the paternal claims were too exorbitant. Yet marriage by hostile
and formal capture still exists, and was still more in vogue a couple of
centuries ago. Among the Čeremis, in the governments of Viátka, Perm,
and Ufá, capture is still practised, and marriage by match-making in the
government of Ufá is extremely rare. In fact all the terms used in
arranging a marriage by contract are said to be of Čuvaš origin. In the
district of Malmiž (Viátka) the bride is carried off from the dance at a
festival, or in the woods while picking berries and mushrooms, or from
the bank of a stream while engaged in washing clothes. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_220.md) But among the Votiaks in the district of
Sarapul capture only takes place to avoid the expense of a wedding; or
if the girl is willing, but the parents refuse their consent; or if the
parents wish to marry their daughter to a rich suitor whom she
detests. <span id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_221.md)

Though hostile capture as a means of obtaining a wife has no doubt
existed from the earliest times, it was only a concurrent method for
attaining the end, and only undertaken under stress of circumstances as
a last resort. Among the Yakuts, whose mode of living and habitat
greatly resembles that of the ancient Finns, marriage is by purchase,
though the husband cannot bring his wife home till he has paid

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

the whole price. If he is a poor man he pays by instalments, and is
allowed to visit his wife at her home till the balance is paid;
sometimes three years may elapse before he is able to do so. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_222.md) Writing in the last century, Georgi
relates of the Barabints Tatars that instead of giving money for his
wife, a man might work for his father-in-law, hunting, fishing, and
ploughing with him for a certain length of time. Of the Kačints Tatars
he relates that if a suitor is too poor he guards his father-in-law's
herds for from three to five years, hunts, and gets wood for him,
etc. <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_223.md) Though it is of rare
occurrence for a Zịrian son-in-law to settle for good in his wife's
home, it is sometimes done in the government of Viátka. In such cases he
severs connection with his own people, abandons his family name, and
assumes that of his wife's father. His children augment the family of
his father-in-law, and bear the name of the latter. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_224.md) Though not expressly stated, it is
probable that some economic motive, such as inability to pay the bride's
price, induces the Zịrian to abandon his home and take up house entirely
with his father-in-law. It is impossible to say whether such a custom
was ever the rule, but it may point to an older state of things when the
bridegroom had to live at his father-in-law's house for a limited time
in a menial capacity, and under special circumstances prolonged the
period for life. The only other sign-post that points in the same
direction is the custom of 'mutual avoidance,' as Dr. Tylor terms
it, <span id="fr_227"></span>[4](#fn_225.md) by which the wife avoids her
husband's relations and he hers. He regards it as having arisen in the
transition period between the maternal and paternal system, when the
husband, after a

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

limited residence in the wife's house, subsequently shifts to his
father's abode. But it was continued into the later period, when a man
takes his wife home at once, and it is in this last stage that we find
it among the Votiaks. Among them a bride must hide from her
father-in-law, and in his presence must conceal her face with a
kerchief. For a whole year she must not say a word to him, or even
mention his name. In his presence, or in that of her elder
brother-in-law and the eldest sister-in-law, she may not appear
bare-headed or bare-footed. The same takes place in the behaviour of the
son-in-law towards his wife's father and mother. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_226.md)

#### PERSONAL NAMES.

Though the prehistoric Finns had no surnames or family names, no doubt
they had something corresponding to clan names, and gave names to their
children. It is not easy to ascertain on what principle they did so, as
the light thrown on the subject by existing or recent practice is far
from clear. But, on the whole, it would seem that the element of chance
was an important factor in deciding the momentous question how a child
was to be called. The first person or natural object fortuitously
encountered by the name-giver was accepted as a supernatural
coincidence, so that the imposition of his or its name on the newborn
child would naturally be accompanied by luck. In the middle of the last
century, according to Le Brun, a Samoyede child was named after the
first man or beast that entered the hut, or after the first they met on
going out, or after the first object they set eyes upon, whether

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

beast, bird, river, or tree. <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_227.md) In
the heroic ballads of the Ostiaks the name of an old prince was, 'The
rotten elderly hero, the chick of a large grebe, a little grebe's chick
that has rotted for three hundred years.' <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_228.md) But a name of this sort could not have
been given at birth. More than one hundred years ago, speaking of the
Čeremis, Georgi states that a name was given to a male child by the
first male friend that arrived, and to a female infant by the first
female friend or neighbour that looked in. Further, that a husband never
called his wife by her name, but simply 'woman,' *vata*, and she called
him *mari*, 'man; Čeremis.' <span id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_229.md) To the
Mordvins of former times the naming of a child was a very important
matter, and one had to be chosen that would bring luck. The father went
out of the house, and the first living or inanimate object that caught
his eye was given as a name. Hence such names as 'Splinter,' 'Leaf,'
'Grass,' etc. The name Smith is common enough, which shows the first
person met was of that trade; Fiddle, for a similar reason, is likewise
common. <span id="fr_232"></span>[4](#fn_230.md) Among the Votiaks the name
of a new-born child was formerly given by the midwife. At present this
has fallen into desuetude in the district of Glazov, unless the babe is
female. In that case the midwife gives it the name of the *voršud* to
which the child's father belongs. Till her marriage she is never called
by this name, but at her husband's house she is always called by it till
death, and her children are called after the *voršud* of their father.
In the government of Kazan a child born in the ploughing season might be
called *Gerei*, from *geri*, 'a plough'; if in harvest-time, a suitable
name is *Urakai*, from *urak*, 'a sickle.' To break

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

the run of ill-luck, when several children have died in succession, the
name *Tuktar*, 'Stay!' is given. <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_231.md)
Another author mentions that Wolf, Bear, Squirrel, Thrush are common
male names, and are given to children born at the season when these are
hunted or caught; but that nowadays women, till married, are called by
their Russian baptismal names, and after that by the name of the village
they come from. <span id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_232.md) In some parts of
the district of Glazov the practice is different. The husband does not
call his wife by her own name—a woman has two names—but by a maternal
one that she inherited from her mother, and she in turn from hers. At
birth the midwife who gives the name to the new-born daughter says, for
instance: 'Be good Čabia, Ebga' (the mother's name). Professor Smirnov
sees here an undoubted survival of the maternal system. The mother
yields her right to the father to transmit his name to his son, but
keeps her right to hand down her name to his daughter. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_233.md) But as the second name is of the nature
of a surname, and the wife in ancient times had practically no rights,
this use has all the appearance of a very modern development, dating
from a time when, with the increase of civilisation, some freedom of
will was allowed to married women. If a Lapp child became ill, or cried
excessively, the reason was that it had been given a wrong name. It was
therefore rebaptized, and from this cause a Lapp might have three or
four additional names. <span id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_234.md)

#### THE HOUSE, DOMESTIC OCCUPATIONS, ETC.

The settlements of the prehistoric Finns must always have been on or
near the bank of a river, or along the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

shore of a lake, as everywhere traces of neolithic man are found in such
obviously suitable localities. The dwelling in which the prehistoric
patriarch lived and ruled his family was far from luxurious. That used
in summer was little more than a screen for the fire that burned in the
centre. It was a more or less conical structure of light poles, cut or
broken from trees, the lower ends of which rested on the ground, while
the upper ends inclined towards the top, leaving an aperture for the
escape of the smoke. This framework was covered with bark, hides of wild
animals or with sods of turf and was entered by a door that very likely
faced towards the south. Such a primitive dwelling still survives as an
outhouse for cooking in the F. *kota* and the portable Lapp tent,
*goatte*. The name, though not the original shape and structure of the
house, is still preserved by the Mordvins, Čeremis, the Permian group,
and the Ostiaks, and therefore takes us back to the first period. For
the rigorous winters of the north such a habitation was manifestly quite
insufficient, and to protect themselves better against cold they lived
in winter in huts that were partly underground. An excavation of
suitable size was dug with some kind of rude implement to a sufficient
depth, was roofed over with poles and then covered with sods of turf.
Such a dwelling is termed *gort* by the Permians, and is found in great
numbers in the government of Vologda in groups of from ten to fifteen;
it is also known to the Ostiaks under the name of *tal χot* or 'winter
hut.' As the F. *huone* 'a house, a room,' seems to have meant 'a warm,
snug place,' <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_235.md) it may originally
have been an underground winter hut.

Though there is no common word for village, it is not

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

likely the ancient Finns lived permanently in isolated dwellings far
from neighbours.

As a word for 'fire' (F. *tuli*) is common to all the Ugrians, the East
and West Finns, it may almost be inferred that it was neither sacred nor
an object of worship, though its warmth must have been appreciated. For
'door' there are two sets of words: F. *ovi*, Vog. *ävi*, *eu*, Ost.
*ou*, and F. *uksi*, Lap. *uks*, *ufsa*, Z. *ödz´ös*, *ös*, *öbös*, V.
*ös*. The only common words for an enclosure of any sort outside the
house seems to be F. *piha* 'courtyard,' Č. *peče* 'a fence.' <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_236.md) For outhouses and storehouses, though
there are often native words, yet each term is confined to a single
group. A place fortified by a rampart and ditch to serve as a refuge
from attack was unknown in remote prehistoric times, though in the
protohistoric period forts were much used by the Ugrians and by both
branches of the Finns. The furniture of the hut was almost *nil*;
tables, chairs, stools, etc., were unknown, but they had prepared skins
of animals to spread on the ground for sleeping and sitting upon, and
were therefore not so badly off after all.

Besides looking after the children the women had a variety of
occupations. With half-closed eyes smarting from the smoke that filled
the hut, they plied their coarse bone needles (F. *äimä*, L. *aibme*, Č.
*im*, Z. *jem*) threaded with sinew, (F. *suoni*, L. *suodna*, M. *san*,
V. and Z. *sön*, Vog. *tan*) while making boots (F. *kenkä*, L. *gam*,
M. *kämä*, *kem*, Z. *köm*) or other articles of dress. Or taking up a
bundle of fibre made from some kind of nettle by means of a spindle and
whorl, (F. *keträ*, M. *kištir*, Č. *šidir*, V. *čers*, Z. *čörs*) they
span (F. *punoa*, L. *padnam*, M. *ponan*) it into thread (F. *syy*. V.
and Z. *si*) and wound

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

it into a ball (F. *kerä*, M. *kirnä*). This could be used in two ways;
for 'sewing with wide stitches,' (F. *kursia*, E. M. *kurǰe*) <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_237.md) or for weaving (F. *kutoa*, L. *goδδet*,
M. *kodams*, Č. *kuo*, V. *kunị*, Z. *kịnị*). The loom of course was a
very rude and simple apparatus, but they attached the threads of the
warp (F. *loimi*; M. *limä*) to one end of it, worked in the woof (F.
*kude*, L. *goδa*, V. *kuon*, Z. *kịan*; M. *añks* = *ats* in Esth.
*ats-pōl* 'a shuttle' <span id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_238).md) and thus
manufactured woven stuff (F. *kutama*, M. *kotf*, V. *kuon*, Z. *kịan*).
Perhaps the shuttle was not used as there is no common term for it,
though several native ones are to be found. Though sewing and making
boots must have been practised in the first period, the existing words
all belong to the first half of the second period, as well as the terms
for spinning and weaving.

The cookery was decidedly plain. Fish and flesh were generally eaten
raw, but fat meat must have formed the basis of the 'broth' (F'.
*liemi*, L. *liebma*, M. M. *läm*, E. M. *lem* 'grease,' Vog. *lom*)
they had learnt to prepare, and this must have been boiled in some kind
of pot that would resist fire or into which hot stones could be dropped.
For holding liquids there were wooden bowls (F. *malja*, M.
*mal´anka*), <span id="fr_241"></span>[3](#fn_239.md) and for solids they
had plaited baskets (F. *vakka*, M. *vakan* (?)). Like all inhabitants
of the north the prehistoric Finns of the first period, when they could
get it, ate fat (F. *vol*, M. *vai*, Č. *ü*, V. *vöi*, Z. *vịi*, O.
*voi*, Vog. *voi*); in later times the word was also used for 'butter.'
There is no common word for 'milk,' showing there were no domestic
milking animals in the first period. But before the end of the second
period the Mordvins and

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> West Finns had
learnt how 'to milk' (F. *lypsää*, Z. *lịstịnị* <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_240) = M. *lofsa*, 'milk'.md), and to churn (F.
*pyöhtää*, M. *pištoms*) <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_241.md) the milk
into butter.

The oldest prehistoric weapons were the bow and arrow, the words for
which with little change are found in the Ugrian, East and West Finnish
languages. Whether the bow was simple or compound we do not know. At any
rate the Ostiaks, who are far from being a progressive or inventive
people, used in the thirteenth or fourteenth century and still use a bow
composed of two kinds of wood fastened together with fish glue and then
bound round with birch bark. The lower half was of very hard pine, the
upper part of birch. Though the string is now made of hemp, in ancient
times it was doubtless of sinew. <span id="fr_244"></span>[3](#fn_242.md)
Besides the pointed arrow they also used the blunt-headed kind, F.
*vasama*, though there is no common word for it. F. *veitsi* 'a knife,'
which corresponds with M. *iñks* 'a scraper,' <span
id="fr_245"></span>[4](#fn_243.md) and F. *ora*, M. *ura*, *uro* 'an awl'
or instrument for boring holes may originally have been flint or bone
instruments.

In winter the hunting expeditions were made on long wooden snow-skates
(F. *suksi*, M. *soks*, Ost. *toχ*, Vog. *tout*). In summer they
travelled in 'boats' (F, *veneh*, L. *vanās*, M. *venš*) which they
'rowed' (F. *soutaa*, Vog. *tovantam*) and steered with a 'paddle or
steering oar,' (F. *mela*, L. *mœlle*, M. *milä*). But this class of
boat and paddle belongs to the later half of the second period. The
sleigh appears to have come into use at a much later time as there is

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

nothing in common between the East and West Finns in this respect,
though F. *ohja*, M. *vožja*, 'a rein' if genuine and not loan
words, <span id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_244.md) indicate that driving was
known by the close of the second period. A primitive mode of catching
fish would be to dam up a small stream with a 'dam or weir' (F. *pato*,
N. Ost. *pot*), and capture them as they passed through a small opening.
Nets were probably unknown in the first period, but in the first half of
the second they invented 'wicker traps' (F. *merta*, M. *mereta*, Č.
*murδa*, V. *murdo*, Z. *morda*) for catching fish, which undoubtedly
formed a most important article of food.

About the middle of the second period agriculture began to be practised,
for though there are no common terms to express ploughing and sowing,
those employed are taken from the native stock of words. The earliest
grain may have been the humble variety of wheat known as 'spelt' (M.
*viš*, Č. *višt*&lt;\* *višn*, V. *vaz´*), forms that correspond with F.
*vehnä*, 'wheat,' though the Häme have another word for the same grain,
*nisu*. Besides these the East and West Finns have several apparently
native words for cereals, which are confined to one, or at most two
groups: M. *toiz´uro*, 'wheat,' is evidently a compound of *s´uro*,
'corn'; M. *šuz*, O. *šoš*, 'barley'; Vtk. *jidi*, Zịr. *id*, 'barley,'
perhaps connected with F. *ide*, a growing shoot'; F. *otra*, *ohra*,
'barley'; M. *pineme*, 'oats,' and Vtk. *s´ezi*, 'oats.' As Mr. Paasonen
equates F. *suurima*, 'groats,' with M. *s´uro*, *s´ora*, 'corn, grain,'
(Zịr. *sör*, 'oats'); F. *sii-kanen*, 'the beard on grain, chaff,' with
M. *s´iva*, Č. *s´u*, 'chaff,' and Z. *s´u*, 'corn, rye'; F. *kyrsä*, 'a
loaf, bread,' with M. *kša*, *kši*, 'bread,' <span
id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_245.md) there can be little doubt that one or
two cereals were known and used as food about the middle of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the second period. The cultivation of the soil must have been of a very
primitive description and no doubt was left to the women and 'slaves'
(F. *orja*, M. M. *ur’ä*), who scratched the surface of a plot of ground
near the dwelling with a pointed stick, threw in a few handfuls of
grain, covered it over with earth and waited till it grew up. When ripe
the grain was separated from the 'straw' (F. *olki*; M. *olgo*) and
'ground' (F. *jauhoa*, M. *jažams*) between a couple of stones.

In the first period the year was only divided into 'winter' (F. *talvi*,
L. *dalvve*, M. *t´ala*, Č. *tele*, V. *tol*, Z. *töl*, Vog. and Ost.
*tal*) and 'summer' (F. *kesä*, *suvi*, L. *gœsse*, M. *kiza*, Z.
*gožịm*, Vog. *tuv*). It was only in the second period when the state of
the crops drew their attention to it that a word for 'autumn' (F.
*syksy*, L. *čakča*, M. *soks*) was found to be necessary. Some of the
natural measures of length seem to have been in use at a very early
period. The 'fathom' has a very wide range (F. *syli*, L. *sal*, M.
*sel*, V. and Z. *sịl*, Vog. *tal*, Ost. *lal*); the 'ell' (F.
*kyynärä*, M. *kener*, Č. *kun´er*, V. *gịr* (?)) and the 'span' (F.
*vaaksa*, L. *vuopse*, M. *vaksa*, Z. *ves´t*) have a less range. In the
first period they could only count up to seven; by the time they needed
a term to express ten, they were already divided into four groups—a West
Finnish-Mordvin, a Lapp-Čeremis-Vogul, a Votiak-Zịrian, and an Ostiak
group. The last two groups borrowed their terms from a Persian and
Turkish source respectively. It was only at a later time that much was
done in the way of 'counting' (F. *lukea*, L. *lokkat*, M. *luvan*),
'paying' (F. *maksaa*, L. *makset*, M. *maksan* (I give), and 'selling'
(F, *myydä*, L. *mieggaδ*, M. *mijan*, Vog. *mịgam*).

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

#### THE METALS.

One of the great turning-points in the history of a people is the
introduction of the use of metal and the gradual disuse of stone
implements. The first metal that became known to the Finns may have been
copper, though no distinction was made between this and bronze.

<span id="img_20400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/20400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20400.jpg.md)</span>  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_246.md)

At the present time the Ostiaks use *vāχ*, *voχ* in the general sense of
'metal, money,' and in some places 'iron.' When they wish to be explicit
they prefix *patar* or *vosta*, 'green, yellow,' when they mean
'copper'; *navi*, 'white,' when they mean 'silver'; and *et*, which
Castrén translated by 'simple,' when speaking of 'iron.' Among the
Voguls *voχ* has also the meaning of 'money, metal,' though in some
places it means 'copper.' Taking everything into consideration it seems
best to suppose that the original meaning of *voχ*, *vāχ* was 'bronze,'
with its necessary connotation of 'metal.' Another word for 'copper'
alone is confined to Vogul, Čeremis and the Permian group.

<div align="center">

|            |         |         |         |
|------------|---------|---------|---------|
| Čer.       | Vtk.    | Zịr.    | Vog.    |
| *vörgën´e* | *irgon* | *ịrgön* | *ärgin* |

</div>

As this set of words has only one meaning and is never used in the sense
of metal it is probably of later origin than the *vaski*-group.

The next metal to be noticed is 'silver,' for which the West Finns have
a special name, *hopea*&lt;*šopeda*, not found, however, in the Eastern
groups or among the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ugrians. But the
Permian and Ugrian groups have a very interesting and puzzling series of
words for this metal which cannot well be separated from the terms for
'tin, lead.' Some of them have the appearance of being compounds, the
last part of which is believed by Mr. Wichman to be of the same origin
as F. *vaski*, Vog. Ost. *voχ*. <span id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_247.md)

<span id="img_20500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/20500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20500.jpg.md)</span>

Dr. Munkácsi maintains that the Osetan is the original source from which
the Permian group and the Magyars obtained their word for 'silver,' but
this is denied by Schrader, Hübschmann, and Wichman, who consider, on
the contrary, that the Osetan form is borrowed from an East Finnish
source. The latter, starting from the Vtk. *azves´*, analyses it into
*az*, 'white,' and *ves´*, 'metal,' the equivalent of F. *vaski*. But
the grounds on which he makes *az* to mean 'white' seem to me very
precarious. Dr. Munkácsi took down a Votiak magic song in which the word
*aziz* occurred as an epithet of a 'hill' and a 'prince.' The word was
unintelligible to him, but his Votiak teacher explained it by what looks
very much like a piece of folk-etymology. As *iz* means a 'stone,' he
explained that *iz* was a 'stone' and *az* 'a very heavy white stone.'
The explanation not being very intelligible, Mr. Wichman supposes that
*az* must mean white,' and *aziz* 'white stone.' <span
id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_248.md) But it seems to me that the teacher did
not really understand the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

word and merely hazarded a guess. As a good many Arabic and Persian
words have crept into Votiak through a Tatar source, I rather suspect
this is the Arabic-Persian-Turkish *’aziz*, 'precious, respected,
powerful,' a fitting epithet for a 'prince' and one that under certain
circumstances might be applied to a 'hill.'

Referring back to the list above, we notice: (1) that the word for
'silver,' common to the Permian group, to Magyar and Osetan, is not
found in Vogul or Ostiak; (2) that the Ostiaks use a compound word
meaning 'white metal' instead, and the Voguls a word that corresponds
with the Magyar for 'lead'; (3) that in the Permian group, lead and tin
are either distinguished as black and white *uzveś* or no distinction is
made at all; (4) that the Vogul for 'lead' seems to be the same as the
Permian, Magyar and Osetan for 'silver,' as Vog. *t* is often the
equivalent of a common Finnish *s*, *z*; (5) that the Permian, Magyar,
and Osetan for 'silver' seem to be compound words; (6) and, that as the
words for 'tin' in Vogul-Ostiak mean 'white lead,' 'male lead,' much as
in the Permian groups, we may neglect the word for 'tin,' and confine
our attention to 'silver' and 'lead.'

From the fourth observation we are led to suppose that the older meaning
of Vog. *atveš* was 'silver,' not 'lead,' though it is by no means
certain. It might also be imagined that *atveš* was borrowed from the
Vtk. *azveś*, *z* being replaced by *t*, a phonetic change that
certainly might take place. But this does not account for the form
*atkues*, where *kues* seems to be the Ost. Sam. *kues* 'iron, metal,' a
word that in other Samoyede dialects appears as *jēse’*, *vese*, *bese*,
*basa*, *baza*. In the short excursus at the end of this section it will
be seen that all these forms, including *kues*,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

go back to an original form beginning with *v* or *j*: The Osetan and
Permian forms seem to show that the original sibilant was an *s* not an
*š* sound, as in Magy. *ezüst*, Vog. *atveš*. If this is so, still the
probability that Vog. *atveš*&lt;*atves* is a loan from the Votiak is
considerably lessened by the consideration that there is also a Sam.
*vese*.

Corresponding to and probably of the same origin as the Samoyede words
for 'iron, metal,' are Magyar vas 'iron,' Vog. Ost. *voχ* 'copper,
metal' and F. *vaski* 'copper.' The word in Northern Asia and Siberia
that corresponds best with the Samoyede forms is undoubtedly the Turk.
*jes*, Mong. *dzes*, Burj. *zet* (&lt;*jes*, *jet*) 'bronze, copper,
metal.' As the Turks have a word for 'copper' only, the oldest meaning
may have been 'bronze'; and as in one Samoyede dialect we find that
initial *j*, *v*, are equipollent, it seems possible to suppose that
*jēse’* was borrowed directly from a T. *jes* and dialectically became
*vese*, *vasa*.

If this is correct the West Finnish, Vogul, and Ostiak for 'copper,
metal,' the Magyar for 'iron' and the second part of the words for
'silver' in Permian are all referrible ultimately to a common form
*jes*, which is also found in Turkish and Mongolian. Whether the last
two peoples obtained it from a still more remote source must be left
undecided. I imagine that the diffusion of the word took place in this
way. From the Altai region, where copper is abundant and tin is also
found, *jes*, with the meaning 'bronze,' gradually spread through the
medium of Samoyede tribes to the Ugrians living chiefly on the east
side, but also in considerable numbers on the west side of the Urals,
reaching them not later than the sixth century B.C. and possibly a good
deal earlier. From the Ugrians, under the form *vas*, it was passed on
to the West Finns, Mordvins

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and Lapps, who added the suffix-*ke*, *k´ä*, perhaps merely a diminutive
that did not essentially affect the meaning. This hypothesis receives
support from the facts recorded in chapter ii., for the earliest bronze
socketed celts, found in the north of Finland, in Lapland, at Anánino,
as well as in other parts of the government of Viátka, are all of
transuralian form, the aperture of the socket being always angular,
never circular in section. The battle-axes from the coast of the White
Sea and Anánino are also of Siberian type. While the crania from
Fatiánovo, associated with minute pieces of copper and iron, seem to be
Ugrian.

As the Magyar for iron is *vas*, and the Vogul-Ostiak for 'copper,
metal,' is *voχ*, *vuaχ*, it is clear that the second part of their
words for 'silver,' 'lead' (-*üst*, -*veš*) are borrowed. And if Vog.
-*veš*, -*kues* are borrowed, as suggested above, from Samoyede
dialects, they do not stand alone. Ahlqvist has noted eighteen Vogul or
Ostiak words borrowed from the Samoyedes and among them *atkues*. <span
id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_249.md) Perhaps, too, the Ost. *patar*, which
has no meaning by itself, in *patar-voχ* copper is the Ost. Sam. *padal*
'green,' probably 'yellowish green' as it is a derivative of *pad* 'the
gall.' The Mordvin word for copper also means 'green.' It still remains
to explain the suffix -*te*, -*t* found in the Magyar and Osetan words
for silver. In Samoyede, the breathing marked by ’ as in *jēse’* can
sometimes be traced back to lost dental as in the Jur. *ji’*. Tav.
*bē’*, Jen. *bi’*, 'water' compared with Knd. *vit*. O. *üt* 'water.'
The older forms of *jēse’*, *vese* may therefore have been \**jeset*,
\**veset*, or \**jesete*, \**vesete*, and from this would arise the
Magyar -*üst* &lt; *\*veste*, which occurs as a loan from the Magyar in
the Osetan -*vist*, -*veste*.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

The origin of the prefixes *ez*-, *az*-, *at*-, in the words for
'silver' requires explanation, if we reject that of Mr. Wichman, and I
offer the following suggestion instead.

Castrén explained the Ost. *et-voχ* 'iron' as 'simple metal.' Owing to
its form and meaning it is difficult to separate this from the Ost.
*int-vuaχ* 'steel,' <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_250.md) the first part
of which is evidently connected with Vog. *jemtan*, Vtk. *andan*, Os.
*andan* 'steel,' all from a N. Pers. *hundwānī*, *hindawānī*, *hindī*,
'Indian steel,' see [p. 234](ms110.htm#page_234.md). As initial *h* is
regularly dropt in Osetan, and the Permian group has no *h*, it is
uncertain whether Vtk. *andan* is a direct loan from Osetan or *vice
versâ*, or whether both borrowed from a common source. Here the *int*-
is clearly adapted from one of the N. Pers. forms, and *int-vuaχ* is a
folk-etymology containing as an ingredient *vuaχ* 'metal,' the *int*
being unintelligible. This being the case it is possible to suppose that
dialectically the *n* may have dropt out and the result was *etvoχ*
'iron' 'steel (?)' The first member of this compound is perhaps the same
as the *at*- in Vog. *atveš*, *atkues* 'lead.' If the last part of this
is a loan from the Samoyede, and *at*- is not of Samoyede origin we must
suppose that at one time the Voguls used *ves*, \**ves*, \**veste*
concurrently with *voχ* as an independent word, and the Magy. *üst*
'silver' seems to confirm this, though the old meaning is changed. The
loans *voχ* &lt; \**vas*, *veš* &lt; \**veste* must also have been made
at different epochs. From some such form as \**etveste* the Magyars
formed *ezveste*, in which form it was taken by the Osets, and
subsequently *ezüšt*. If there is anything in this suggestion, the
Magyar word for 'silver' once meant 'Indian metal,' and the Permian
equivalents of F. *vaski* 

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

viz. -*ves´*, *ịs´* were introduced quite independent of the Finnish and
at a much later date, but also through an Ugrian channel.

To account for the Permian words for 'lead,' 'tin,' there is the N.
Pers. *arzị̄z*, 'lead, tin,' from which they might be borrowed with the
loss of *r*, as in Vtk. *ǰuges*, 'an eagle,' from Os. *cärgäs* (*c* =
*ts*), N. Pers. *kargas*. In this case the inserted *v* in *uzves´*
would have followed the analogy of *azves´*, while the original is
better preserved in the Zịr. *ozịs´*. As the N. Pers. *arzị̄z* is itself
a loan word from the Ar. *raṣaṣ*, 'lead, tin,' the Permian words, if
this view is correct, cannot be older than the seventh century A.D.
There is no silver or tin in the Ural Mountains, so that in any case the
East Finns and Ugrians can only have seen these metals as imported
articles. Galena, on the contrary, is found in a good many places in the
above region, though it does not appear to have been utilised in
prehistoric times, all the so-called Čudish mines being of copper or
gold.

The next metal that followed in the wake of bronze and copper in
North-eastern Russia was probably iron, how long after we cannot say,
though the interval may not have been very great, for a small piece,
evidently very precious and embedded in a disk of copper, was discovered
at Fatiánovo. As all the names for it are borrowed, they will be
mentioned in a later section. Gold may have followed next, as the loan
words for it in East Finnish and Ugrian were borrowed about the same
time as those for 'iron' and from the same source. On *à priori* grounds
we should expect gold to be known much earlier than silver, the ore of
which is difficult to reduce, while the other metal is often found in
nuggets. But at present the place at which the earliest finds of gold
objects have been made is

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gliadénova, though
only to the number of three out of about 23,000, while a few silver
articles were obtained not only there, but also at Anánino. The
introduction of terms for 'metal,' 'bronze,' and 'copper' may therefore
be set in the latter part of the second period; for 'iron,' 'gold,'
'silver,' and 'lead' in the third period for the East Finns, but not
till the fifth period for the West Finns, with the exception perhaps of
silver.

Though there are forms in Mordvin and Ugrian corresponding to F.
*valaa*, 'to cast (metal), to pour out (any fluid),' there are no common
words for 'mine,' 'crucible, 'bellows,' 'moulds,' and other apparatus
necessary for an artificer in bronze, when casting alone was employed.
This is to be explained by the very simple appliances used, which
scarcely required a technical expression, and by working as a rule on a
small scale. For instance Ostiak women still cast their own tin
ornaments in moulds of pine bark made by themselves, <span
id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_251.md) and a recent English visitor of the
Island of Kolguev describes how he saw a Samoyede make a ring. Round a
stick he cut a groove, fitted a piece of paper over it, and then ran in
some white-looking metal which he had heated in the fire in a hollow
piece of wood. The wood of the stick was cut away, the ring removed, and
finished with a knife and sand. He worked away till he had a ring as
well and accurately shaped as any plain gold signet ring. Though this
mould was of wood, the Samoyedes use bullet moulds of stone set in a
pair of wooden scissors. <span id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_252.md) As the
anvil, the sledgehammer, the forge-fire, and the smith himself only
became a necessity when iron was abundant, it is not surprising

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

that though for some of these expressions there are native words, none
of them are common to two groups unless they are loan words.

\*

It might be supposed that *kues* is either a different word or that it
retains an original *k* that the other dialects have lost. This,
however, is not the case. There are at least a dozen words in which
Jurak *j*, *v*, Jenisei, Tavgị, and Kamasin *b* are represented in Sam.
Ostiak by *k*. And first it must be observed that the Tavgị and Jenisei
dialects have no *v*, *p*, so that the equivalent of an initial *v*,
*p*, in Jurak is perforce *b*, *f*, in these two dialects. In Sam.
Ostiak no word can begin with a soft consonant or with *j*. In Kamasin
*v* is not an initial sound, and sonant stop consonants in that position
are rare. The instances in which Ost. *k* correspond with Jur. *j*, *v*,
Jen. Tav. Kam. *b* are to be explained by *b* being exchanged for *g*
which hardened initially into *k*. There are a good many words in which
Jur, has initial *h* and all the others *k*, showing that the latter was
the original sound. There are also a good many in which Jur. Jen. Tav.
begin with *j*, but Ost. with *t´*, *č*, and Kam. with *t´*; here the
original initial was doubtless *j*.

<span id="img_21200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/21200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21200.jpg.md)</span>

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

No. 1 is an interesting example, the original being the White Russian
*vuda*, Gr. Rus. *vuda*, 'fish-hook.' Fish-hooks were probably early
import articles of the Great-Novgorodian merchants trading in Siberia,
and were found more serviceable than the old native ones of bone.

No. 3 may be compared with M. *getesōn*, Burj. *geteheñ*, 'bowel, guts,'
but the relations between Mongol and Samoyede have not yet been worked
out, so that it proves nothing. No. 6 is not quite regular; the Kam.
*t´aga* and Jen. *jaha* come from *jaga*, not from *vaga* as we should
expect; all the forms may be compared with N.O. *jopan*, F. *joki*. In
No. 9 *varña* is the same as N.O. *vorga*, *vorña*, 'a crow'; the Vog.
*kuereχ*, judging from the vowels, is borrowed from the Sam. Ost.
*kuere*, and this may be compared with Mng. *kerije*, 'a raven,' though
the resemblance is possibly accidental. From the above it is quite
evident that the initial *k* in *kues* is not original, and that most
likely it was *v*, as initial *j* in a number of instances becomes in
Kam. *t´*, in Sam. Ost. *t´*, *č*, and even occasionally *k*. There is
just one exception in the *j* and the *v* series.

<div align="center">

|       |            |       |       |      |           |
|-------|------------|-------|-------|------|-----------|
| Water | *jī’, vit* | *bī’* | *bē’* | *bu* | *üt, öt.* |
| Fat   | *jur*      | *jō*  | *jir* | * *  | *ür, ōr.* |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Comparing the
first set with Mng. *usun*, 'water' &lt; \**utun* (?), it is likely that
the original initial was *u*, *ü*, which has been retained by Sam.
Ostiak intact; the same may be true of the next line.

#### DOMESTIC ANIMALS.

The animal first domesticated or enslaved, and that in the first period,
was the dog. There is a term for him common to all the East and West
Finns as well as to all the Ugrians. Whether he was used for drawing
burdens cannot be stated with certainty as there is no common expression
for 'sledges' but every hunter must have been followed by a
woolly-haired, sharp-nosed, savage, and ill-fed

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

dog. If he was used for draught the burden was probably attached to two
light poles, the upper ends of which were fastened to a sort of collar,
while the lower ends trailed along the snow.

In the archæological chapter we learnt that before the close of the
neolithic age, that is to say, towards the end of the second period, the
principal domestic animals, the horse, ox, sheep, and pig were known to
the settlers on the Central Volga, between Kazán and the mouth of the
Kama, and that at the Station of Burtneek in the far west, the ox,
sheep, and, perhaps, the horse, were also known. As by hypothesis the
East and West Finns were in possession of the upper Volga valley at a
still earlier period, it follows they must have acquired the knowledge
of domestic animals from some other more civilised people, for though
there were wild cattle and wild swine in the region they inhabited,
there were no wild sheep or wild horses. If the Finns had brought the
domestic animals with them from Asia into Europe, they must have entered
the country by a much more southerly route than is generally supposed.
The country east of the Urals, in the governments of Perm and Tobolsk,
was densely forested, was studded with impassable morasses, and was
quite unsuited for sheep, horses, and horned cattle. Even at the present
day the Ostiaks hardly keep any, and in their epic poetry, though much
is related of lifting herds of reindeer as well as of feasting, the
sheep is never once mentioned, and the horse appears rather as a
legendary animal. In fact, till the Finns became civilised and provident
enough to cut and stack a supply of hay for the long winters they could
have kept neither sheep, cattle, nor horses in such a region. The only
possibility of keeping

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

these animals in high latitudes is when certain conditions are
fulfilled. It is necessary that large tracts of pasture should be free
from snow all the year round. In a flat, forested region like the
valleys of the Central Ob and the Irtish the snow lies far too deep for
horses and cattle to reach the herbage below. It is only in mountainous
tracts like the Altai, where hillside terraces and shallow valleys are
exposed to violent blasts of wind, that sweep away the snow, that
animals can be maintained in the winter months without the necessity of
providing them with artificial fodder. The northern limit of the sheep
under natural conditions starts from near the north corner of the
Caspian and passes through the intersections of Lat. 50° N. Long. 60° E.
and Lat. 57° N. Long. 90° E. <span id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_253.md), or
roughly speaking from the north-east corner of the Caspian to Yeniseisk.

Next to the dog the name for 'sheep' has the widest range among the
Finno-Ugrians, and its natural habitat shows the Finns could not have
known it before they entered Europe.

<span id="img_21500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/21500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21500.jpg.md)</span>

The Ostiaks and Voguls used al as a generic term, and to distinguish the
sexes prefix 'male,' 'female,' while a lamb is a 'sheep's young one.' As
a rule such a nomenclature is not that of a pastoral people, who
generally have a special term for each sex and each age, though

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

it is true the sheep-breeding Turks use a compound of *koi* 'sheep' to
denote a 'ewe.' The Čeremis seem to have borrowed all their words from a
Čuvaš and Turkish source, and in Zịrian, with the one exception of *iž*,
all the words have a Čuvaš, Iranian and Russian origin. The Mordvins
have perhaps borrowed a word for 'lamb' from an Iranian people, and
certainly for 'ram' from a Turkish and a Russian source. The West Finns
borrowed a term for 'ram' in the fourth or Lithuanian period, but they
have two native words for 'lamb,' one of which merely means a
'yearling,' and the other (*karitsa*) is evidently formed from *kari*, a
call-word used for attracting lambs, so neither of these terms is
necessarily of any great age. It is clear then that sheep-breeding at
first was on a very small scale, and the Finns could in no sense be
called a pastoral people. It is also to be noted that the West Finns
borrowed a special term for wool' at the same time that they adopted a
new term for 'ram.'

The terms for 'horse' have a much narrower range:—

<span id="img_21600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/21600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21600.jpg.md)</span>

Professor Setälä connects the Permian *už* with F. *uveh*, while Dr.
Munkácsi equates the former with Os. *urs*, *vurz*, 'a stallion.' <span
id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_254.md) The West Finns have another native word
for 'stallion,' *orih*, as well as for 'mare' (*tamma*), and

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'colt' (*varsa*),
but they are not found in the Eastern branches. The origin of F.
*hevonen*, 'a horse,' is not quite certain, though it is probably a loan
word. As L. *alddo* could hardly have been borrowed from the Mordvins, I
suspect it was really taken from the West Finns, who subsequently lost
the word, and that the older meaning of F. *lehmä* was 'horse,' not
'cow.' The Mordvins have also a native word for a 'foal,' *vaše*,
*vašenä*. The Čeremis *βül´o* 'mare,' Vtk, *val*, Zịr. *völ* 'horse,' if
not connected with M. *äldä*, L. *alddo*, might be compared with Tat.
*ulak*, *ulā*, Čuv. *vịlịχ*, 'a draught animal, a post horse,' and if
*βül´o* is really a loan word, as I suppose, then the Čeremis have no
native word for a horse, for *imne* 'a horse,' *jaβaga* 'a foal,' are of
Tatar origin and the Permian group have only one term, all the others
being Turkish or Russian loan words. The Ugrian groups have a special
word for 'horse' which never penetrated westwards:—

<div align="center">

|                                   |                  |       |
|-----------------------------------|------------------|-------|
| Ost.                              | Vog.             | Magy. |
| *ḷovi*, *ḷoχ*, *ḷau* (*ḷ* = *tl*) | *lu*, *lo*, *lį* | *ló*  |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perhaps these are
remotely connected with Mong. *tagi*, 'a wild horse,' otherwise they
stand alone. Dr. Munkácsi believes that the rich equine terminology of
the Voguls and Ostiaks, their preference for horse-sacrifices and
horseflesh shows that once they lived further south in the wilderness
between the Urals, the Caspian and the Sea of Aral. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_255.md) The northern limit of the extinct horse
in Europe, is said to be a line drawn from the mouth of the Elbe, to
where Lat. 50° N. cuts the Ural River. Where it has not been introduced,
the northern limit of the horse is from near

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the point where Lat. 44° N. cuts the Caspian Sea to the source of the
Yenisei and then eastwards. <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_256.md) If
this is correct it shows that, till they arrived in Europe, the Finns
could never have seen a horse.

Though it is probable that horned cattle became known, at any rate to
some of the Finnish peoples, as early as the horse, the terms for 'ox,
cow' have only a limited extension.

<span id="img_21800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/21800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21800.jpg.md)</span>

Dr. Munkácsi compares Vog. Ost. *mis* with Zend *maēši* N.P. *meš*, 'a
ewe,' but as he also compares Zịr. *mež*, 'a sheep' with the same
Iranian forms, and the Zịrian term for 'cow' is *mös*, these two Zịrian
words cannot have a common origin, unless Z. *mös* is a direct loan from
the Ugrian *mis*. <span id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_257.md) Though Z. *mež*
might easily be referred to a N.P. *meš*, with the same meaning, the
difficulty of comparing Ost. Vog. *mis* 'a cow' with N.P. *meš* is
considerable, apart from the difference of meaning, and I suppose it has
an independent origin, though borrowing may have taken place from Ugrian
to Permian, or *vice versâ*. He also compares the Permian *oš*, *öš*,
Vog. *ūska*, *us´ka* 'ox,' with a Kabardin *vịš*, 'young bull' and Znd.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

*ukhšan*, Gth. *aúhsa*, 'ox, bull,' adding that these indo-European
words agree with the common Turk. *öküz*, *ögüs* 'ox, bull.' <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_258.md) As Ost. *ūges* is certainly a loan from
the Turk. *ögüs*, it is probable that Vog. *ūska*, *us´ka* has the same
origin, either by metathesis or by contraction (*ūs* &lt; *ögüs*) with a
diminutive suffix—*ka*. In that case the Permian forms seems to be
derived from the Ugrian and not *vice-versâ*, as the original final *s*
is preserved in the latter, while the Permians have first borrowed a
softened form *us´ka* and further changed it into *oš*, *öš*, *öška*.
Another word for 'cow' is perhaps also of Turkish origin:—

<div align="center">

|     |          |         |                  |         |        |              |
|-----|----------|---------|------------------|---------|--------|--------------|
|     | E. Mord. | Čer.    | Vtk.             | S. Ost. | Vog.   | Turk.        |
| Cow | *skal*   | *uškal* | *sikal*, *iskal* | *sāgar* | *saịr* | &lt; *sịgịr* |

</div>

The Ugrian words are certainly Turkish; the East Finnish forms are less
certain, but if borrowed, the group that turned the final *r* into *l*,
perhaps the Erza, must have handed on the word to the other groups.
Tomaschek compares with hesitation F. *vasa*, M. *vaza* 'calf' with Skr.
*vatsa*, Ost. *väss* 'calf,' but as the medial consonant *s*, *z* is
single, the equation must be considered doubtful. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_259.md) Professor Thomsen is inclined to believe
that F. *hehko*, *hehvo*, Vote *ōhva* 'a heifer' may be derived from the
Lith. *ašva* (gen. -*ōs*) 'horse,' an older form of which was *ešva*,
though an intermediate form \**ehvo*, *ehva*. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[3](#fn_260.md) The West Finns have a native word for
'bull' *sonni*, which in Esthonian carries the meaning of 'stallion
colt,' but it does not extend further.

The Permians have also several isolated words: Vtk. *valị*, 'a cow in
calf' which may have the same origin as Vtk.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

*val* 'a horse'; Zịr. *poroz* 'a bull,' *bịtš* 'a small ox,' probably
from the Russian, and *zị̄l´um*, 'an ox, a boar.'

The words for 'reindeer' are not widely diffused and in some instances
borrowing from a neighbour is tolerably certain.

<span id="img_22000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/22000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22000.jpg.md)</span>

The West Finns have several words for reindeer; *poro* 'a tame
reindeer,' *petra*, *peura* 'a wild reindeer, a stag,' which last with
great reservation and a note of interrogation is derived by Professor
Thomsen from Lith. *brëdis* 'elk'; <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_261.md)
the equation is therefore doubtful. Fin. *hirvas* 'male reindeer, stag,'
and Fin. *hirvi* 'elk' are referred by him with a note of interrogation
to a hypothetical Lith. \**širvis*, *širvas*, based on O. Pr. *sirvis*
(or *sịrnis*) 'a roe.' He regards Lap, *sarva* 'stag, elk,' as
undoubtedly a loan from Fin. *hirvi* and Lap. *sarves* 'a reindeer bull'
as a loan from Fin. *hirvas*. <span id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_262.md) The
Fin. *vaadin* gen. *vaatimen*, 'a three or four-year-old reindeer calf,'
is connected with Lap. *vaǰ*. gen. *vačem* 'a reindeer cow' and with
Lap. *vāǰa*, gen. *vačama* 'a two-year-old reindeer calf.' Whether Vtk.
*pužei* 'a reindeer' is a loan word or not I am not sure,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

but Zịr. *peš* 'a reindeer calf,' and Zịr. *kịr* 'a reindeer' are almost
certainly borrowed from a Ugrian source. The Lap, *alddo*, 'a reindeer
cow' has already been mentioned; the Mordvin and Čeremis forms seem to
stand alone. At the present time Finland cannot be termed a reindeer
country, though in winter wild ones wander as far south as the central
districts and the north shore of Lake Ladoga, so that they are known to
hunters and to the Finns who live as neighbours of the Lapps in the
extreme north of the country. But they are not bred by the Finns unless
perhaps in Lapland. Further east and north of the Volga they are not
kept by the Čeremis, the Votiaks, or the Zịrians, save such of the
latter as have got possession by foul or by fair means of the herds of
the unfortunate Samoyedes. The Mordvins live too far south for reindeer,
and can only know of them by hearsay. At the present time reindeer are
not kept in the valley of the Ob, south of Berezov, or about Lat. 64°
N., though a few centuries ago when the epic songs were composed these
animals were bred along the whole central course of the Irtịsh to within
200 miles north of Tobolsk or about Lat. 59° N., perhaps even further to
the south. <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_263.md) According to Andrew
Murray the southern limit of the reindeer, starting from about Lat. 62°
N. on the west coast of Finland, takes a line about a degree north of
the general course of the Volga before it turns south, about as far as
where Lat. 55° N. cuts Long. 60° E., thence it continues eastwards
towards Akmolinsk, but south of it, as far as Kobdo, north of the great
Altai mountains. <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_264.md) The southern
limit east of the Urals is certainly brought too far south, though it
may correspond fairly well with the range of this animal in prehistoric

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

times. From the above we may conclude that the reindeer was never a
domestic animal of the prehistoric Finns.

The only other domestic animal to which the East and West Finns can lay
claim is the 'pig,' Fin. *sika*, Mord. *tuva*, <span
id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_265.md) though Professor Genetz refers it
eventually to an Indo-European \**swi*- with a Finnish diminutive suffix
-*ka*. <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_266.md) The Permian group, the
Voguls and Ostiaks have all borrowed from the Russian, though the
Zịrians have three native words for 'boar,' of which one has also the
meaning of 'bull.' The West Finns have also native words for boar
(*karju*, *urosa*); for 'a gelded boar' (Fin. *oras*, Mord. *uris*),
which has been compared with the Zd. *vareza* and for 'a sow' Fin.
*imisä*. In a wild state the pig must have been known to the Finns from
the very beginning of their history.

#### TREE-NAMES.

Beside the above culture words there is yet another small series to
consider, as they show the class of trees that grew in the country
inhabited by the Finns in the second period. Soft-wood trees and indeed
a good many hard-wood trees being of no use in this inquiry, it is only
necessary to enumerate a few of the latter.

<span id="img_22200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/22200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22200.jpg.md)</span>

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

The 'bird-cherry' no doubt belongs to the first period and therefore was
known to the Finns before they left Asia. The same cannot be said of the
'elm,' even if the above equations are correct, as this tree does not
grow on the eastern slopes of the Urals. For this tree the West Finns
have another word—*jalava*. In the West Finnish dialects there are
several names for the 'lime' and more than one in Mordvin, so there is
no doubt it was known during the whole of the second period. In the
Zịrian country both this and the elm grow along the Sịsola about as far
north as Latitude 62° N., but the trees are stunted and of small size.
The lime however grows well in the neighbourhood of Perm and in the
south-western part of the government is a forest tree, yet the finest
forests are found on the right bank of the Volga in the country of the
Mordvins. The northern limit of the 'oak' passes along the south coast
of Finland at no great distance from the sea, then approximately through
St. Petersburg and Vologda eastwards to Long. 50° where it turns
south-east to about Slatoust in the Urals and from here it turns
south-west to about Orenburg. As it does not cross the Urals and does
not reappear in Siberia till we reach the distant valley of the Amur,
the Finns who know the tree must have named it after their arrival in
Europe. The Zịrians have borrowed their word from the Russian and the
Vtk. *tịpị-pu* seems to have the same origin. The northern limit of the
maple, which does not grow east of the Urals, and of wheat, is nearly
the same as that of the oak. The 'ash,' which appears to be only known
to the West Finns, covers a much more restricted area than the oak. Its
northern limit skirts the south coast of Finland, passes through St.
Petersburg and about 1° north of Moscow to

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

half or quarter of a degree north of Penza and thence, passing about 1°
north of Saratov to the river Ural. All these indications seem to point
to some district in the valley of the Volga from the mouth of the Kama
westwards as the original home of the undivided Finns. Archæological
considerations had previously led us to a similar conclusion. As the
Permian group gradually pushed northwards they would lose their word for
oak and possibly, nay probably, they never lived within the area where
the ash flourishes.

At the beginning of the chapter it was mentioned that reasons would be
given at the close of it in support of the propositions that at the end
of the first period the Finns were in Europe and formed the earliest
settlers in the valley of the Oká, and therefore that the life of the
still undivided Finns, embraced by the first portion of the second
period, was passed in the valley of the Volga. During this epoch the
Finns of course were at a stage of pure neolithic civilisation without
knowledge of any domestic animals but the dog. In order to make the
matter clearer forty-nine of the words already discussed above are
arranged in Table IX. in a way that displays at a glance the range that
each possesses. We have first to show that the lapse of time between the
beginning of the second period and the beginning of the Christian era
cannot be less than one thousand years, and that about fifteen hundred
years is a better estimate; secondly, that though absolute proof is
wanting that the whole of this period was passed in Europe, there is
proof that a large portion of it was so spent, and a considerable
probability that this whole epoch was European not Asiatic. The table
shows that a word for 'ten' was not found necessary

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span id="img_tab09"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TABLE
IX.](tn/tab09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/tab09.jpg.md)  
TABLE IX.  
</span>

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

till the Finns had broken up into three larger groups. In the third
period, which may have begun between 400–600 B.C., a term for 'one
hundred' was borrowed. It is not too much to suppose that the word for
'ten' became current a hundred years earlier, or about 500–700 B.C. Then
for the first half of the second period and the earlier part of the
second half, during which time they taught themselves to weave, to make
wicker fish-traps, to cultivate spelt on a small scale and to give a
name to the horse, not less than five hundred years can be assigned,
thereby bringing the beginning of the second period to 1000–1200 B.C.
But this is a low estimate; the interval between learning a word from
'ten' and for '100' might well be increased, as well as the period of
the undivided life and the interval between this and the genesis of a
term for 'ten.' So that from 1500 to 1800 B.C. does not seem to me an
excessive estimate, and that is probably sufficient to meet all
archæological requirements. The reason for supposing that the whole of
this time was passed in Europe is based on the nearly undivided Finns
having learnt the use of spelt, which it seems impossible to believe
could have been cultivated in their Asiatic home, and in the fairly wide
range of the word for 'oak,' a tree that could not have been seen beyond
the Urals and may once have been known to the Permian groups, though
they subsequently lost it in a way that can very naturally be explained.

It is generally supposed that the West Finns knew 'copper'—the 'sheep'
may be added—before leaving Asia, as the terms employed are common to
the Ugrian family. But in that case the words must have come into use
more than eleven hundred, more likely fifteen hundred, years before the
present era, a date that no one will try

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

to justify. The conclusion therefore is that though a word is common to
West Finnish and to one or more members of the Ugrian group it does not
necessarily belong to the first period. Some other explanation must be
offered. With regard to 'copper' I have already tried to show that the
West Finns borrowed their word from an Ugrian source and the same may
hold true, though I do not absolutely assert it, for 'bride,
father-in-law, son-in-law, sheep,' which must otherwise be referred to
the first period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[153:1](ms109.htm#fr_122) Castrén, (2.md) i. 207.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[153:2](ms109.htm#fr_123) *Ibid*., (2.md) ii. 162.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[153:3](ms109.htm#fr_124) *Ibid*., (2.md) i, 301,
309.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[154:1](ms109.htm#fr_125.md) Radloff, ii. 8.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[154:2](ms109.htm#fr_126.md) Ostrovski, p. 33.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[154:3](ms109.htm#fr_127) Munkácsi, (1.md) pp.
185, 186.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[154:4](ms109.htm#fr_128) Patkanov, (1.md) pp. 48,
49.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[155:1](ms109.htm#fr_129) Patkanov, (2.md) pp.
100, 101.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[155:2](ms109.htm#fr_130) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 12.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[157:1](ms109.htm#fr_131) Smirnov, (2.md) p, 20.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[157:2](ms109.htm#fr_132) Wichman, (1.md) p. 9.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[157:3](ms109.htm#fr_133) Smirnov (4.md), p. 211.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[158:1](ms109.htm#fr_134) Smirnov, (4.md) p. 218.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[158:2](ms109.htm#fr_135.md) Vereščagin, p. 79.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[158:3](ms109.htm#fr_136) Munkácsi, (1.md) pp. 67,
186.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[158:4](ms109.htm#fr_137) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 194.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[158:5](ms109.htm#fr_138.md) Von Düben, p. 247.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[158:6](ms109.htm#fr_139) Smirnov, (3.md) p. 247.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[158:7](ms109.htm#fr_140) Castrén, (2.md) i. 209;
ii. 162.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[158:8](ms109.htm#fr_141) Castrén, (2.md) ii. 164.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[159:1](ms109.htm#fr_142) Munkácsi, (1.md) p. 67,
68.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[159:2](ms109.htm#fr_143) Smirnov, (1.md) 174.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[160:1](ms109.htm#fr_144) Patkanov, (2.md) p. 112.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[160:2](ms109.htm#fr_145) Castrén, (2.md) ii. 108.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[161:1](ms109.htm#fr_146.md) Friis, p. 100.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[161:2](ms109.htm#fr_147) Castrén, (2.md) i. 209.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[161:3](ms109.htm#fr_148) *Ibid*., (2.md) i. 307.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[161:4](ms109.htm#fr_149.md) Ostrovski, p. 33.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[161:5](ms109.htm#fr_150) Wichman, (1.md) p. 10.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[161:6](ms109.htm#fr_151) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 201.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[161:7](ms109.htm#fr_152) Smirnov, (4.md) pp. 210,
211, 213.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[161:8](ms109.htm#fr_153.md) Friis, pp. 94, 95;
Von Düben, p. 244.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[161:9](ms109.htm#fr_154) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 198.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[162:1](ms109.htm#fr_155) Wichman, (1.md) pp. 9,
10, 31; Vereščagin, p. 53.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[162:2](ms109.htm#fr_156) Smirnov, (1.md) p. 187.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[162:3](ms109.htm#fr_157) Castrén, (2.md) i. 299,
300.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[163:1](ms109.htm#fr_158) Castrén, (2.md) i.
301–303.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[163:2](ms109.htm#fr_159.md) De Harlez, pp. 178,
179.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[163:3](ms109.htm#fr_160) Castrén, (2.md) i. 208,
209.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[164:1](ms109.htm#fr_161.md) Von Düben, pp.
233–235.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[164:2](ms109.htm#fr_162) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 145.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[164:3](ms109.htm#fr_163) Smirnov, (2.md) pp. 212,
213.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[165:1](ms109.htm#fr_164) Wichman, (1.md) p. 20;
Gavrilov, (1) pp. 161, 162.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[165:2](ms109.htm#fr_165) Smirnov, (1.md) pp. 174,
175.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[166:1](ms109.htm#fr_166.md) Wichman, pp. 20, 21.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166:2](ms109.htm#fr_167) Smirnov, (2.md) pp. 38,
39.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167:1](ms109.htm#fr_168) Castrén, (2.md) i. 207

<span id="fn_167"></span>[167:2](ms109.htm#fr_169.md) Friis, pp. 81, 151.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[168:1](ms109.htm#fr_170) Wichman, (1.md) pp. 7,
124; Smirnov (4), p. 212.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[168:2](ms109.htm#fr_171) Castrén, (2.md) ii. 185.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[168:3](ms109.htm#fr_172) Castrén, (2.md) i. 309.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[168:4](ms109.htm#fr_173.md) Vereščagin, pp. 70,
77, 79.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[168:5](ms109.htm#fr_174) Castrén, (2.md) i. 206.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[168:6](ms109.htm#fr_175.md) Wichman, p. 33.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[169:1](ms109.htm#fr_176) Smirnov, (1.md) p. 164.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[169:2](ms109.htm#fr_177) Smirnov, (4.md) pp. 193,
194.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[169:3](ms109.htm#fr_178.md) Friis, pp. 126, 127.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[169:4](ms109.htm#fr_179.md) Radloff, ii. 52.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[169:5](ms109.htm#fr_180) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 180.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[169:6](ms109.htm#fr_181) Wichman, (1.md) p. 39.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[169:7](ms109.htm#fr_182) Smirnov, (1.md) pp. 148,
149.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[170:1](ms109.htm#fr_183) Castrén, (2.md) i. 308.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[171:1](ms109.htm#fr_184.md) Mikhailovskij, pp.
85, 86, 90; Radloff, ii. 16.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[173:1](ms109.htm#fr_185) Castrén, (2.md) i.
199–201.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[173:2](ms109.htm#fr_186) *Ibid*., (2.md) i.
300–303.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[174:1](ms109.htm#fr_187) Munkácsi, (1.md) p. 68.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[175:1](ms109.htm#fr_188.md) Friis, pp. 24, 129,
130.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[175:2](ms109.htm#fr_189.md) Vereščagin, p. 37.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[175:3](ms109.htm#fr_190.md) Buch, pp. 126, 127.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[175:4](ms109.htm#fr_191.md) Friis, pp. 113, 115.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[176:1](ms109.htm#fr_192.md) Radloff, ii. 8.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[176:2](ms109.htm#fr_193.md) Mikhailovskij, p.
133.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[176:3](ms109.htm#fr_194) Castrén, (2.md) i. 308.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[176:4](ms109.htm#fr_195.md) Von Düben, p. 249.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[177:1](ms109.htm#fr_196) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 183.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[177:2](ms109.htm#fr_197) *Ibid*., (3.md) p. 243.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[178:1](ms109.htm#fr_198) Smirnov, (4.md) pp.
176–179.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[178:2](ms109.htm#fr_199) *Ibid*., (4.md) pp. 184,
193.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[180:1](ms109.htm#fr_200.md) Ostrovski, p. 26.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[180:2](ms109.htm#fr_201) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 151.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[180:3](ms109.htm#fr_202) Mainov, (2.md) p. 58;
(3) p. 153.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[181:1](ms109.htm#fr_203.md) Ostrovski, p. 27.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[181:2](ms109.htm#fr_204) Mainov, (2.md) pp. 23,
33–35; (3) pp. 121, 131, 132.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[181:3](ms109.htm#fr_205) Castrén, (2.md) i. 310,
312.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[181:4](ms109.htm#fr_206) Munkácsi, (i.md) p. 70.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[182:1](ms109.htm#fr_207.md) Friis, pp. 86, 27,
70, 137.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[182:2](ms109.htm#fr_208) Wichman, (i.md) p. 17.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[182:3](ms109.htm#fr_209) Mainov, (2.md) pp. 35,
36; (3) p. 133.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[182:4](ms109.htm#fr_210) Smirnov, (4.md) p. 158.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[182:5](ms109.htm#fr_211) Mainov, (2.md) p. 6.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[182:6](ms109.htm#fr_212) Smirnov, (4.md) pp. 144,
145

<span id="fn_211"></span>[183:1](ms109.htm#fr_213) Smirnov, (1.md) p. 128.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[183:2](ms109.htm#fr_214) *Ibid*., (3.md) p. 209.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[183:3](ms109.htm#fr_215) *Ibid*., (2.md) p. 145.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[185:1](ms109.htm#fr_216) Smirnov, (1.md) pp. 122,
123.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[191:1](ms109.htm#fr_217) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 30.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[191:2](ms109.htm#fr_218) Patkanov, (1.md) p. 60.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[192:1](ms109.htm#fr_219) Smirnov, (1.md) pp. 121,
124.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[192:2](ms109.htm#fr_220) *Ibid*., (1.md) p. 124;
(2) pp, 142, 143; (3) p. 212; (4) pp. 152, 155; Ahlqvist, (1) p. 160.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[192:3](ms109.htm#fr_221) *Ibid*., (3.md) p. 211.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[193:1](ms109.htm#fr_222) Smirnov, (1.md) pp. 129,
133.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[193:2](ms109.htm#fr_223.md) Vereščagin, p. 27.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[194:1](ms109.htm#fr_224.md) Böhtlingk, p. 73.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[194:2](ms109.htm#fr_225.md) Georgi, vol. ii. pp.
130, 190.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[194:3](ms109.htm#fr_226) Smirnov, (3.md) p. 215.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[194:4](ms109.htm#fr_227.md) *Jour. of Anth.
Inst.*, Feb. 1889, pp. 246–252.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[195:1](ms109.htm#fr_228) Smirnov, (2.md) p. 160.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[196:1](ms109.htm#fr_229.md) Le Brun, p. 14.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[196:2](ms109.htm#fr_230) Patkanov, (1.md) p. 11.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[196:3](ms109.htm#fr_231.md) Georgi, ii. 840.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[196:4](ms109.htm#fr_232) Mainov, (2.md) pp. 13,
14; (3) pp. 12. 13.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[197:1](ms109.htm#fr_233) Gavrilov, (1.md) pp.
168, 169.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[197:2](ms109.htm#fr_234.md) Buch, p. 108.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[197:3](ms109.htm#fr_235) Smirnov, (2.md) pp. 137,
138.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[197:4](ms109.htm#fr_236.md) Friis, p. 127.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[198:1](ms109.htm#fr_237) Setälä, (1.md) p. 270.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[199:1](ms109.htm#fr_238) Setälä, (1.md) p. 274.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[200:1](ms109.htm#fr_239) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 16.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[200:2](ms109.htm#fr_240) *Ibid*., (1.md) p. 8.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[200:3](ms109.htm#fr_241) *Ibid*., (1.md) p. 20.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[201:1](ms109.htm#fr_242.md) The original meaning
of these words, preserved in Zịrian, is 'to press out,' so that 'to
milk' is a secondary and more specific meaning.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[201:2](ms109.htm#fr_243) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 22.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[201:3](ms109.htm#fr_244) Patkanov, (1.md) p. 29.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[201:4](ms109.htm#fr_245) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 41.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[202:1](ms109.htm#fr_246) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 21.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[202:2](ms109.htm#fr_247) *Ibid*., (1.md) pp. 34,
30, 17.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[204:1](ms109.htm#fr_248) Paasonen, (1.md) p. 40;
Wichman, (2) p. 23.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[205:1](ms109.htm#fr_249) Wichman, (2.md) p. 23.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[205:2](ms109.htm#fr_250). *Ibid.*, (2.md) pp. 23,
24.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[208:1](ms109.htm#fr_251) Ahlqvist, (3.md) pp.
5–8.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[209:1](ms109.htm#fr_252) Tomaschek, (2.md) p. 42,
gives this form, which was unknown to Castrén and Ahlqvist.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[211:1](ms109.htm#fr_253) Martin, (2.md) Tafel, 4.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[211:2](ms109.htm#fr_254.md) Trevor-Battye,
*Icebound on Kolguev* (Westminster, 1895), pp. 172, 298.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[215:1](ms109.htm#fr_255.md) Murray, map 35.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[216:1](ms109.htm#fr_256) Setälä, (2.md) p. 6;
Munkácsi, (2) p. 195.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[217:1](ms109.htm#fr_257) Munkácsi, (2.md) pp.
195, 187.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[218:1](ms109.htm#fr_258.md) Murray, map 42.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[218:2](ms109.htm#fr_259) Munkácsi, (2.md) pp.
186, 192, 196.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[219:1](ms109.htm#fr_260) Munkácsi, (2.md) p. 186.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[219:2](ms109.htm#fr_261.md) Tomaschek, p. 13.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[219:3](ms109.htm#fr_262) Thomsen, (1.md) p. 146,
note 4.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[220:1](ms109.htm#fr_263) Thomsen, (1.md) p. 162.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[220:2](ms109.htm#fr_264) *Ibid*., (1.md) p. 225.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[221:1](ms109.htm#fr_265) Patkanov, (1.md) pp. 34,
35.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[221:2](ms109.htm#fr_266.md) Murray, map 32.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[222:1](ms109.htm#fr_267.md) Setälä, pp. 8, 9;
Paasonen, p. 31.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[222:2](ms109.htm#fr_268) Genetz, (3.md) p. 42.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Third or Iranian Period](ms110.md)

</div>
