<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ms111.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Magic Songs of the West Finns, Vol. I*, by John Abercromby, \[1898\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

The following contemporary advertisements are included for
completeness—JBH.

THE GRIMM LIBRARY

A Series of Folk-Lore Monographs under the general editorship of Mr.
ALFRED NUTT. In crown 8vo volumes, elegantly printed at the Constable
Press, on laid paper, half-bound in art linen, edges uncut. Limited
issue.

GEORGIAN FOLK-TALES. Translated by MARJORY WARDROP. Pp. xii +175. 5s.
net.

THE LEGEND OF PERSEUS. By EDWIN SIDNEY HARTLAND, FṢ.A.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

VOL. I. THE SUPERNATURAL BIRTH. Pp. xxxiv + 228. 7s. 6d. net.

VOL. II. THE LIFE-TOKEN. Pp. viii + 445. 12s. 6d. net.

VOL. III. ANDROMEDA. MEDUSA. Pp. xxxvii + 225. 7s. 6d. net.

</div>

THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL. Edited by KUNO MEYER. With Essays upon
the Happy Otherworld in Irish Myth, and upon the Celtic Doctrine of
Rebirth, by ALFRED NUTT.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

VOL. I. THE HAPPY OTHERWORLD. Pp. xvii + 331. 10s. 6d. net.

VOL. II. THE CELTIC DOCTRINE OF REBIRTH. Pp. xii +352. 10s. 6d. net.

</div>

THE LEGEND OF SIR GAWAIN. Studies upon its Original Scope and
Significance, by JESSIE L. WESTON. Pp. xiv + 117. 4s. net.

\[TURN OVER

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

The volumes hitherto issued in the Grimm Library have been cordially
welcomed alike by folk-lore students and by the most representative
organs of the general press.

The following expressions of opinion may be cited:—

Concerning MR. HARTLAND'S 'LEGEND OF PERSEUS.'

The Antiquary.—'Folk-lore, treated as it is in the scientific method
employed in the present work, is raised at once to a high level of
importance, and is full of possibilities in the near future.'

The Athenaeum.—'A notable study in the early psychological history of
man.'

The Academy.—'There will be agreement as to the skill with which he has
disentangled a mass of valuable material.'

The Manchester Guardian.—'A book that no one interested in the early
history of religion in folk-lore or in anthropology can safely neglect.
Probably the best book touching the study of folk-lore—that is, on the
growth and development of primitive human ideas—published since the
"Golden Bough."'

The Westminster Gazette.—'Mr. Frazer's "Golden Bough" began a new epoch
in the modern treatment of mythology. . . . Mr. Hartland is one of our
most learned and competent workers in this novel field, and he ably
follows Mr. Frazer's footsteps.'

The Nation (New York).—'A most scholarly and fascinating work. Those who
have not followed the progress of similar investigations will be
startled by its suggestiveness.'

The Speaker.—'Mr. Hartland writes with a scholar's modesty and a
scholar's ease.'

The Literary World.—'We can find nothing but praise for this able and
systematic inquiry into a subject fraught with interest to student and
reader alike.'

Notes and Queries, in mentioning the issue of Vol. III.—'The ambitious
and scholarly task of Mr. Hartland is now accomplished, and the world is
the richer by an all-important contribution to comparative folk-lore.'

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

The Daily Chronicle.—'A work which as an authoritative exposition of the
anthropological exposition of folk-lore has taken its place by the side
of Mr. Frazer's "Golden Bough."'

Concerning 'THE VOYAGE OF BRAN'

Monsieur H. D’Arbois de Jubainville in the 'Revue Celtique.'—'Œuvre
d’une grande valeur scientifique et d’une lecture agréable.'

Monsieur H. Gaidoz in 'Mélusine.'—'Édition, tradition et commentaire
philologique sont d’une critique irréprochable. . . . M. Nutt est bien
informé: ses matériaux sont pris aux meilleures sources: son exposition
est nette et précise: son livre est une œuvre d’histoire générale à la
fois des croyances et des littératures.'

Monsieur Gaston Paris in 'Romania.'—'Très savante étude . . . qui sera
lue avec grand profit par tous ceux qui s’occupent de littérature
comparée ou d’histoire religieuse.'

Professor Ernst Martin in the 'Zeitschrift für deutsches
Alterthum.'—'Ueberall verwertet Nutt die besten und neuesten
Hilfsmittel, aber er vermehrt auch selbstständig das Material und zieht
eine Reihe von Schlüssen welche er methodisch begrundet und zugleich
klar und fesselnd vorträgt.'

Professor P. York Powell in 'Folk-Lore:—'The most valuable contribution
to the history of religion and religious ideas that, so far as my
knowledge goes, last year gave us.'

Monsieur L. Marillier in the 'Revue de l’Histoire des Religions.'—'M,
Nutt aura rendu un éminent service en portant à la connaissance des
mythologues des documents dont beaucoup malheureusement ne sont mis à
profit que dans le cercle étroit des celtisants; il en aura rendu un
plus grand encore en faisant avec tant de sureté critique et de solide
érudition l’analyse et l’histoire des conceptions complexes qui y sont
contenues.'

Notes and Queries,—'This notable contribution to the history of Celtic
myth and religion.'

Manchester Guardian.—'The bock is important, because it is a carefully
reasoned constructive effort to get a working-theory of Aryan religious
history.'

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

Inverness Northern Chronicle.—'A reconstruction of pre-Christian Irish
theology. . . . Professor Meyer's translations are admirable. . . . It
is impossible to give in this notice an idea of Mr. Nutt's painstaking
gathering of materials, or of the scientific use he makes of them in the
work of restoration.'

Modern Language Notes (Baltimore).—'The field has been thoroughly
examined for material, the material has been well and clearly worked
over. The statements of fact are always fair; the reasoning is usually
clear, forcible, and just, and the conclusions sane.'

Literature.—'Must for some time to come form the starting-point for
future inquiry into the varying views of man about the life after
death.'

The Nation (New York),—'Of Professor Meyer's part as editor and
commentator, we can speak only in terms of the highest praise. . . . The
same praise should be extended to Mr. Nutt's disquisitions . . . which
prove him to be a master of his complicated theme.'

Concerning 'THE LEGEND OF SIR GAWAIN.'

Manchester Guardian.—'A careful, readable, and suggestive study which
adds substantially to the results obtained by Madden's well-known book.'

Academy.—'Invaluable in clearing the path for a final survey of the
tangled wood of Arthurian legend.'

 

 

 

 

LONDON: DAVID NUTT, 270 STRAND

 
