<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ms109)  [Next](ms111.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Magic Songs of the West Finns, Vol. I*, by John Abercromby, \[1898\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

### CHAPTER V

### THE THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> third or Iranian period is of special
interest. Now, for the first time, the Finns and Ugrians, emerging from
their sombre, impenetrable forests and trackless swamps, came in contact
with a civilised people, speaking an Iranian dialect, and now for the
first time it becomes possible to assign an approximate date to the
epoch. The new things and the new ideas now introduced may be divided
into two categories; those found in West Finnish and those confined to
the East Finns and Ugrians. The first list of words, on the whole,
favours the idea that these civilised foreigners had no hostile
intentions, but were rather traders who wished to do business with the
natives. All that the latter would have to barter at first would be the
pelts of wild animals, though, after they had been taught the art of
beekeeping, wax and honey may have been added to the list. The earliest
trading-place would be the banks of a large river, and a survival of
this fact is found in the Vogul *vātakum*, 'a trader,' literally 'the
bank of a river man.' Small trading-posts or factories may also have
been established in various parts of the country by the foreign
merchants, just as used to be done a couple of centuries or so ago in
the territory of the Hudson's Bay Company, of the Niger Company, and by
the Russians in Siberia. But if all the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

words of the second category were certain, which, however, is not the
case, we should rather have to suppose that the civilised foreigners
formed part of the wandering Scythians and Skolots that nomadised along
the north shores of the Black Sea, of the Caspian, and for a
considerable distance inland. These Scythians are believed by the most
reliable authorities to have been in the main an Iranian people, a few
of whom still survive as the Osets of the north central Caucasus. Wm.
Tomaschek has noted over thirty words in Mordvin, and about thirteen in
the Permian group, which he believes have an Iranian origin. Dr.
Munkácsi gives a list of forty-two words in the Ugrian and Finnish
languages which, in his opinion, are derived from a similar
source. <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_267.md) Some of these are very
doubtful, others are confined to the Ugrian branches, others have no
cultural significance, so that it is only necessary here to give a
selection.

These words, it would seem, were not all adopted exactly at the same
time. Some are older loans than others, and if taken from an Iranian
people, the language was at an earlier stage than any existing record of
it. For instance, judging from the first vowel in the West Finnish and
Mordvin words for 'honey,' these are supposed to go back to an Indo-Eur.
*médhu*, while the other East Finnish forms might come from a Zend or
Bactrian form, and therefore be of later date. So, too, the front vowels
in all the words for 'name' correspond best with the O. Sl.
\[*n*\]*ime<sup>n</sup>*, though the wide diffusion of the word makes it
probable that the loan is earlier than any distinctly Slav word, besides
the fact that it is unknown to the Letto-Lithuanian branch of the Slavs.
It may strike one at first as singular that an Iranian word for 'fly'
should be uniformly accepted as an appropriate

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span id="img_23000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/23000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23000.jpg.md)</span>

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

term for 'bee.' The explanation is that in Sanskrit and Osetan, so
probably in Old Bactrian as well, 'bee' is expressed by 'honey-fly'; the
Finns therefore adopted the word in an apocopated form. It is hardly to
be supposed that traders would bring bees with them, but they may have
taught the natives how to domesticate wild bees, or at any rate how best
to take their wax and honey, which may subsequently have become an
article of barter as well as the skins of black foxes. As the words for
'100, horn, hammer (axe)' come directly from an Iranian source at the
same stage as the Zend, supposing, of course, that the latter two
equations are correct, they must either be later than the words for
'honey, bee, fox,' or they were introduced by strangers speaking a
different and less ancient dialect. The original meaning of the Z.
*vazra*, 'mace, club,' is best preserved by the West Finns; whether the
head was of stone or metal it is impossible to say.

The second list embraces a still larger number of words. (Table on next
page.)

The special interest attached to the words in the first line is that if
they really are derived from *zarayañh*, the borrowing must have taken
place at a time when the original final *s* had not developed into *ñh*.
The same remark applies to lines 3 and 4. If Vg. *s´oter* stands for
*s´oser*, as it might do, the *h* and *ñ* in *hazañra* must have sounded
*s*, as in the Skr. *sahasra*, '100'; and ahura must have been
pronounced *asura*. Dr. Munkácsi estimates that these loan words may be
placed as far back as the sixth or seventh century B.C. If that is true,
the words for '10' and '100' must be quite as old, though from their
present form they might easily be taken for comparatively recent loans.
It is odd, though, that if the

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span id="img_23200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/23200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23200.jpg.md)</span>

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ostiaks had
learned to count up to a thousand some 2500 years ago, their
arithmetical ideas should still be so hazy; a single word does duty for
80 and 800, another for 90 and 900. A thousand, therefore, can seldom be
used except as a round number, and perhaps was never more than that. In
the last chapter I made a rough calculation that the West Finnish and
Mordvin words for '10' may have originated about 500 B.C., but if they
borrowed a term for '100' between 600 and 700 B.C. the '10'-word must be
still older. On line 5 Dr. Munkácsi traces the Permian words for 'lord,
master' to a Skolotan or Scythian *ksai*, preserved by Herodotus in the
words Leipo-*xais*, Arpo-*xais* the old Bactrian equivalent of which is
*khšaya* 'powerful, master' from *khši* 'to rule.' In Hübschmann's
opinion the connection between Zịr. *khši* and Os. *äχsīn* 'a lady' is
very problematical, so the equation of the Permian words with an Osetan
or Scythian form is not thoroughly established, though the
identification is attractive. The words for 'gold' in line 7 are
evidently a good deal later than those in line 1, 3, 4, for now the
initial O. B. *z* is reproduced as *s*, *z* not by *š*, as the older
aspirated *ž*, from which *z* originated, would lead us to expect. A
term for 'iron' came into use about the same time no doubt; and the new
metal was introduced in the form of a 'knife or short sword,' for that
is the meaning of the O. B. *kareta*, from which are derived most of the
East Finnish and Ugrian terms for 'iron.' The Magyars have retained the
original sense of the word, but the Mordvins, more peaceably inclined,
have turned the sword into a 'plough-share.' The latter have a special
word for 'iron,' *kšn´ä* which may have an East Persian origin. In the
Pamir dialects we find *išn*, *spin* 'iron'; an older form of the first
would be

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \**išpin*,
\**ošpinā* and from this by rejection of the initial vowel, by
metathesis of *p*, *š* and mutation of *p* into *k*, all which phenomena
are possible in Mordvin, we should obtain *kšina* *kšnâ*. The word for
'steel' is later and probably belongs to the end of the Iranian period.
Professor Schrader believes the origin of the Osetan word is to be found
in East Finnish, Dr. Munkácsi on the contrary regards the Osetan as the
original word; but Colonel Yule has pointed out that the *ondanique* of
Marco Polo, *andanīcum* in the Latin text, is to be referred to the N.
P. *hundwáníy*, 'Indian steel' and quotes an Arabic dictionary of about
1200 A.D. in which *Hunduwán* is explained by *ensis*. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_268.md) The identity of Os. *ändón* with the
*ondanique* of Marco Polo is certain and the Osetan form is therefore
from the N. P. *hundwānī*, *hindawānī* 'made of Indian steel; a sword';
Osetan always rejects initial *h*. The Permian words for 'otter' may go
back to an Iranian form, but might equally well be referred to a
European word. It is tempting to believe that in line 14 Vg. *ūs-kä*
comes from an O. B. *uχšan*&gt;*ūš* which became *ūs* in consequence of
the *k* of the suffix (cf. *pesken* &lt; R. *puška*) and perhaps it is
so rather than the explanation given in the last chapter. But in the
next line the equation is very doubtful as we can hardly suppose a
Sanskrit-speaking people, even as traders, were ever in contact with the
protohistoric Finns-ugrians, and the O. Bactrian equivalent is *iza*.
Still the possibility of a Scythian original for the word is by no means
excluded, for nothing is known of the Scythian dialects. Forms like
Lith. *ožịs* 'he-goat,' *oška* 'she-goat' leave room for the
presumption, till positive proof to the contrary is adduced, that the
Finno-ugrian words for

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'sheep' and very
likely for 'ox, bull' were borrowed from some of the nomads that
wandered over the *steppe* on the north side of the Black Sea and
perhaps far inland. The equation, however, of Z. *mež* 'sheep' with N.
P. *meša*, hardly with an older *maēša*, seems tenable. Munkácsi further
connects the words in line 17 with a Parthian-*kerta* found in
place-names, but it is more likely they belong to a much later time and
were borrowed from the Čuwaš or some Tatar source. The attempt to derive
the Permian words for 'wheat' from a Persian word for 'white' is, I
think, certainly wrong. By 'wheat-coloured' the modern Persians
understand 'brown,' the colour of the grain when ready to be cut. A
fuller and better Vtk. form is *c´abli* which is evidently borrowed from
the Tatar *kaplị* 'spelt,' an inferior sort of wheat.

From the above we deduce the conclusion that the Iranian period may have
begun about 600 B.C., and lasted for several centuries. In the east of
Russia we have already learnt that intercourse was kept up with Persia
till the overthrow of the Sassanide dynasty in the seventh century. For
the West Finns however its duration was very much shorter, perhaps not
more than 100 or 200 years. When the Finno-ugrians first came in contact
with Indo-Europeans though they had particular names for many things,
they had no word for the abstract idea of 'name' apart from a particular
object. The more advanced Finns, having already taught themselves a word
for '10,' now learnt to count up to '100,' while the more backward
Permians had even to borrow a word for '10' though apparently they and
some of the Ugrians, outstripping the more advanced West Finns and
Mordvins, borrowed a word for '1000' several hundred years earlier than
the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

latter. About the same time they took to bee-keeping and their foreign
superiors were given a title of honour for which they had no native term
and accordingly had to borrow one. The westerly Finns became acquainted
with a new and better form of hammer or hammer-axe which I imagine was
only of polished stone and all the Finns borrowed a term for 'horn,'
which perhaps may be taken to mean that up to that time they had no
knowledge of horned cattle. A good deal later, perhaps about 300 B.C.,
gold and iron were introduced among the East Finns and Ugrians, who thus
became acquainted with these metals several centuries earlier than the
West Finns. The trade in iron swords seems to have continued for a long
time. Abu el Kassim relates that it was said the Bolgars conveyed to the
Yugra (Voguls, or Ostiaks) swords fabricated in Mohammedan countries.
Though these swords had no handles or ornament, and were simply blades
as they left the hands of the blacksmith, they were bought at a great
price by the Yugra, who threw them into the Sea of Darkness. God then
causes a huge fish, the size of a mountain, to issue from the bosom of
the ocean and a still larger fish to pursue it. The first fish directs
its flight towards the coast of the Yugra and gets into shoal water near
the shore. Those that threw the sword into the sea surround the fish in
their boats and cut off its flesh. They maintain that if they did not
throw a sword into the sea no fish would come and they would suffer
famine. <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_269.md)

We have now to consider the questions whether in all cases the East
Finns and the Ugrians received the same word from the fountain-head
independently, or whether only one received and then passed it on,
perhaps after a

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

considerable lapse of time; and whether the East Finns and Ugrians were
both on the east side of the Urals. Dr. Munkácsi holds that, at the
beginning of the Iranian period when the Persian civilising element was
introduced, the Magyars and the people nearest them, especially the
Voguls, Ostiaks, Zịrians and Votiaks, formed a connected whole, and that
this separation had not taken place in the sixth or seventh century B.C.
And as the beginning of the Iranian influence affected the West Finns
and Lapps, but did not bring them a knowledge of gold and iron, the
separation of the West Finnish-Lapp branch from the original home and
communion with the Ugrians cannot be later than the third century B.C.
at the latest. <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_270.md) A glance down the
columns of Ugrian words in two lists above, shows not only a good many
words common to the Permians and the Vogul-Ostiaks that are wanting in
Magyar, but that when there are corresponding words in Magyar their form
is so different that the Vogul-Ostiaks and the Magyars must have
borrowed at different times and presumably in different places. As it
seems to me, the separation of the Magyars from the rest of the Ugrians
had already taken place before the commencement of the Iranian period.
The Mordvin loan-word for 'lord, master' being also found in
Vogul-Ostiak, suggests that the latter were also on the west side of the
Urals when they borrowed the word; though I do not suppose the whole
body of them lived in Europe, only that they wandered on both sides of
the Chain. Certainly the reverse could not have been the case, that the
Mordvins dwelt east of the Urals. For earlier than this loan the
Mordvins and West Finns had invented a word for '10,' and presumably
about the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

same time the Voguls, Čeremis, and Lapps agreed upon another word. Some
two hundred or three hundred years later the West Finns, after adopting
a word for '100,' were so far to the west, that the words for gold and
iron never reached them. So short a space of time would not allow of the
West Finns traversing the great extent of country that stretches between
Western Siberia and the region of the Waldai Hills or thereabouts. The
West Finns and Mordvins were therefore certainly in Europe before the
beginning of the Iranian period. No doubt the Permians have for a long
time been nearer to the general mass of the Ugrians than other members
of the Finnish family, and this, together with their living on the same
trade route, accounts for the greater number of words they have in
common, compared with the Central Finns. Still it is possible that
sometimes a word has been borrowed by the Ugrians and subsequently
passed on to the Permians or *vice versâ*. In the term for '1000,'
apparently one of the oldest loan-words, the Voguls have preserved the
old form best in so far that metathesis has taken place in Ostiak and in
the Permian groups. The probability is that this only once took place,
and most naturally among the Ostiaks; the conclusion being that in this
instance the Permians borrowed from the Ostiaks and not directly from an
Iranian source. So too the exact likeness between the Ostiak and Permian
words for 'gold' makes it probable that both were not drawn from the
fountain-head. The fact that the Permian forms show what looks like the
original initial *z* proves nothing, for initial *s* can in Permian
readily become *z*, a sound with which no Vogul-Ostiak word can begin;
and in the word for 'sea' the Zịrian form begins with *s*, the Votiak
with *z*, which is

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

therefore to be considered a later change. The adoption of a word for
'man' by both Mordvins and Permians, though perhaps at different times,
also tends to the belief that the Permians lived west of the Urals.

If we could show that the Volga and the Kama were the most likely routes
by which Iranian traders penetrated among the Finns and Ugrians, we
should go far to prove that on the Volga, at the beginning of the new
period, there were Mordvins who may in fact have borrowed their name for
it from Iranians; that there were Permians and Ugrians partly perhaps on
the Volga, partly on or near the Kama. About 500 B.C. Hecatæus and,
about three hundred years later, Eratosthenes were both under the
impression that the Caspian was connected with the circumambient ocean.
In geographical, as in other myths, there is often a substratum of truth
or of physical fact. In this instance it really exists. With the
exception of a short portage of a little over four miles, it is possible
to travel by natural waterways from the north coast of Persia to the
Arctic Ocean, by ascending the Volga, the Kama, and its tributaries, to
the watershed between it and the basin of the Pečóra. The myth seems to
repose on the fact that before 500 B.C. the Volga and the Kama had been
previously ascended for a very considerable distance by traders, for no
one else travelled in those days, who learnt from the reports of the
natives, that at the north end of the world there was a great Sea of
Darkness which was accessible by water. In a previous chapter it was
made clear that the works of Arabian art found in the province of Perm
came there by a road leading along the west side of the Urals, and the
presumption was great that the Arabs followed the old route of the
Persian

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

merchants whom they had supplanted. Arab writers hint at two routes to
Bolgari—one by water, the other by land—but both of course lay west of
the Urals, which is the really important point. As it is nearly certain
that from the fourth century A.D. for several hundred years there was a
trade between Persia and the valley of the Kama either by the Volga or
by a land route a little to the east of it, but west of the Urals, it is
more likely than not that any earlier traffic between these two regions
must have followed the same routes. The Yugra mentioned by Abu el Kassim
were probably living at the mouth of the Ob. Yet all their swords came
*viâ* Bolgari, though actually manufactured, as another writer mentions,
in Aderbaijan, where they cost four pieces of gold. The same author
states it was the Isu or Zịrians of the Pečora basin who acted as
middlemen and transmitted the swords to the Yugra. Here we have direct
evidence that an Ugrian tribe on the east side of the Urals obtained
Persian wares *viâ* the Volga, not *viâ* the Irtịš or the Ob valley.

The earliest known settlement on the Kama belonging to this period is at
Anánino. Though most of the objects found there are of Central Siberian
type, some are Kobanian, and it is not impossible that the place was at
first a small Iranian trading post established among natives of
uncertain affinities. A very late Arab writer, Sherif ed din, mentions
that the old name of Elábuga, which lies close to Anánino, was *suddum*
or *sodum*, and that in the Yunani language it meant a 'perch-fish,' in
Tatar *alabuga*. <span id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_271.md) Though *yunani*
means 'Greek' in Arabic, it cannot have that meaning here, but possibly
it meant the language of the Bolgars, some of whom clung to the

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

baseless belief that Bolgari had been founded by Alexander of Macedon.
Otherwise it must have referred to the natives of the neighbourhood.
Though *suddum*, *sodum* does not mean 'a perch' in any Finnish or
Ugrian language, Wiedemann catalogues a Zịr. *šulim* as '*ein Fisch*
(?)', a word which comes near it in form. As the name of a fish is
compatible with a river-name, we may note here a *Sodom-ka* river in the
district of Kotelnits (Viátka), and the Ostiak name for the Salịm, a
tributary of the Irtịš, is the *Sōdom*. Though Spitsịn does not quote
the word in Arabic, the double *d* may be a transcription of the letter
*dād*, which does not correspond, I believe, with any Finno-ugrian
dental, yet might be used perhaps to represent an Ugrian *dl* sound.
With regard to the late tradition of the Bolgars that their chief town
was founded by Alexander of Macedon, it seems just credible that when
they first arrived there they found a tradition current that the spot
had previously been occupied as a trading post by some Iranian people
whom the Bolgars, after acquiring a knowledge of Arabic, identified with
the Greeks and Alexander of Macedon. None of the above inferences to
demonstrate that the Iranian influence penetrated to the Permians and
Ugrians by the valley of the Volga may be very conclusive in themselves,
yet on the other hand, so far as I am aware, there is no evidence,
archæological or historical, to indicate the existence of any trade
route northwards from Khorasmia, Sogdiana, or Bactria to the Išim, the
Irtịš, or any other great tributary of the Ob, into the heart of the
Ugrian territory. The ancient geographers knew nothing of these rivers.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

#### THE FOURTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD.

In the Iranian period it is not necessary to believe that the West Finns
ever came personally into contact with Iranians. All the words in the
first list might have been transmitted to them by some intermediate
tribe like the Mordvins, even though the West Finns have sometimes
preserved an older form than the tribe from whom they borrowed can now
show. In the fourth period it was quite different. The general mass of
the West Finns seem to have shifted their centre of gravity somewhat
west or northwestwards and broken away from the Mordvins before 300
B.C., or whenever it was that the words for 'iron' and 'gold' reached
the latter. In course of time the West Finns had become neighbours for
the first time in their history with a so-called Indo-European people
speaking a Lithuanian dialect.

The Europeans whom the West Finns now met could not have been very
highly civilised themselves, though in most respects they were certainly
more advanced than the latter. It is not certain that the former knew
iron or even bronze, for we have already seen that iron was unknown in
the Baltic Provinces before the second century, and there was strictly
speaking no bronze age at all in that part of the world. So the inland
tribes that lived far from trade routes would most likely to all intents
and purposes be still in a neolithic stage of civilisation. The Baltic
people possessed flocks and herds of sheep and goats, cattle and horses,
and led to a great extent a roving life. In winter they travelled in
sledges, but in summer they seem to have used carts or wagons, the
wheels of which no doubt were solid, being made of two or more thick

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

planks clamped together with wooden pegs. Such cumbrous vehicles could
only have been drawn by several yoke of oxen. When a deep and narrow
water-course had to be traversed, they knew how to throw a light bridge
of planks across it.

Professor W. Thomsen estimates that the date of the first contact
between the two peoples certainly cannot be later than the first
centuries of the present era, perhaps rather earlier. And they may have
been in touch till about 500 A.D., at all events not later than 800
A.D. <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_272.md) It is to his labours that we
are indebted for the best and most thorough explanation of the loan
words made by the Finns from the Letto-Lithuanian or Baltic peoples, and
from him I have taken all those that are found in this section; <span
id="fr_275"></span>[2](#fn_273.md) those marked with an \* are not quite
certain.

Into the nomenclature of the family several new terms were now
introduced, such as 'sister,' 'daughter,' 'cousins,' 'bride,' and
\*'son-in-law.' None of these words were accompanied by wholly new
ideas. There had always been a term for 'elder sister,' but it was
associated with other meanings, while 'younger sister' may have been
included under 'girl'; but now blood relationship was emphasised, and
the mere rank or status that the sister held in the family fell into the
background. A 'daughter,' too, was now distinguished from a mere 'girl,'
and a 'bride' from a 'young daughter-in-law.' Here the first instance
again shows a greater insistance on blood kinship, and the second might
point to some change in the marriage ceremonies in which the bride
played a more important part than before. 'Relationship' *heimo*; 'a
comrade, a person of the same name' *kaima*; \*'society, company'
*seura*, and

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'a social
gathering at which neighbours, in consideration of being supplied with
food and drink, give their help on certain occasions' *talka*, were
partly new ideas, partly old ones from new points of view.

The Finns had never been without a knowledge of 'fire,' though
apparently without attaching any sacred quality to it; now they borrowed
a fresh term (*panu*), which has acquired a personal and mythical
character, though the original word from which it comes seems to have
been of the neuter gender. The 'hut' *maja*, 'bath or out-house'
*pirtii*; \*'room' *tupa*, 'wall' *seinä*, all constructed of \*'boards'
*lauta*, with a 'wooden roofing' *malka*, outside which lay an
'enclosure' *tarha*, fenced round with 'stakes' *seivas*, as well as the
wooden 'bridge' *silta*, were certainly additions to the civilisation of
the Finns.

Some of the instruments now introduced may have been of new forms, or
better in some respect than those that they supplanted, such as the
'axe' *kirves*, and its \*'shaft' *varsi*, the \*'ice-pick' *tuura*;
'distaff' *kuontalo*, <span id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_274.md) and 'comb,
brush, curry-comb' *suka*, as well as 'string or ribbon,' for tying
things together. But the 'wedge' *vaaja*, \*'spade' *lapio*, 'besom'
*luuta*, for sweeping out the house, 'ladle' *kauha*, and 'butter-dash'
*mäntä*, were probably new; for though butter was known the more
primitive way of making it is to shake the milk and cream in a leather
bag. Though weaving was also an old occupation, the 'thrums' *niisi*,
received a name for the first time. For transport purposes they had now
a 'sledge' *reki*, and an unwieldy 'cart or wagon,' as the word for
'wheel' *ratas* has that meaning when used in the plural.

Articles of dress were the 'tall cap' *kypärä*, of a new

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

shape, \*'boots of raw hide' *kurpponen*, and some sort of 'trimming'
*paarre*.

Without our being able to explain exactly why, the Finns of the fourth
period borrowed terms for various parts of the body, such as, 'tooth,'
'neck,' navel,' \*'thigh,' 'the tendon Achilles,' 'the *os sacrum*,' and
\*'beard.'

In relation to out-door life stand words for 'forest' *metsä*, 'woody
island' *salo*, 'branch' *haara*, 'birch-bark' *tuohi*, 'tar' *terva*,
'juniper' *kataja*, \*'lichen' *karve*, \*'moss' *sammal*, and 'burdock
or thistle' *takiainen*. New varieties of instruments for catching birds
and wild animals were the 'snare' *ansa*, and the 'bird-trap' *lahto*.
Among the new names for wild animals, birds, and insects were \*'elk'
*hirvi*, *petra*, 'wild ox (?)' *tarvas*, the exact meaning of which in
old Finnish is now lost, but the Lithuanian word from which it is taken
means '*bos primigenius*,' and sometimes the 'buffalo'; 'goose,'
'magpie,' 'cuckoo,' 'thrush,' 'heath-cock,' 'snake' *käärme*, though
there was already a native word, 'hornet' and 'wasp.'

In connection with domestic animals the following terms were now
introduced: 'ox' *härkä*—the Lithuanian word means 'horse'—'ram'
*jäärä*, 'wether' *oinas*, 'pig' *porsas*, 'goat' *vuohi*,
\*'draught-ox, or horse' *juhta*; 'a grey animal' *halli*, 'an animal
with a star on its forehead' *laukki*, 'a polled ox' *mulli*; \*udder'
*utar*, 'fresh milk' *rieska*; 'blubber, fat' *ihra*, 'mane' *harja*;
'hair, colour' *karva*; 'thong' *hihna*, 'wool' *villa*, and 'hide'
*vuota*. The animals were put in charge of a 'herdsman or shepherd'
*paimen*, who may have been provided with a \*'herding-horn' *torvi*.
During the long winters the beasts could now be fed on 'hay' *heinä*, in
connection with making which the Finns learnt what the 'aftermath'

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

*ätelä*, meant; also the 'water-meadow' *luhta*, 'rushes' *vihvilä*,
\*'clover' *apila*, and \*'dried-up grass' *kulo*.

The adoption of several of these new terms which are not evidence of
increased civilisation may be explained by a change in the mode of life
of many of the Finns. They had become more pastoral, and now observed
things that formerly escaped their notice. It was not necessary to be in
the neighbourhood of the Baltic to hear the thrush and the cuckoo; in
the valley of the Volga they might have listened to the song of these
birds. And if they had looked they might have observed hornets and
wasps, clover, burdocks, juniper, rushes, and water-meadows, ages ago.
But evidently they had cared for none of these things; they were of no
use.

In agricultural matters improvements were also effected. A regular
'furrow' *vako*, was now made, into which the 'seed' *siemen*, of some
kind of corn or grain' *jyvät*, was sown. The grain had a 'beard' *oka*,
and outside the kernel was the 'husk' *pelut*. 'Peas' *herne*, were
quite a new article of food and now came into use. After the sowing was
completed the furrows may have been filled in with a \*'harrow' *äes*,
or a 'bush-harrow' *hara*. Out of barley or millet they may also have
brewed \*'ale' *olut*, which Professor Thomsen now refers to the
Lithuanian period, though formerly and, I think, with greater
probability, to the Proto-Scandinavian or fifth period, when they learnt
the use of 'hops' and how to make 'malt.' According to Wulfstan the
Eastas knew mead, but not ale, and the final *t* is better explained by
a Teutonic than by a Lithuanian original.

Connected with boating and fishing we find terms for such words as 'sea'
*meri*, 'ship' *laiva*, 'sail' '*purje*,'

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \*'coracle'
*karvas*, \*'the side of a ship' *laita*; 'crab,' 'eel,' and 'salmon'
which could now be caught with a 'leister' and 'torch' or by a new sort
of 'fish wear' *toe*, and perhaps \*'a pole for driving fish into the
net' *tarpa*, was also employed. The first three words, however, do not
necessarily imply that the Finns had reached the sea, for the Lithuanian
*mares* can be applied to a large inland lake, and in fact usually means
the Frische Haf. For the 'sea' the Lithuanians use a different word.

With regard to external nature, the Finns now noticed things from a
different point of view and began to differentiate. They had always
known the sun, but the word also meant 'day'; now they seem to have
borrowed a word that meant \*'dawn' or the \*'morning star' and used
that for 'the sun' *aurinko*, alone. So, too, they had always known
night frosts and hoar frost, but till they took more seriously to
agriculture such natural phenomena hardly attracted notice; at any rate
they were harmless. But now all this was changed; premature 'night
frost' *halla*, and 'hoar frost' *härmä*, resulting in hard 'frozen
ground' *routa*, could, and often did, ruin their prospects of harvest
in a single night; the new experience demanded a new set of terms.
Having good sleighs, too, they now noticed whether 'the state of the
road' *keli*, was propitious for travelling upon or the reverse. From
time immemorial they had seen the sky above their heads and had given it
a name that perhaps always included a personality or spirit inhabiting
it. But at the very beginning of the fourth period the physical aspect
of the sky seems to have dropt out of sight and they now borrowed from
the Lithuanians a new word that meant 'god,' but which is now used by
the Finns simply as the 'physical sky or firmament' *taivas*. No

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

doubt the Lithuanian word implied 'the god that dwells in the sky,' and
was therefore at first almost synonymous with F. *Jumala* and *Ilmari*;
but the personality implied by the native words prevailed in the native
mind, so that eventually nothing was left of the foreign divinity but
his tabernacle, the physical sky. Another personal name of foreign
origin has also entirely changed its meaning without leaving a trace of
its ancient signification. F. *perkele* 'devil,' is borrowed from L.
*perkunas*, the thunder-god of the Baltic peoples, who is still regarded
as a beneficent being. To the Letts he is of little less importance than
God himself; he drives away evil spirits; is invoked to strike and
destroy a stitch in the side; to hurl forth lightning and close a dam
that has been made to stop the bleeding of a wound; to break and reduce
a swelling or tumor; and in a song he is addressed quite like a national
god and the defender of his people

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Thunder, thunder, Pêrkoniti,*  
*Split the bridge o’er the Daugava, (Dvina)*  
*Lest the Poles and the Lithuanians*  
*Should cross to my father-land.' <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_275.md)

</div>

Various abstract terms, adjectives, etc., were also introduced during
the fourth period, such as 'custom, manner' *tapa*, 'order, state,
condition, quality' *laita*, 'a turn, a time' *kerta*, 'narrow, tight'
*andas*, 'greyish, green' *halea*, 'grey' *harmaa*, 'yellow' *kelta*,
loose, unbound' *irtainen*, 'thin,' lazy,' 'flat,' 'wet,' \*'skew'
*karsas*, empty,' 'all,' 'always,' 'still, yet,' and the important word
for '1000.'

A Lithuanian influence can also be traced among the Mordvins and
Čeremis. Professor W. Thomsen gives a

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

list of twenty Lithuanian words which seem to be found a loan words in
one or other or both the above peoples. Of these all but three were also
adopted by the West Finn: The more important Mordvin loans are
'daughter,' 'younger sister'—the original of which is simply
'sister'—'stall, courtyard,' 'pig,' 'udder,' 'thong,' 'knife,'
'millet'—neither of these two last are found in W. Finnish;—'goose,' and
'1000.' The Čeremis have also borrowed \*'heath-cock' and 'out-house'
*pört*, a word that has travelled as far east as the country of the
Čuvaš. <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_276.md) Whether these words came
directly or indirectly to the East Finns is necessarily uncertain. Some
of the links that once served to connect the East and West Finns, such
as the Meriens and the people of Murom no longer exist. There is nothing
improbable in supposing that the words were transmitted mediately
through these now vanished tribes. Articles like knives and millet,
which are easily carried, may have found their way to the Mordvins
directly through the medium of Lithuanian traders though, possibly, as
Professor Thomsen suggests, in a southerly direction the Lithuanians and
Mordvins ma; once have been in contact.

#### THE FIFTH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD.

Though, as Professor W. Thomsen supposes, the Lithuanian and the
Proto-Scandinavian or East Teutonic influence may have been partly
contemporaneous, both belonging to the early centuries of the present
era, the former certainly began earlier and the new civilisation it
introduced was far less important. In loan-words of the fourth period
the voiceless explosives *k*, *t*, *p*, and the voices

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

*g*, *d*, *b*, were treated as identical and reproduced in the Finnish
by *k*, *t*, *p*. But in the fifth period a difference made itself felt.
Now a Teutonic *g*, *d*, *b*, was rendered in Finnish by *k*, *t*, *p*,
while a Teutonic *k*, *t*, *p*, was, when possible, doubled, appearing
as *kk*, *tt*, *pp*, each explosive being sounded twice. This gemination
also took place exceptionally in the fourth period, showing that its
duration was considerable. In the fourth period there are several
examples of a passage from *ti* to *si*, as in F. *silta*&lt;L. *tiltas*
'a bridge,' a phonetic change which is not found in loan-words of the
fifth period. <span id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_277.md) But though on the
whole the Proto-Scandinavian loan-words are later than the Lithuanian,
they nevertheless belong to a stage of East Teutonic as old, often older
than the Gothic of the fourth century. They show no trace of the vowel
change caused by *i* or *u* in the second syllable reacting on the vowel
or diphthong in the root syllable; the original diphthongs *ai*, *au*,
*iu*, as well as initial *j*, *v*, are retained; where a Gth. *ë*
answers to O. N. *ā*, the Finnish agrees with the former; and in a word
like F. *autuas* &lt; Gth. *áudags* &lt; \**audagas* 'blessed,' the
original final -*as* is retained, while in the Gothic the *a* has
disappeared. Dialectically however the vowel maintained itself much
later than in Gothic; in the runic inscription on the By stone, Buskerud
Amt, in the south of Norway, attributed by Professor Bugge to about the
middle of the seventh century, the nominative of masculine nouns still
ends in -*aR*. <span id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_278.md) According to
Professor Bugge the *umlaut* caused by *i* had already taken place about
500 A.D.; the final *z* did not become *r* till after that time; initial
*j* was already lost in the sixth century, and initial *v* had vanished
by the middle of the

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

seventh century. <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_279.md) It may be assumed
then that most of the loan-words about to be enumerated <span
id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_280.md) are earlier than 600 A.D. or
thereabouts.

For the first time in their history the West Finns began to acquire the
notion of a 'king' with persons of lower dignity, such as 'princes' and
'local governors' (*haltia*), whose prerogative it was 'to govern' and
to judge' the 'nation and the state,' which for convenience was divided
into smaller 'provinces or administrative districts' (*kihlakunta*), the
various villages of which were bound together for mutual protection by
giving 'pledges or hostages' (*kihla*) to that effect. In connection
with these dignitaries was the 'herald' and the 'guard.' The judge dealt
with cases of 'murder,' had to pass sentence on the 'thief,' perhaps on
the 'harlot,' had to decide on the merits of the case when two men were
at 'strife' and one brought an 'action' against the other, and had
authority to inflict a 'fine.' If a 'trader' in order to promote and
augment 'trade' obtained a 'loan' from a 'rich' neighbour he had now to
pay 'interest' for it. Communication was rendered easier over marshy
ground by laying down a 'bridge of felled trees or planks' and 'rafts of
timber' were now floated down stream. In the family circle it was now
considered derogatory to use the old native word for mother, as that was
also used for the females of animals, and a new term for 'mother,' free
from such a stigma, was accordingly adopted. The 'bride' was also
distinguished from the new daughter-in-law and a more formal 'betrothal'
(*kihla*) belongs perhaps to this period, though it is not the earliest
sense in which the word was used.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Among the new arms introduced were the 'spear' and the sword'
(*miekka*). As the Gothic *mēkeis* translates μάχαιρα the new weapon
must have been a short, one-edged sword about two feet long, such as was
used in Scandinavia and the East Baltic area during the first four
centuries of the present era. The natural complement of a sword was its
'sheath.'

Besides giving each article of dress a special name, a general term for
'clothes' was now introduced as well as words for 'coat, petticoat,'
'shirt,' 'breeches,' 'gloves,' the 'upper shoe-leather' of a boot as
well as its sole.' The 'combs' and rings' now introduced were doubtless
improvements on the old ones, were more ornamental, were of new shapes,
and far more fashionable.

The 'farm-house' (*kartano*) was now built of 'beams,' contained 'rooms'
and 'sleeping-rooms,' was provided with a 'floor,' a 'hearth' of
improved construction, and if need be the door could be fastened with a
'lock.' Inside the house stood a 'chest' or two for keeping clothes; at
the head of the bed lay a 'bolster,' and on the hearth was the 'kettle.'
In other parts of the house stood the 'churn' which might have 'hoops'
round it, the 'milk-pail,' the 'weaver's reed,' and, if the house
belonged to a small merchant, 'weighing scales' which registered a
'pound weight.' Outside the house was the 'well,' and on the roof of the
house the 'stork' may now have perched. It is hardly likely the 'hawk'
was trained for hawking as the country was too forested. In summer when
the house was oppressively hot they could take refuge in a 'tent.'

Among the instruments that came into use were the 'axe-hammer,' which
was certainly of iron and so required a new name, the \*'wedge,'
'borer,' 'saw,' and needle,'

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

all of which would now be of metal. In connection with the needle was
the 'seam.'

Fresh names were adopted for the 'he-goat,' the 'bullock' and the
'sheep,' which was now 'shorn' instead of being plucked, as was probably
the case in the fourth period. Plucking, it may be remarked, instead of
shearing was resorted to by the Shetlanders as late as the last century.
The horse was already known, but the 'headstall,' 'halter,' and 'saddle'
made riding more comfortable. By means of a 'yoke' the oxen were
attached to a 'plough' of a better description than the old native one,
the coulter being doubtless of iron. 'Uncultivated or desert' land was
now distinguished from the 'field,' on which 'manure' was also thrown,
and after being ploughed could be sown with 'oats,' 'rye,' 'hops,'
'flax,' or 'hemp,' from which last 'ropes' and 'hawsers' were
manufactured. In the 'mould' of the garden, which was already known,
they planted 'leeks' and borrowed a general term for a 'shoot or
sprout.' After being threshed and freed from 'chaff' the grain was
gathered into a 'barn.' In hay-making, after cutting the grass it was
piled up in 'hay-cocks.' Barley was already known; now they learnt to
make 'malt,' and with the addition of 'hops' to brew it into 'ale.' The
'wine' must have been imported. From 'dough' they made a better kind of
'bread' than before, and it could also be eaten with 'honey,' though
this certainly was no new luxury.

Although the 'cod' frequents the Baltic, the 'whale,' I believe, is
unknown in those waters. The introduction of the latter term seems to
show that some of the West Finns had by this time penetrated as far as
the 'shore' of the White Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Boats had

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

now 'seats,' well-defined 'bows,' and were propelled by regular oars.'
Fishing was practised with a 'line or with a 'net.' Now they became
acquainted with the special dangers of the sea, its great 'waves,' its
'rocks,' and 'reefs,' its narrow 'sounds' and 'high tides,' as well as
with its more or less fabulous 'monsters' (*tursas*).

The new metals were 'iron,' 'gold,' and 'tin,' and it may be observed
that the Finns did not borrow the ordinary word for iron, but one that
meant 'red iron ore, hæmatite.' It looks rather as if the West Finns
first learnt to know the ore before seeing the metal, which was
ultimately extracted from it, and that may mean that the Scandinavians
compulsorily employed their Finnish captives in the hæmatite mines. The
prisoners, after becoming familiar with the term for ore, subsequently
transferred the meaning to the metal extracted from the hæmatite, for at
first they would not know that a metal could be obtained from it. On the
escape or release of some of the captives, the word gradually would
reach the main body of the West Finns. Besides learning these new metals
the heat of the 'forge fire' was augmented by the use of 'bellows.'

To various parts of the body were now given fresh names, such as
'bosom,' 'the back of the shoulders,' 'belly,' the 'hips,' And the body
became subject, though not for the first time in the history of the
Finns, to 'disease,' 'pain,' 'sudden spasms,' 'wounds' and the 'scars'
that accompany them. If, in course of time, pursued by a remorseless
fate, the 'sick man' died, the lot of the 'deceased' (*vainaja*) was
regarded as wretched, for Professor Setälä derives the word from the
Gth. *vainags* 'unhappy, miserable. <span
id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_281.md)' The Finns were no pessimists,

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

they preferred to live as long as possible; the life beyond the grave
was anticipated with anything but pleasure.

Some confused notion of a spirit distinct from the body the Finns always
possessed; towards the end of the period they adopted a more distinctive
word for 'soul.' Various abstract terms also became current, such as
'necessity'; the notion of making a 'mistake' or falling into 'error';
asking 'permission' from a superior and 'vexation' of any kind. By
natural disposition it was recognised that a man might be 'just,'
'wise,' 'merciful,' 'gracious,' 'willing,' 'assiduous or eager'; that he
might be 'blessed,' deserve 'merit' and be worthy of 'renown'; on the
other hand, he might also be 'timid.' Other abstract terms were
applicable to man, and to natural or artificial objects such as 'rich,'
'abundance,' 'worth,' 'precious,' 'beautiful,' 'unique.' Though some
sort of singing must have accompanied the zither in the previous period,
a new word was introduced for a 'song' *runo*.

The word for 'Russia' (*Venäjä*) is very interesting as it represents
the *Venedi* of Tacitus, the A. Sax. *Wined* and the modern *Wend*. In
Ohthere's time Wendland meant Pomerania, but in the second century there
were Venedi on the east side of the Vistula and along the north of the
Carpathians. By the sixth century some of these had pressed northwards,
though without corning into contact with the West Finns. As the word
Wend is not applied by the Slavs to themselves, but only by Teutons to
their Slav neighbours, the Finns borrowed the term from the East
Teutons, and originally, though not now, F. *venäjä* must have meant the
Wendish people as well as Wendland. The Scandinavians in their journeys
to and fro between their native land and the country occupied by the
Goths,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

that lay north of the lower Danube, or in the south-west corner of
modern Russia, would have to pass through the land of the Wends, In this
way it came to pass that the Finns heard of Wends and a great Wendland
to the south of themselves, and in course of time, as the Slavs or Wends
pressed closer upon them from the south, the idea of *Venäjä* expanded,
till it included the whole area occupied by the people they had learnt
to call Wends from the Eastern Teutons, but whom we call Russians.

Partly to account for the Proto-Scandinavian influence several writers
on the subject have supposed that the Baltic Provinces were inhabited by
Scandinavians, at any rate in part, but the most recent results of
archæology lend a very uncertain support to this theory. With much
greater show of reason, archæology can point to the south-west of
Finland as having been inhabited by a prehistoric Scandinavian people
from a very early date down to about the sixth century. It also leads us
to conclude that before they took their departure—they may have gone
south to join their kinsmen the Goths—they had taught so much metallurgy
to the West Finns that there is no absolute breach of continuity between
the civilisation of the first and second periods of iron in that region.
The passage is gradual, clearly showing the Finns had entered far enough
into Finland to get within reach of the new civilisation at an early
date, perhaps as early as the second or third century A.D. Before
reaching Finland the Finns had lived further south, had apparently
touched on Lithuanians in Esthonia and eventually dispossessed them
altogether, though they may have migrated with the East Teutons of
Finland to the sunny south, to the great Eldorado where plunder was
easily obtained. But this event, if it ever

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

really took place, is still very obscure. How far inland the West Finns
were spread cannot of course be determined, but probably as far as the
Waldai Hills. It is not necessary to suppose that more than the outer
fringe of the main body were in actual contact either with the
Lithuanians or with the East Teutons. If a sufficient length of time is
allowed, all the culture-words of the new civilisations would gradually
permeate and leaven the whole mass of the people. The Finns still lived
an unsettled, half-roving life, and no doubt annually there were great
gatherings for some special object to which some members of the most
remote clans inevitably flocked. To people that live such a mode of
life, a journey of several weeks’ duration to attend a national festival
is nothing; time has absolutely no value. Another way in which new ideas
with corresponding new words could travel very far from their source is
to suppose that escaped prisoners, or even such as voluntarily had
entered the service of the foreigners, eventually returned to their
native homes. Again, the Finns, when they had an opportunity, would make
prisoners of their enemies, who might be sent far inland, and from them
the Finns living at a distance would learn many new arts of
civilisation.

#### THE SIXTH OR EARLY SLAV PERIOD.

Although there are no actual records of the event, it is certain that
for several centuries after the present era various Slav tribes,
subsequently known collectively as Russians, were gradually pushing up
from the south in the direction of Lake Ilmen. In course of time they
met some of the West Finns, such of them as still lived outside

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Finland and formed
the southern fringe of the nation. The date of this occurrence cannot of
course be accurately fixed, but it was later than the fifth period and
earlier than the earliest literary documents of the Slavs. The test of
the antiquity of the loan-words of the sixth period lies in the
retention of a vowel +*n* instead of the nasal vowel of the earliest
manuscripts and the treatment of the vowels *yerŭ*, *yerĭ*. Mr. Mikkola,
who has collected and discussed the loan-words of this period, and from
whom I have taken all the words given below, <span
id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_282.md) is of opinion that they were borrowed
before the Finns entered Finland, an event which was completed at any
rate about A.D. 800. <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_283.md) This
statement is, I believe, far too sweeping. If there is any truth in what
has been advanced in the last section, some of the West Finns were in
Finland perhaps as early as the second or third century, while the more
southerly tribes may have extended as far as the Waldai Hills and Lake
Ilmen. According to my interpretation these more southerly Finns
borrowed a considerable number of new words from the Slavs, but
ultimately were pushed northwards, partly into Finland to amalgamate
with the earlier settlers there, partly north-westwards to swell the
numbers of the Esthonians, and partly perhaps to the north-east in the
direction of Lake Bielózero. The result of this late movement was that a
number of words of Slav origin passed into all groups of the West Finns
much quicker than they otherwise would have done.

As a social body the Finns lived in different 'communities or parishes,'
separated from each other by definite 'boundaries.' From time to time
they assembled in the 'market-place,' which might be several 'versts'
from their

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

respective homes, and there transacted business, not by barter, but in
silver currency, using the old Russian *grivna* (F. *riuna*). Originally
this was a silver torque, or collar, worn round the neck; then it was
used as a unit of value with a weight, at Novgorod, of thirteen ounces;
finally it became a coin, and now has a value of only ten kopeks, or
about threepence. For buying and selling there was a definite 'measure'
of quantity or of weight; 'goods' were distinguished by their 'quality
or sort,' and agricultural produce could be kept or transported in
'sacks.'

The house was now provided with a regular 'window' and an outside
'gate'; besides stools there was the 'bench' and the 'bench fixed into
the wall' in the vicinity of the 'stove.' As an offset to this
increasing comfort they had now to put up with 'cockroaches.' Outside in
the courtyard was the 'cow-house,' and the 'sparrow' for the first time
seems to have attracted notice. Inside the house the women plied the
'distaff,' the 'spindle,' and a new sort of 'weaver's reed,' with which
they wove 'linen,' and perhaps \*'home-spun cloth' and \*'sackcloth.' It
would be their business, too, to make the 'footless socks' to protect
the feet in walking through snow, the 'linen drawers' and 'cloaks' that
now became the fashion. 'Boots' were now sewed with 'waxed or pitched
thread,' and for summer wear 'bast-shoes' were found advantageous.

The only new weapon was a 'battle-axe' of iron; for lopping off branches
'twigs' and 'rods' they used a 'billhook'; for carpenters’ work a
\*'chisel'; for reaping a 'sickle,' and for spearing fish a new kind of
'leister.' The hunter was followed by some new breed of 'hunting dog.'

The boatmen perhaps navigated the inland waters and narrow 'sounds' in
\*'barges,' and learnt the use of the

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'fire beacon.' The
'walrus' could only have been known by hearsay, though they may have
seen its tusks or the strong ropes and tackle that were made from its
hide.

Although the Finns had already borrowed a number of words for various
parts of the body, they now augmented the number by re-naming the
'throat.'

New articles of food from the kitchen garden were 'beans' and 'carrots.'
On feast days the bill of fare was increased by the addition of a 'pie
or pasty.' After a drinking bout they learnt, hardly for the first time
in their history, the disastrous effects of 'drunkenness and hot
coppers.'

Murder as a crime was known in the previous epoch, now they borrowed a
term for the 'thief' and the 'wizard.' A new ailment, or one with a
fresh name, was the 'itch.'

Among the new abstract ideas were the sensations of feeling 'free,' of
being 'clean and decent' or 'sorrowful'; the deeper-seated sensations of
'pity' and 'anguish'; and the more advanced conceptions involved in the
notions of 'insight, comprehension,' and 'counsel, reflection.'

Among the very latest of the loan-words are several ecclesiastical
terms, showing that Christianity had been preached at a fairly early
date, though hardly before the beginning of the tenth century. The words
are 'cross,' to 'christen,' 'priest,' the 'Holy Scriptures,' and
'heathen.'

#### THE SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD.

Between the third or Iranian, and the seventh or Tatar Period, there
seems to have been an interregnum of stagnation among the East Finns,
though the former may have lasted to the fall of the Sassanide empire.
The oldest

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mordvin loan-words
of this period, according to Mr. Paasonen, to whom I am indebted for all
the loan-words given below, <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_284.md) seem
to have been taken from the Čuvaš, some of them when it was at an older
stage than at present. <span id="fr_287"></span>[2](#fn_285.md) Dr.
Radloff, Vambéry, and Paasonen all hold that the Čuvaš are descendants
of the ancient Bolgars. They speak a strongly marked Tatar dialect,
presenting certain phonetic peculiarities which led Dr. Radloff to
believe that they are a Tatarised people; the physical aspect of the
people points to the same conclusion. Several Arab authors aver that the
language of the Bolgars and Khozars was the same, and was different from
the Turkish and Persian. The former first appeared in Europe in the
fifth century, and, if they called themselves Bolgars or Bulgars, must
have been Tatarised before entering Europe. They may have settled on the
central Volga as early as the sixth or seventh century, where they
maintained themselves till the capture of Bolgari in 1238 by the
Mongols. The earlier Čuvaš loans are about sixteen in number, and are
indicated below by a (Č.) in brackets; the later ones date from the
thirteenth century onwards, and were made from the Mišär Tatars, now
found in the governments of Nižni, Simbirsk, Penza, and Saratov.

The Mordvins now adopted two fresh terms for dignitaries, the 'prince'
and the 'Kān.' The 'assembly of the community' took place in the street,
for that is the meaning of the Tatar original. Hospitality seems to have
been a new 'custom,' and was marked by receiving the 'stranger' and
treating him as a 'guest' or as a 'friend or comrade.' As a counterpoise
to the exercise of this virtue the 'glutton' came into existence.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

Merchants and traders, braving 'storms' and 'waves,' assembled in the
'market-place or bazar,' and had scales' weighing up to a 'weight of 10
lbs.' They 'tested' the quality of an article to see if it was 'bad or
spoilt,' and it was 'good luck' for them to buy 'cheap.' Among the
foreign articles they traded in were 'pepper,' 'paper,' 'brass,'
'chains,' 'silk,' and many other articles.

In the family new terms were borrowed for '(Č.) mother, wife, woman,'
and '(Č.) elder sister or aunt (on either side).' Marriage customs took
a new turn or were conducted with greater ceremony and etiquette, for
'match-makers' appear on the stage, and haggling took place over the
'price of the bride' or the bridal feast, as the word means in the
original. Fresh terms of address and respect were adopted for the
'husband's sister older than the husband,' 'husband of elder sister or
brother-in-law,' 'husband of sister's wife,' 'wife's younger sister,'
'younger brother,' 'son, young man,' and 'child.' A 'sense of shame or
decorum in girls' was now required, and a stigma was attached to
'leading an immoral life.'

Men wore a '(Č.) long coat or kaftan,' with a 'pocket' in it, as well as
a 'cap.' The 'pretty' women adorned themselves with 'necklaces of glass
beads' and 'coins worn as an ornament.' The best clothes of both sexes
might be of '(Č.) silk,' embroidered with 'gold and silver thread,' and
the colour of their garments was sometimes 'white.' Against 'cold, wind,
or weather,' they had 'coverings of felt.'

A 'beard,' when it could be grown, was now the fashion, and fresh terms
were borrowed for the 'lower part of the back,' and the 'left (hand).'
They now suffered from 'skin disease' and 'itch,' and the 'blind'
excited compassion;

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

in the old days they were perhaps put away as soon as the blindness was
remarked.

The 'house' no doubt was an improvement on the older dwelling; the
furniture included a 'chest' and part of the building could be
partitioned off with a 'curtain.' The warmth and comfort of the
establishment however invited the '(Č) bug.' Increased notions of
cleanliness necessited the use of 'soap.' Outside was the 'enclosed
courtyard,' where 'turkey cocks' now displayed themselves, the
'cultivated field' and the 'portion of a field or forest.' In the
cultivated ground grew '(Č.) hops,' 'cucumbers,' 'horse radish,' 'male
hemp,' and 'fruit' as well 'dry grass' and weeds like 'darnel.' Beyond
the cultivated fields by the 'steep bank' of some stream grew the '(Č.)
willow' and the '(Č.) elm or ash,' the original of which last meant the
alder; a fresh term too became current for a '(Č.) branch or twig.' In
the open fields the 'hare' crouched in its form and the 'mole' threw up
mole-hills. With regard to wild birds they borrowed a name for the
'hawk' and two for the 'jackdaw.'

The dietary was improved by the introduction of 'dumplings,' '(Č.) round
cakes' which could be eaten with 'honey-comb,' 'cream,' and 'sour milk';
'pepper' was used as a seasoning. With the hops 'small beer' was brewed
which sometimes would lead to 'intoxication' and 'fighting with 'clubs.'
For holding liquids there was the 'trough.'

As the Tatars were a horse-loving people, the Mordvins adopted new terms
for 'stallion,' 'gelding,' a 'refractory horse' and a 'hired horse and
conveyance' as well as for a 'saddle girth' and 'halter.'

'(Č.) Brass' was the only new metal, and this as well as iron could be
wrought into 'chains.'

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

In the religious life, besides learning 'to fast' and to keep 'pure and
holy,' they were taught the existence of 'Satan,' of an 'evil spirit of
Keremet,' of a 'sorcerer or evil spirit,' and they acquired some new way
of 'divining' the future to see what their 'luck' would be.

Among the more abstract ideas were free will, 'freedom,' 'clean, well,
strong,' to assist,' 'to prepare,' 'to despise,' and a 'contour or
outline,' the original word meaning the ghost of a dead person.

The Čeremis were quite as much indebted to the Čuvaš and to the Tatars.
All the loan-words below are taken from Professor Smirnov. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_286.md) The new civilisation introduced the
'chimneyless hut' with its 'hearth' and 'escape for the smoke.' Inside
the house was a 'loft' and the furniture consisted of 'stools,'
'chairs,' 'cushions,' 'featherbeds,' and even 'bed curtains' to keep out
the midges and mosquitoes. New ideas of cleanliness led the people to
adopt the 'tub' and the use of 'soap.' Women span thread with a
'distaff,' and learnt 'to embroider.' Round the house were distributed
the 'cellar,' the 'bath house,' and the 'cattle shed,' and these were
contained within a 'compound or fenced enclosure,' in one side of which
was a 'gate.' They bred 'cattle,' 'horses,' and sheep,' for which there
are several names. The hay was kept in a 'covered structure' for that
purpose, and 'enclosures for cattle' were now made in the woods or in
the fields. The 'herds' were in charge of a 'herdsman,' and a trough for
the cattle to drink out of in winter was found useful.

Agriculture took a new development. The 'ploughed fields' were manured
with 'dung,' and ploughed with a 'hook plough' into 'strips,' with a
'boundary' between

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

each, and might be sown with 'oats.' After being reaped the corn was
bound into 'sheaves' and the 'straw' was separated from the grain by
threshing. 'Hay' was cut with a 'scythe' and turned with a 'fork' before
being housed. Near the house was the 'kitchen garden' in which
vegetables and fruit such as 'onions,' 'garlic,' 'radishes,' and
'apples' were cultivated. For transporting the corn and agricultural
produce there was a 'wagon' to which horses were attached by means of a
'collar,' and to separate the shafts they used a 'bow or arch' which
rose immediately above the collar. The horses were ridden and driven
with a 'bit' and in connection with the wagon and its harness they made
use of 'nails,' 'hooks,' chains,' and 'cords.'

As a consequence of turning their attention largely to agriculture the
Čeremis were now able to indulge in 'porridge' and to eat 'pancakes.'

The people were no longer on an equal level of modest competence; they
had to recognise the difference between 'rich' and poor,' between
'master and mistress' an the one hand and 'work-people' on the other. A
trader brought his 'goods' to the 'bazaar or market place,' put a
sufficient 'price' upon them to make a 'profit' and secure himself
against loss' and was 'paid' in money.' If his stock ran short he could
apply to a 'usurer' for a 'loan.'

From Mohammedan missionaries, who first came to Bolgari in the tenth
century, the Čeremis imbibed a number of totally new ideas, such as
'religion' and 'sin.' He trembled at the idea of the 'Judge in the other
world,' of 'hell' and of 'Satan.' Their immediate surroundings, they
heard, were only a small part of the 'world' and the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

sky itself only formed a part of 'nature' as a whole. They adopted a
word for 'man,' which placed him in a new light; which differentiated
him entirely from animals and made him a special creation of the
Almighty with whom he might ultimately expect to dwell in 'paradise.'
For man was possessed of a 'soul' and 'spirit' which directed his 'mind'
and

The Votiaks have borrowed still more largely than the Čeremis and the
Mordvins from their Tatar and Čuvaš neighbours. Dr. Munkácsi, from whom
I have taken all the words given below, <span
id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_287.md) has enumerated a list of over 800 Votiak
words of Tatar, Persian, and Arabic origin, many of them verbs. But as
they all came through a Tatar source and belong to the same period as
the loan-words in Mordvin and Čeremis, it is not necessary to separate
them into three categories or to enumerate the whole of them.

In their social life the Votiaks now recognised a 'lord' and prince' in
'authority' over them, to whom they paid 'tribute' and 'taxes,' who
would preside at their 'assemblies,' issue his 'commandments' and govern
a 'district.' The 'judge' administered the 'law' and the 'statutes,'
tried the 'robber,' and the 'thief,' the 'debtor' and the 'calumniator'
that had told 'lies' about the prosecutor; and heard the 'witnesses'
'give evidence' on 'oath.'

Of lower rank than the prince was the 'master,' for which there are a
couple of terms. The mass of the 'people' was still lower in the social
scale and they were subdivided according to their vocation. There was
now the 'artisan or handicraftsman,' the 'workman,' 'herdsman,'
watchman,' 'messenger,' servant,' and also the 'harlot.' A distinction
was thus drawn between 'rich'

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

and 'poor,' and in other ways the old social equality was impaired, for
a 'strong man or hero' could now make a name for himself and raise
himself above his fellows in a way that formerly had not been possible.
The new laws of hospitality brought in a word for a 'guest,' who was
treated as a 'friend' and 'comrade.'

In the 'family' a considerable number of new terms were adopted, showing
that its old constitution had undergone a change. Such were
'grandmother,' 'elder-brother,' 'brother,' 'elder sister,' 'elder sister
on the father's side,' 'elder sister or aunt,' 'husband of wife's
sister,' 'wife's brother or sister'; 'step-father, stepmother;
'relation.' Marriages were arranged by a 'match-maker'; the young couple
were formally 'betrothed' and the 'price of the bride' was agreed upon
beforehand. With the stricter marriage laws a definite, legal term for
'adultery' was added to the vocabulary. At the wedding feast and other
festivities was to be heard the 'singer' accompanying himself on the
'zither,' as well as the player on the 'fiddle,' 'bagpipes,' and 'horn.'

The new 'farm-house' was built on a 'foundation,' and was provided with
a 'hearth' and a 'chimney flue,' besides being divided into separate
'rooms'; a 'staircase' led to the upper chambers. As furniture there
were 'mats,' 'cushions,' 'pillows,' and 'coverings.' Outside, enclosed
by a 'fence' of some sort for which there are two words, was the
'courtyard,' 'bath-house,' 'shed' and 'granary,' including the 'well'
and 'bucket' for drawing water. Within the yard, to which there was
access by a 'gate,' could be heard the gobbling of the 'turkey-cock,'
the crowing of the 'cock,' the cackling of the 'hens' and 'chickens,'
the cooing of the 'dove,' the lowing of the

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'calf' and
bleating of the 'sheep, lambs' and 'he-goats.' Some birds were kept in
'cages.'

As a means of transport there was the 'wagon' to which a 'gelding' could
be harnessed. Some riders preferred the 'ambling horse' with 'a saddle,'
'stirrups,' and 'halter,' others the 'ass.' Excepting as a name and by
vague report the 'camel' could hardly have been known. For fodder in
winter they made hay which was heaped into 'hay-cocks' with a
'pitchfork.'

The 'fields,' for which there are two expressions, were tilled and might
be sown with 'flax' or 'corn' of some kind such as 'millet'; when cut it
was tied up in 'sheaves' and the 'grain' was separated from the 'straw'
by threshing. In the 'kitchen garden' they grew 'lentils,' 'gourds,'
'radishes,' 'turnips,' 'onions' and 'garlic,' as well as 'fruit,' such
as 'apples' and 'cherries.' They even took a fancy to 'roses,' perhaps
to other 'flowers' by reason of their 'colour' and smell. Agriculture of
a more advanced type was introduced and with it the artificial 'beehive'
in which better 'honey-combs' were produced.

'Bread' was now baked and the above vegetables, including 'rice' which
of course was imported, could now be made into 'soup and food' of
various sorts by cooking them in a 'pan'; 'meat' was 'roasted' before
the fire. The meal was washed down with 'beer' and 'brandy,' drunk out
of a 'glass' or 'bowl'; the results of drinking too much led to
drunkenness and hot coppers.'

Spinning and weaving had already been learnt, but a different sort of
'weaver's sley' was introduced. The dress for great occasions was of
greater splendour than of yore. 'Women's cloaks' could be of 'silk,'
embroidered with gold thread,' for 'gold' was now known. They also

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

wore 'pearls,' 'shoes,' 'stockings,' and a 'cap.' Men let their
'moustaches' grow, and new terms were substituted for various parts of
the body, such as 'foot or leg,' 'loin,' 'throat,' 'cheek,' and belly.'

New instruments, all of course of metal, were 'shears,' 'saws,'
'knives,' 'wire,' 'anvils,' and 'weighing scales.' With the latter was
associated a 'weight of 2½ drachms' (*miskal*); Munkácsi does not give
the word, but it is certainly the Ar. *mithdal*, which weighed about 74
grains, or nearly 10 grains in excess of the modern weight. Metallic
'money' was now current and with it came the ideas of 'gain' and
'profit.' 'Paper' was used for writing and drawing upon, for some of the
natives had learnt 'to read' and could recognise a 'picture or
portrait.' Formerly the divisions of 'time' were of ample dimensions,
nothing less than a month; now they divided the month into 'weeks.'

Though the Votiaks had always lived in a cold country and were
acquainted with meteorological and other natural phenomena, they thought
fit to enlarge their vocabulary by new terms such as 'frost and cold,'
'fog,' 'storms' (two words), the '*steppe*,' 'steep bank,' 'island,'
chalk' and 'reeds.'

So too they found it advisable to incorporate into their language
several words for animals, some of which they knew before, and in
certain instances they have changed the original meaning of the
loan-word. Such are 'elk'; 'beaver or otter,' but musk-rat in Tatar;
'rat,' but beaver in Tatar; 'squirrel,' but hare in Tatar; 'martin' and
'lion.' New bird-names are 'eagle,' the 'great horned owl,' 'gull,'
'jackdaw,' 'crane,' 'lark,' and 'quail.' Among cold-blooded animals are
the 'serpent' as a mythological fancy, 'leech,' 'frog,' besides two
words for 'flies.'

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

A new malady may have been 'small-pox': a man might be 'deaf,' 'blind,'
'crippled,' or in 'pain' from a 'wound,' but instead of the old charms
for banishing the evil spirits of disease he could now resort to the use
of 'medicine.'

In the 'street' besides 'shops' could now be seen the 'mosque' with its
slender and picturesque 'minaret.' Here was proclaimed the 'religion or
creed' of the 'Prophet,' bringing with it new notions of the nature of
'sin' and 'guilt'; of the deceptions of 'Satan' and the manifold 'evil
spirits' which pervade the 'world,' though their machinations could be
thwarted by the good offices of 'angels'; of the virtues of 'fasting,'
'alms,' 'offerings,' 'prayer,' 'penance,' and 'compassion' for the
'poor.' Now they cherished a 'hope' of 'eternal life' in 'Paradise' and
shuddered at the idea that their 'fate' should lead them to 'Hell' to
abide with the 'accursed.' The 'place of sacrifice' of their own native
gods also acquired a new name.

Lastly, the mental horizon of the Votiaks was enlarged by abstract terms
such as 'honour,' 'duty,' 'true and right,' 'good,' 'righteous,'
'generous,' 'beautiful,' 'joyful,' 'peace,' 'friend,' 'friendly,'
'freedom' and 'free.' The opposites of these were 'treachery,'
'treacherous,' 'deceit,' 'deception,' 'dissolute,' 'lust,' 'wickedness,'
'hatred,' 'derision,' 'enemy' 'unclean' and 'unfree.' They also borrowed
words denoting 'intelligence,' 'insight,' 'advice, counsel,' 'watchful,
careful' and many verbs such as 'to remember,' 'to forgive,' 'to
honour,' 'to advise,' 'to take counsel,' 'to make a vow,' 'to boast,'
'to regret,' 'to fall in love or to take up with any one,' 'to bless';
'to rob,' 'to be vexed,' 'to curse and to swear.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_267"></span>[229:1](ms110.htm#fr_269.md) Tomaschek, pp. 12–14;
Munkácsi, (2) pp. 191–197.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[234:1](ms110.htm#fr_270.md) Yule, vol. i. pp. 93,
94.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[236:1](ms110.htm#fr_271.md) Abu el Kassim, p. 83.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[237:1](ms110.htm#fr_272) Munkácsi, (2.md) p. 88.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[240:1](ms110.htm#fr_273.md) Spitsịn, p. 88.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[243:1](ms110.htm#fr_274) Thomsen, (1.md) pp. 151,
152.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[243:2](ms110.htm#fr_275) *Ibid*., (1.md) pp.
145–148.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[244:1](ms110.htm#fr_276.md) Mikkola places this
loan in the Proto-Slav or sixth period.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[248:1](ms110.htm#fr_277.md) Kobert, pp. 171. 270,
245, 251, 259, 260; Sprogis, p. 316.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[249:1](ms110.htm#fr_278) Thomsen, (1.md) p. 153.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[250:1](ms110.htm#fr_279) Thomsen, (1.md) pp.
72–76, 151.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[250:2](ms110.htm#fr_280) *Ibid*., (2.md) p. 118;
Bugge, p. 115.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[251:1](ms110.htm#fr_281.md) Bugge, pp. 107, 71,
103.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[251:2](ms110.htm#fr_282.md) These will be found
in Thomsen, (2) pp. 121, 128, 185.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[254:1](ms110.htm#fr_283.md) Setälä, p. 60.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[258:1](ms110.htm#fr_284.md) Mikkola, pp. 31,
36–180.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[258:2](ms110.htm#fr_285.md) *Ibid*., pp. 28, 29.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[261:1](ms110.htm#fr_286.md) Paasonen, pp. 26–57.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[261:2](ms110.htm#fr_287.md) *Ibid*., p. 5.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[264:1](ms110.htm#fr_288) Smirnov, (1.md) pp.
24.29.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[266:1](ms110.htm#fr_289) Munkácsi, (3.md) pp.
79–151.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Beliefs of the West Finns as Exhibited in the Magic
Songs](ms111.md)

</div>
