[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw02)  [Next](omw04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BABYLONIAN

The Babylonian religion was on a higher level than the Egyptian, which,
according to Maspero, one of the greatest of Egyptologists, was close to
the animism and fetichism of the African tribes. Yet the Sumerians and
Babylonians, compared with the Egyptians, had a very faint conception of
a life beyond the grave. "They imagined the lower world to be a place of
darkness, where the departed, retaining their consciousness, were
condemned to lie motionless for ages, under the stem rule of a goddess
who reigned in that world." Then Professor Rostovtzeff goes on to say:

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

The hymns and prayers addressed to the gods of Babylon and Assyria are
full of religious inspiration and unfeigned religious feeling. The
Babylonians in their epic poetry sought to explain the mighty secrets of
nature, connected with the life of gods and men. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

Their stories of the struggles of the gods against Chaos and the
monsters produced by Chaos, of Gilgamish's adventures, of Ishtar's
descent into the World of the Dead, are comparable to nothing else but
their sculptures--those carvings in which kings and soldiers, horses and
lions, chariots and spears, are rendered with such power as seems to us
terrifying.

Marvels that showed a mighty will,  
Huge power and hundred-handed skill,  
That seek prostration and not praise  
Too faint such lofty ears to fill! <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

\[paragraph continues\] We owe the preservation of the Babylonian and
Sumerian stories, in a large measure, to an Assyrian king of the
neo-Babylonian epoch, to Ashur-bani-pal, who reigned in Nineveh B.C.
668. Says a pamphlet published by the British Museum:

Having determined to form a Library in his palace he set to work in a
systematic manner to collect literary works. He sent scribes to ancient
seats of learning, *e.g.*, Ashur, Babylon, Cutah, Nippur, Akkad, Erech,
to make copies of the ancient works that were preserved there, and when
the copies came to Nineveh he either made transcripts of them himself,
or caused his scribes to do so for the Palace Library. In any case he
collated the texts himself and revised them before placing them in his
Library. The appearance of the tablets from his Library suggests that he
established a factory in which the clay was cleaned and kneaded and made
into homogeneous, well-shaped tablets, and a kiln in which they were
baked, after they had been inscribed. The uniformity of the script upon.
them is very remarkable, and texts with mistakes in them are rarely
found. . . . Ashur-bani-pal was greatly interested in the literature of
the Sumerians, *i.e.*, the non-Semitic people who occupied Lower
Babylonia about B.C. 3500 and later. He and his scribes made bilingual
lists of signs and words and objects of all classes and kinds, all of
which are of priceless value to the modern student of the Sumerian and
Assyrian languages. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

The Greeks borrowed one myth from the Babylonians--the myth of Adonis
who is Tammuz. "Every year," says Frazer in "The Golden

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Bough," "Tammuz was believed to die, passing
away from the cheerful earth to the gloomy subterranean world, and every
year his divine mistress journeyed in quest of him." Tammuz's death was
mourned by men and women at midsummer. The story of Ishtar's descent
into the World of the Dead was probably made up from the hymns chanted
during the mourning ceremonies. Like Osiris, Tammuz personified the
vegetable life that dies and rises up again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xi:6](omw03.htm#fr_5) "A History of the Ancient
World, Vol. I.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xi:7](omw03.htm#fr_6) George Darley, *Nepenthe*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xi:8](omw03.htm#fr_7) The Babylonian Story of
the Deluge and the Epic Gilgamish: 1920.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Persian](omw04)
