[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw01)  [Next](omw03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EGYPTIAN MYTHOLOGY

It is natural to begin with things Egyptian. But the stories that we
have from the mythology of that great civilization are all fragmentary;
for the most famous of them we have to go to a Greek work--to Plutarch's
treatise on Isis and Osiris. In the story as given here the outline is
Plutarch's. But included in it is the story of the Creation which is
from Egyptian sources; the names of the deities are not as in Plutarch,
but are given in forms sanctioned by Egyptian scholars. The second story
is mythological in all that deals with the course of the Sun. The
greater part of Egyptian mythology dealt with the appearance,
disappearance, and reappearance of the Sun, and with descriptions of the
World of the Dead. But no piece of mythology extant gives us in
narrative form the Egyptian ideas on these subjects. To provide an
outline in which this mythology could be given in story form, the tale
about the brothers and their dying father has been invented. The hymn
given in this story is from Adolf Leman's "*La religion Egyptienne*."

How greatly the story of Osiris and Isis influenced the ancient world
outside of Egypt can be understood from the speculation which Plutarch
commits himself to:

This thing that our priests to-day, with prayer for mercy and in dim
revelation, most reverently do hint, even that Osiris is King and Lord
among the dead, bewilders the minds of most men who know not how the
truth of this thing is. For they fancy that Osiris, in whom most surely
is all holiness of God and nature, is thus said to be in the earth and
beneath the earth, where are hidden the bodies of those who seem to have
had their end. But Osiris's self is far indeed from the earth,
untouched, undefiled, immaculate of all substance that admits of
corruption and death. And souls of men, here in the embrace of bodies
and of passions, have no communion with the God save as in a dream, a
dim touch of knowledge through philosophy. But when they are set free,
and shift their homes into that Formless and Invisible and Pure, then in
truth is God their leader and their king, even this God, so that
fastened unto him, and insatiably contemplating and desiring that Beauty
ineffable and indescribable of man--whereof the old legend would have it
that Isis was in love, and did

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

ever pursue and with it consort-all beings there are fulfilled of all
the good and fair things that have share in creation.

Plutarch's interpretation of the Osiris-Isis story is not necessarily an
Egyptian one. Nor can we be sure that the prayer that Apuleius's hero,
Lucius, makes to Isis is one that an Egyptian at any period might make:

O thou most holy and eternal saviour of the human race, and ever most
munificent in thy tender care of mankind, unto the hazard of our sorrow
thou givest the sweet affection of a mother. Nor doth any day or any
night's repose, nay, not a tiny moment, vanish past empty of benefits,
but ever on earth and sea thou art protecting men, driving aside life's
tempests, stretching forth thy right hand of salvation. The threads of
our life, by us inextricably entangled, thou dost untwine; thou stillest
storms of fate, thou holdest the evil goings of the stars. Thee Heaven
doth worship; the shades are thy servants; 'tis thou dost spin the
world, and lightest up the sun, and governest the universe, and
tramplest upon hell. To thee the stars make answer, for thee the seasons
return, heaven's powers exult, the elements obey. At thy nod blow the
breezes, clouds give fertility; thine is the germing of the seed and the
growth of the germ. Before thy majesty the birds do tremble whose goings
are in the air, and the beasts that haunt the hills, and the serpents
lurking in the dust, and the monsters that swim in the ocean. But I,
scant of soul for the offering of thy praise, poor of patrimony for the
celebrating thy sacrifices, feeble of voice for the telling out my
heart's knowledge of thy Majesty-nay, nor would one thousand mouths, one
thousand tongues suffice, nor the long utterance of an eternal
lauds,--I, what (in my poverty) my worship, at least, can do, that will
I care to effect. Thy divine countenance and most holy godhead, stored
within my heart of hearts, will I forever keep, and there will watch and
picture it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Babylonian](omw03.md)
