[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw16)  [Next](omw18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CENTRAL AMERICAN AND MEXICAN

In regarding Central America and Mexico as a single cultural area, I
accept the authority of Eduard Seler, who, grouping Guatemala, Yucatan,
and the area that includes Mexico City together, writes:

The unity of this entire region of ancient civilization is most clearly
expressed by the calendar, which these people considered the basis and
alpha and omega of all high and occult knowledge. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

According to this view, the Mayan, the Toltec, and the Aztec are
varieties of a single culture.

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

The most dramatic rendering of the mythology belonging to this culture
is in a book written in Guatemala, in a Mayan language, some time in the
seventeenth century. This is the "Popul Vuh." The Spanish version of the
native text was translated into French by the Abbé Brasseur de
Bourbourg, and our main knowledge of this curious and exciting book is
derived from this translation. Two stories in this collection are from
the "Popul Vuh"--the story of the Creation, and the story of the
adventures of the Twin Heroes. A little material has also been taken
from an English version of parts of another native book--the "Annals" of
the *Cakchiquel* Indians. The rest of the stories are Aztec; they belong
to the people whose capital was where Mexico City now stands. The
political and material power that this people had attained to is
revealed in the impression that their great city, Tenochtitlan, made on
the chronicler of the Spanish Conquest, Bernal Diaz:

We counted amongst us soldiers who had traversed different parts of the
world: Constantinople, Italy, Rome; they said that they had seen nowhere
a place so well aligned, so vast, ordered with such art, and covered
with so many people.

Of the Aztec stories, the most appealing is the one that tells of
Quetzalcoatl, his beneficence and his banishment from Tollan. Scholars
maintain that Quetzalcoatl was a Toltec divinity, or that he was the
last of the Toltec kings, and bore the name of their principal divinity.
His story then symbolizes the fall of the mild and enlightened Toltec
civilization before the onslaught of the war-like Aztec tribes. Another
interpretation is given by Mr. Lewis Spence:

From April or May to the beginning of October the trade-wind blows from
the east coast over the Plateau of Anahuac, bringing with it abundance
of rain, and accelerating vegetable growth, thus actually "sweeping the
ways for the rain-gods." Its advance is comparatively slow, the rains
beginning three or four weeks earlier in Vera Cruz than in Puebla and
Mexico. At the beginning of October, however, it is invariably modified
by the local monsoon, which interrupts it over wide areas, or in certain
districts invades it in violent cyclonic storms, dissipating its
energies and altering its course. Quetzalcoatl represents the gentle
trade-wind, which ushers in the growth-making rains. His reign of peace,
plenty, and fertility over, he comes into opposition with Tezcatlipoca,
who represents the monsoon and who chases his rival "from city to city,"
ravening at him like a tiger, says Mendieta, and at last hustling

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

him out of the country. That Tezcatlipoca is also a god of wind is
certain, as is proved by one of his names, Yoalli Ehecatl, "Wind of
Night," and that he is the monsoon or hurricane is proved beyond all
doubt by the circumstance that he is said to have rushed along the
highways at night at extraordinary speed, and that Hurakan, his Quiche
name, is still employed for the very wind he represented, and has become
a generic name for a tempestuous wind in practically all European
languages, which have without question adopted it from the American
word. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

As we look upon the powerful sculptures of the ancient Mexicans and
their compact drawings we get the impression of a strangely earthbound
civilization: it was as if all of the figures were rooted; in some of
the drawings hands are in movement, but it is like the movement of
branches of trees, and we can never think of the faces as being lifted
to the skies. In their mythology we have the impression of thought which
can never become abstract. This literalness leaves theirs the most
terrible of the religions connected with any of the great civilizations.
Always they wanted rain, and they strove to give example to the
rainmaking deities by pouring out human blood. They sacrificed thousands
of human victims every year; every Aztec ceremony culminated in human
sacrifice. Something, however, can be said for this religion:

Students of religious phenomena not infrequently show distaste for the
deeper consideration of the Mexican faith, not only because of the
difficulties which beset the fuller study of this interesting phase of
human belief in the eternal verities, but also, perhaps, because of the
"diabolic" reputation which it has achieved, and the grisly horrors to
which it is thought those who examine it must perforce accustom
themselves. It is certainly not the most obviously prepossessing of the
world's religions. Yet if due allowance be made for the earnestness of
its priests and people in the strict observance of a system the
hereditary burden of which no one man or generation could hope to
remove, and the religion of the Azteca be viewed in a liberal and
tolerant spirit, those who are sufficiently painstaking in their
scrutiny of it will in time find themselves richly rewarded. Not only
does it abound in valuable evidences for the enrichment of the study of
religious science and tradition, but by degrees its astonishing beauty
of colour and wealth of symbolic variety will appeal to the student with
all the enchantment of discovery. The echoes of the sacred drum of
serpent-skin reverberating from the lofty pyramid of Uitzilopochtli, and
passing above the mysterious city of Tenochtitlan with all the majesty
of Olympian thunder, will seem not less eloquent of the soul of a
vanished faith

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

than do the memories of the choral chants of Hellas. And if the
recollection of the picturesque but terrible rites of this gifted,
imaginative, and not undistinguished people harrows the feelings, does
it not arouse in us that fatal consciousness of man's helplessness
before the gods, which primitive religion invariably professes and which
reason almost seems to uphold? <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxiv:23](omw17.htm#fr_22) Unity of Mexican and
Central American Civilization: Report to Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 28.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxvi:24](omw17.htm#fr_23) Lewis Spence: The
Gods of Mexico.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxvii:25](omw17.htm#fr_24) Lewis Spence: The
Gods of Mexico.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zuñi](omw18)
