[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw10)  [Next](omw12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ICELANDIC

When we realize that in France, Britain, and Ireland, Christianity had
been established for six hundred years before it was introduced into
Iceland and the Scandinavian countries, we are aware of what a long
lifetime the mythology of northern Europe had in comparison, let us say,
with the mythology of Celtic Britain and Ireland. The Icelandic
mythology is part of the Scandinavian which is again part of the
mythology of the Germanic people. It had a separate development in
Norway, and a separate development, perhaps, in Iceland where the
records that we have of it were made. Iceland, at the time, was the
centre of the Scandinavian world. As shaped in the Icelandic poems and
stories, this mythology has been influenced by Christianity. Of the
great poem that tells of the creation of the world and the gods, the
"Voluspo," the latest translator, Mr. Henry Adams Bellows, writes:

That the poem was heathen and not Christian seems almost beyond dispute;
there is an intensity and vividness in almost every stanza which no
archaizing Christian could possibly have achieved. On the other hand,
the evidences of Christian influence are sufficiently striking to
outweigh the arguments of Finnur

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Jonsson, Müllenhof, and others who maintain that
the "Voluspo" is purely a product of heathendom. The roving Norsemen of
the tenth century, very few of whom had as yet accepted Christianity,
were nevertheless in close contact with Celtic races which had already
been converted, and in many ways the Celtic influence was strongly
felt. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)

We owe our knowledge of this mythology to the Poetic and Prose
Eddas--the first a collection of poems celebrating the gods and heroes
of the olden times, and the second a handbook giving an account of the
gods and the old system of divinity, with a number of separate stories
about the gods and heroes. Scholars now agree that the poems that make
up the Poetic Edda were shaped between 900 and 1050. The Prose Edda was
composed by an Icelandic scholar, Snorri Struluson, about the year 1220.
The rediscovery of this mythology was hailed by the whole Germanic
world, and treated as a racial inheritance: it lives as no other
European mythology lives to-day through the expression it has been given
in the tragic music of Richard Wagner's "Ring" operas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xx:19](omw11.htm#fr_18.md) Introduction to the
Poetic Edda. New York, the American-Scandinavian Foundation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indian](omw12.md)
