[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw28)  [Next](omw30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CONFOUNDING OF THE ANGEL OF DEATH

When it came to pass that Moses was about to die, Samael, the angel who
is filled with enmity towards man, came before the throne of the Most
Holy One and said, "Give me permission to take his soul from Moses." But
God said to that angel who is named Severity of God, "How wouldst thou
take his soul? From his face? How couldst thou approach the face that
looked upon My face? From his hands?

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But those hands received the Torah from Me, and
how couldst thou be able to approach them? From his feet? But his feet
touched My clouds, and how then couldst thou be able to approach them?
Thou canst not go near Moses." But Samael said, "I pray thee permit me
to take his soul." Then God said, "Thou hast my warrant."

Samael wrapped himself in the red of his wrath, and with his sword upon
his thigh he went to where Moses was. And when he came before him Moses
was writing the Ineffable Name. Therefore his face was suffused with
radiance and his eyes were filled with light. And when he turned his
face towards him and his eyes upon him, Samael's eyes grew dim, and his
hand trembled upon his sword's handle. Humbly he said, "Yield to me thy
soul, for the time is at hand for thee to depart from the world." But
Moses said, "Not to thee, hater of man, will I yield my soul." Then
holding his staff and standing upright he said to the angel with the
sword, "I am he who led sixty myriads of Israel out of Egypt, who turned
the bitter water into sweet, who mounted into Heaven and there spoke
face to face with God the Al. mighty, who hewed out the two tables of
stone on which God wrote His law, who waged war on the giants Sihon and
Og that were created before the Flood, and were so tall that the Flood
did not reach to their ankles: with my staff I slew the two of them. How
darest thou then, wicked one, presume to seize such a soul as mine? Thou
hast no power to sit where I sit nor stand where I stand. Get thee
hence; I will not yield to thee my soul." In terror Samael went from
before Moses and appeared once more before Almighty God.

Then the Most Holy One said, "In joy thou didst set out to take the soul
of my servant Moses, and now thou comest back without it. Thou wretched
one! Go fetch me Moses's soul, for if thou dost not, I will discharge
thee from the office of taking men's souls!" Then Samael covered himself
with the crimson of his fury, and, holding his sword naked in his hand,
he went to where Moses was. Moses rose up when he appeared, and with the
staff on which was written the Ineffable Name, he drove Samael away.

But even as he did this, Moses heard a voice that said, "Why dost thou
strive in vain? Thy last minute is at hand!" Then God Himself appeared
before him, and Moses fell upon his face and said, "Lord of the world!
In love didst thou create the world, and in love thou

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

guidest it! Treat me with all of Thy love, and deliver me not into the
hands of Samael, hater of man."

With the Most High there came the three angels, Michael, Gabriel, and
Zagzagel. Gabriel went forward and arranged the couch for Moses, Michael
spread a purple garment upon it, Zagzagel laid down a pillow. The
Almighty One stayed at Moses's head, Michael at his right side, Gabriel
at his left side, and Zagzagel at his feet. "Cross thy feet." Moses did
so. "Fold thy hands." Moses did so. "Lay them on thy breast." Moses did
so. Then the Almighty said, "Close thine eyes." Moses did so, and God
said to the soul that was within, "O my daughter, for one hundred and
twenty years I decreed that thou shouldst dwell with this righteous
body, but delay not now to leave it, for the time has come for thee to
do so." And when Moses heard these words he said unto his soul, "Return
to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee."
Thereupon God took Moses's soul by kissing him on the mouth.

God and His angels laid Moses's body in a secret place in the earth, and
God took Moses's soul and laid it beside His throne. Samael did not know
the doing of God and His angels, and for the third time he sought out
Moses so that he might take his soul from him.

But Moses was not in the place he went to. Samael went into the Promised
Land, thinking that Moses had gone there, and he asked the land where
Moses was, and the land answered him and said, "Long did Moses pray to
be here, but Moses is not here."

Then Samael hastened to the sea, and he said to the sea, "Is Moses
here?" And the sea made answer and said, "I have not looked upon Moses
since the day when he divided me into twelve parts so that the twelve
tribes might pass through my waters." Samael went to the abyss, and he
said, "Is Moses in the abyss?" And the abyss made answer and said, "I
have not seen him, but I have heard his call." Samael went up into the
clouds of Heaven, and he said to the clouds, "Is Moses with you?" And
the clouds answered and said, "We have not seen him since the day when,
at God's command, he went through us to receive the Torah in Heaven."
Samael went to where the Tree of Knowledge grows, and he asked of the
tree if it had seen aught of Moses, and the tree made answer through its
leaves, and said, "Since the day when he came to me for a sliver of my
wood with which to

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

make a pen for the writing of the Torah I have not seen Moses." And he
went to the mountain, and when he asked of it concerning Moses, the
mountain said, "Since he hewed the two tables out of me for the writing
of the Law, I have not seen Moses." Then he asked of the angels had they
seen Moses, and the angels answered and said, "We have heard
lamentations for him on earth, and we have heard rejoicings over him in
Heaven, but him we have not seen." Then Samael, Severity of God, went
amongst men and asked of them where Moses was, and men looked at him
boldly, and said to him, "What hast thou to do with him? God has taken
his soul to Himself, and it is now in its place beside the throne of
God." And when he heard this said, and saw the spirit that was in the
faces of men, Samael, the Angel of Death, knew himself confounded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In the Beginning](omw30.md)
