[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw25)  [Next](omw27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ISHTAR'S DESCENT INTO THE WORLD BELOW

A time came when the Lady of the Gods, even Ishtar, thought upon the
spouse of her youth, upon Tammuz; her heart inclined her to go down into
the realm of Irkalla, into the Place of Darkness where Tammuz had gone.
So, in all the magnificence of her apparel, in all her splendour and
power, the Lady Ishtar went into the cavern that goes down to the realm
of Irkalla. She came to the place that is surrounded by seven walls,
that has seven gates opening into it, the place where the Dead sit in
unchanging and everlasting gloom. Before the first gate she called upon
the Watchman, Nedu: "Ho, Watchman! Open thou the gate that I may enter
in!" The Watchman looked at her from over the gate; he did not speak to
her; he did not open the gate to her. "If thou openest not the gate, I
will smite upon it; I will shatter the bolt, and beat down the doors!
Yea, I will bring away the Dead that are under the rule of thy mistress!
I will raise up the Dead so that they will devour the Living, so that
the Dead shall outnumber those that live!" So spoke the Lady of the Gods
standing before the gate in all her power and splendour.

And hearing her commanding voice and looking upon her in all her power
and splendour, Nedu, the Watchman of Irkalla's realm, said, "Great Lady,
do not throw down the gate that I guard. Let me go and declare thy will
to the queen, to Irkalla." He went before the queen. And hearing of the
coming of the Lady of the Gods, Irkalla was angered terribly. She bade
the Watchman open the gates and take possession of the new-comer
according to the ancient usages. He returned to the first gate. He laid
hands upon that side of the gate on which the dust lies thick; he drew
the bolt on which the dust is scattered. "Enter, O Lady, and let the
realm of Irkalla be glad at thy coming; let the palace of the land
whence none return rejoice at thee." He said this

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

and he took the great crown off Ishtar's head. "Why hast thou taken the
great crown off my head?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the law of
Irkalla."

So Ishtar entered through the first gate and saw the second wall before
her. With head bent she went towards it. The Watchman at her coming
opened the second gate. "Enter, O Lady, and let the realm of Irkalla be
glad at thy coming; let the palace of the land whence none return
rejoice at thee." He said this and put forth his hand and took that
which was at her neck, the eight-rayed star. "Why, O Watchman, hast thou
taken the eight-rayed star?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the law of
Irkalla."

So the Lady Ishtar, her head bent, the radiance gone from her, went
through the second gate and saw the third wall before her. The Watchman
opened the gate that was there. "Enter, O Lady. Let the realm of Irkalla
be glad at thee; let the palace of the land whence none return rejoice
before thee." He said this and he took the bracelets from off her
arms-the bracelets of gold and lapis-lazuli. "Why, O Watchman, hast thou
taken the bracelets from off mine arms?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the
law of Irkalla."

So Ishtar, her head bent, the radiance gone from her, and no longer
magnificent in the gold of her ornaments, went through the third gate
and saw the fourth wall before her. The Watchman opened the gate that
was there. "Enter, O Lady. Let the realm of Irkalla be glad at thee; let
the palace of the land whence none return rejoice before thee." He said
this and he took the shoes from off her feet. "Why, O Watchman, hast
thou taken the shoes from off my feet?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the
law of Irkalla."

So the Lady Ishtar, her head bent, the radiance gone from her, no longer
magnificent in the gold of her ornaments, with stumbling and halting
steps went through the fourth gate and saw the fifth wall before her.
The Watchman opened the gate that was there. "Enter, O Lady. Let the
realm of Irkalla be glad at thee; let the palace of the land whence none
return rejoice before thee." He said this, and he put forth his hand,
and he took her resplendent veil away. "Why hast thou taken the veil
from me?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the law of Irkalla."

So Ishtar, her head bent, the radiance gone from her, no longer
magnificent in the gold of her ornaments, no longer resplendent in her

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

apparel, with stumbling and halting steps went through the fifth gate
and saw the sixth wall before her. The Watchman opened the gate that was
there. "Enter, O Lady. Let the realm of Irkalla be glad at thee; let the
palace of the land whence none return rejoice before thee." He said
this, and he took off her outer robe. "Why hast thou taken my outer
robe?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the law of Irkalla."

So the Lady Ishtar, her head bent, the radiance gone from her, no longer
magnificent in the gold of her ornaments, with apparel no longer full
nor resplendent, with stumbling and halting steps went through the sixth
gate and saw the seventh wall before her. The Watchman opened the gate
that was there. "Enter, O Lady. Let the realm of Irkalla be glad at
thee; let the palace of the land whence none return rejoice before
thee." He said this, and he took off her garment. "Why hast thou taken
off my garment?" "Enter so, O Lady; this is the law of Irkalla."

And naked, with her splendour, and her power, and her beauty all gone
from her, the Lady of the Gods came before Irkalla. And Irkalla, the
Goddess of the World Below, had the head of a lioness and the body of a
woman; in her hands she grasped a serpent. Before her stood Bêlit-sêri,
the Lady of the Desert, holding in her hands the tablets on which she
wrote the decrees of Irkalla.

Ishtar saw the Dead that were there. They were without light; they ate
the dust and they fed upon mud; they were clad in feathers and they had
wings like birds; they lived in the darkness of night. And seeing their
state, Ishtar became horribly afraid. She begged of Irkalla to give her
permission to return from the House of Dust where dwelt high priests,
ministrants, magicians, and prophets; where dwelt Tammuz, the spouse of
her youth. But Irkalla said to her:

Thou art now in the land whence none return, in the place of darkness;  
Thou art in the House of Darkness, the house from which none who enter
come forth again;  
Thou hast taken the road whose course returns not;  
Thou art in the house where they who enter are excluded from light,  
In the place where dust is their bread and mud their food,  
Where they behold not the light, where they dwell in darkness,  
And are clothed like birds in garments of feathers.  
Over the door and across the bolt the dust is scattered.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Then Irkalla cursed Ishtar; she called upon Namtar, the demon of the
plague, to smite the Lady of the Gods. And Namtar went to her and smote
her, so that the plague afflicted every member of her body. Ishtar saw
the light no more; feathers came upon her; she ate dust and fed upon the
mud; she was as one of those whom she had sent down into Irkalla's
realm.

She stayed in Irkalla's realm and went no more upon the earth. A season
passed. The earth was not as it had been when Ishtar went upon it. No
longer did the cow low for the bull; no longer did the bull bellow so
that the cows might hear of his might. The ewe did not run to ram; the
mare was not drawn to the stallion; the he-goat, chief of a flock,
browsed with the flock as though there were no longer male and female;
the birds did not call to each other. The hero did not take the maid in
his arms; the warrior returning did not embrace his wife; his wife
uttered no words of love to the warrior. None sought the women in the
temple of Ishtar. The women in the temple did not call to the men who
went by. So it was on the earth when Ishtar was in the World Below.

Shamash, the Sun God, beheld all this; he knew of the calamity that had
befallen men and birds and beasts and all things upon the earth. The
generation of creatures would die; no life would be left after them, and
the creation of the Gods would perish. So Shamash said in his heart, and
in haste he came before Ea, the great God. And when he had heard what
Shamash related--that life was not being renewed upon the earth--and
when it had been made known to him that this was because Ishtar was
being held in the World Below, Ea, the great God, formed a being,
Ud-dushu-nāmir, and bade him go down into the World Below, and into the
presence of Irkalla, and conjure her by the power of the great Gods to
give him the Water of Life with which to sprinkle Ishtar, the Lady of
the Gods.

So the being whom Ea had formed went into the presence of Irkalla, and
over Ud-dushu-nāmir Irkalla had no power. He conjured her by the power
of the great Gods to grant him the Water of Life with which to sprinkle
Ishtar, the Lady of the Gods. Irkalla was enraged when she heard his
saying; she opened her lion's mouth; her woman's body shook with rage as
she cursed Ishtar and cursed the being that was before her. But the
being that Ea had formed stood there, not trembling at all

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

at her curses. The Water of Life she had to bring to him. She put the
vessel that held it into his hands; she bade Namar bring forth the Lady
of the Gods.

Ishtar came from out the dust and the mud; the Water of Life was
sprinkled upon her. She stood before Irkalla's seat living, but pale,
powerless, naked, and trembling.

Nadu the Watchman put his hand upon the bolt on which the dust lay; he
opened the gate on which the dust was scattered. Ishtar passed through
the gate. He gave her her garment; she put the garment upon her and her
nakedness was covered. She went upon her way. He opened the second gate.
He gave her back her outer robe. He gave her back her veil; he gave her
back the shoes for her feet; he gave her back her bracelets of gold and
lapis-lazuli; he gave her back the eight-rayed star that had been at her
neck. At last he opened the outer gate of the realm of Irkalla. He took
the great crown and he set it upon her head. Then Ishtar went from the
realm of Irkalla. But she did not go in splendour, she did not go in
radiance; she went with her head bowed. She went into the world where
light was. No blossoms were there, and no birds called.

But no sooner had she come upon the earth than her splendour and power
came back to Ishtar; she walked as a Goddess--yea, as the Lady of the
Gods. The creatures of the earth heard her voice. Then the bull
bellowed; the cow heard and lowed back to him; the stallion neighed and
the mare was drawn to him; the warrior returning embraced his wife; his
wife said, "Thou shalt be my man, I shall be thy woman"; the hero took
the maid in his arms. All creation rejoiced; all creation praised the
works of Ishtar. And the Gods rejoiced, knowing that what they had
created would not pass away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jamshīd the Resplendent](omw27.md)
