[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw38)  [Next](omw40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span id="img_10700"></span>

[![](tn/10700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10700.jpg)

# ROMAN

## THE CHILDREN OF MARS: NUMA THE LAW-GIVER: THE SIBYL: POMONA AND VERTUMNUS

### THE CHILDREN OF MARS

### I

In the ancient Latin land there was a city which, because it stretched
out along a ridge, was called Alba Longa. In the old days Silvius
reigned there: he was called by that name because he was born in a
forest. After him there reigned Æneas Silvius and Latinus Silvius: three
kings kept the name that came to their forefathers from the forest. Then
there came a king who was named Proca; he bequeathed the ancient realm
of the Silvan family to his son, Numitor.

But Numitor had a brother, a violent and a crafty man named Amulius. No
sooner was Proca dead than this man drove out of the king's house the
one to whom the realm had been bequeathed. He seized Numitor's young
sons and he put them to death. A daughter only was left in Numitor's
house. Amulius, that violent and crafty man, was afraid of what might
happen through this girl; he feared that she might marry some powerful
prince and have children who would claim the Alban realm. And yet he
might not put her to death as he had put her brothers to death--the
people would turn against him if they knew him for the slayer of a
maiden. Not with violence, therefore, did he deal with her, but with
craft: he had the maiden (Rhea Silvia she was named) placed amongst
those who might never marry, amongst those who tended the sacred fire of
Vesta and were named Vestal Virgins, and this he did under the pretence
of honouring his brother's daughter.

In the forest Rhea Silvia met a man with whom there went a wolf and a
woodpecker. He forced her to espouse him. And he was Mars, the War God
of the Latin people.

The Vestals who made themselves unfit to tend the sacred fire were
condemned to death by the people. Amulius now had an excuse for
destroying what remained of the house of Numitor. He had Rhea

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Silvia seized and manacled and cast into prison.
She gave birth to twirl boys. The king ordered that they be taken out
and drowned in the river.

That river was the one that had been called in the old days the Albula:
a king of Alba whose name was Tiberinus was drowned in it, and its name
then was changed to Tiber. Now at the season of the year when Rhea
Silvia's twin boys were born the river spreads its stream beyond its
banks, making shallow and stagnant pools. The slaves who had been
ordered to drown the children brought them only as far as one of these
pools. There they left the basket in which the twins were and went away,
thinking that a very little water would drown the babes.

The basket went amongst the sedges and was held there. Then the water
receded, leaving the basket upon the mud. A she-wolf came down to that
place: she stood over the children and she let them suck from her teats.
And a woodpecker came upon the basket and dropped food into their
mouths. So the children were nourished by the wolf and the woodpecker
that went with Mars, their father.

And in time a shepherd named Faustulus, in chasing a wolf that went very
slowly away from him, came to a sedgy place and found a basket there
with twin babes in it. He brought them to his hut and gave them to his
wife to rear. And so the two grandsons of Numitor were brought up in the
hut of this shepherd.

They were brought up as shepherd boys. But, born from the embrace of
Mars and having a she-wolf for their foster-mother, they were not lads
who were content to be always with their sheep. They ranged the
mountains and the forest. They hunted wild beasts. Other boys followed
them, taking them for leaders. And after they had grown in hardiness and
resoluteness they made attacks upon gangs of robbers and took their
spoil from them. Often they did this. And the spoil that was taken the
leaders shared with their following.

By this time the twins had names: one was named Romulus and the other
Remus. Now at that time the hill that is now called the Palatine was the
scene of a festival called the Lupercalia. Youths stripped and ran about
naked by way of doing honour to a God. Romulus and Remus and their
companions came to the hill and joined in the festival. Remus stripped
and ran naked with other youths who were there. And then the companions
were set upon by a

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

band of robbers whose spoil they had taken. Remus was not able to defend
himself and he was taken by the robbers. Romulus followed them, and saw
his brother put into the king's prison.

He went back to the shepherd's hut. When Romulus told his foster-father
that Remus was in the prison of King Amulius, Faustulus, the shepherd of
Numitor, became all stirred up. He had come to think that the youths
whom he had brought up in his but were the children of the royal house.
He knew that Rhea Silvia's twin boys had been cast into the river, and
he knew that he had found these twins at a time not long after King
Amulius's sentence had been carried out. But always the shepherd had
been afraid to disclose his thought to any one.

But when Romulus told him that Remus had been taken and was about to be
brought before the king on a charge of making raids upon the land,
Faustulus told the youth that he and his brother were, in all
likelihood, the grandsons of Numitor--of Numitor to whom Proca had left
the Alban realm. Now Romulus had seen Numitor: he had come back to Alba
Longa, and, because he was old and feeble and had no children nor
friends, his life was left to him, and he was even permitted to live at
the king's house.

Romulus sent messages to his grandfather: Numitor was amazed at what was
told in them. Then he went to where Remus was imprisoned: he looked upon
the features of the youth, he noted his bold bearing, and he thought
that he saw in him a likeness to the Silvan kings. Then to Romulus's
messengers he declared himself ready to help to deliver Remus.

Romulus came before the king's house; his shepherd friends were with
him, and they were armed. Numitor drew off the king's defenders by
declaring that the citadel was being attacked by invading enemies. The
guards went from the house to the citadel. Then Remus broke out of the
prison. The king had few left to defend him, and he was slain by the
hand of Romulus.

Numitor brought together the council of the people. He told them of
Amulius's crimes, and he reminded them that the Alban realm had been
bequeathed to him, Numitor, by King Proca. The people hailed Numitor as
king; the youths Romulus and Remus were acknowledged to be of the royal
house, and they agreed to serve their grandfather.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

After a time they were seized with a desire to found a city in the place
where they had been exposed and where they had been brought up. Now in
Alba Longa there were already too many folk, especially were there too
many young men. The proposal to found a new city under the leadership of
the youths Romulus and Remus was pleasing to all the youths of the
place.

So the brothers and their followers went to the hills on which they had
guarded their sheep and in the glades of which they had hunted game and
harried robbers. Romulus took the Palatine Hill for his quarters, and
Remus took the Aventine Hill. Unto Remus the first augury was shown. He
saw a flight of vultures--six of them. Now the vulture was sacred
because it was a bird that did not prey on other birds, but ate only of
what was dead. When Remus saw these vultures, those who were with him
cried out that he was the one who was to found the city and gave a name
to it. But no sooner was the omen reported than another flight of
vultures was shown to Romulus--twelve vultures. Thereupon each of the
twins was saluted by his own followers as the one who would found the
city, give a name to it, and rule over it after it had been built.

A quarrel grew up between the brothers and between the followers of
Romulus and the followers of Remus. Romulus, declaring that to him the
omen was given because he had been shown twice the number of birds that
had been shown Remus, set out to build a wall that would protect the
city. Remus mocked at him; in mockery he leaped over the wall. Then
Romulus struck his brother down, slaying him. "So perish all who leap
over my walls," Romulus said.

So it was Romulus who founded it and named the city--*Rome*--and became
king over it. The city at first had only a scanty population, for few
people joined themselves to the followers of Romulus and Remus. Then,
that he might draw people to the city, Romulus founded a sanctuary
between two groves on the way up the hill that is now called the
Capitoline Hill; it was a sanctuary for men who had done dangerous
things, or who had debts that they could not meet, and for all men who,
for one reason or another, were being pursued. Those who came into that
sanctuary could have safety. And many dangerous and desperate men came
there, and were received

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

into Romulus's community, adding strength and daring to the populace of
the city upon the hills.

In that city there were few women; many young men who had come with
Romulus and Remus and all the fugitive men who had come to the sanctuary
were without wives. Rome, on account of the lack of children, might not
last long as a city. Romulus sent embassies to all the neighbouring
states and cities asking them to make marriage alliances with his
people. But this new city was not liked by the neighbouring cities and
states: they thought it was a camp rather than a city--a camp of outcast
and dangerous men. The envoys were dismissed with scorn. "Unless you
open a sanctuary for run-away women there will be no wives for you," the
envoys were told. And those who said this to them hoped that no families
would grow up in Rome and that the city would become forsaken.

The young men of Rome took what was said as an insult--an insult that
they bitterly resented. Romulus was angered, and he made up his mind
that he would get wives for the men of this city by force or by guile.
At harvest-time the Romans kept the festival of Consus whose altar was
underground: he was the God who helped the people to garner and store
their crops. By a proclamation that Romulus made, the people of the
neighbouring state were invited to a great spectacle that the Romans
promised to show.

The Sabines were the people who lived nearest to the Romans. They were
curious to know what kind of celebration the Romans would have. Many of
them came to the city bringing their wives and children, their growing
boys and girls. They were hospitably received by the Romans and were
given lodging in their houses. They saw the city; they looked at its
wall and its defences, and they marvelled at the growth that they saw.

And then they were shown the spectacle. It was of young men upon horses.
The Sabines looked on, delighted with the appearance of the young men
and their fine management of their horses. But suddenly the horsemen
dashed amongst them. The Sabines were scattered; fathers and brothers
who could defend daughters and sisters were crowded and held at one end
of the field. Then the young Romans seized the Sabine maidens and
carried them off as their brides.

The Sabine fathers and mothers went back to their homes in sorrow

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and indignation. They cursed the Romans for the crime of violating
hospitality.

Romulus sent envoys to the Sabine king. He declared to the king that the
maidens would be wedded solemnly to their captors and that they would
become sharers in all that Rome possessed. And he declared, too, that
each Roman would not only endeavour to be a good husband to his Sabine
bride, but that he would strive with all his power to console her for
the loss of home and parents.

As Romulus said, so it came about. But first there was war. The Sabine
fathers in mourning garments went amongst the people, striving to stir
them up to punish the Romans for the violence done to the maidens. And
soon Romulus had to defend Rome from the rage of the Sabines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Children of Mars, Part II](omw40)
