[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw32)  [Next](omw34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEMETER

Once when Demeter, daughter of Kronos and Rhea, was going through the
world, making men's fields fertile, she heard a cry that came to her
from across high mountains and mounted up to her from the sea. Demeter's
heart shook when she heard that cry, for she knew that it came to her
from her daughter, from the maiden Persephone.

She stayed not in the fields, but she hurried, hurried away to Sicily
and to the fields of Enna, where she had left Persephone. All Enna she
searched, and all Sicily, but she found no trace of Persephone, nor of
the maidens with whom Persephone had been playing. From all whom she met
she begged for tidings, but although some had seen the maidens gathering
flowers and playing together, no one could tell Demeter why her child
had cried out nor where she had since gone.

There were some who could have told her. One was a nymph. But she,
before Demeter came to her, had been changed into a spring of water. And
now, not being able to speak and tell Demeter where her child had gone
and who had carried her away, she showed in the water the girdle of
Persephone that she had caught in her hands. And Demeter, finding the
girdle of her daughter in the spring, knew that she had been carried off
by violence. She lighted a torch at Ætna's burning mountain, and for
nine days and nine nights she went searching for her through the
darkened places of the earth.

Then, upon a high and a dark hill, the Goddess Demeter came face to face
with Hekate, the Moon. Hekate, too, had heard the cry of Persephone; she
had sorrow for Demeter's sorrow: she spoke to her as the two stood on
that dark, high hill, and told her that she should go to Helios for
tidings--to bright Helios, the watcher for the Gods, and beg Helios to
tell her who it was who had carried off by violence her child
Persephone.

Demeter came to Helios. He was standing before his shining steeds,
before the impatient steeds that drew the sun through the course of the
heavens. Demeter stood in the way of those impatient steeds; she

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

begged of Helios who sees all things upon the earth to tell her who it
was who had carried off by violence Persephone, her child.

And Helios, who may make no concealment, said, "Queenly Demeter, know
that the King of the Underworld, dark Hades, has carried off Persephone
to make her his Queen in the realm that I never shine upon." He spoke,
and as he did, his horses shook their manes and breathed out fire,
impatient to be gone. Helios sprang into his chariot and went flashing
away.

Demeter, knowing that one of the Gods had carried off Persephone against
her will, and knowing that what was done had been by the will of Zeus,
would go no more into the assemblies of the Olympians. She quenched the
torch that she had held in her hands for nine days and nine nights; she
put off her robe of Goddess, and she went wandering over the earth,
uncomforted for the loss of her child. No longer did she appear as a
Goddess gracious to men; no longer did she bless their fields. None of
the things that it pleased her once to do would Demeter do any longer.

 

Persephone had been playing with the nymphs who are the Daughters of
Ocean in the lovely fields of Enna. They went to gather the flowers that
grow there in the spring-time irises and crocuses, lilies, hyacinths,
and rose-blooms. As they went gathering flowers in their baskets they
had sight of the pool that the white swans come to sing in.

Beside a deep chasm that had been made in the earth a wonder-flower was
growing--in colour it was like the crocus, but it sent forth a perfume
that was like the perfume of a hundred flowers. And Persephone, as she
went towards it, thought that having gathered that flower she would have
something more wonderful than her companions had.

She did not know that Hades, the Lord of the Underworld, had caused the
flower to grow there so that she might be drawn by it to the chasm that
he had made.

As Persephone stooped to pluck the wonder-flower, dark Hades, in his
chariot of iron, dashed up through the chasm, and, grasping the maiden
by the waist, set her beside him. Only Cyane, the nymph, tried to save
Persephone, and it was then that she caught her girdle in her hands.

The maiden cried out, first because her flowers had been spilled,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and then because she was being reft away. She cried out to her mother,
and her cry went over the high mountains and sounded up from the sea.
The Daughters of Ocean, affrighted, fled and sank down into the depths
of the sea.

In his great chariot of iron that was drawn by black steeds, Hades
rushed down through the chasm that had been made. Into the Under. world
he went; he dashed across the River Styx, and brought the chariot up
beside his throne. And on his dark throne he seated Persephone, the
fainting daughter of Demeter.

No more did the Goddess Demeter make fertile the fields of men: weeds
grew where crops should be growing; men feared that in a while they
would famish for lack of bread.

She wandered through the world, her thought all upon her child,
Persephone, who had been taken from her. Once she sat by a well by a
wayside, thinking upon the daughter whom she might not come to and who
might not come to her.

She saw four maidens come near; their grace and their youth reminded her
of her Persephone. They stepped lightly along, carrying bronze pitchers
in their hands, for they were coming to the Well of the Maidens beside
which Demeter sat.

The maidens thought when they looked upon her that the Goddess was some
ancient woman who had a sorrow in her heart. Seeing that she was so
noble and so sorrowful looking, the maidens, as they drew clear water
into their pitchers, spoke kindly to her.

"Why do you stay away from the town, mother?" one of the maidens asked.
"Why do you not come to the houses? We think that you look as if you
were shelterless and alone, and we should like to tell you that there
are many houses in our town where you would be welcomed."

Demeter's heart went out to the maidens because they looked so young and
fair and simple and spoke out of such kind hearts. She said to them:
"Where can I go, dear children? My people are far away, and there are
none in all the world who would care to be near me."

Said one of the maidens, "There are princes in the land who would
welcome you in their houses if you would consent to nurse one of their

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

young children. But why do I speak of other princes beside Keleos, our
father? In his house you would, indeed, have welcome. But lately a babe
has been born to Metaneira, our mother, and she would greatly rejoice to
have one as wise as you to nurse little Demophon."

All the time that she watched them and listened to their voices Demeter
felt that the grace and youth of the maidens made them like her
Persephone. She thought that it would ease her heart to be in the house
where these maidens were, and she was not loath to have them go and ask
of their mother to have her come to nurse the infant child.

Swiftly they ran back to their home, their hair streaming behind them
like crocus flowers, kind and lovely girls whose names are well
remembered--Kallidike and Kleisidike, Demo and Kallithoe. They went to
their mother and they told her of the stranger woman whose name was
Doso. She would make a wise and kind nurse for little Demophon, they
said. Their mother, Metaneira, rose up from the couch she was sitting on
to welcome the stranger. But when she saw her at the door, awe came over
her, so majestical the stranger seemed.

Metaneira would have her seat herself on the couch, but the Goddess took
the lowliest stool, saying in greeting, "May the Gods give you all good,
lady."

"Sorrow has set you wandering from your good home," said Metaneira to
the Goddess, "but now that you have come to this place you shall have
all that this house can bestow if you will rear the infant Demophon,
child of many hopes and prayers."

The child was put into the arms of Demeter; she clasped him to her
breast, and little Demophon looked up into her face and smiled. Then
Demeter's heart went out to the child and to all who were of that
household.

He grew in strength and beauty in her charge. And little Demophon was
not nourished as other children are nourished, but even as the Gods in
their childhood were nourished. Demeter fed him on ambrosia, breathing
on him with her divine breath the while. And at night she laid him on
the hearth, amongst the embers, with the fire all around him. This she
did that she might make him immortal, and like to the Gods.

But one night Metaneira looked out from the chamber where she

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

lay, and she saw the nurse take little Demophon and lay him in a place
on the hearth, with the burning brands all round him. Then Metaneira
started up; she sprang to the hearth, and she snatched the child from
beside the burning brands. "Demophon, my son," she cried, "what would
this stranger woman do to you, bringing bitter grief to me that ever I
let her take you in her arms?"

Then said Demeter, "Foolish, indeed, are you mortals, and not able to
foresee what is to come to you of good or of evil! Foolish, indeed, are
you, Metaneira, for in your heedlessness you have cut off this child
from an immortality like to the immortality of the Gods themselves. For
he had lain in my bosom, and had become dear to me, and I would have
bestowed on him the greatest gift that the Divine Ones can bestow. I
would have made him deathless and unaging. All this, now, has gone by.
Honour he shall have, indeed, but Demophon will know age and death."

The seeming old age that had been upon her had fallen from Demeter;
beauty and stature were hers, and from her robe there came a heavenly
fragrance. There came such light from her body that the chamber shone.
Metaneira remained there, trembling and speechless, unmindful even to
take up the child that had been laid upon the ground.

It was then that his sisters heard Demophon wail. One ran from her
chamber and took the child in her arms; another kindled again the fire
on the hearth; the others made ready to bathe and care for the infant.
All night they cared for him, holding him in their arms and at their
breasts, but the child would not be comforted; the nurses who handled
him now were less skillful than was the Goddess-nurse.

As for Demeter, she left the house of Keleos and went upon her way,
lonely in her heart, and unappeased. And in the world that she wandered
through, the plough went in vain through the ground; the furrow was sown
without any avail, and the race of men saw themselves near perishing for
lack of bread.

Once again Demeter came near the Well of the Maidens. She thought of the
daughters of Keleos as they came towards the well that day, the bronze
pitchers in their hands, and with kind looks for the Stranger--she
thought of them as she sat by the well again. And then She thought of
little Demophon, the child she had held at her breast.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] No stir of living was in the land near their
home; only weeds grew in their fields. As she sat there and looked
around her there came into Demeter's heart a pity for the people in
whose house she had dwelt.

She rose up and she went into the house of Keleos. She found the king
beside the house measuring out a little grain. The Goddess went to him;
she told him that because of the love she bore his household she would
bless his fields so that the seed he had sown in them would come to
growth. Keleos rejoiced; he called all the people together; they would
raise a temple there to Demeter, they vowed. She went through the fields
and blessed them, and the seed they had sown began to grow. And the
Goddess for a while dwelt amongst the people. The place was Eleusis.

 

But still she kept away from the assemblies of the Gods. Zeus sent a
messenger to her-Iris with the golden wings--bidding her to Olympos.
Demeter would not join the Olympians. Then, one after another, the Gods
and Goddesses of Olympos came to her; no one was able to make her cease
from grieving for Persephone, or to go again into the company of the
immortal Gods.

And so it came about that Zeus was compelled to send a messenger down to
the Underworld to bring Persephone back to the mother who had grieved so
much for the loss of her. Hermes was the messenger whom Zeus sent.
Through the darkened places of the earth Hermes went, and he came to the
dark throne where Hades sat, Persephone beside him. Then Hermes spoke to
the Lord of the Underworld, saying that Zeus commanded that Persephone
should come forth from the Underworld that her mother might look upon
her.

Persephone, hearing of the word of Zeus that might not be gainsaid,
uttered the only cry that had left her lips since she had sent out that
cry that had reached her mother's heart. And Hades, hearing the command
of Zeus that might not be denied, bowed his dark, majestic head.

She might go to the Upperworld and rest herself in the arms of her
mother, he said. And then he cried out, "Ah, Persephone, strive to feel
kindliness in your heart towards me who carried you off by violence and
against your will. I can give to you one of the great kingdoms that the
Olympians rule over, albeit that it is a dark kingdom. And I, who

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

am brother to Zeus, am a fitting husband for you, Demeter's child."

So Hades, the dark Lord of the Underworld, said, and he made ready the
chariot with the deathless horses that Persephone might go up from his
kingdom.

Beside the single tree in his domain Hades stayed his chariot. A single
fruit grew upon that tree, a bright pomegranate fruit. Persephone stood
up in the chariot and plucked the fruit from the tree. Then did Hades
prevail upon her to divide the fruit; having divided it, Persephone ate
seven of the pomegranate seeds.

It was Hermes who took the whip and shook the reins of the chariot. He
drove on, and neither the sea nor the water-courses, nor the glens, nor
the mountain-peaks, stayed the deathless horses of Hades; soon the
chariot was brought near to where Demeter awaited the coming of her
daughter.

And when, from a hilltop, Demeter saw the chariot approaching, like a
wild bird she flew to clasp her child. Persephone, when she saw her
mother's dear eyes, sprang out of the chariot, and fell upon her neck
and embraced her. Long and long Demeter held her dear child in her arms,
gazing, gazing upon her. Suddenly her mind misgave her. With a great
fear at her heart she cried out, "Dearest, has any food passed your lips
in all the time you have been in the Underworld?"

She had not tasted food in all the time she had been there, Persephone
said. And then, suddenly, she remembered the pomegranate that Hades had
asked her to divide. When she told how she had eaten seven seeds from
it, Demeter wept; her tears fell upon Persephone's face.

"Ah, my dearest," she cried, "if you had not eaten the pomegranate seeds
you could stay with me, and always we should have been together. But now
that you have eaten food in it, the realm of Hades has a claim upon you.
You may not stay always with me here.

"Again you will have to go back and dwell in the dark places under the
earth, and sit upon Hades' throne. But not always will you be there.
When the flowers bloom upon the earth you shall come up from the realm
of darkness, and in great joy we shall go through the world together,
Demeter and Persephone."

And so it has been since Persephone came back to her mother after

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

having eaten the pomegranate seeds. For two seasons of the year she
stays with Demeter; for one season she stays with her dark lord. While
she is with her mother there is spring-time on the earth. Demeter
blesses the furrows, her heart being glad because her daughter is with
her once more. The furrows become heavy with grain, and soon the whole
wide earth has grain and fruits, leaves and flowers. When the furrows
are reaped, when the grain has been gathered, when the dark season
comes, then Persephone goes from her mother; going down into the dark
places, she sits beside her mighty lord, Hades, upon his throne. Not
sorrowful is she there; she sits with her head unbowed, for she knows
herself to be a mighty queen. She has joy, too, knowing of the seasons
when she may walk with Demeter, her mother, on the wide places of the
earth, through fields of flowers and fruit and ripening grain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Orpheus](omw34.md)
