[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw46)  [Next](omw48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DEATH OF CONAIRE MÓR, THE KING OF IRELAND

### I

When Eterscel, the king, died, a bull was slain; then one who was a
diviner drank of the broth and ate of the flesh of the bull and went
into a slumber, and truth-compelling spells were chanted over him. All
this was done so that it might be shown to the people what man was
destined to be king over them.. In his slumber the diviner cried out
that he saw the one who was destined to be the King of Ireland: he saw
him as a naked man carrying a sling, and with a stone in the sling,
coming by night along the road to Tara. Messengers were forth. with sent
to meet this naked man, and to bring him into the king's house and
proclaim him king.

Now at that time a youth who had been brought up in Eterscel's house and
recognized as Eterscel's son was playing with his foster-brothers along
the plain of the Liffey. This youth was Prince Conaire. And while he was
with his foster-brothers he saw a flock of birds that were wonderful for
their size and their colour, and he drove towards them. The birds flew,
and lighted on the ground, and flew again as Conaire followed them;
always they kept a spear-cast ahead of his chariot. He became separated
from his foster-brothers. At last the birds lighted on the shore of the
sea; then Conaire dismounted from his chariot, and went towards them, a
sling in his hand.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Thereupon the flock of birds turned themselves into men; they came
towards him with spears and swords. One of them protected Conaire.
"Know," he said to him, "that I am Nemglan, king of thy father's birds,
and there is no one here but who is kin to thee."

"Until now," said Conaire, "I knew not this."

It was then that the youth learned of his parentage and of his descent.
His mother was Mess Buachalla. She was called by that name which means
"The Cowherds' Fosterling" because, from her infancy, she was brought up
by two cowherds. She was reared in a hut of wattles, but her fosterers
taught her many accomplishments, and no king's daughter was fairer than
she was. One of King Eterscel's folk looked into the wattled hut one
day; he saw there the fairest maiden in all Ireland, and he brought back
to the king's household word of what he had seen. Now it had been told
King Eterscel that he would marry a maiden of a strange race: when he
heard of the Cowherds' Fosterling, he said, "This is the woman who is to
be mine according to the prophecy."

Now that day, while Mess Buachalla sat within her wattled hut with the
last of the daylight coming through the wattles, a bird flew down
through the opening of the roof. The bird changed into a man, a radiant
being, and Mess Buachalla knew that he was one of the Danaan lords and
from the Land of the Ever-living. They became lovers, he and she, and
Conaire was the child of their love. Eterscel sent for Mess Buachalla,
and she became his queen, and it was thought that Conaire was the son of
King Eterscel.

Now those who were of the Danaan folk both loved and hated the race from
which Mess Buachalla had come. She was sprung from Etain who, in the
Land of the Ever-living, was loved by Midir the Proud. Etain became a
mortal and married Eochaid, the King of Ireland. And when Midir had
drawn Etain back to the Land of the Ever-living, Eochaid had laid waste
the places where the Danaan folk dwelt. From Eochaid who had laid waste
these places, through Mess Buachalla, daughter of his daughter, Conaire
was descended.

Thus Conaire learned from Nemglan of his parentage and of his descent.
"Thou shalt be made King of Ireland," Nemglan told him, "and these are
things that thou must never do." Then Nemglan gave Conaire a list of
*geise*, of things that were prohibited to him to do.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

"If thou dost break any of these prohibitions," he said, "nothing will
stand in the way of the Danaan vengeance upon thy house." Thereafter he
said, "A man stark naked who shall go at the end of the night along the
road to Tara, having a sling and a stone in the sling--’tis he shall be
made king." Then Conaire stripped off his raiment and went naked through
the night to Tara. Messengers were watching the roads for him. When they
met the naked man they clothed him in royal garments and brought him
into the king's house. All rejoiced to find that it was Prince Conaire
who was given to them for king. His foster-brothers were
there--Ferrogain, Fergobar, and Lomna Dru--and greatly did they rejoice
at his being made King of Ireland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Conaire Mór, the King of Ireland, Part II](omw48.md)
