[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw56)  [Next](omw58.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BUILDING OF THE WALL

Before the peace between the Aesir and the Wanes was made, and before
the seats of the Gods had been built up again, a strange being came
before the assembly of the Gods. "I know what is in the mind of Oithin,"
he said. "He would make strong and splendid his city here. I cannot
build halls that are beautiful. But I can build great walls that can
never be overthrown. Let me build a wall around Asgarth."

"How long will it take you to build a wall that will go around Asgarth?"
the Oithin All-Father asked him.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

"A year, O Oithin," said the Stranger.

Now Oithin knew that if a great wall were built around it, the Gods
would not have to spend all their strength defending Asgarth from the
Giants. He thought that no payment that the Stranger could ask would be
too much for the building of the wall. The Stranger swore that in a year
he would have the great wall built. Then Oithin made oath that the Gods
would give him what he asked in payment if the wall was finished to the
last stone in a year from that day.

The Stranger went away and came back on the morrow. It was the first day
of summer when he started work. He brought no one to help him except a
great horse. Now the Gods thought that the horse would do no more than
drag blocks of stone for the building of the wall. But the horse did
more than this. He set the stones in their places and mortared them
together. And day and night, by light and dark, the horse worked; soon a
great wall was rising around the halls that the Gods themselves were
building.

"What reward will the Stranger ask for the work he is doing for us?" the
Gods asked one another.

Oithin went to the Stranger. "We marvel at the work you and your horse
are doing for us," he said. "No one can doubt but that the great wall of
Asgarth will be built up by the first day of summer. What reward do you
claim? We would have it ready for you."

The Stranger turned from the work he was doing, leaving the great horse
to pile up the blocks of stone. "O Oithin, Father of the Gods," he said.
"The reward I shall ask for my work is the sun and the moon, and the
Goddess Freyja for my wife."

When Oithin heard of this price he was terribly angered. He went amongst
the other Gods who were then building their shining halls within the
great wall, and he told them what reward the Stranger had asked for. The
Gods said, "Without the sun and moon the world will wither away." And
the Goddesses said, "Without Freyja all will be gloom in Asgarth."

They would have let the wall remain unbuilt rather than let the Stranger
have the reward he claimed for the building of it. But one who was in
the company of the Gods spoke. He was Loki, a being who only half
belonged to the Gods; his father was the Wind Giant. "Let the Stranger
build the wall around Asgarth," Loki said, "and

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I will find a way to make him give up the hard
bargain he has made with the Gods. Go tell him that the wall must be
finished by the first day of summer, and that if it is not finished to
the last stone on that day, the price he asks will not be given him."

The Gods went to the Stranger and they told him that if the last stone
was not laid on the wall by the first day of summer, neither the sun nor
the moon nor Freyja would be given him. And now they knew that the
Stranger was one of the Giants.

The Giant and his great horse piled up the wall more quickly than
before. At night, while the Giant slept, the horse worked on, hauling
stones and laying them on the wall with his great forefeet. And day by
day the wall around Asgarth grew higher and higher.

But the Gods had no joy in seeing that great wall rise higher and higher
around their halls. The Giant and his horse would finish the work by the
first day of summer; then he would take the sun and the moon away, and
take, too, Freyja, who had come to them from the Wanes, and whom all in
Asgarth loved.

But Loki was not disturbed. He kept telling the Gods that he would find
a way to prevent him from finishing his work, and thus he would make the
Giant forfeit the terrible price he had led Oithin to promise him.

It was three days to summer-time. All the wall was finished except the
gateway. Over the gateway a stone was still to be placed. And the Giant,
before he went to sleep, bade his horse haul up a great block of stone
so that he might put it above the gateway in the morning, and so finish
his work two full days before summer.

It happened to be a beautiful moonlit night. Svathilfari, the Giant's
great horse, was hauling the largest stone he had ever hauled, when he
saw a little mare come galloping towards him. The great horse had never
seen so pretty a little mare, and he looked at her with surprise.

"Svathilfari, slave," said the little mare to him, and went frisking
past.

Svathilfari put down the stone he was hauling and called to the little
mare. She came back to him. "Why do you call me 'Svathilfari, slave'?"
said the great horse.

"Because you have to work night and day for your master," said the
little mare. "He keeps you working, working, working, and never

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

lets you enjoy yourself. You dare not leave that stone down and come and
play with me."

"Who told you I dare not do it?" said Svathilfari.

"I know you daren't do it," said the little mare, and she kicked up her
heels and ran across the moonlit meadow.

Now the truth is that Svathilfari was tired of working day and night.
When he saw the little mare go galloping off he became suddenly
discontented. He left the stone he was hauling on the ground. He looked
around and he saw the little mare looking at him. He galloped after her.

He did not catch up with the little mare. She went on swiftly. On she
went over the moonlit meadow, turning and looking back now and again at
the great Svathilfari, who came heavily after her. Down the
mountain-side the mare went, and Svathilfari, who now rejoiced in his
liberty, in the freshness of the wind and the smell of the flowers,
still followed her. With the morning's light they came near a cave; the
little mare went into it. They went through the cave. Then Svathilfari
caught up with the little mare, and the two went wandering together, the
little mare telling Svathilfari stories of the Dwarfs and the Elves.

They came to a grove and they stayed together in it, the little mare
playing so nicely with him that the great horse forgot all about time
passing. And while they were in the grove the Giant was going up and
down, searching for his great horse.

He had come to the wall in the morning, expecting to put the stone over
the gateway and so finish the work. But the stone that was to put the
finish on the work was not near. He called for Svathilfari, but the
great horse did not come. He went in search of him; he searched all down
the mountain-side, and he searched as far across the earth as the Realm
of the Giants. But he did not find Svathilfari.

The Gods saw the first day of summer come and the gateway of the wall
stand unfinished. They said to each other that if it were not finished
by the evening they need not give the sun and moon to the Giant, nor
Freyja. The hours of the summer day went past; the Giant did not raise
the stone over the gateway. In the evening he came before them.

"Your work is not finished," Oithin said to him. "You forced us

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

to a hard bargain, and now we need not keep it with you. You shall not
be given the sun and the moon; neither shall Freyja go with you.

"Only the wall I have built is so strong I would tear it down," said the
Giant. He went outside the wall he had built and away from Asgarth. Then
Loki returned. He told the Gods how he had transformed himself into a
little mare, and how he had led away Svathilfari, the Giant's great
horse. The Gods sat in their halls behind the great wall and rejoiced
that no enemy could come upon their seats and destroy them. But Thor did
not rejoice--Thor, the son of Oithin and Jorth, the champion of the Gods
and the guardian of oaths. He spoke in rage about what had been done to
cheat the Giant. Oithin did not rejoice: he knew that what had been done
would make the Giants their undying enemies, and set them against the
Aesir on the day of the great battle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mimir](omw58.md)
