[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw58)  [Next](omw60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BALDR

In Asgarth there were two places that meant strength and joy to the
Aesir and the Wanes: one was the garden where grew the apples that Ithun
gathered--the apples that gave youthfulness to those who ate

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

them, and the other was the Peace Stead, where, in a hall called
Breithablik, Baldr the Well-beloved dwelt.

In the Peace Stead no crime had ever been committed, no blood had ever
been shed, no falseness had ever been spoken. Contentment came into the
minds of all in Asgarth when they thought upon this place. Baldr who
dwelt there was beautiful. So beautiful was he that all white blossoms
on the earth were called by his name. So happy was he that all the birds
on the earth sang his name. So just and wise was he that the judgment he
pronounced might never be altered.

But even into Baldr's stead foreboding came. He had a dream. He dreamt
of Hel, the queen who is half living woman and half corpse. In his dream
Hel had come into Asgarth, saying, "A lord of the Aesir I must have to
dwell with me in my realm beneath the earth." A silence fell upon all
when Baldr had told his dream. And Oithin and Frigg, the father and
mother of Baldr, looked at each other with fear in their hearts.

Oithin went to his watch-tower. He waited there till Hugin and Munin,
the ravens that flew through the worlds and came back to him with
tidings of all that was happening, came to him. They flew back; lighting
on each of his shoulders they told him that a bed was spread and a chair
was left empty in Hel's habitation for some lordly comer.

And hearing this Oithin mounted Sleipnir, his eight-legged steed, and he
rode down towards the abodes of the dead. For three days and three
nights of silence he journeyed on. Once one of the hounds of Helheim
broke loose and bayed upon Sleipnir's tracks. For a day and a night
Garm, that hound, pursued them; Oithin smelled the blood that dripped
from its monstrous jaws.

At last he came to where, wrapped in their shrouds, a field of the dead
lay. He dismounted from Sleipnir; he called upon one to rise and speak
with him. It was on a dead prophetess he called. And when he pronounced
her name he uttered a rune that had the power to break the sleep of the
dead.

There was a groaning in the middle of where the shrouded ones lay. Then
Oithin cried out, "Arise, Volva, prophetess!" There was a stir in the
middle of where the shrouded ones lay, and a head and shoulders were
thrust up amongst the dead.

"Who calls upon Volva? The rains have drenched my flesh, and

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

the storms have shaken my bones for more seasons than the living know.
No living voice has the right to call me from my sleep with the dead."

"It is Vegtam the Wanderer who calls. For whom is the bed prepared and
the seat left empty in Hel's habitation?"

"For Baldr, Oithin's son, is the bed prepared, the mead brewed, and the
seat left empty. Now let me go back to my sleep with the dead." "Wise
woman, cease not! Who shall become the destroyer of Baldr? Who shall
steal the life from Oithin's son? Answer, Volva, prophetess!"

"Hoth the Blind shall be the destroyer of Baldr. Unwillingly I speak;
now let me be still." "Wise woman, cease not! Who shall bring vengeance
on those who do the evil deed? Who shall bring to the flames the slayer
of Baldr?"

"Vali, who is not yet born, shall bring vengeance on the doer of the
evil deed. His hands he shall not wash, his hair he shall not comb, till
he brings to the flames the slayer of Baldr. Unwillingly I spake, and
now I would be still."

"Wise woman, cease not! I fain would know who are the maidens who shall
weep for Baldr?" "Vegtam thou art not; Oithin thou art. Ride home,
Oithin; know that no one shall seek me till Loki is loosed from his
bonds, and until to the last battle the fighters shall come." Then there
was silence in the field of the dead. Oithin turned Sleipnir, his steed;
for four days, through the gloom and silence, he journeyed back to
Asgarth.

 

Frigg had felt the fear that Oithin had felt. She looked towards Baldr,
and the shade of Hel came between her and her son. But then she heard
the birds sing in the Peace Stead, and she knew that there was no thing
in all the world that would injure Baldr.

And to make sure she went to all the things that could hurt him, and
from each of them she took an oath that it would not injure Baldr the
Well-beloved. She took an oath from fire and from water, from iron and
from all metals, from earth and stones and great trees, from birds and
beasts and creeping things, from poisons and diseases. Very readily they
all gave oath that they would work no injury to Baldr.

When Frigg came back and told what she had accomplished, the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

gloom that had lain on Asgarth lifted. Baldr would be spared to them.
Hel might have a place prepared in her dark habitation, but neither fire
nor water, nor iron nor any other metal, nor earth nor stones nor great
wood, nor birds nor beasts nor creeping things, nor poisons nor
diseases, would help her to bring him down. "Hel has no arms to draw you
to her," the Aesir and Wanes cried to Baldr.

Hope was renewed for them, and they made games to honour Baldr. They had
him stand in the Peace Stead, and they brought against him all the
things that had sworn to leave him hurtless. And neither the battle-axe
flung at him, nor the stone out of the sling, nor the burning brand, nor
the deluge of water, would injure the beloved of Asgarth. The Aesir and
the Wanes laughed joyfully to see these things fall harmlessly from him
while a throng came to join them in the games, Dwarfs and friendly
Giants.

But Loki, who had been made outcast from Asgarth, came in with that
throng. He watched the games from afar. He saw the missiles and the
weapons being flung; he saw Baldr standing smiling and happy under the
strokes of metal and stones and great wood. He wondered at the sight,
but he knew that he might not ask the meaning of it from the ones who
knew him.

He changed his shape into that of an old woman; he went amongst those
who were making sport for Baldr. He spoke to Dwarfs and friendly Giants.
"Go to Frigg and ask. Go to Frigg and ask," was all the answer Loki got
from any of them.

Then to Frigg's hall Loki went. He told those in the hall that he was
Groa, the old Enchantress who was drawing out of Thor's head the
fragments of a grindstone that a Giant's throw had embedded in it. Frigg
knew about Groa, and she praised the enchantress for what she had done.

"But will you not tell me, O queen, what is the meaning of the things I
saw the Aesir and the Wanes doing?" Loki said. "I will tell you," said
Frigg, looking kindly and happily on the pretended old woman. "They are
hurling all manner of heavy and dangerous things at Baldr, my beloved
son. And all Asgarth cheers to see that neither metal, nor stone, nor
great wood will hurt him."

"But why will they not hurt him?" said the pretended old woman.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

"Because I have drawn an oath from all dangerous and threatening things
to leave Baldr hurtless," said Frigg.

"From all things, lady? Is there no thing in all the world that has not
taken an oath to leave Baldr hurtless?"

"Well, indeed, there is one thing that has not taken the oath. But that
thing is so small and weak that I passed it by without taking any
thought of it."

"What can it be, lady?"

"The Mistletoe that is without root or strength. It grows on the eastern
side of Valhall. I passed it by without drawing an oath from it."

"Surely you were not wrong to pass it by. What could the Mistletoe--the
rootless Mistletoe--do against Baldr?"

Saying this the pretended enchantress hobbled off.

But not far did the pretender go hobbling. He changed his gait and
hurried to the eastern side of Valhall. There a great oak-tree
flourished; out of a branch of it a little bush of Mistletoe grew. Loki
broke off a spray; with it in his hand he went to where the Aesir and
the Wanes were still playing, giving honour to Baldr.

All were laughing as Loki drew near, for the Giants and the Dwarfs, the
Wanes and the Heroes from Valhall, were all casting missiles. The Giants
threw too far, and the Dwarfs could not throw far enough; others threw
far and wide of the mark. In the midst of all that glee and gamesomeness
it was strange to see one standing joyless. But one stood so, and he was
of the Aesir--Hoth he was, Baldr's blind brother.

"Why do you not enter the game?" said Loki to him in his changed voice.

"I have no missile to throw at Baldr," said Hoth.

"Take this and throw it," said Loki. "It is a twig of the Mistletoe."

"I cannot see to throw it," said Hoth.

"I will guide your hand," said Loki. He put the twig of Mistletoe into
Hoth's hand; he guided the hand for the throw. The twig flew towards
Baldr. It struck him on the breast and it pierced him. Then Baldr fell
down with a deep groan.

The Aesir and the Wanes, the Dwarfs and the friendly Giants, the Heroes
out of Valhall, all stood in doubt and fear and amazement.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Loki slipped away. And blind Hoth, from whose
hand the twig of Mistletoe had gone, stood quiet, not knowing that his
throw had bereft Baldr of life.

Then a wailing sound arose around the Peace Stead. It was from the Aesir
and the Wanes. Baldr was dead; they began to lament him. And while they
were lamenting, Oithin came amongst them.

"Hel has won our Baldr from us," Oithin said to Frigg, as they both bent
over the body of their beloved son.

"Nay, I will not say it," Frigg cried. When the Aesir and the Wanes had
won their senses back, the mother of Baldr went amongst them. "Who
amongst you would win my love and good-will?" she asked. "Whoever would,
let him ride down to Hel's dark realm, and ask the queen to take ransom
for Baldr. It may be that she will take it, and let Baldr come back to
us. Who amongst you will go? Oithin's steed is ready for the journey."

Then forth stepped Hermodr the Bold, the brother of Baldr. He mounted
Sleipnir, and turned the eight-legged steed towards Hel's dark realm.

For nine days and nine nights Hermodr rode on; his way was through
rugged glens, one deeper and darker than the other. He came to the river
that is called. Gjöll and to the bridge across it that is all glittering
with gold. The pale maid who guards the bridge spoke to him,

"The hue of life is still on thee," said Modgudr, the pale maid, "why
dost thou journey down to Hel's deathly realm?"

"I am Hermodr," he said, "and I go to see if Hel will take ransom for
Baldr."

"Fearful is Hel's habitation for one to come to," said Modgudr, the pale
maid. "All around is a steep wall that even thy steed may hardly leap.
Its threshold is Precipice. The bed therein is Care. The table is
Hunger. The hanging of the chamber is Burning Anguish."

"Nevertheless, I am appointed to ride to Hel," said Hermodr the Bold.

"Baldr had ridden over Gjöll's Bridge," said Modgudr. "Down and north
lieth Hel-way."

Then Hermodr rode on till he came to Hel-gate; he dismounted from his
steed and made the girths fast; he mounted again and pricked

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sleipnir with his spurs; the eight-legged steed
leaped over the gate. Then Hermodr rode to the hall. Hel came out from
her hall and spoke to Hermodr. And Hel said that if Baldr was so well
beloved as was said she would take ransom for him and let him return to
Asgarth. "If all things in the world, quick and dead, weep for him, then
shall Baldr go back to the Aesir. But he shall remain with me if any
gainsay it, if any will not weep."

Joyously then did Hermodr turn Sleipnir; joyously did he ride back
through the rugged glens, each one less gloomy than the other. He
reached the upper world; he saw that all things were still lamenting for
Baldr. Joyously he rode onward. And all men whom he sought prayed that
Baldr be kept from Hel's dark realm. And the earth, and the stones, and
the trees, and the metals, all made the same prayer. But one day Hermodr
came upon a crow that was sitting on a dead branch of a tree. The crow
made no lament as he came near. She rose up, and flew away; Hermodr
followed her to make sure that she lamented for Baldr.

He lost sight of her near a cave. And then before the cave he saw a hag
with blackened teeth who raised no voice of lament. "If thou art the
crow that came flying here, make lament for Baldr," Hermodr said.

"I, Thokk, will make no lament for Baldr," the bag said. "Let Hel keep
what she holds."

"All things weep tears for Baldr," Hermodr said.

"Thokk will weep dry tears for him; I loved him not," she said.

Then Hermodr the Bold knew that he might not ride back to Hel's
habitation. All things knew that there was one thing in the world that
would not weep for Baldr. With head bowed over Sleipnir's mane, Hermodr
rode back to Asgarth.

 

After that the Aesir and the Wanes knew that no ransom would be taken,
and they knew that with Baldr the joy and content of Asgarth were gone
indeed. They made ready his body for the burning. First they covered
Baldr's body with a rich robe; each of the Aesir and the Wanes left
beside it a most cherished possession. Then they all took leave of him,
kissing him on the brow. But Nanna, his gentle wife, flung herself on
his dead breast, and her heart broke, and she died of

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

grief. Then did the Aesir and the Wanes weep afresh. And they took the
body of Nanna, and they placed it side by side with Baldr's body.

They took the body of Baldr and the body of Nanna and they brought them
to the sea. *Hringhorni* was the name of Baldr's ship: it was the
greatest of all ships; the Gods would have launched it and made Baldr's
funeral pyre upon it, but the ship stirred not forward for all the
effort that they made to move it. Then Hyrrokkinn, a Giantess, was sent
for. She came mounted on a great wolf and having a viper for a bridle.
Four Giants held fast the wolf when she alighted. Hyrrokkinn went to the
ship; with a single push she sent it into the sea. The rollers struck
out fire as the ship dashed over them, and all lands trembled.

Then were the bodies of Baldr and Nanna borne upon shipboard. Thor was
there with his hammer Mjollnir; Freyr was there in his chariot that was
drawn by the boar Gold-mane; Heimdallr was there on his horse called
Gold-top; Freyja was there in her chariot that was drawn by cats; Oithin
was there with his ravens upon his shoulders; Frigg and the rest of the
Goddesses and Gods were there. There were also Giants and Dwarfs. Fire
was kindled when the ship rode the water. And in the blaze of the fire
one was seen bending over the body of Baldr and whispering into his ear.
It was Oithin All-Father. He went off the ship and the fire rose into a
mighty burning. Speechlessly the Aesir and the Wanes, the Giants and the
Dwarfs, the Heroes out of Valhall, watched the burning. Tears streamed
down their faces, and all things lamented, crying, "Baldr the Beautiful
is dead, is dead."

And what was it that Oithin All-Father whispered to Baldr as he bent
above him, the flames of the burning ship around them? He whispered of a
Heaven above Asgarth that Surt's flames might not reach; he whispered of
a life that would come to beauty again after the world of men and the
world of the Gods had been searched through and through with fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Loki's Punishment](omw60)
