[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw51)  [Next](omw53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MATH, THE SON OF MATHONWY

### II. THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF GWYDION AND GILVAETHWY

He took his magic wand, and he struck Gilvaethwy, so that he became a
deer, and he seized upon Gwydion hastily lest he should escape from him.
He struck him with the same magic wand, and he became a deer also.
"Since now ye are in bonds, I will that ye go forth together and be
companions, and possess the nature of the animals whose form ye bear.
And this day twelvemonth come hither to me."

At the end of a year from that day, lo! there was a loud noise under the
wall, and the barking of the dogs of the palace together with the noise.
"Look," said Math the son of Mathonwy, "what is without." "Lord," said
one, "I have looked; there are there two deer and a fawn with them."
Then Math arose and went out. And when he came he beheld the three
animals. He lifted up his wand. "As ye were deer last year, be ye wild
hogs each and either of you, for the year that is to come." And
thereupon he struck them with his magic wand. "The young one I will take
and cause to be baptized," he said. "Be ye of the nature of wild swine,"
he said. "And this time twelvemonth be ye here under the wall."

At the end of the year the barking of dogs was heard under the wall of
the chamber. And Math arose and went forth, and when he came forth he
beheld three beasts: he saw two wild hogs of the woods and a young one
with them. "Truly," said Math, "this one I will take and cause to be
baptized. Now as for you, as ye were wild hogs last year, be ye wolves
each and either of you for the year that is to come." Thereupon he
struck them with his magic wand, and they became wolves. "And be ye of
like nature with the animals whose semblance ye bear, and return here
this day twelvemonth beneath this wall."

And at the same day at the end of the year, he heard a clamour and a
barking of dogs under the wall of the chamber. And Math arose and went
forth. And when he came, behold! he saw two wolves, and

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

a cub with them. "This one I will take," said Math, "and I will cause
him to be baptized." So the three that were the fawn, the young hog, and
the wolf-cub were baptized, and the names given them were Hydwn,
Hychdwn, and Bleiddwn, and they were the sons of Gilvaethwy.

Then Gwydion and Gilvaethwy he struck with his magic wand, and they
resumed their own nature. "Oh, men," said he, "for the wrong that ye did
unto me sufficient has been your punishment and your dishonour." And he
said to those who were around him, "Prepare now precious ointment for
these men, and wash their heads, and equip them." This was done, and the
brothers, the sons of Math's sister, were men that he could speak with
once more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Math, the Son of Mathonwy: Part III. Gwydion and
Arianrhod](omw53.md)
