[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw54)  [Next](omw56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span id="img_17900"></span>

[![Lemminkainen's Resurrection](tn/17900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17900.jpg.md)  
Lemminkainen's Resurrection  

# FINNISH

### LEMMINKAINEN, HIS DESTRUCTION AND HIS RESTORATION TO LIFE

Into the forest went Lemminkainen. As he went he chanted his Magic Song,
"O Tapio, Lord of the Forest, aid me: lead me where I may take my
quarry! Nyyrikki, O thou son of the Forest's Lord, red-capped one,
mighty hero, make a path for me through your father's domain; clear the
ground for me and keep me on the proper roadway"' Lemminkainen, the
handsome, the light-stepping one, chanted Magic Songs to win the forest
divinities as he went seeking the Elk of Hiisi.

Another Magic Song he chanted: "O Mielikki, Mistress of the Forest,
fair-faced, bountiful lady, send the game towards me; turn it into the
pathway of the hunter; open the thickets; unlock Tapio's storehouse;
make wide the door of his castle in the forest! Do this during this
hunting-trip of mine!" Other Magic Songs Lemminkainen chanted as he went
through the forest seeking the Elk of Hiisi. "If thou wilt not trouble
thyself about me, Mistress of the Forest, charge thy little
serving-girls to help me! And thou, Tapio's girl, little maiden of the
forest, put the flute to your mouth of honey, whistle through thy pipe
so that the Lady of the Forest may rouse herself and harken to my Magic
Songs!"

So he went through the forest; but the quarry he sought was not turned
towards him. Through the trackless forest he went, across the marshes,
over the heaths. At last he went up a mountain; he climbed a knoll; he
turned his eyes to the north-west; he turned his eyes to the north;
there, across the marshes, he saw Tapio's mansions with their doors and
windows all golden.

Then once more the quick-moving, light-stepping Lemminkainen went
onward. He dashed through all that lay across his path. Under the very
windows of the mansions of the Lord of the Forest he came. Through the
windows he saw those whose business it was to dispense the game to the
hunters. They were resting; they were lolling; their worst wear they had
on them. Under the windows Lemminkainen chanted his Magic Songs:

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

"Mistress of the Forest, wherefore do you sit here and do you let the
others sit here in such shabbiness? You are loathsome to behold! Yet
when I went through the forest I saw three castles--one a wooden one,
one a bone one, one a stone one; they had six windows, all bright, all
golden; they who were within had rustling, golden garments on! Re-array
as before thyself and thy household! Put away now your birch-bark shoes,
your old garments, your disgusting shabbiness! Mistress of the Forest,
put on thy garments of good fortune! Put thy golden bracelets on thy
wrists, thy golden rings on thy fingers, a head. dress of gold put on!
Put gold coins in thy hair, gold rings in thine ears, gold beads around
thy neck! Long and wearily have I wandered hereabouts; I wander for
nothing; the quarry I seek is not to be seen by me!

"Greybeard with the pine-leaf hat," he chanted, "with the cloak of moss!
Re-array the woods; give the aspens their greyness, give the alders a
robe of beauty, clothe the pine-trees in silver, Adorn the fir-trees
with gold, and the birch-trees with golden blossoms. Make it as in the
former years when days were better, when the waste-places flowed with
honey. O daughter of Tapio, Tuulikki, gracious virgin, drive the game
this way! Take a switch; strike the game on their haunches; drive the
game towards the one who seeks for it and waits for it! Master of
Tapio's mansions, mistress of Tapio's mansions, make wide the doors,
send forth the game that has been shut in!"

So Lemminkainen chanted; for a week he ranged through the forest. His
Magic Songs appeased the Lord of the Forest, delighted the Mistress of
the Forest, and made glad the hearts of all the Forest Maidens. To where
the Elk of Hiisi had his lair they went; they drove forth the Elk; they
turned it in the direction of the one who waited for it.

Over the Elk Lemminkainen threw his lasso. And when he held the Elk he
chanted his Magic Song once more, "Lord of the Forest, Tapio; Mistress
of the Forest, Mielikki, come now and take your reward for the good you
have done me! Come now and take the gold and silver I scatter on the
ground of the forest!" So he chanted; then to the north, to Pohjola, he
journeyed with the Elk he had captured. "I have caught the Elk of Hiisi!
Come forth now, ancient one of Pohjola; give me your daughter; give me
the bride I have come for!"

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Louhi, the Mistress of Pohjola, came out of her dwelling, and she looked
upon Lemminkainen and the Elk he had captured. "I will give you my
daughter, I will give you the bride you have come for, when you capture
the Steed of Hiisi, and bring it to me here."

Then Lemminkainen took a golden bridle and a halter of silver; he went
through the green and open meadows; he went out upon the plains. No sign
he saw of the Steed of Hiisi. He called upon Ukko, the God of the Sky,
and he chanted a Magic Song:

"Open the clefts of the Heavens; cast the hail upon the back of Hiisi's
Steed; fling ice-blocks upon him that he may race from where he is, that
he may come to where I am!" Ukko rent the air; he scattered ice-blocks;
they were smaller than a horse's head, but they were bigger than a man's
head. They struck the back of Hiisi's Steed. It raced forward. Then
Lemminkainen chanted, "Steed of Hiisi, stretch forth thy silver head;
push it into this golden bridle! I will never drive thee harshly; with a
rope's end I will never smite thee. No, with silver cords I will lead
thee, and with a piece of cloth I will drive thee!" So he chanted, and
the Steed of Hiisi put forward his head; the golden bridle with the bit
of silver went across his head and into his mouth.

Then to the north went Lemminkainen bringing the chestnut steed with the
foam-flecked mane. He called to the Mistress of Pohjola, "I have
captured the Steed of Hiisi and the Elk of Hiisi. Now give thy daughter
to me, give me the bride that I have come for."

But Louhi, the Mistress of Pohjola, answered him, "I will give thee my
daughter, I will give thee the bride thou hast come for when thou hast
shot with an arrow, and using one arrow only, the white Swan on
Tuonela's dark water." Then Lemminkainen took his bow. He went down into
Manala's abysses. He went to where Tuoni's murky river flowed. He went
to where the waters made a dread whirlpool.

There the cowherd Märkähattu lurked; there the blind man waited for
Lemminkainen. When Lemminkainen had come first to Pohjola he had chanted
his Magic Songs; he had chanted them against the swordsmen and the young
heroes who were there, and he had driven them all away, banning them
with his Magic Songs. One old man he had not banned--Märkähattu the
cowherd who sat there, his eyes closed in blindness. Lemminkainen had
scorned him. "I have not banned

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

thee," he cried, "because thou art so wretched a creature. The worst of
cowherds, thou hast destroyed thy mother's children, thou hast disgraced
thy sister, thou hast crippled all the horses, thou hast wearied to
death the foals." Märkähattu, greatly angered, left the place where
Lemminkainen had scorned him; ever since he had waited by the whirlpool
for the coming of Lemminkainen.

The white Swan was on the dark river of Tuonela. Lemminkainen drew his
bow. As he did, Märkähattu grasped a water-snake; he hurled it; he
pierced Lemminkainen with the serpent. Lemminkainen knew no Magic Songs
to relieve himself from the wounds made by water-snakes. He sank into
the murky river; he was tossed about in the worst of whirlpools; he was
dashed down the cataract; the stream brought him into Tuonela.

There Tuoni's bloodstained son, drawing his sword, hewed him into
pieces. He hewed him into eight pieces and he flung the pieces into the
dark river. "Be tossed about for ever with thy bow and thy arrows, thou
who camest to shoot the sacred Swan upon our sacred River!"

Only through his mother could help come to Lemminkainen. She had bided
at home, troubled by his long delay in returning. One day she looked up
the comb and the hair-brush he had left behind: she saw blood trickling
from the comb, blood dripping from the hair-brush. She knew that blood
was coming from the body of her son. She gathered up her skirt and she
went off to find him.

Valleys were lifted up as Lemminkainen's mother went on; hills were
levelled; the high ground sank before her and the low ground was lifted
up. She hastened to Pohjola. She came to the door and she questioned the
Mistress of Pohjola.

"Whither hast thou sent my son, Lemminkainen?" "I know no tidings of
your son. I yoked a steed for him; I fixed a sledge for him, and he
started off from my dwelling; perhaps in driving over a frozen lake he
sank into it." "Shameless are the lies thou tellst me. Tell me whither
thou hast sent him or I will break down the doors of Pohjola." "I fed
him; I gave him meat and drink, and I placed him in his boat; he went to
shoot the rapids, but what has befallen him I do not know." "Shameless
are the lies thou tellst. Tell me whither thou hast sent him or this
instant death will come to thee." "Now I will tell thee, now

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I will tell thee truly. Lemminkainen went to
shoot the [sacred](errata.htm#0.md) bird, the Swan on Tuonela's River."

Then his mother went in quest of him; she questioned the trees, she
questioned the pathway, she questioned the golden moon in the sky. But
the trees, the pathway, the golden moon in the sky, all had their own
troubles, and they would take no trouble for any woman's son. She
questioned the sun in the heavens, and the sun told her that her son was
in Tuonela's River.

Then to the smith Ilmarinen went Lemminkainen's mother. For her
Ilmarinen fashioned a rake, a rake with a copper handle and with teeth
of steel--a hundred fathoms was the length of the teeth, five hundred
fathoms was the length of the handle. To Tuonela's River she went: there
she chanted a Magic Song.

She prayed the sun to shine with such strength that the watchers in
Manala would sleep and that the powers of Tuonela would be worn out. And
the sun stooped upon a crooked birch-tree and shone in his strength so
that the watchers of Manala were worn out--the young men slept upon
their sword-hilts; the old men slept resting upon their staffs; the
middle-aged men, the spearmen, slept resting upon the hafts of their
spears. Then Lemminkainen's mother took her rake; she raked the river
against the current; once she raked it, and she raked it again. The
third time she raked the river she brought up the hat and stockings of
her son Lemminkainen. She went into the river, and she waded in its
deepest water. She drew up the body with her rake of iron.

Many fragments were wanting to make up the body of Lemminkainen--half of
his head, a hand, many little fragments. Life was wanting in the body.
But still his mother would not cast it back into the river. Once again
she raked Tuonela's deep river, first along it and then across it; his
hand she found, half of his head she found, fragments of his backbone
she found, and pieces of his ribs.

She pieced all together; the bones fitted, the joints went together. She
chanted a Magic Song, praying that Suonetar would weave the veins
together, and stitch with her finest needle and her most silken thread
the flesh and the sinews that were broken. She sang a Magic Song,
praying that Jumala would fix together the bones. Then the veins were
knit together, the bones were fastened together, but still the man
remained lifeless and speechless.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Then Lemminkainen's mother sang a Magic Song. She bade the bee go forth
and find the honey-salve that would give final healing. The bee flew
across the moon in the heavens; he flew past the borders of Orion; he
flew across the Great Bear's shoulders, and into the dwelling of Jumala
the Creator. In pots of silver, in golden kettles was the salve that
would give final healing. The bee gathered it and brought it back to
Lemminkainen's mother.

With the salve she rubbed him. She called upon her son to rise out of
his slumbers, to awaken out of his dreams of evil. Up he rose; out of
his dreams he wakened, and speech came back to him. Even then he would
have slain the Swan so that he might win a bride in Pohjola. But his
mother persuaded him, and his mother drew him back with her to his home.
There the bride awaited him whom he had won in another place and on
another day, Kyllikki, the Flower of Saari.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In the Beginning](omw56.md)
