[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw67)  [Next](omw69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_23200"></span>

[![Gotama's Attainment](tn/23200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23200.jpg)  
Gotama's Attainment  

### BUDDHIST

### GOTAMA'S ATTAINMENT

Gotama was born into a royal family; the maiden whom be married was a
princess, and there were many who thought that he himself would become a
world-ruler. And so Prince Siddhārtha (for that was his name in his
father's palace) grew up with every circumstance of power and delight
surrounding him. But even as the lotus grows in the water in which it is
born, and rises above it, and ceases to be stained by it, so does the
one who is born to be a Buddha, the Enlightened and the Giver of
Enlightenment, rise above all that belongs to the world whether of
delight or power, trouble or service. Gotama was born to be the Buddha
of our age. He did not give his mind to those who urged him to make
himself a world-ruler; rather, he left his wife and child and his
father's palace, and he went into the forest, becoming a hermit so that
he might discover how men may escape from death that is bound to birth,
and old age that is bound to infancy. And after having lived for six
years in the forest during which time he subsisted on the few grains of
millet seed which he ate daily, he went once more towards where men
lived, saying to himself, "I will nourish my body and seek Enlightenment
through other means than through those severities which have brought me
near to death."

He came to a village. Now in that village there was a woman whose name
was Sujātā. She had been warned in a dream that the one who was to
become Buddha would come that way and that she

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

was to be ready to bestow a gift of food upon him. And so when Gotama
came into that village Sujātā had milk and rice of the purest kinds
ready for him, and she gave him this food in a golden bowl. Gotama
rejoiced in the readiness with which the gift was offered, in the purity
of the food, and the fineness of the vessel in which it was given. He
blessed Sujātā. He ate the food and thereafter he bathed in the river.
And when he placed it in the water the golden bowl floated up the
stream. Thereupon a great joy possessed Gotama; the bowl floating up the
stream was, he knew, a sign given him that he would soon attain
Enlightenment.

So he went towards that Tree of Knowledge under which had sat the
Buddhas of other ages; under it they had attained Enlightenment and had
become Buddhas. And as he went towards that tree birds of bright colours
flew around his head and beasts walked behind him. The friendly spirits
hung banners upon trees to guide him to the place. As he went on he
thought that these friendly spirits and the birds and the beasts would
be witnesses to the victory that would give him Enlightenment, and that
the spirits of evil would be witnesses of it also.

That thought went from his mind and it penetrated the mind of Mārā, the
chief of the spirits of evil. Hastily Mārā got together his forces:
Gotama must not be allowed to stay under the Tree of Knowledge, he told
his followers. With the speed of the whirlwind, with his band Mārā went
to the place. But with composure, with the assurance of victory in his
heart, with majesty, Gotama went towards the tree. He took his place
where the Blessed Ones who had attained to Enlightenment had taken
theirs; he seated himself on the eastern side of the Tree of Knowledge.

The earth heaved six times, and the birds and beasts that had come with
Gotama were affrighted and fled away. But the friendly spirits remained
near him. Then Mārā, the chief of the evil spirits, taking on himself
the appearance of a messenger from his father's country, went to where
Gotama sat. Breathlessly he said to him, "Even while you sit here your
evil-hearted cousin has taken possession of your father's kingdom, and
is cruelly and rapaciously treating all the people whom you should
protect. Go, go from this place. Destroy the tyrant, and give peace to
your country!" But the words of Mārā,

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

cunning though they were, had no effect: Gotama remained unmoved. He
reflected that if his cousin were acting in such way it was because of a
malice that possessed him, and if the nobles of the land permitted him
to act unjustly it was because they were weak and cowardly. And then he
thought upon weakness, malice, and cowardice, and he resolved to raise
himself above them by destroying in himself the centre out of which they
come; namely, desire that fixes itself upon things of this world. He
resolved, too, to show others how to destroy that desire in themselves.
So he remained unmoved. The spirit of the tree cast perfumes upon him,
and prayed him through its leaves to continue his mighty efforts towards
Enlightenment.

Then Mārā flung against him his army of evil spirits. Terrible beyond
all imagination were they-footless and headless and eyeless beings armed
with all manner of weapons. So terrifying were they in their mere
appearances that the friendly spirits who had stayed near him now fled
from beside Gotama, and the spirit of the tree groaned and withdrew
itself into the depths of the earth. The army of the evil spirits came
towards Gotama howling terribly, raging frightfully, brandishing spears
and swords, clubs and lighted torches. But Gotama remained unmoved; then
did the weapons stick to their hands, then were the hands that held the
weapons paralyzed. Raging to see his army made so powerless, Mārā raised
himself up on his mighty elephant. He made that elephant rush towards
Gotama. In his hand he held the discus which, when flung, could split a
mountain. He flung the discus at Gotama. But the iron circle did not
strike him; it stayed in the air over his head as if it were a halo.
Then Mārā came close to him and howled to him: "Depart from this place!
Begone! You have not the merit that would permit you to seat yourself
where Buddhas of former ages seated themselves. Depart, unworthy one!"
So Mārā, the Evil One, said, hoping to create in Gotama's mind a doubt
about himself. And all who were with the Evil One cried out, "He has not
merit enough! He has not merit enough!" Their voices were like the sound
of all the waves in the ocean. "This place is mine, not yours," cried
the Evil One, "and I call on these many witnesses to declare that it is
mine." "It is thine! It is thine! We are witnesses!" the army of the
Evil One cried out. But Gotama remained unmoved. He put his hand down
upon the earth, asking the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

earth to bear witness for him. And the earth in a thousand voices bore
witness that he had merit enough to sit in the place in which the
Buddhas of former ages had sat. Then the elephant on which Mārā rode
bowed its knees in homage to Gotama. Then the army of the Evil One fled
away, and Mārā turned and fled with them.

But even as he fled he remembered that there was one force that he had
not used against Gotama. Something else he would bring against him to
prevent his attaining Enlightenment. Mārā summoned his three daughters,
Desire, Lust, and Pining. Lovely were they in the eyes of men. Now they
came before Gotama as he sat under the Tree of Knowledge and danced and
sang for him. He saw them, but his mind did not go out to them. All his
thought was now upon the attainment of Enlightenment and the attainment
of the power to enlighten others. And the daughters of Mārā, reaching to
an understanding of the nobility of his purpose, ceased to dance, ceased
to sing, ceased to posture; they knelt before him, and they prayed:

That which your heart desires may you attain,  
And finding deliverance, deliver all.

\[paragraph continues\] When Mārā saw his own daughters kneeling before
Gotama he fled away.

Then was Gotama left in peace. The sun went down, and still he remained
under the tree. Enlightenment dawned upon his mind. In the twentieth
hour all things were gathered up for him, and things in the farthest
worlds and things beside him showed themselves to him in their values
and their measures. Then did he know the law that binds all existences
together. Then did he obtain perfect enlightenment. Then did he become
Buddha.

And having become Buddha, rays of six colours went from his body and
spread through all the universe. All creation rejoiced because out of
myriads of beings one had become Buddha. For seven days he remained in
meditation under the Tree of Knowledge and the serpent Mucalinda covered
him with its coils. Then with knowledge of how to break the chain that
binds together birth and death, infancy and old age, Buddha rose up and
went forth to instruct mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In the Beginning](omw69)
