[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw63)  [Next](omw65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### *EPIC*

### THE CHURNING OF THE OCEAN

The Asuras were older than their half-brothers the Gods. They acquired
great possessions in the three worlds, but because they did not
sacrifice to each other, because they did not visit holy places, they
did not acquire great powers within themselves. But the Gods who did not
have great possessions went on making sacrifices, went on dealing
truthfully with each other, went on visiting holy places until they had
greater and greater powers within themselves.

The Gods and the Asuras knew that they could gain the Amrit, the Water
of Life, if they churned up one of the seven oceans that, ring beyond
ring, encircles the worlds. They came down to the Ocean of Milk. They
took the Mountain Mandara for a churning-pole and the hundred-headed
serpent Vāsuki for a churning-rope. They wound the serpent around the
mountain, and pulling it this way and that way they splashed and dashed
the, Ocean up and down and to and fro. And the Ocean of Milk frothed and
bubbled as they churned.

For a thousand years the Gods and the Asuras churned the Ocean of Milk.
All that time Vāsuki, the serpent, from his hundred heads spat venom.
The venom bit into the rocks and broke them up; it flowed down,
destroying the worlds of Gods and men. Then all creation would have been
destroyed in that flood of venom if it had not been for the act of one
of the Gods.

Shiva took up the venom in a cup and drank it. His throat became blue
with that draught of bitterness. But by his act, the Gods won to more
powers than the Asuras had.

Still they churned. Then out of the Ocean of Milk came the
wish-bestowing cow, Surabhi. Gods and Asuras rejoiced at the prosperity
that came with her. Then appeared the Apsarases, the heavenly nymphs,
and the Gods and the Asuras sported with them. The moon was churned up,
and Shiva took it and set it upon his forehead.

But now the Asuras wearied in their toil, and more and more

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

they sported with the Apsarases. The Gods, their powers increased
through Shiva's deed, laboured at the churning, and the whole Ocean of
Milk foamed and bubbled. Then was churned up the gem of gems, Kaustubha,
and then white Uccaibhsravas, the best of steeds.

Now the Gods grew in strength as they laboured, and they laboured as
they grew in strength, while the Asuras abandoned themselves more and
more to pleasures, and they fought amongst themselves on account of the
pleasures that all of them sought. And then, seated on a lotus and
holding a lotus in her hand, a lovely Goddess appeared. She went to
Vishnu; she cast herself on the breast of the God, and, reclining there,
she delighted the Gods with the glances she bestowed on them. All knew
her for Shrī, the Goddess of Good Fortune. And the Asuras, in despair
because Good Fortune had gone to the side of the Gods, stood around,
determined to seize by force the next good thing that came out of the
churning.

And then, behold! there appeared the sage Dhanvantari, and in his hands
was the cup that held the Amrit, the Water of Life. The Asuras strove to
seize it; they would drink it all themselves, or else they would fling
the Amrit where the serpent's venom was dripping on the rocks. Almost
they overpowered the Gods in their efforts to seize the Amrit. Then
Vishnu changed himself into a ravishing form; he seemed to be the
loveliest of the nymphs of Heaven. The Asuras went towards where the
seeming nymph postured for them. Even then they fought amongst each
other. And the Gods took the cup, and, sharing it, they drank of the
Amrit.

And now they were filled with such vigour that the Asuras could not
overpower them. Many they drove down into hell where they became the
Daityas or Demons. That was the beginning of the wars between the Gods
and the Daityas--the wars that went on for ages.

The Gods were triumphant and the three worlds became filled with
radiance and power. Indra, king of the Gods, seated upon his throne,
made a hymn in praise of Shrī. She granted him his wish, which was that
she should never abandon the Gods.

And so they lived upon that most holy mountain which is round like a
ball and all made of gold. The birds there have golden feathers. Indra
stays there. The steed which he gained at the Churning of the Ocean
grazes near him. Beside him is his thunderbolt winged with

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

a thousand plumes: Tvastir made it for him from the bones of the seer
Dadhica: it is hundred-jointed, thousand-pointed. With the thunderbolt
is his spear and his conch. Vishnu is near. But he broods upon the
waters, resting upon a serpent, and Shrī, his bride, is beside him and
over him the bird Garuda hovers. Shiva dwells in a lovely wood that is
filled with flowers. Near him is the spear with which he will destroy
the worlds at the end of an age. And beside him is his bow, his
battle-axe, and his trident. Once, in jest, his wife Umā covered Shiva's
eyes with her hands. Then was the world plunged into darkness, men
trembled with fear, and all that lived came near to extinction. But to
save the world a third eye appeared in Shiva's forehead: when it blazed
forth the darkness vanished, men ceased to tremble, and power once more
pervaded the worlds. And always Shiva's throat will be blue from the
bitterness of the venom that he drank when he saved creation. Above the
most holy mountain is the golden palace of the Lord of All-Brahma--a
palace that is built on nothing that is substantial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Birth of the Ganges](omw65.md)
