[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw59)  [Next](omw61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOKI'S PUNISHMENT

The crow went flying towards the North, croaking as she flew, "Let Hel
keep what she holds. Let Hel keep what she holds." That crow was the hag
Thokk transformed, and the hag Thokk was Loki.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

He flew to the North and he came to the wastes of Jotunheim. As a crow
he lived there, hiding himself from the wrath of the Gods. He told the
Giants that the time had come for them to build the ship *Naglfar*, the
ship that was to be built out of the nails of dead men, and was to sail
to Asgarth on the day of Ragna rök, with the Giant Hrym steering it. And
harkening to what he said, the Giants, then and there, began to build
*Naglfar*, the ship that Gods and men wished to remain unbuilt for long.

Then Loki, tiring of the wastes of Jotunheim, flew to the burning South.
As a lizard he lived amongst the rocks of Muspellsheim, and he made the
Fire Giants rejoice when he told them that the Gods had lost much of
their power--that Tyr, the bravest of the Aesir, had lost his right
hand, and that Freyr, the foremost of the Wanes, had given up his magic
sword in order to win Gerth, a Giant's daughter.

In Asgarth there was still one who wept for Loki--Sigyn, his wife.
Although he had left her and had shown his hatred for her, Sigyn wept
for her evil husband.

He left Muspellsheim as he had left Jotunheim, and he came to live in
the world of men. He knew that he had now come into a place where the
wrath of the Gods might find him; he made plans to be ever ready for
escape. He built a house that had four doors to it so that he might see
in every direction. And the power that he kept for himself was the power
of transforming himself into a salmon.

Often as a salmon he hid in Gleaming Water. But even for the fishes that
swam beside him, Loki had hatred. Out of flax and yarn he wove a net
that men might have the means of taking fishes out of the water.

The Gods searched through all the world and they found at last the place
where Loki had made his dwelling. He sprang into the waterfall and
transformed himself into a salmon. When his pursuers entered his
dwelling they found only a burnt-out fire. In the ashes were the marks
of a burnt net; his pursuers knew that these were the traces of
something made to catch fishes. And from the marks left in the ashes
they made a net that was the same as the one Loki had burnt.

With the net in their hands his pursuers went to the waterfall. They
dragged the net through the water. Loki was affrighted to find a thing
of his own weaving used against him. He lay between two stones at the
bottom of the water, and the net passed over him.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

But his pursuers knew that the net had touched something at the bottom.
They fastened weights to it, and they dragged the net again through the
waterfall. Loki knew that he might not escape it this time; he rose in
the water, and he swam towards the sea. His pursuers caught sight of him
as he leaped down the waterfall. Thor waded behind, ready to seize him.

Loki came out at the mouth of the river, and behold! there was a great
eagle hovering over the waves of the sea and ready to swoop down on the
fishes. He turned back in the river. He made a leap that took him over
the net that his pursuers were dragging. Thor was behind the net; he
caught the salmon in his powerful hands, and for all the struggle that
Loki made he held him. No fish had ever struggled so before. Loki got
himself free all but his tail. Thor held on to his tail, and brought him
amongst the rocks, and forced him to take on his proper form.

They brought him to a cavern and they bound him to three sharp-pointed
rocks. There they would have left him bound and helpless. But Skathi,
who was of the fierce Giant brood, was not content that he should be
left untormented. She found a serpent that had a deadly venom; she hung
the serpent above Loki's head. The drops of venom fell upon him,
bringing him anguish drop by drop, minute by minute. So Loki's torture
went on.

Sigyn with the pitying heart came to his relief. She exiled herself from
Asgarth; she endured the darkness and the cold of the cavern that she
might take away some of the torment from him who was her husband. Over
Loki Sigyn stood, holding in her hands a shell into which fell the
serpent's venom, thus sparing him from the full measure of anguish. But
now and then Sigyn had to turn aside to spill out the flowing cup; then
the drops of venom fell upon Loki, and he screamed in agony, twisting in
his bonds. And in his bonds Loki stayed until Ragna rök came with the
battle in which all things ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Children of Loki](omw61.md)
