[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw77)  [Next](omw79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

# PERUVIAN

## VIRACOCHA: THE LLAMA-HERDER AND THE VIRGIN OF THE SUN

### VIRACOCHA

In other days we who are of the race of the Incas worshipped the Sun; we
held that he was the greatest and most benignant of all beings, and we
named ourselves the children of the Sun. We had traditions that told of
the pitiable ways that we and the rest of the human race lived in before
the Sun, having had compassion upon us, decided to lead us towards
better ways of living. . . . Lo, now! Our Lord, the Sun, put his two
children, a son and a daughter, in a boat upon Lake Titicaca. He told
them they were to float upon the water until they came to where men
lived. He put his golden staff into the hands of his son. He told him he
was to lead men into a place where that staff, dropped upon the earth,
sank deep down into it.

So the children of our Lord the Sun went upon the waters of Lake
Titicaca. They came to where our fathers lived in those far days. . . .
Where we live now we see villages and cities; we see streams flowing
down from the mountains, and being led this way and that way to water
our crops and our trees; we see flocks of llamas feeding on good grass
with their lambs--countless flocks. But in those days we lived where
there were thickets and barren rocks; we had no llamas; we had no crops;
we knew not how to make the waters flow this way and that way; we had no
villages, no cities, no temples. We lived in clefts of the rocks and
holes in the ground. The covering of our bodies was of bark or of
leaves, or else we went naked in the day and without covering to put
over us in the night. We ate roots that we pulled up out of the ground,
or fought with the foxes for the dead things they were carrying away. No
one bore rule amongst us, and we knew nothing of duty or kindness of one
to another.

Out of their boat on Lake Titicaca came the children of our Lord to us.
They brought us together; they had rule over us, and they showed us how
to live as husband and wife and children, and how to know those who were
leaders amongst us and how to obey those leaders. And

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

having showed us these things they led us from the land they had found
us in.

And often did he who was the son of our Lord the Sun drop the golden
staff upon the ground as we went on. Sometimes the staff sank a little
way into the earth, sometimes it sank to half its length in the earth.
We came to a place where the golden staff, dropped by him who was the
son of our Lord the Sun, sank into the earth until only its top was to
be seen. And there we stayed, or, rather, there our fathers stayed, for
we are many generations from the men and women who came into this place
with the two who were the children of the Sun.

They showed us how to sow crops in that rich ground, and how to lead
water down from the hills to water the crops and the trees. They showed
us how to tame the llamas, and how to herd them and tend them as tamed
beasts. They showed us how to take the wool from them and weave the wool
into garments for ourselves; also, they showed us how to dye our
garments so that we went brightly clad in the light of the sun. They
showed us how to work in gold and silver, and how to make vessels of
clay, and how to put shapes and figures upon these vessels. They showed
us how to build houses, and how to build villages, and cities, and
temples. And they showed us, too, how to obey the rule of those who were
left to rule over us, the Incas.

Then the two who were the son and daughter of the Sun left us. Before
they went from us they told us that the Sun, their father, would adopt
us as his children. And so we of the Inca race became the children of
the Sun. They said to us, too, "Our father, the Sun, does good to the
whole world; he gives light that men may see and follow their pursuits;
he makes men warm when they had been cold; he ripens their crops; he
increases their flocks of llamas; he brings dew upon the ground. The
Sun, our father, goes round the earth each day that he may know of man's
necessities and help him to provide for them. Be like the Sun, then,
far-seeing, regular in all your occupations. And bring the worship of
the Sun amongst the tribes who live in darkness and ignorance."

And so these two, his son and daughter who were sent to us by the Sun,
were seen no more by us. But we knew ourselves now as the children of
the Sun. We subdued the tribes in his name, and brought the knowledge of
his beneficence amongst them. We built a great temple

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

to him. And the daughters of the Incas in hundreds served him as Virgins
of the Sun.

Yes, but there were those amongst us who came to have other thoughts
about Heaven and the ways of Heaven. "Does not the Sun go as another
being directs him to go?" one of the Incas said to his councillors. "Is
he not like an arrow shot onward by a man? Is he not like a llama
tethered by the will of a man rather than like one who has freedom? Does
he not let a little cloud obscure his splendour? Is it not plain that he
may never take rest from his tasks?"

So men amongst us have said, and they who have said them have mentioned
a name. Viracocha that name is. And then they would say words from rites
that were known to the people of this land before the Incas came into
it. They would say, "O conquering Viracocha! Thou gavest life and valour
to men, saying, 'let this be a man,' and to women saying, 'let this be a
woman.' Thou madest them and gavest them being! Watch over them that
they may live in health and peace! Thou who art in the high heavens, and
among the clouds of the tempest, grant this with long life, and accept
this sacrifice, O Creator!" So those who were priests in the land before
our fathers came into it prayed.

And they said that it was Viracocha who created the Sun, and created the
Moon also. They said that at the beginning the Sun was not brighter than
the Moon, and that in his jealousy he flung ashes upon the face of the
Moon and dimmed the Moon's primal brightness. And they said that
Viracocha could make great terraces of rock and clay rear themselves up
with crops upon them, and that he could bring the water-courses to
freshen terraces and gardens merely by striking with a hollow cane that
he carried.

Now although Viracocha was so great, he obscured himself, and came back
to live amongst the Gods in the guise of a beggar. None knew him for
Viracocha, the Creator of all things. And he saw the Goddess Cavillaca
as she sat amongst llama lambs under a lucma-tree, weaving the wool of
the white llama. He saw her and he approached her. He left a ripe fruit
beside her. She ate the fruit and she became with child by him.

And when her child was born her parents and her friends said to her,
"You must find out who is the father of this child. Let all who live
near come to this lucma-tree, and let the child crawl amongst

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

them. The man he crawls to and touches with his hand we will know is his
father."

So under the lucma-tree Cavillaca sat, and her child was with her. All
who lived near came to that place, and amongst them came Viracocha,
still in his beggar's dress. All came near to Cavillaca and her child.
The child crawled where they stood. He came to Viracocha. He put his
hand up and touched the man who was in the beggar's garb.

Then was Cavillaca made ashamed before all the Gods. She snatched up her
child and held him to her. She fled away from that place. She fled
towards the ocean with her child. Viracocha put on his robes of
splendour and hastened after her. And as he went he cried out, "O
Goddess, turn; look back at me! See how splendid I am!" But the Goddess,
without turning, fled with her child from before him.

Viracocha went seeking them. As he crossed the peaks he met a condor,
and the condor flew with him, and consoled him. Viracocha blessed the
condor, and gave him long life and the power to traverse the wilderness
and go over the highest peaks; also he gave him the right to prey upon
creatures. Afterwards he met a fox; but the fox derided him, telling him
that his quest was vain. He cursed the fox, saying to him that he would
have to hunt at night, and that men would slay him. He met a puma, and
the puma went with him and consoled him. He blessed the puma, saying
that he would receive honour from men. As he went down the other side of
the mountain, he came upon parrots flying from the trees of their
forest. And the parrots cried out words that were of ill-omen. He cursed
the parrots, saying that they would never have honour from men. But he
blessed the falcon that flew with him down to the sea.

And when he came to the sea he found that Cavillaca and her child had
plunged themselves into the water and had been transformed into rocks.
Then Viracocha in his grief remained beside the sea.

Now beside the sea there were two virgins who were Urpihuachac's
daughters. They were guarded by a serpent. Viracocha charmed the serpent
with his wisdom, and the serpent permitted him to approach Urpihuachac's
daughters. One flew away and became a dove. But the other lived there
with Viracocha. And this Virgin of the Sea showed Viracocha where her
mother kept all the fishes of the world. They were in a pond and they
could not go through the waters of the world.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Viracocha broke down the walls of their pond,
and let them go through the streams and the lakes and the sea. And thus
he let men have fishes to eat.

He lived amongst men, and he taught them many arts. He it was, as the
priests of those who were here before the Incas say, showed men how to
bring streams of water to their crops, and taught them how to build
terraces upon the mountains where crops would grow. He set up a great
cross upon the mountain Caravay. And when the bird that cries out four
times at dawn cried out, and the light came upon the cross he had set
up, Viracocha went from amongst men. He went down to the sea, and he
walked across it towards the west. But he told those whom he had left
behind that he would send messengers back who would protect them and
give them renewed knowledge of all he had taught them. He left them, but
men still remember the chants that those whom he left on the mountain,
by the cross, cried out their longing:

Oh, hear me! From die sky above, In which thou mayst be, From the sea
beneath, In which thou mayst be, Creator of the world, Maker of all men;
Lord of all Lords, My eyes fail me For longing to see thee; For the sole
desire to know thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Llama-Herder and the Virgin of the Sun](omw79.md)
