[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw81)  [Next](omw83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### QUETZALCOATL

In Tollan dwelt Quetzalcoatl. And in Tollan all the arts and crafts that
we know of were first practised, for Quetzalcoatl taught them to the
people there. He taught them the smelting of silver and the clearing and
setting of precious stones; he taught the craft of building with stones;
he taught them how to make statues, and paint signs in books, and keep
count of the moons and suns. All crafts except the craft of war
Quetzalcoatl taught the people of Tollan. And they made sacrifice to him
with bread, and flowers, and perfumes, and not as other peoples made
sacrifice to the other gods--by tearing the hearts out of the opened
breasts of men and women.

He lived in a house that was made of silver: four chambers that house
had: the chamber to the east was of gold, the chamber to the west was
set with stones of precious green--emeralds and turquoises and nephrite
stones, the chamber to the south was set with coloured sea-shells, and
the chamber to the north was set with jasper. The house was thatched
with the feathers of bright-plumaged birds. All the birds of rich
plumage and sweet song were gathered in that place. In the fields the
maize grew so big that a man could not carry more than one stalk in his
arms; pumpkins were great in their round as a man is high; cotton grew
in the fields red and yellow, blue, and black, and white, and men did
not have to dye it. All who lived where Quetzalcoatl was had everything
to make them prosperous and happy.

There was a time when they did not have maize, when they lived upon
roots and on what they gained in the chase. Maize there was, but it was
hidden within a mountain, and no one could come to where it

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

was. Different gods had tried to rend the mountain apart that they might
come to where the maize was; but this could not be done. Then
Quetzalcoatl took the form of a black ant; with a red ant to guide him
he went within the mountain Tonacatepetl, and he came to where the maize
was: he took the grain, and laboriously he bore it back to men. Then men
planted fields with maize; they had crops for the first time; they built
cities, and they lived settled lives, and Quetzalcoatl showed them all
the crafts that they could learn from him. They honoured him who dwelt
in the shining house. And Quetzalcoatl had many servants; some of them
were dwarfs, and all were swift of foot.

Then it came to pass that Tezcatlipoca, he who can go into all places,
he who wanders over the earth stirring up strife and war amongst men,
descended upon Tollan by means of spider-webs. And from the mountain he
came down on a blast of wind of such coldness that it killed all the
flowers in Quetzalcoatl's bright garden. And Quetzalcoatl, feeling that
coldness, said to his servants, "One has come who will drive me hence;
perhaps it were better that I went before he drives me, and drank from a
fountain in the Land of the Sun, whence I may return, young as a boy."
So he said, and his servants saw him burn down his house of silver with
its green precious stones and its thatch of bright plumage, and its
door-posts of white and red shells. And they saw him call upon his birds
of sweet song and rich plumage, and they heard him bidding them to fly
into the land of Anahuac.

Then Tezcatlipoca, that god and that sorcerer, went to where
Quetzalcoatl stood, and took him into the ball-court that the two might
play a game together. All the people of the city stood round to watch
that game. The ball had to be cast through a ring that was high upon the
wall. Quetzalcoatl took up the ball to cast it. As he did Tezcatlipoca
changed himself into a jaguar and sprang upon him. Then Quetzalcoatl
fled. And Tezcatlipoca chased him, driving him through the streets of
the city, and out into the highways of the country.

His dwarfs fled after him and joined themselves to him. With them he
crossed the mountains and came to a hill on which a great tree grew.
Under it he rested. As he rested he looked into a mirror and he said, "I
am grown to be an old man." Then he threw the mirror down and took up
stones and cast them at the tree.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

He went on, and his dwarfs made music for him, playing on flutes as they
went before him. Once again he became weary, and he rested on a stone by
the wayside; there, looking back towards Tollan, he wept, and his tears
pitted the stone on which he sat, and his hands left their imprints upon
it where he grasped the stone. The stone is there to this day with the
pits and the imprints upon it. He rose up, and once again he went on his
way. And men from Tollan met him, and he instructed them in crafts that
he had not shown them before.

But he did not give them the treasure of jewels that his dwarfs and
humpbacked servants carried for him. He flung this treasure into the
fountain Cozcaapan; there it stays to this day--Quetzalcoatl's treasure.
On his way he passed over a Fire-mountain and over a mountain of snow.
On the mountain of snow his dwarfs and humpbacked servants all died from
the cold. Bitterly he bewailed them in a song he made in that place.

Then Quetzalcoatl went down the other side of the mountain, and he came
to the sea-shore. He made a raft of snakes, and on that raft he sailed
out on the sea. Or so some say, telling Quetzalcoatl's story. And those
who tell this say that he came to the land of Tlappallan in the Country
of the Sun, and there he drank of the Water of Immortality They say that
he will one day return from that land young as a boy. But others say
that when he reached the sea-shore he divested himself of his robe with
its bright feathers, of his snake-skin mask of the colour of turquoise,
and that, leaving these vestments upon the shore, he cast himself into a
fire and was consumed to ashes. And they say that Quetzalcoatl's ashes
changed into bright-coloured and sweet-singing birds, and that his heart
went up into the sky and became the Morning Star. After he had been dead
for eight days that star became visible to men, and thereafter
Quetzalcoatl was named the Lord of the Dawn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Quetzalcoatl's Enemy](omw83)
