[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ae06)  [Next](ae08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852006/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Apocalypse Explained*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1757-9\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocalypse Explained

<span class="margnote"><span id="301.">301.</span></span>

Verses 2, 3. And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a great voice,
Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? And no
one was able, in heaven nor upon the earth nor under the earth, to open
the book, neither to look thereon. 2. "And I saw a strong angel
proclaiming with a great voice," signifies the influx of the Lord into
heaven (n. 302); "who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals
thereof?" signifies is there anyone there who is such as to know and
perceive the states of life of all (n. 303)? "And no one was able, in
heaven nor upon the earth nor under the earth, to open the book, neither
to look thereon," signifies manifestation that no one knows and
perceives of himself anything whatever of the state of life of all in
general, and of each in particular (n. 304).

<span class="margnote"><span id="302.">302.</span></span>

Verse 2. And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a great voice,
signifies exploration by the influx of the Lord into heaven. This is
evident from the signification of a "strong angel," as being heaven (of
which presently); also from the signification of "proclaiming with a
great voice," as being exploration by the influx of the Lord, namely,
exploration whether anyone is able to know the states of life of all in
heaven and on the earth in general and in particular, for this is what
is here treated of. This is signified by "proclaiming," and the influx
of the Lord is signified by "a great voice;" for "voice," in reference
to the Lord, signifies every truth of the Word, of doctrine, and of
faith from Him; and in reference to heaven and the church, it signifies
every thought and affection thence; and since everything true and good
that angels in heaven and men in whom the church is, think and are
affected by, is from the influx of the Lord, this is what is here
signified by "a great voice." For it is well known, that no one from the
love of good can be affected by good, and from the love of truth can
think truth, of himself, but that this flows in from heaven, that is,
through heaven from the Lord; and because this is so, "a great voice"
signifies the influx of the Lord. (That "voice" in the Word signifies
the truth of the Word, of doctrine, and of faith, also everything
announced in the Word, see above, n. 261, and Arcana Coelestia, n. 3563,
6971, 8813, 9926; and that it signifies the interior affection of truth
and good, and thought therefrom, n. 10454.) A "strong angel" signifies
heaven because the whole angelic heaven before the Lord is as one man,
or as one angel, likewise each society of heaven; therefore by "angel"
in the Word an angel is not meant, but an entire angelic society, as by
"Michael," "Gabriel," "Raphael." Here, therefore, "a strong angel
proclaiming with a great voice" signifies the influx of the Lord into
the whole heaven. That it is into the whole heaven is clear from what
follows, for it is said, "And no one was able, in heaven nor upon the
earth, neither under the earth, to open the book and to look thereon."
(That "angels" in the Word mean entire societies of heaven, and in the
highest sense the Lord in respect to Divine truth proceeding, see above,
n. 90, 130, 200; and that The Whole Heaven before the Lord is as One
Man, or as One Angel, and also every Society of Heaven, see in the work
on Heaven and Hell, n. 59-87.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="303.">303.</span></span>

Who is worthy to open the book and to loose the seals thereof?
signifies, is there anyone there such as to know and to perceive the
states of life of all? This is evident from the signification of "Who is
worthy?" as being, is there anyone who has merit and righteousness, and
who has omniscience, thus whether there is any such? That "worthy," in
reference to the Lord, signifies merit and righteousness, which belong
to Him alone, see above (n. 293). And that omniscience is signified is
clear from what follows, where it is said, "the Lamb took the book out
of the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, and opened it;" for
"right hand" signifies omniscience and omnipotence (see above, n. 297);
it is evident also from the signification of the "book," as being the
states of life of all in general and in particular (of which see just
above, n. 299); and also from the signification of "to open the book and
to loose the seals thereof," as being to know and perceive; for when the
"book" signifies the states of life of all, "to open and to loose the
seals" signifies to know and perceive those states; for knowing and
perceiving are predicated of the state of life, but opening and
loosening seals relate to a book; thus the words in the internal sense
conform to the things signified by the words in the sense of the letter,
for they correspond; therefore, "to open" signifies to know, and "to
loose the seals" signifies to perceive what is altogether hidden from
others (as above, n. 300).

<span class="margnote"><span id="304.">304.</span></span>

Verse 3. And no one was able, in heaven nor upon the earth, nor under
the earth, to open the book, neither to look thereon, signifies
manifestation that no one knows and perceives of himself anything
whatever of the state of life of all in general, and of each one in
particular. This is evident from the signification of "And no one was
able to open the book, neither to look thereon," as being that no one of
himself knows and perceives the states of the life of all in general and
of each one in particular (of which see just above, n. 303); also from
the signification of "in heaven nor upon the earth nor under the earth,"
being that no one anywhere has such knowledge, not even in the slightest
degree; for "in heaven, upon the earth, and under the earth," means the
three heavens; and by all who are there heaven in its entire complex is
meant. And as heaven is heaven from the Divine truth that flows in from
the Lord and is received by the angels, and not at all from any
self-intelligence of the angels, for this is no intelligence, so the
same words signify that no one has any knowledge or perception whatever
from himself. That angels in heaven as well as men in the world have a
selfhood \[proprium\], which regarded in itself is nothing but evil, see
in the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 592), and as evil receives nothing of
intelligence and wisdom, it follows that angels equally with men
understand nothing at all of truth from themselves, but solely from the
Lord. Angels are such for the reason that all angels are from the human
race, and every man retains after death what is his own \[suum
proprium\], and angels are withheld from the evils that pertain to what
is their own \[proprii eorum\] and are kept in goods by the Lord. (That
all angels are from the human race, and not one is created such from the
beginning, see in the small work on The Last Judgment, n. 14-22; and
that they are all withheld from evil, and kept in good by the Lord, see
in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 166.) \[2\] "In heaven," "upon
the earth," and "under the earth," signify the three heavens, because
the angels that are in the third or highest heaven dwell upon mountains;
and those that are in the second or middle, upon hills; and those that
are in the first or lowest, in plains and valleys below these. For in
the spiritual world, where the spirits and angels are, it is just as it
is in the natural world where men are, that is, there are lands, hills,
and mountains; and in appearance the resemblance is such that there is
no difference at all; therefore men after death scarcely know otherwise
than that they are still living on the earth, and when the privilege is
granted them to look into our world, they see nothing dissimilar.
Moreover, the angels who are in the lowest heaven call that heaven where
the angels of the third heaven dwell, because it is high above them, and
where they themselves dwell they call earth; moreover, the third or
highest heaven, which is upon the mountains, does not appear, to those
who are below or upon that earth, otherwise than as the highest region
of the atmosphere covered with a thin bright cloud appears before us,
thus as the sky appears to us. From this it can be seen what is here
meant, specifically, by "in heaven," "upon the earth," and "under the
earth." (But more can be seen on this subject in the work on Heaven and
Hell, where Appearances in Heaven are treated of, n. 170-176; and The
Habitations and Dwelling Places of Angels, n. 183-189.) \[3\] As men
have not known that there is a like surface of the earth in both worlds,
the natural and the spiritual, therefore they have not perceived
otherwise when they have read the Word than that "heaven" and "earth"
there mean the heaven visible before our eyes, and the earth inhabited
by men; from this arose the belief in the destruction of heaven and
earth, and the creation of a new heaven and a new earth at the day of
the Last Judgment; when yet "heaven" and "earth" there mean the heaven
and the earth where spirits and angels dwell, and in the spiritual sense
the church with angels and with men (for there is a church with angels
equally as with men, as may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell, n.
221-227). It is said, in the spiritual sense, for an angel is not an
angel, nor is a man a man, from the human form, which both have, but
because of heaven and the church with them. This is why "heaven" and
"earth," where angels and men dwell, signify the church; "heaven" the
internal church and also the church with angels, and "earth" the
external church and also the church with men. But since it can only with
difficulty be believed that "earth" in the Word means the church,
because it is not yet known that in every particular of the Word there
is a spiritual sense, whence a material idea adheres and keeps the
thought fixed in the nearest meaning of the expression, I wish to
illustrate and confirm it by a number of quotations. \[4\] In Isaiah:
Behold, Jehovah maketh the earth empty and maketh it void, and He shall
disfigure the faces thereof; in emptying the earth shall be emptied, and
in spoiling it shall be spoiled; the habitable earth shall mourn and be
confounded; the world shall be confounded; the earth shall be profaned
under its inhabitants; therefore a malediction shall devour the earth,
and the inhabitants of the earth shall be burnt up, and a man shall be
rare. A shout over the wine in the streets; the gladness of the earth
shall be banished; it shall be in the midst of the earth as the shaking
of an olive tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is ended. From the
uttermost part of the earth we have heard songs, Glory to the righteous.
The floodgates from on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth
quake; in breaking the earth is broken, in rending the earth is rent
asunder, in moving the earth is moved; in tottering the earth shall
totter as one drunken; and it shall be moved to and fro as a veil; but
it shall be in that day that Jehovah will visit upon the host of the
height in the height, and upon the kings of the earth who are upon the
earth (Isa. 24:1, 3-6, 11, 13, 16, 18-21). Here it is very clear that
"earth" does not mean the earth, but the church. Let the particulars be
run over and considered. One who is in a spiritual idea does not think,
when "earth" is mentioned, of the earth itself, but of the people on it
and their quality; still more is this true of those who are in heaven;
who, since they are spiritual, perceive that the church is meant. Here
the church destroyed is treated of; its destruction in respect to the
good of love and the truth of faith, which constitute it, is described
by "Jehovah maketh the earth empty and maketh it void," "in emptying the
earth shall be emptied, in spoiling it shall be spoiled," "it shall
mourn and be confounded," "it shall be profaned," and "a malediction
shall devour it;" "the floodgates from on high are opened, and the
foundations of it quake;" "it is broken," "it is rent asunder," "it is
moved," "it shall totter as one drunken." These things can be said
neither of the earth, nor of any nation, but only of the church. \[5\]
In the same: Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh, to lay the earth waste;
and He shall destroy the sinners out of it. For the stars of the heavens
and the constellations thereof do not cause their light to shine, the
sun hath been darkened in its rising, and the moon maketh not bright her
light. I will make a man more rare than fine gold; wherefore I will
cause the heavens to tremble and the earth shall quake out of its place
(Isa. 13:9-10, 12-13). It is clear from the particulars understood in
the spiritual sense, that "earth" here means the church. The end of the
church is here treated of, when truth and good, or faith and charity,
are no more. For "the stars and constellations that do not cause their
light to shine," signify the knowledges of truth and good; the "sun that
has been darkened in its rising," signifies love; the "moon that maketh
not bright her light," signifies faith; a "man made more rare than fine
gold," signifies intelligence and wisdom: this makes clear what is
signified by "Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh to lay the earth waste.
I will cause the heavens to tremble and the earth shall quake out of its
place;" "the day of Jehovah" is the last end of the church, when there
is the judgment; the "earth" is the church. It can be seen that the
earth itself does not quake out of its place, but that the church is
removed when love and faith are not. "To quake out of its place"
signifies to be removed from its former state. \[6\] In the same:
Behold, the Lord, as a deluge of hail, a storm of slaughter, as a deluge
of mighty waters. He shall cast down to the earth with the hand. A
consummation and decision I have heard from the Lord Jehovih of hosts
upon the whole earth (Isa. 28:2, 22). This is said of the day of
judgment upon those who are of the church. The day of judgment, when the
church is at an end is meant by "a consummation and decision I have
heard from the Lord Jehovih of Hosts upon the whole earth;" it is
therefore said "as a deluge of hail, a storm of slaughter, as a deluge
of mighty waters. He shall cast down to the earth with the hand;" by
"hail" and "a deluge of it" falsities that destroy the truths of the
church are signified; by "slaughter," and "a storm of it," evils that
destroy the goods of the church are signified; by "mighty waters"
falsities of evil are signified. (That a "deluge" or "flood" signifies
immersion into evils and falsities, and the consequent destruction of
the church) see Arcana Coelestia, n. 660, 705, 739, 756, 790, 5725,
6853; the like is meant by "casting down to the earth," or a violent
rain. \[7\] In the same: The land shall become burning pitch; from
generation to generation it shall be desolate (Isa. 34:9-10). "Burning
pitch" signifies every evil springing from love of self, through which
the church entirely perishes and is desolated; it is therefore said,
"the land shall become burning pitch; from generation to generation it
shall be desolate." Who does not see that such things are not said of
the land itself? \[8\] In the same: The land mourneth and languisheth;
Lebanon blusheth, and hath withered away (Isa. 33:9). Here also the
"land" means the church, which is said "to mourn" and "to languish" when
falsities begin to be accepted and acknowledged in place of truths; it
is therefore said, "Lebanon blusheth and hath withered away;" "Lebanon"
signifying the like as "cedar," namely, the truth of the church. \[9\]
In Jeremiah: The lion is gone up from his thicket, and the destroyer of
the nations hath gone forth from his place to make thy land a waste; thy
cities shall be destroyed. I saw the earth, when lo, it was void and
empty; and towards the heavens, and lo, they had no light. I saw the
mountains, and lo, they quaked and all the hills are overturned. Jehovah
said, The whole earth shall be a waste. For this shall the land mourn,
and the heavens above be black (Jer. 4:7, 23-24, 27-28). Here also the
vastation of the church is treated of, which takes place when there are
no longer truth and good, but falsity and evil in place of them. This
vastation is described by "the lion going up from his thicket, and the
destroyer of the nations going forth from his place;" "the lion" and
"the destroyer of the nations" signifying falsity and evil, laying
waste. The "mountains that quake," and the "hills that are overturned,"
signify love to the Lord and charity towards the neighbor. This is the
signification of "mountains" and "hills," because those who are in love
to the Lord dwell upon mountains in heaven, and those who are in charity
towards the neighbor, upon hills (see what has been said above, also in
the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 188, and in the notes there, letter,
original edition). "The heavens where there was no light, and that were
black" signify the interiors of the men of the church, which, when
closed by evils and falsities, do not admit light from heaven, but
darkness from hell instead. From this it can be seen what is signified
by "the lion and the destroyer of the nations making the land a waste;"
so likewise by "I saw the earth, and lo, it was void and empty;" also by
"the whole earth shall be a waste; for this shall the land mourn,"
namely, that the earth is not meant, but the church. \[10\] In the same:
How long shall the land mourn, and the herb of every field \[wither\]?
for the evil of them that dwell therein the beasts shall be carried off,
and the fowl. The whole land is made waste because no man layeth it to
heart. Wasters are come upon all the bare heights in the wilderness; for
the sword of Jehovah devoureth from one end of the land even to the
other end of the land. They have sown wheat and have reaped thorns (Jer.
12:4, 11-13). That the "land" here signifies the church is evident, from
its being said that "the land shall mourn, and the herb of every field
\[wither\]," and that "the beasts and the birds shall be carried off for
the evil of them that dwell therein, and because no man layeth it to
heart." "The herb of every field" signifies every truth and good of the
church, and the "beasts and the fowl" signify the affections of good and
truth; and since the church is signified by the "land," and it is here
treated of as being vastated, it is said "wasters are come upon all the
bare heights in the wilderness; for the sword of Jehovah devoureth from
one end of the land even to the other end of the land. They have sown
wheat, and have reaped thorns." "The bare heights in the wilderness upon
which the wasters came" signify the things that are of charity,
"wilderness" meaning where there is no good because no truth; "the sword
of Jehovah" signifies falsity destroying truth; "from one end of the
land to the other end of the land" signifies all things of the church;
"to sow wheat and reap thorns" signifies to take from the Word the
truths of good and to turn them into the falsities of evil, "wheat"
meaning the truths of good, and "thorns" the falsities of evil. \[11\]
In Isaiah: Upon the ground of my people shall come up the thorn and
briar; the palace shall be deserted; the multitude of the city shall be
forsaken (Isa. 32:13-14). The "thorn and briar that shall come up upon
the ground" signify falsity and evil; the "palace that shall be
deserted" signifies where good dwells; and the "multitude of the city
that shall be forsaken" signifies where there are truths; for "city"
signifies the doctrine of truth. \[12\] In the same: All the land shall
be a place of briars and brambles; but as to all the mountains that
shall be hoed with the hoe, there shall not come thither the fear of the
briar and bramble; but there shall be the sending-forth of the ox and
the trampling of the sheep (Isa. 7:24-25). "Briars and brambles" signify
falsity and evil; which makes evident what is signified by "all the land
shall be a place of briars and brambles." "The mountains that shall be
hoed with the hoe" signify those who from the love of good do goods,
that with them there shall be no falsity and evil, but good, natural as
well as spiritual, is signified by "there shall not come thither the
fear of the briar and bramble, but there shall be the sending forth of
the ox, and the trampling of sheep;" that is, thither shall oxen be
sent, and there the sheep shall trample, "ox" signifying natural good,
and "sheep" spiritual good. \[13\] In Ezekiel: Thy mother is a lioness;
she couched among lions; one of her whelps went up; he desolated the
cities; the land and the fullness thereof was made waste by the voice of
his roaring (Ezek. 19:2-3, 7). "Mother" signifies the church; a
"lioness" and "lions" signify the power of evil and falsity against good
and truth; the "roaring of the lion" signifies the lust of destroying
and desolating; the "cities that he desolated" signify doctrine with its
truths, which makes evident what is signified by "the land and the
fullness thereof was laid waste," namely, the whole church. \[14\] In
the same: They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their
waters with astonishment, that the land may be laid waste from the
fullness thereof, because of the violence of all them that dwell
therein; and the cities that are inhabited shall be desolated, and the
land shall be a waste (Ezek. 12:19-20). Here "the land and the cities
that shall be desolated and shall be a waste" have the same
signification as above, namely, "the land" signifies the church, and
"cities" doctrine with its truths; it is therefore said, "because of the
violence of all them that dwell therein." Since this is what is meant,
it is first said that "they shall eat their bread with carefulness, and
drink their waters with astonishment," "bread" and "water" in the Word
signifying all the good of love and truth of faith (see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 9323), and "eating" and "drinking" signifying instruction
and appropriation (n. 3168, 3513, 3832, 9412). \[15\] In David: I called
upon Jehovah, and cried unto my God. Then the earth tottered and quaked,
and the foundations of the mountains trembled and tottered when He was
wroth (Ps. 18:6-7). Here the "earth" stands for the church, which is
said to "totter and quake" when it is perverted by the falsification of
truths; and then "the foundations of the mountains" are said "to tremble
and totter," for the goods of love, which are founded upon the truths of
faith, vanish; "mountains" meaning the goods of love (as above), and
their "foundations" the truths of faith; which also shows that the
"earth" is the church. \[16\] In the same: The earth is Jehovah's and
the fullness thereof, the world and they that dwell therein; and He hath
founded it upon the seas, He hath established it upon the rivers (Ps.
24:1, 2). The "earth" and the "world" stand for the church, and
"fullness" for all things thereof; the "seas upon which He hath founded
it," mean the knowledges of truth in general; the "rivers" doctrinals;
because the church is founded on both of these, it is said that "He hath
founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the rivers." That this
cannot be said of the earth and the world is clear to anyone. \[17\] In
the same: We will not fear, when the earth shall be changed, and when
the mountains shall be moved in the heart of the seas, when the waters
thereof are in tumult and do foam. The nations are in tumult, the
kingdoms are moved, when He giveth forth His voice the earth shall
dissolve (Ps. 46:2-3, 6). The "earth" evidently means the church, since
it is said "to be changed" and "to dissolve," also that "the mountains
shall be moved in the heart of the seas, and the waters thereof shall be
in tumult," and "the nations are in tumult and the kingdoms are moved."
"Mountains" signify (as above) the goods of love, which are said "to be
moved in the heart of the seas" when the essential knowledges of truth
are perverted; "waters" signify the truths of the church, which are said
"to foam" when they are falsified; "nations" signify the goods of the
church, and in a contrary sense, its evils; and "kingdoms" the truths of
the church, and in a contrary sense, its falsities; and also those who
are in the one and the other." \[18\] In the same: O God, Thou hast cast
us off; Thou hast been angry; bring back rest to us. Thou hast made the
earth to quake, Thou hast broken it up; heal the breaches thereof, for
it is moved (Ps. 60:1-2). It can be seen that these things are said of
the church, and not of the earth, for it is said, "Thou hast made the
earth to quake, Thou hast broken it up; heal the breaches thereof, for
it is moved;" and as "the earth" signifies the church, and here the
church vastated, it is said, "O God, Thou hast cast us off, Thou hast
been angry; bring back rest to us." \[19\] In the same: When I shall
receive the set time, I shall judge with uprightness. The earth and all
the inhabitants thereof shall be dissolved; I will make firm the pillars
of it (Ps. 75:23). Here, likewise, the "earth" stands for the church,
which is said to "dissolve" when the truths by which there is good fail;
truths, because they support the church, are called its "pillars," which
God will make firm; it is not the pillars of the earth evidently that
are made firm. As the restoration of the church is here described, it is
said, "When I shall receive the set time, I shall judge with
uprightness." The truths of the church, here called the "pillars of the
earth," are also called the "bases of the earth" (1 Sam. 2:8); and the
"foundations of the earth," in Isaiah: Do ye not understand the
foundations of the earth? It is He that dwelleth upon the circle of the
earth, that bringeth the princes to nothing; and maketh the judges of
the earth as emptiness (Isa. 40:21-23). The "princes who will be brought
to nothing," and the "judges of the earth, whom He will make as
emptiness," signify the things that are from self-intelligence and from
one's own judgment. \[20\] In Jeremiah: A tumult cometh even to the end
of the earth. Thus said Jehovah, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation
to nation, and a great tempest shall be stirred up from the sides of the
earth. And the slain of Jehovah shall be in that day from the end of the
earth even unto the end thereof (Jer. 25:31-33). The "end of the earth"
and the "sides of the earth" signify where the ultimates of the church
are, and where evils and falsities begin; and "from the end of the earth
to the end thereof" signifies all things of the church; from this it can
be known what is signified by "a tumult shall come to the end of the
earth," and "a great tempest shall be stirred up from the sides of the
earth," also by "the slain of Jehovah in that day shall be from the end
of the earth to the end thereof." The "slain" signify those in whom the
truths and goods of the church are extinguished (see Arcana Coelestia,
n. 4503). \[21\] In Isaiah: The isles saw, they feared; the ends of the
earth trembled, they drew near, and came. I will make the wilderness
into a pool of waters, and the dry land into a spring of waters (Isa.
41:5, 18). The establishment of the church among the Gentiles is thus
described; they are signified by the "isles" and the "ends of the
earth;" for "isles" and "the ends of the earth" in the Word signify
those who are far removed from the truths and goods of the church
because they do not have the Word, and consequently, are in ignorance.
That a church is to be established with such is signified by "I will
make the wilderness into a pool of waters, and the dry land into a
spring of waters." That is called a "wilderness" where there is not yet
good because there is not yet truth, and for the same reason it is
called "dry land;" a "pool of waters" and a "spring of waters" signify
good, because they signify truth; for all spiritual good, which is the
good of the church, is acquired by means of truths. \[22\] In the same:
Woe to the land shadowed with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Cush.
Go, ye messengers, to a nation trodden down, whose land the rivers have
despoiled (Isa. 18:1-2). No one knows what is meant by "a land shadowed
with wings," and "a land that the rivers have despoiled," unless he
knows that "land" means the church, and "rivers" falsities; "a land
shadowed with wings" is a church that is in thick darkness in respect to
Divine truths (that these are signified by "wings," see above, n. 283);
"beyond the rivers of Cush" signifies in respect to the knowledges
themselves from the sense of the letter of the Word, which have been
falsified; "a nation trodden down, to which the messengers should go,
whose land the rivers have despoiled," signifies those out of the church
who are in falsities from ignorance; "rivers" meaning the truths of
doctrine, and in a contrary sense falsities; that "the messengers should
go to them" signifies that they should be invited to receive the church.
\[23\] In the same: In the fury of Jehovah of Hosts the land is obscured
(Isa. 9:19). A "land obscured" signifies the things of the church in
thick darkness, that is, in falsities; for the falsities of evil are
said to be in thick darkness, but truths in light. \[24\] In the same:
Jehovah shall remove man, and forsaken places shall be multiplied in the
midst of the land (Isa. 6:12); "man whom Jehovah shall remove,"
signifying him who is wise, and abstractly, wisdom (as may be seen
above, n. 280); "forsaken places multiplied in the midst of the land"
signifying that there shall be no good at all, because no truth; "the
midst of the land" meaning where truth is in the highest light;
consequently when there is no light there, thick darkness pervades the
whole; thus there is nowhere any truth at all. \[25\] In the same:
Jehovah shall smite the earth with the rod of His mouth, and with the
breath of His lips shall He put to death the wicked (Isa. 11:4). "The
rod of Jehovah's mouth which shall smite the earth," signifies truth in
ultimates, which is the truth of the sense of the letter of the Word;
"the breath of the lips which shall put to death the wicked," signifies
truth in the spiritual sense of the Word; these truths are said "to
smite the earth," and "to put to death the wicked," when such are
condemned by truths; for by truths everyone is judged and is condemned.
\[26\] In the same: The earth is at rest, and is quiet. Hell hath
stirred up the Rephaim because of thee, all the powerful of the earth.
They that see thee shall say, Is this the man that maketh the earth to
tremble, that maketh the kingdoms to quake; that hath made the world as
a wilderness and threw down the cities thereof? Thou hast destroyed thy
land, thou hast slain thy people. Prepare slaughter for his sons, that
they rise not up and possess the land, and the faces of the world be
filled with cities. I will break the Assyrian in My land, and upon My
mountains I will tread him down (Isa. 14:7, 9, 16-17, 20-21, 25). These
things are said of the king of Babylon, by whom is signified the
destruction of truth by the love of ruling over heaven and earth; which
love the truths of the Word or of the church are made to serve as means;
here their damnation is treated of. The "Rephaim whom hell stirred up,"
mean those who are in the direful persuasion of what is false, who are
therefore called the powerful of the earth; "to make the earth to
tremble," "to make the kingdoms quake," "to make the world as a
wilderness," and "to throw down the cities thereof," signifies to
pervert all things of the church; "earth" and "world" mean the church,
"kingdoms" the truths that constitute it; and "cities" all things of
doctrine. From this it is clear what is signified by, "Thou hast
destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people." The "Assyrian who shall
be broken in the land and trodden down upon the mountains," signifies
the reasonings from falsities against truths; "to be broken" means to be
dispersed, and "to be trodden down" means to be wholly destroyed;
"mountains upon which this is done," signify where the good of love and
charity reigns, for there, or with such, all reasoning from falsities is
dispersed or destroyed. \[27\] In the same: Howl, ye ships of Tarshish;
from the land of Chittim it shall manifestly come to them. Pass through
thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish; the girdle is no more.
Behold the land of the Chaldean; Assyria hath founded it into heaps.
Jehovah will visit Tyre, that she may return to the hire of whoredom and
commit whoredom with all the kingdoms of the earth upon the faces of the
ground (Isa. 23:1, 10, 13, 17). Neither ships of Tarshish, nor Tyre, nor
the land of Chittim, nor the land of the Chaldeans, nor Assyria, are
here meant, as can be seen from the particulars in this chapter; but
"the ships of Tarshish" mean the knowledges of truth and good, "Tyre"
the like; "the land of Chittim" what is idolatrous; "the land of the
Chaldeans" the profanation and destruction of truth, and "Assyria"
reasoning from falsities. From this it is clear that, "Howl, ye ships of
Tarshish, for Tyre is desolated" signifies that there were no longer any
knowledges of truth; "from the land of Chittim it shall manifestly come
to them" signifies idolatry therefrom; "the girdle is no more" signifies
that there is no longer any coherence of truth with good; "behold the
land of the Chaldeans" signifies that thus there is profanation and
destruction of truth; "Assyria hath founded it into heaps" signifies
that reasonings from falsities have destroyed it; "to return to the hire
of whoredom" and "to commit whoredom with all kingdoms upon the faces of
the ground" signifies the falsification of all truths of the whole
church. \[28\] In the same: The king of Assyria shall pass on through
Judah, he shall overflow and pass through, he shall reach even to the
neck; and the flappings of his wings <span
id="fr_84"></span>[304-1](#fn_84.md) shall be the fullness of the breadth
of thy land, O Immanuel (Isa. 8:8). Here, too, "the king of Assyria"
signifies the reasoning from falsities against truths; "he shall pass on
through Judah, he shall overflow and pass through" signifies that this
shall destroy the good of the church (to "overflow" is predicated of
falsities, because they are signified by "waters"); "he shall reach even
to the neck" signifies that thus there shall be no longer any
communication of good and truth; and "the flappings of his wings shall
be the fullness of the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel" signifies that
falsities shall be opposed to all the truths of the Lord's church; "the
breadth of the land" signifies the truths of the church (see Heaven and
Hell, n. 197), consequently, in a contrary sense, falsities; therefore
the "flappings of his wings" signify reasonings from falsities against
truths; "fullness" signifies all; thus "the fullness of the breadth of
the land" signifies all the truths of the church. \[29\] In the same: In
that day shall the bud of Jehovah be for adornment and glory, and the
fruit of the earth for magnificence and splendor to those left of Israel
(Isa. 4:2). The "bud of Jehovah," that shall be for adornment and glory,
signifies the truth of the church; and the "fruit of the earth," that
shall be for magnificence and splendor, signifies the good of the
church; "Israel" signifies the spiritual church. Evidently it is the
truth and good of the church, and not the bud and the fruit of the
earth, that shall be for adornment, glory, magnificence, and splendor.
When it is said the truth and good of the church, the truth of faith and
the good of love are meant, for all truth is of faith, and all good is
of love. \[30\] In the same: Thou hast added to the nation, O Jehovah;
Thou hast been glorified; Thou hast removed all the ends of the earth
(Isa. 26:15). The "nation to which Jehovah has added" signifies those
who are in the good of love, whom He has claimed to Himself; "the ends
of the earth which He has removed" signify the falsities and evils that
infest the church, from which He has purified them. \[31\] In the same:
Thine eyes shall behold the king in his beauty, they shall behold a land
of far distances (Isa. 33:17). "To see the king in his beauty," means to
see genuine truth, which is from the Lord alone; "to behold a land of
far distances" signifies to behold the extension of intelligence and
wisdom. \[32\] In the same: I have given thee for a covenant to the
people, to restore the earth. Sing aloud O heavens, and exult O earth,
and break forth O mountains with a song (Isa. 49:8, 13). This treats of
the Lord and His coming; the establishment of the church by Him is
described by "I have given thee for a covenant of the people, to restore
the earth," to "restore the earth" being to reestablish the church; it
is known that the Lord did not restore the earth to the Jewish people,
but that He established a church among the Gentiles; the joy in
consequence is described by, "Sing aloud O heavens, and exult O earth,
and break forth O mountains with a song," "the heavens" being the
heavens where angels are who are in the interior truths of the church,
"the earth" the church among men, and "the mountains" those who are in
the good of love to the Lord. \[33\] In Jeremiah: The land is full of
adulterers; for because of malediction the land mourneth; the pastures
of the wilderness are dried up (Jer. 23:10). "Adulterers" signify those
who adulterate the goods of the church; therefore it is said, "the land
is full of adulterers, and because of the malediction the land
mourneth;" the "pastures of the wilderness that are dried up" signify no
spiritual nourishment in such a church; that is called "wilderness"
where there is no truth. \[34\] In the same: A drought is upon her
waters, so that they shall become dry; for it is a land of graven images
(Jer. 50:38). "A drought upon the waters, so that they shall become dry"
signifies that there are no more truths, "waters" being truths; "for it
is a land of graven images" signifies the church destroyed by falsities
which are from self-intelligence, which they call truths, "graven
images" signifying those falsities. \[35\] In Ezekiel: The end hath come
upon the four quarters of the earth; the earth is full of the judgment
of bloods, and the city is full of violence (Ezek. 7:2, 23). "The end
hath come upon the four quarters of the earth" signifies the last time
and the last state of the church, when its end is, the four quarters
being all truths and goods of the church, and in a contrary sense, all
its falsities and evils, thus all things of the church; "the earth full
of the judgment of bloods" signifies that it is filled with evils of
every kind, "bloods" being the evils that offer violence to the goods of
love and charity and wholly destroy them; "the city full of violence"
signifies the doctrine of that church likewise offering violence. \[36\]
In the same: All the luminaries of light in heaven will I make black
over thee, and will set darkness upon thy land (Ezek. 32:8). "The
luminaries of light in the heavens" mean the sun, moon, and stars; the
"sun" signifying love, the "moon" faith therefrom, and the "stars" the
knowledges of good and truth; from this it is clear what is signified by
"I will make them black over thee," namely, that these no longer exist;
thence also it is clear what is signified by "I will set darkness upon
thy land," namely, that there will be falsities in the church,"
"darkness" meaning falsities, and "land" the church. \[37\] In the same:
Prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains and
to the hills and to the watercourses and to the valleys, Behold, I am
for you, and I will turn unto you that ye may be tilled and sown (Ezek.
36:6, 9). "The land of Israel" means the church; "mountains, hills,
watercourses, and valleys" signify all things of the church from the
first to the last things thereof, "mountains" are the goods of love to
the Lord, "hills" the goods of charity towards the neighbor-these are
the first things of the church; "watercourses and valleys" are truths
and goods that are the last things of the church. That this is the
meaning can be seen from what was said at the beginning of this article,
namely, that those in heaven who are in the good of love to the Lord
dwell upon mountains, those who are in charity towards the neighbor upon
hills, and those who are in goods and truths in the lowest heaven in
plains and valleys; "watercourses" are the truths of doctrine there; to
implant these is signified by "I will turn unto you that ye may be
tilled and sown." \[38\] In Hosea: In that day I will hear the heavens,
and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn and the
new wine and the oil, and these shall hear Jezreel, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[304-2](#fn_85.md) and I will sow her unto me in the
earth (Hos. 2:21-23). Evidently these things are to be understood
spiritually, and not naturally according to the sense of the letter, for
it is said that "these shall hear Jezreel; and I will sow her unto me in
the earth;" therefore the "heavens" mean the heavens where the Lord is;
and the "earth" the church where also the Lord is; "corn, new wine, and
oil" signify all the things of spiritual nourishment, which are the
goods of love and charity and the truths of faith. \[39\] In Malachi: He
shall not destroy for you the fruit of the ground, neither shall the
vine in the field be barren to you; all nations shall proclaim you
happy, and ye shall be a land of good pleasure (Mal. 3:11-12). These
things are said of those with whom is the church; and because "the fruit
of the ground," and "the vine in the field" signify the goods and truths
of the church ("fruit" goods, and "the vine" its truths), therefore they
are called "a land of good pleasure." \[40\] In David: Let thy good
spirit lead me into the land of uprightness; vivify me, O Jehovah, for
Thy name's sake (Ps. 143:10-11). "The land of uprightness" stands for
the church in which is the right and the true; and because "the spirit
of Jehovah" signifies Divine truth, and everyone receives spiritual life
through that, therefore it is said, "Let Thy good spirit lead me," and
"vivify me, O Jehovah." \[41\] As the "earth" signifies the church, and
where the church is there is heaven, therefore heaven is called "the
land of the living," and "the land of life;" "the land of the living" in
Isaiah: I said, I shall not see Jah in the land of the living (Isa.
38:11); and in Ezekiel: Who caused terror in the land of the living
(Ezek. 32:23-27). "The land of life," in David: Unless I had believed to
see good in the land of life (Ps. 27:13). \[42\] In Moses: The stone
shall be entire and just, the ephah shall be entire and just, that thy
days may be prolonged upon the earth (Deut. 25:15). "Days to be
prolonged upon the earth" does not mean a lengthening of life in the
world, but the state of life in the church, thus in heaven; for "to be
prolonged" is predicated of good and its increase, and "day" signifies
the state of life; and as "a stone entire and just," which was a weight,
and "an ephah entire and just," which was a measure, signify truth and
good and their quality, and both together signify justice, "stone"
signifying truth, and "measure" good, and as not to deceive by weight
and measure is to be just, therefore such shall have the life of the
church and afterwards life in heaven, which is meant by "their days upon
the earth shall be prolonged." \[43\] The like is signified by this
precept in the Decalogue: Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days
may be prolonged upon the earth (Exod. 20:12). Those who honor father
and mother have heaven and the happiness there, because in heaven no
other father but the Lord is known, for all there have been generated
anew from Him; and in heaven by "mother" the church is meant, and in
general, the kingdom of the Lord. It is clear that those who worship the
Lord and seek his kingdom will have life in heaven, also that many of
those who honor father and mother in the world do not live there long.
\[44\] In Matthew: Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth (Matt. 5:5). "Inheriting the earth" signifies not possession of
the earth, but possession of heaven and blessedness there; the "meek"
mean those who are in the good of charity. \[45\] In Isaiah: Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call His name
God-With-Us: butter and honey shall He eat, that He may know to reject
the evil and to choose the good; for before the Lad knoweth to reject
the evil and to choose the good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken of its two kings. It shall come to pass in that day, by reason
of the abundance of milk they yield, He shall eat butter; for butter and
honey shall everyone eat that is left in the midst of the land (Isa.
7:14-16, 21-22). It is known that these things were said respecting the
Lord and His coming; "butter and honey," which He shall eat, signify the
goods of love; "butter" the good of celestial and spiritual love,
"honey" the good of natural love; this means that He would appropriate
the Divine to Himself even in respect to the Human; "to eat" signifying
to appropriate. That "the land shall be forsaken before He knoweth to
reject the evil and to choose the good" signifies that when He should be
born there would not be anything of the church remaining in the whole
world; and because those where the church was, rejected every Divine
truth and perverted all things of the Word, and explained it in favor of
self, it is said of the land, that is, the church, "which thou abhorrest
from the presence of its two kings; "king" signifying the truths of
heaven and of the church; "two kings" the truth of the Word in the
internal or spiritual sense, and the truth of the Word in the external
or natural sense. "Milk" signifies truth through which good comes, and
as "butter" signifies the good therefrom, "by reason of the abundance of
yielding milk, butter shall everyone eat that is left in the midst of
the land" signifies that every truth shall be from good. \[46\] In
Matthew: In the consummation of the age, all the tribes of the earth
shall lament (Matt. 24:30). "The consummation of the age" which is
treated of in that chapter, is the last time of the church, when
judgment takes place; "all the tribes of the earth" signify all truths
and goods of the church, which are said "to lament" when they are no
more. \[47\] In Luke: Then shall there be signs in the sun, the moon,
and the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, the sea and the
waves roaring; men expiring for fear and for expectation of the things
coming upon the whole earth; for the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken. That day as a snare shall come upon all that dwell upon the face
of the whole earth (Luke 21:25-26, 35). Here also the last time of the
church is treated of, when judgment takes place, and the "earth" and the
"world" here mean the church. "The distress of nations upon the earth,"
"the fear and expectation of the things coming upon the earth, and upon
all who dwell upon the face of the whole earth" signifies upon those who
are in the spiritual world, not upon those who are in the countries in
the natural world. (That there are lands in the spiritual world also,
see what is said at the beginning of this article; and that the Last
Judgment was accomplished there, see Last Judgment.) It has been told
before what "sun," "moon," and "stars" signify, in which are signs,
namely, that "sun" signifies love, "moon" faith therefrom, and "stars"
the knowledges of good and truth; the "sea and waves roaring" signify
the reasonings and assaults of truth from the sense of the letter of the
Word, wrongly and perversely applied. The "powers of the heavens that
shall be shaken" signify the Word in the sense of the letter, since this
sense is the foundation of the spiritual truths that are in the heavens.
(See Heaven and Hell, in the article that treats of the conjunction of
heaven with man by the Word, n. 303-310.) \[48\] In Isaiah: Sing aloud
ye heavens; shout, ye lower parts of the earth; break forth with
singing, ye mountains, O forest and every tree therein; for Jehovah hath
redeemed Jacob. I am Jehovah, that maketh all things; that stretchest
forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by Myself (Isa.
44:23-24). "Sing aloud, ye heavens; shout, ye lower parts of the earth;
break forth with singing, ye mountains, O forest and every tree therein"
signifies all things of heaven and of the church, both internal and
external, all of which have reference to good and to truth. Things
internal are signified by "the heavens," things external by "the lower
parts of the earth;" "mountains" mean the good of love, the "forest"
means natural truth, and the "trees" therein mean the knowledges of
truth. Because such things are signified, it is said, "for Jehovah hath
redeemed Jacob," "Jacob" in the Word signifying the external church, and
"Israel" the internal church; "to stretch forth the heavens," and "to
spread abroad the earth" signifies the church on all sides, which is
spread forth and extended by the multiplication of truth and the
fructification of good, with those who are of the church. \[49\] In
Zechariah: Jehovah stretcheth out the heavens, and foundeth the earth,
and formeth the spirit of man in the midst of him (Zech. 12:1). Here,
too, in like manner "heavens" and "earth" signify the church everywhere,
thus in respect to its interiors and as to its exteriors; therefore it
is also said, "He formeth the spirit of man in the midst of him." \[50\]
In Jeremiah: The gods that have not made the heaven and the earth, let
them perish from the earth and from under the heavens. Jehovah maketh
the earth by His power, prepareth the world by His wisdom, and
stretcheth out the heavens by His intelligence. At the voice which He
giveth forth there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and He
causeth the vapors to ascend from the end of the earth (Jer. 10:11-13;
51:15-16). Because the "heavens" and the "earth" signify the church (as
above), it is said, "Jehovah maketh the earth by His power, prepareth
the world by His wisdom, and stretcheth out the heavens by His
intelligence;" and therefore also it is said, "At the voice which He
giveth forth there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and He
causeth the vapors to ascend from the end of the earth;" "the voice that
Jehovah giveth forth" signifies Divine truth proceeding from Him; the
"multitude of waters in the heavens" signifies truth in abundance, for
"waters" signify truths; and "the vapors that He causeth to ascend from
the end of the earth" signify the ultimate truths of the church,
"vapors" are those truths; and "the end of the earth" is the ultimate of
the church; and as "gods" signify the falsities of doctrine and of
worship, which destroy the church, it is said, "The gods that have not
made the heaven and the earth, let them perish from the earth and from
under the heavens." \[51\] In David: Jehovah, who by intelligence maketh
the heavens, and spreadeth out the earth above the waters (Ps. 136:5-6).
Because "heaven" and "earth" signify the church, and the church is
formed by truths, and the truths of the church constitute intelligence,
it is said, "Jehovah maketh the heavens by intelligence, and spreadeth
out the earth above the waters," "waters" meaning the truths of the
church. \[52\] In Isaiah: Thus saith Jehovah God, that createth the
heavens, and stretcheth them out, that spreadeth forth the earth and the
products thereof, that giveth breath to the people upon it, and spirit
to them that walk therein (Isa. 42:5). "To create the heavens" and "to
spread forth the earth and the products thereof" signifies to form the
church and to reform those who are in it, "products" meaning all things
of the church; therefore it is said, "that giveth breath to the people
upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein." That "to create" is to
reform, see above (n. 294). \[53\] In the same: Drop down, ye heavens,
from above, and let the \[higher\] clouds flow down with righteousness;
let the earth open, and bring forth the fruit of salvation. I have made
the earth, and created man upon it. Thus said Jehovah who created the
heavens; God Himself who formeth the earth and maketh it and prepareth
it: I have not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness
(Isa. 45:8, 12, 18-19). "Heavens" and "earth" here plainly mean all
things of the church, both its internals and externals; for it is said,
"Drop down, ye heavens, and let the \[higher\] clouds flow down with
righteousness; let the earth open, and bring forth the fruit of
salvation." "Heavens" signify the interiors of the church, because the
interiors that are of man's spiritual mind are the heavens with him.
(That with the man with whom the church is there is a heaven, see in the
work on Heaven and Hell, n. 30-57.) "To create the heavens and to form
the earth, and make and prepare it," signifies to fully establish the
church. \[54\] In the same: Behold, I create new heavens and a new
earth, and the former shall not be remembered (Isa. 65:17). "To create
new heavens and a new earth" signifies to establish a new church in
respect to its interiors and exteriors, both in the heavens and on earth
(as above). \[55\] In the same: Who hath heard a thing like this? shall
the earth bring forth in one day? shall a nation be begotten at one
time? For as the new heavens and the new earth which I am about to make
shall stand before Me, so shall your seed and your name stand (Isa.
66:8, 22). Because the "earth" signifies the church, it is said, "shall
the earth bring forth in one day? shall a nation be begotten at one
time?" "To bring forth," and "birth," and "to beget," and "begetting,"
in the Word, signify spiritual birth and begetting, which are of faith
and love, thus reformation and regeneration. What the "new heavens" and
the "new earth" signify has been told above. \[56\] In Jeremiah: I have
made the earth, man and beast that are upon the faces of the earth, and
I give it to him who is right in My eyes (Jer. 27:5). "Man and beast
that are upon the faces of the earth" signify the affections of truth
and good in the spiritual and the natural man (see n. 280; and Arcana
Coelestia, n. 7424, 7523, 7872); and since these affections with men
constitute the church in them it is said, "I have made the earth, man
and beast that are upon the faces of the earth, and I give it to him who
is right in My eyes." Everyone knows that God gives the earth not alone
to those who are right in His eyes, but also to those who are not right,
while the church He gives to those only who are right; "right"
signifying truth and its affection. \[57\] In Isaiah: The heavens shall
vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and
the dwellers therein shall die in like manner (Isa. 51:6). The "heavens
that shall vanish away," and the "earth that shall wax old like a
garment" signify the church; this step by step falls, and at length is
desolated; but not so the visible heaven and the habitable earth;
therefore it is said, "and the dwellers therein shall die in like
manner," "to die" signifying to die spiritually: The heavens and earth
shall pass away (Matt. 24:35; Mark 13:31; Luke 16:17); has a like
signification. \[58\] In Revelation: Four angels standing upon the four
corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind
should not blow upon the earth (Rev. 7:1). "The four corners of the
earth," and "the four winds of the earth" signify all truths and goods
of the church in the complex; for they have the like signification as
the four quarters of heaven (that these have this signification, see
Heaven and Hell, on the four quarters in heaven, n. 141-153). To "hold
the four winds" signifies that truths and goods do not flow in because
they are not received; therefore it is said that "the wind should not
blow upon the earth." "The earth" signifies the church elsewhere in
Revelation (as 10:2, 5-6, 8; 12:16; 13:13; 16:2, 14; 20:8-9, 11; 21:1),
as well as in many other places in the Word, too numerous to be cited.
\[59\] As the church was signified by the "earth" and especially by the
"land of Canaan," because the church was there, and as the church which
was there was a representative church, so all things there were
representative, and all that was said to them by the Lord signified the
spiritual or interior things of the church, and this even to the land
itself and its products; as in these words in Moses: If thou wilt keep
the commandments, Jehovah will lead thee into a good land, into a land
of brooks of waters, of fountains, of depths coming forth out of valley
and mountain; a land of wheat, of barley, of vine, of fig, of
pomegranate; a land of the olive, of oil, of honey; a land where thou
shalt eat bread without scarceness; it shall lack nothing; a land where
the stones are iron and out of the mountains is digged copper; and thou
shalt eat, and shalt be satisfied in this good land (Deut. 8:6-10). This
is a description of all things of the church, both its interiors and its
exteriors; but to explain what the particulars signify would be tedious
and not to the present purpose. \[60\] Because the "land" signifies the
church it was among the blessings, that if they lived according to the
commandments: The land would yield its increase, evil beasts would cease
out of the land, nor would the sword pass through the land (Lev. 26:3-4,
6). That "the land would yield its increase" signifies that there would
be good and truth in the church; that "evil beasts would cease"
signifies that there would not be evil affections and lusts, which
destroy the church; that "the sword would not pass through the land"
signifies that falsity would not cast out truth. \[61\] Again, as the
"land" signifies the church, it was also decreed that: The seventh year
should be a sabbath of the land, and that there should be no labor upon
it (Lev. 25:1-8). It is therefore said also that: The land was defiled
on account of their evils, and would vomit them out because of their
abominations (Lev. 18:25-28). Because the "land" \[or ground\] signified
the church: The Lord spat on the earth, and made clay of the spittle,
and anointed the eyes of the blind man, and said, Go wash thee in the
pool of Siloam (John 9:6-7, 11, 15); So the Lord, when the Scribes and
Pharisees questioned Him respecting the woman taken in adultery,
stooping down, wrote twice on the earth (John 8:6, 8); which signified
that the church was full of adulteries, that is, full of the
adulteration of good and the falsification of truth; therefore the Lord
said to them: He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
stone at her; but they went out one by one, beginning from the elders,
even unto the last (John 8:7, 9). \[62\] As most things in the Word have
also a contrary sense, so has the "earth," which in that sense signifies
the church vastated; it is vastated when the good of love and the truth
of faith are no more, but instead thereof evil and falsity; as these
damn man, the "earth" in that sense signifies damnation, as in the
following places: Isa. 14:12; 21:9; 25:12; 26:19, 21; 29:4; 47:1; 63:6;
Lam. 2:2, 10; Ezek. 26:20; 32:24; Num. 16:29-33; 26:10; and elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="305.">305.</span></span>

Verses 4, 5. And I wept much, that no one was found worthy to open and
to read the book, neither to look thereon. And one of the elders saith
unto me, weep not; behold, the Lion that is from the tribe of Judah, the
Root of David, hath overcome to open the book, and to loose the seven
seals thereof. 4. "And I wept much, that no one was found worthy to open
and to read the book, neither to look thereon," signifies grief of heart
on account of the disorder and destruction of all things, if no one
could know \[scire\], cognize \[cognoscere\], and explore all men, and
all things pertaining to men (n. 306). 5. "And one of the elders"
signifies a society of heaven superior in wisdom to the rest (n. 307);
"saith unto me, Weep not," signifies that there need be no grief on that
account (n. 308); "behold, the Lion hath overcome," signifies that the
Lord from His own power subjugated the hells, and reduced all things in
the heavens to order (n. 309); "from the tribe of Judah, the Root of
David," signifies by means of Divine good united to Divine truth in His
Human (n. 310); "to open the book, and to loose the seven seals
thereof," signifies that He knows and recognizes all and each, and the
most secret things of everyone (n. 311).

<span class="margnote"><span id="306.">306.</span></span>

Verse 4. And I wept much, that no one was found worthy to open and to
read the book, neither to look thereon, signifies grief of heart on
account of the disorder and destruction of all things, if no one could
know, recognize and explore all men, and all things pertaining to men.
This is evident from the signification of "weeping," as being to grieve;
therefore "to weep much" means to grieve from the heart, or grief of
heart; that this is on account of the disorder and destruction of all
things will be seen presently. Also from the signification of "no one
was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon,"
as being that no one is such as to be able to know the states of life of
all in general, and of each in particular (of which see above, n. 303,
304); or, what is the same, that no one is such as to be able to know,
recognize, and explore all men, and all things pertaining to men. In
regard to grief of heart (which is signified by "I wept much"), on
account of the disorder and destruction of all things if no one is such
as to be able to know, recognize, and explore all men, and all things
pertaining to men, I will briefly explain. That the angelic heaven may
exist and subsist all things therein must be in order; for unless heaven
were in order it would be dissipated; for the angelic heaven is divided
into societies, and the societies are arranged according to the
affections of truth and good, and these are manifold and numberless.
This arranging depends solely on the infinite wisdom of the One who
knows all things, recognizes all things, and explores all things, and
thence disposes and arranges all things. This One is the Lord alone;
therefore it is said in the Word, that to Him belongeth judgment; and
that He has power in the heavens and on the earth; and here that "He
took the book and loosed the seals thereof." Moreover, unless heaven
were in order, the world, that is, men on the earth, could not exist and
subsist, since the world depends upon heaven and its influx into the
spiritual and rational things of men; in a word, all things would
perish. (But this may be better comprehended from what is set forth in
the work on Heaven and Hell, also in the little work on The Last
Judgment, and in fact, from everything there if read with attention.) It
is said to know, to recognize, and to explore, because this is signified
by "to open the book, to read, and to look thereon;" for the "book"
signifies all things with man, spirit, and angel, or all the states of
their life in respect to love and faith; therefore "to open the book"
signifies to know these things; "to read the book" signifies to
recognize them, and "to look upon the book" signifies to explore them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="307.">307.</span></span>

Verse 5. And one of the elders, signifies a society of heaven superior
in wisdom to the rest. This is evident from the signification of
"elders," as being those who are in truths from good, and abstractly
truths from good (of which above, n. 270), thus those who are superior
to the rest in intelligence and wisdom; for all intelligence is from
good through truths, or through truths from good, and from no other
source. "One of the elders" signifies a society of heaven because "an
angel" in the Word does not mean one angel, but a whole society (see
above, n. 90, 302); in like manner also "one of the elders." A society
superior in wisdom to the rest is meant, because this elder declared
that it is the Lord alone who acquired to Himself Divine wisdom in
respect to the Human in order that He might know, recognize, and explore
everyone, and the states of the life of all in general, and of each one
in particular; which things are signified by his saying, "Weep not;
behold, the Lion that is from the tribe of Judah, the Root of David,
hath overcome to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof;"
for to know this, namely, that it is the Lord alone who is such, belongs
to the wisdom of the angels of heaven; and the angelic societies of the
third or inmost heaven know this from perception, that is, by influx
from the Lord. The others also know it, yet not by perception but by the
illustration of the understanding. The angels of the third or inmost
heaven have perception; angels of the second and of the last heaven have
illustration of the understanding; the difference is this, that
perception is full confirmation by influx from the Lord, but the
illustration of the understanding is spiritual sight. This those have
who are in charity towards the neighbor and in faith therefrom; but the
former, namely, perception, those have who are in love to the Lord (see
further what perception is, in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n.
135-140).

<span class="margnote"><span id="308.">308.</span></span>

Saith unto me, Weep not, signifies there need be no grief on that
account. This is evident from the signification of "weeping," as being
grief of heart, as above (n. 306), where also the reason for this may be
seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="309.">309.</span></span>

Behold, the Lion hath overcome, signifies that the Lord from His own
power subjugated the hells, and reduced all things there and in the
heavens to order. This is evident from the signification of
"overcoming," when predicated of the Lord, namely, that when He was in
the world He subjugated the hells, and reduced all things there and in
the heavens to order, and this by temptations admitted into His Human,
and then by continual victories (of which see in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem, n. 293, 294, 301, 309). This therefore is signified by
"overcoming," when predicated of the Lord; and as the Lord had done
these things from His own power, He is called a "Lion;" for "lion"
signifies power (see above, n. 278). That the Lord did these things from
His own power is known from the Word; but as few are aware of this, I
wish to say something respecting it. The Lord did this from the Divine
that was in Him from conception; this Divine He had as a man has a soul
from his father; and the soul of everyone works by means of the body,
for the body is the soul's obedience. The Divine that was in the Lord
from conception was His own Divine, which in the Athanasian Creed is
said to be equal to the Divine that is there called "the Father;" for it
is said that: As is the Father so also is the Son, infinite, uncreate,
eternal, omnipotent, God, Lord, and that neither of them is greatest or
least, nor first or last, but altogether equal. It is also said that:
The Divine and Human of the Lord are not two, but one person, and that
as the soul and body make one man, so the Divine and the Human are one
Christ. From this also those who have faith in Athanasius may know that
the Lord did these things from His own power, because from His Divine.
From this it can clearly be seen what is meant by what the Lord says in
John: The Father that abideth in Me, He doeth the works. Believe Me,
that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me (John 14:10-11). And
elsewhere in the same: Verily I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of
Himself, except what He seeth the Father doing; for whatever things He
doeth, these also the Son doeth in like manner. As the Father raiseth up
the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will.
As the Father hath life in Himself, so also gave He to the Son to have
life in Himself (John 5:19, 21, 26). As the Divine, which the Lord calls
"the Father," was His Divine, and not another Divine, it can be seen
that whatever He did from the Father, as well as whatever He did from
the Human which He calls "the Son," He did from Himself; and thus that
He did all things by His own power, since He did them from what was His.

<span class="margnote"><span id="310.">310.</span></span>

From the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, signifies by means of Divine
good united to the Divine truth in His Human. This is evident from the
signification of "the tribe of Judah," as being all goods in the
complex, for all the tribes of Israel signified all truths and goods of
heaven and the church (of which above, n. 39); and "Judah" or his tribe
signified the good of celestial love (of which see also above, n. 119;
and Arcana Coelestia, n. 3654, 3881, 5583, 5603, 5782, 6363); therefore
in the highest sense, in which the Lord is treated of, "the tribe of
Judah" signifies Divine good. It is evident also from the signification
of "the Root of David," as being Divine truth; for by "David" in the
Word the Lord in respect to Divine truth is meant (see above, n. 205).
Therefore "of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David," means the Lord in
respect to Divine good united to Divine truth in His Human. In the Word
in the sense of its letter two expressions are mostly used, one
involving good but the other truth; but in its internal or spiritual
sense these two are joined into one, and this on account of the marriage
of good and truth in every particular of the Word (of which see above,
n. 238 at end, 288); the reason is that good and truth in heaven are not
two but one, for every truth there is of good. The Lord in respect to
the Human is called "the Root of David," for the reason that all Divine
truth is from Him, even as all things exist and subsist from their root;
for the same reason also He is called "the Root of Jesse," in Isaiah: It
shall be in that day that the Root of Jesse, which standeth for a
standard of the peoples, the nations shall seek; and His rest shall be
glory (Isa. 11:10). "Jesse" here stands for David, because he was
David's father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="311.">311.</span></span>

To open the book and to loose the seven seals thereof, signifies that He
knows and recognizes all and each, and the most secret things of
everyone. This is evident from what was shown above (n. 299, 303-304),
where similar things are mentioned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="312.">312.</span></span>

Verses 6, 7. And I saw, and behold, in the midst of the throne and of
the four animals, and in the midst of the elders a Lamb standing as if
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of
God, sent forth into all the earth. And He came and took the book out of
the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne. 6. "And I saw, and
behold in the midst of the throne and of the four animals, and in the
midst of the elders," signifies in the whole heaven, and especially in
the inmost heavens (n. 313); "a Lamb standing," signifies the Lord in
respect to the Divine Human (n. 314); "as if slain," signifies as yet
acknowledged by few (n. 315); "having seven horns," signifies who has
omnipotence (n. 316); "and seven eyes," signifies and who has
omniscience (n. 317); "which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth
into all the earth," signifies that all wisdom and intelligence in
heaven and in the church are therefrom (n. 318). 7. "And He came and
took the book out of the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne,"
signifies that these things are from His Divine Human (n. 319).

<span class="margnote"><span id="313.">313.</span></span>

Verse 6. And I saw, and behold, in the midst of the throne and of the
four animals, and in the midst of the elders, signifies in the whole
heaven, and especially in the inmost heavens. This is evident from the
signification of "in the midst," as being the inmost, and therefore the
whole (of which presently); from the signification of "throne," as being
heaven in the whole complex (of which above, n. 253); from the
signification of "the four animals" as being the Lord's providence and
guard that heaven be not approached except through the good of love (of
which see above, n. 277); and as that guard is especially in the third
or inmost heaven, since all who are there are in the good of love to the
Lord from the Lord, that heaven is signified especially by "the four
animals" (which will be more clearly seen from what follows in this
chapter). It is also evident from the signification of "elders" as being
those who are in truths from good (of which also see above n. 270);
here, therefore, those who are in the middle or second heaven, since all
who are there are in truths from good; for there are these two heavens,
the third and second, distinguished from each other by this, that those
in the third heaven are in love to the Lord, and those in the second in
charity towards the neighbor; those in charity towards the neighbor are
in truths from good. From this it can be seen what is especially
signified by the "four animals" and the "elders." \[2\] But the "four
animals" signify in general all Divine good in the whole heaven, which
guards; and the "elders" signify in general all Divine truth proceeding
from Divine good in the whole heaven; both guard because they are
united; thus "the four animals and the elders," together, signify Divine
good united to Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, and therefore the
entire angelic heaven, but especially the two inmost heavens. This is so
for the reason that angels are not angels from what is their own \[ex
proprio\], but from the Divine good and the Divine truth that they
receive; for it is the Divine with them, that is, the Divine received by
them, that causes them to be angels, and causes heaven, which is made up
of them, to be called heaven (see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n.
2-12, 51-86). \[3\] That "the midst" or "in the midst" signifies the
inmost, and therefore the whole, can be seen from many passages in the
Word; but first let something be said to explain whence it is that
because "the midst" signifies the inmost it also signifies the whole.
This may be illustrated by comparison with light, with the sun, with the
arrangement of all in the heavens, and also of all who are of the church
on earth. By comparison with light: Light in the midst propagates itself
round about or from the center to circumferences in every direction; and
because from the inmost it is propagated and fills the spaces around,
thence "in the midst" signifies also the whole. By comparison with the
sun: The sun is in the midst because it is the center of its universe;
because from it are the heat and light in its system, therefore the sun
"in the midst" signifies its presence in every direction, or throughout
the whole. By comparison with the arrangement of all in the heavens:
There are three heavens, and the inmost of them is the third heaven;
this flows into the two lower heavens, and makes them to be one with it
by communication which is effected by influx from the inmost. Moreover,
in every society of the heavens that which is inmost is also the most
perfect; those, therefore, who are round about in that society are in
light and intelligence according to their degree of distance from the
inmost (see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 43, 50, 189). By
comparison with those who are in the church on earth: The Lord's church
is spread through the whole world; but its inmost is where the Lord is
known and acknowledged, and where the Word is; from that inmost, light
and intelligence are propagated to all who are round about and are of
the church, but this propagation of light and intelligence is effected
in heaven (of which see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 308). From
this it can be seen that "the midst" or "in the midst," as it signifies
the inmost, signifies also the whole. This makes clear what is meant by
"I saw, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four animals, and
in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing," namely, the Lord in
respect to His Divine Human, in the whole heaven, and especially in the
inmost heavens. \[4\] "The midst" also signifies the inmost, and
therefore the whole, in many passages in the Word, as in the following.
In Isaiah: Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion, for great is the
Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee (Isa. 12:6). "Inhabitant of
Zion" signifies the like as "daughter of Zion," namely, the celestial
church, that is the church that is in the good of love to the Lord;
"great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee" signifies the
Lord, that He is everywhere and throughout the whole there. \[5\] In
David: We have considered Thy mercy, O God, in the midst of Thy temple.
As is Thy name, so is Thy praise unto the ends of the earth (Ps.
48:9-10). "Temple" signifies the church that is in truths from good
which is called a spiritual church; "in the midst of it" is in its
inmost, and thence in the whole of it; therefore it is said, "as is Thy
name, so is Thy praise unto the ends of the earth," meaning even to the
ultimates of the church, the "earth" is the church. \[6\] In the same:
God is my King of old, working salvations in the midst of the earth (Ps.
74:12); "working salvations in the midst of the earth" signifying in
every direction. \[7\] In the same: God stood in the congregation of
God, in the midst of the gods He will judge (Ps. 82:1). "The
congregation of God" signifies heaven; "in the midst of the gods"
signifies with all angels there, thus in the whole heaven; for the
angels are called gods from the Divine truth that they receive from the
Lord, for "God" in the Word signifies the Lord in respect to Divine
truth proceeding from Him, and constituting heaven (see above, n. 24,
130, 220, 222, 302). \[8\] In Moses: Behold, I send an angel before
thee; beware of his face, since My name is in the midst of him (Exod.
23:20-21). "Angel" here, in the highest sense, means the Lord; "My name
in the midst of him," means that all Divine good and Divine truth are in
him (see above, n. 102, 135, 224). \[9\] In Luke: Jesus said of the last
times, Then let them that are in Judea flee on the mountains; and let
them that are in the midst of her depart out (Luke 21:21). This treats
of the consummation of the age, by which is meant the last time of the
church, when judgment takes place. "Judea" does not mean Judea, but the
church; and the "mountains" do not mean mountains, but the good of love
to the Lord; and as these things are said respecting the end of the
church, it is clear what is signified by "let them that are in Judea
flee on the mountains; and let them that are in the midst of her depart
out;" namely, that when judgment takes place all those of the church who
are in the good of love to the Lord shall be safe. \[10\] In Isaiah: In
that day shall Israel be third to Egypt and Assyria, a blessing in the
midst of the land; whom Jehovah shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt My
people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine inheritance
(Isa. 19:24-25). "Israel" means the spiritual of the church; "Assyria"
the rational of the men thereof; and "Egypt" cognitions and knowledges
\[cognitiones et scientifica\]. From this it can be seen what is
signified by "Israel shall be the third to Egypt and Assyria, a blessing
in the midst of the land," namely, that everything there shall be
spiritual, both the rational and the recognizing and knowing faculty
\[cognitivum et scientificum\]; for when the inmost is spiritual, which
is truth from good, then the rational also which is therefrom is
spiritual, and likewise the knowing faculty, for both are formed from
the inmost, which is truth from good, or the spiritual. \[11\] In
Jeremiah: My heart in the midst of me is broken, all my bones are
shattered (Jer. 23:9). "The heart broken in the midst of me" signifies
grief from inmosts to ultimates, that is, through the whole; therefore
it is also said, "all my bones are shattered," "bones" signifying the
ultimates. \[12\] In the following passages, also, "in the midst"
signifies in the whole, or throughout the whole. In Isaiah: It shall be
in the midst of the earth, in the midst of the peoples, as the beating
of an olive-tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is completed (Isa.
24:13). These things were said of the church vastated in respect to good
and to truth, and in which there is nothing but evil and falsity. "In
the midst of the earth" means that throughout the whole of the church
there is evil; and "in the midst of the peoples" means that throughout
the whole of it there is falsity; therefore it is compared to "the
beating of an olive-tree," and to "the gleanings left when the vintage
is completed;" "olive" signifying the good of the church, "vintage" the
truth thereof, and "beating" and "gleanings" thereof signify vastation.
\[13\] In David: They search out perversities, for the midst of men and
the heart are deep (Ps. 64:6). The "midst of man" means the intellectual
where truth should be; and the "heart" the voluntary where good should
be; here, both of these perverted, the latter into evil, and the former
into falsity. \[14\] In the same: There is no certainty in the mouth of
anyone; perdition is their midst (Ps. 5:9). In the same: They bless with
their mouth, but in their midst they curse (Ps. 62:4). In the same: The
saying of the transgression to the wicked in the midst of my heart is,
there is no dread of God before his eyes (Ps. 36:1). In Jeremiah: They
have taught their tongue to speak a lie: their <span
id="fr_86"></span>[313-1](#fn_86.md) dwelling is in the midst of deceit;
through deceit they refuse to know Me (Jer. 9:5-6). Also in these and in
many other passages, "in the midst" signifies in the whole, because in
the inmost; for such as the inmost is, such is the whole; since from the
inmost all the rest are brought forth and derived, as the body is from
its soul; the inmost of everything is also what is called the soul. For
example: The inmost of man is his will and understanding therefrom, and
such as is the will and the understanding, thence, such is the whole
man; so again, the inmost of man is his love and faith therefrom, and
such as is his love and the faith, thence such is the whole man. \[15\]
That the whole man is such as his midst or inmost is, is also the
meaning of the Lord's words in Matthew: The lamp of the body is the eye;
if the eye be good the whole body is light; if the eye be evil the whole
body is darkened (Matt. 6:22-23). The "eye" signifies man's
understanding (see above, n. 37, 152), if this is good, that is, if it
is made up of truths that are from good, the whole man is such, which is
signified by "the whole body is light;" but on the other hand, if the
understanding is made up of the falsities of evil, the whole man is
such, as is signified by "the whole body is darkened." The eye is called
"good;" but in the Greek the eye is called "single," and "single," means
that there is unity, and there is unity when truth is from good, or the
understanding is from the will. Also, the "right eye" signifies the
understanding of good, and the "left eye" the understanding of truth; if
these make one, there is a "single eye," thus a "good eye."

<span class="margnote"><span id="314.">314.</span></span>

A Lamb standing, signifies the Lord in respect to the Divine Human. This
is evident from the signification of "lamb," as being, in reference to
the Lord, Himself in respect to the Divine Human. The Lord in respect to
the Divine Human is called a "lamb" because a "lamb" signifies the good
of innocence, and the good of innocence is the good itself of heaven
proceeding from the Lord; and so far as angels receive this good, so far
they are angels. This good reigns with angels that are in the third or
inmost heaven; for this reason those in that heaven appear as infants
before the eyes of other angels. (What the good of innocence is, and
that the angels of heaven are in that good, see in the work on Heaven
and Hell, in the chapter treating of The State of Innocence of the
Angels of Heaven, n. n. 276-283, also n. 285, 288, 341, 382.) It is
believed in the world that the Lord is called "a Lamb" for the reason
that the continual burnt-offering, or what was offered every day,
evening and morning, was from lambs, and especially on the Passover
days, when a lamb was also eaten; and that the Lord suffered Himself to
be sacrificed. Such a reason for His being so called may do for those in
the world who do not think beyond the sense of the letter of the Word;
but nothing of this kind is perceived in heaven when the term "lamb" is
predicated of the Lord; but when "lamb" is mentioned, or is read in the
Word, the angels, because they are all in the spiritual sense of the
Word, perceive the good of innocence; and when the Lord is so called,
they perceive His Divine Human, and at the same time the good of
innocence that is from Him. I know that this will with difficulty be
believed, but yet it is true. \[2\] That "lamb" in the Word signifies
the good of innocence, and in reference to the Lord Himself, "lamb"
signifies His Divine Human, can be seen from the following passages. In
Isaiah: Behold, the Lord Jehovih cometh in strength. He shall feed His
flock like a shepherd; He shall gather the lambs into His arm, and shall
carry them in His bosom, and shall gently lead the sucklings (Isa.
40:10-11). This treats of the Lord's coming; the "flock that He shall
feed as a shepherd," signify those who are in the good of charity; and
the "lambs that He shall gather into His arm," signify those who are in
love to Him. It is this love that, viewed in itself, is innocence;
therefore all who are in it are in the heaven of innocence, which is the
third heaven; and as this love is signified by lambs, it is also said,
"He shall gently lead the sucklings." "Sucklings" and "infants" in the
Word mean those who are in innocence (see in the work on Heaven and
Hell, n. 277, 280, 329-345). \[3\] In the same: The wolf shall sojourn
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, the calf and
the young lion and the fatling together, and a little boy shall lead
them; and the heifer and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie
down together; the suckling shall play on the hole of the adder, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the basilisk's den (Isa. 11:6-8).
These things are said of the Lord's coming and of His kingdom, also of
those therein who are in the good of innocence, that they shall have
nothing to fear from the hells and the evils therefrom, because they are
protected by the Lord. The Lord's kingdom is here described by
innocences of various kinds, and by their opposites from which they
shall be protected; a "lamb" means innocence of the inmost degree, its
opposite is the "wolf;" a "kid" means innocence of the second degree,
the opposite of which is the "leopard;" a "calf" means innocence of the
last degree, the opposite of which is the "young lion." (That "lamb,"
"ram," or "sheep," and "calf," signify three degrees of innocence, see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 10132.) Innocence of the inmost degree is such as
belongs to those who are in the third or inmost heaven, and its good is
called celestial good; innocence of the second degree is such as belongs
to those who are in the second or middle heaven, and its good is called
spiritual good; and innocence of the last degree is such as belongs to
those who are in the first or the last heaven, and its good is called
spiritual-natural good. (That all who are in the heavens are in some
good of innocence, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4797.) Because the goods of
innocence are described by the animals above named, it is said further
"and a little boy shall lead them," also, "the suckling shall play on
the hole of the adder, and the weaned child shall put forth his hand on
the basilisk's den." These degrees of innocence are signified also by
"boy," "suckling," and "weaned child." (That "boy" has this
signification, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 430, 5236; that "suckling," or
infant of the first age, and "weaned child," or infant of the second
age, have these significations see n. 3183, 4563, 5608, 6740, 6745.)
\[4\] Because a "lamb" signifies innocence, or those who are innocent,
and a "wolf" those who are against innocence, it is said in like manner
in another place in the same prophet: The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together; they shall not do evil in the whole mountain of holiness (Isa.
65:25); "the mountain of holiness" is heaven, especially the inmost
heaven. Therefore the Lord said to the seventy whom He sent forth: I
send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves (Luke 10:3). \[5\]
Because "lambs" signify those who are in the love to the Lord, which
love is one with innocence, and because "sheep" signify those who are in
love towards the neighbor, which love is charity, the Lord said to
Peter: Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me? He saith unto Him, Yea,
Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee. He saith unto Him, Feed My lambs;
and afterwards, Feed My sheep (John 21:15-17). These things were said to
Peter, because by "Peter" truth from good, or faith from charity was
meant, and truth from good teaches; "to feed" meaning to teach. \[6\] In
Ezekiel: Arabia and all the princes of Kedar, these were the merchants
of thy hand, in lambs, rams, and goats (Ezek. 27:21). This is said of
Tyre, by which those who are in the knowledges of truth and good are
meant. "Arabia" and "the princes of Kedar," who are "the merchants of
her hand," signify those who are in truths and goods from knowledges;
"merchants" signify those who communicate and teach these; "lambs, rams,
and goats," signify three degrees of the good of innocence, the same as
"lambs, rams, and calves." (That these signify the three degrees of the
good of innocence, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 10042, 10132.) \[7\] In like
manner in Moses: He made him to ride on the high places of the earth,
and fed him with the increase of the fields; he made him to suck honey
out of the cliff, and oil out of the flint of the rock; butter of the
herd and milk of the flock, with the fat of lambs, of the rams of
Bashan, and of goats, with the fat of the kidneys of wheat; and thou
drinkest the pure blood of the grape (Deut. 32:13-14). These things are
said of the establishment of the Ancient Church, which was the first
church after the flood, and all these things describe its various kinds
of good; but as scarcely anyone will understand them without
explanation, I will briefly explain them. "To ride on the high places of
the earth" signifies that the intelligence of those who were of that
church was interior; "He fed him with the increase of the fields"
signifies that they were instructed in all truth and good; "He made him
to suck honey out of the cliff" signifies that they had natural good by
means of truths; "oil out of the flint of the rock" signifies that they
had spiritual good also by means of truths; "honey" and "oil" signifying
those goods, and "cliff," "rock," and "hard rock," signifying truths;
"butter of the herd, and milk of the flock," signify the internal and
the external good of truth; "the fat of lambs, of the rams of Bashan,
and of goats," signifies the goods of innocence of the three degrees (as
above); "the fat of the kidneys of wheat" and "the blood of the grape"
signify genuine good and genuine truth therefrom. \[8\] In Isaiah: The
sword of Jehovah shall be filled with blood; it shall be made fat with
fatness, with the blood of lambs and of he-goats, and with the fat of
the kidneys of rams (Isa. 34:6). Here, too, "lambs, rams, and goats,"
signify the three degrees of the good of innocence (of which above); but
here their destruction by the falsities of evil is treated of; for
"sword" signifies falsity destroying truth and good; the "blood" with
which it shall be filled signifies destruction. \[9\] Since a "lamb"
signifies innocence, which, viewed in itself, is love to the Lord, a
"lamb," in the highest sense, signifies the Lord in respect to the
Divine Human, for in respect to this, the Lord was innocence itself; as
may be seen in the following passages. In Isaiah: He endured persecution
and He was afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth; He is led as a lamb
to the slaughter (Isa. 53:7). Send ye the lamb of the ruler of the land
from the cliff toward the wilderness unto the Mount of the daughter of
Zion (Isa. 16:1). In John: John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith,
Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world. And
afterwards, seeing Jesus walking, he said, Behold the Lamb of God (John
1:29, 36). And in Revelation: The Lamb in the midst of the throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters (Rev.
7:17). They overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of the
testimony (Rev. 12:11); besides also elsewhere in Revelation (as 13:8;
14:1, 4; 17:14; 19:7, 9; 21:22-23; 22:1, 3). \[10\] Since
"burnt-offerings and sacrifices" signified all representative worship
from the good of love and from the truths thence, "burnt-offerings"
worship from the good of love, and "sacrifices" in a special sense
worship from the truths thence, so: Every day, evening and morning,
there was a burnt-offering of lambs (Exod. 29:38-43; Num. 28:1-9); Every
sabbath, of two lambs, besides the continual burnt-offering of them
(Num. 28:9-10); In the beginnings of the months, of seven lambs (Num.
28:11-15); Likewise on the day of the firstfruits (Num. 28:26 to end);
Likewise in the seventh month, when there was a holy convocation (Num.
29:1-7); Likewise, namely of seven lambs on each day of the passover,
besides two young bullocks, one ram, and one goat (Num. 28:16-24). The
burnt-offering was of "seven lambs" because "seven" signifies all and
fullness, and it is predicated of what is holy, and because
"burnt-offerings" in general signified worship of the Lord from the good
of love, and the good of love to the Lord from the Lord is the good
itself of innocence; and "lamb" in the highest sense signified the Lord
in respect to the Divine Human. (That "burnt-offerings" signified all
worship from the good of love to the Lord from the Lord, see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 923, 6905, 8680, 8936, 10042.) On account of this
representation there was also instituted: The supper of the passover of
lambs or kids (Exod. 12:1-29); for "the feast of the passover"
represented the glorification of the Lord's Human (see Arcana Coelestia,
n. 10655). Because "infants" signified innocence, it was also commanded
that: After birth, on the day of purification, they should sacrifice a
lamb, a young pigeon, or a turtle dove; or, instead of a lamb, two young
pigeons or two turtle doves (Lev. 12:6, 8); "young pigeons" and "turtle
doves" signifying the like as "lambs," namely, innocence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="315.">315.</span></span>

As if slain, signifies as yet acknowledged by few. This is evident from
the signification of "slain," as being, in reference to the Lord, that
He has not been acknowledged; here that few have acknowledged His Human
to be Divine, for it is said "a Lamb standing as if slain," a "lamb"
signifying the Lord in respect to the Divine Human (as was shown just
above, n. 314). The meaning here is similar to what was said of the Lord
(chap. 1:18), "and I became dead," which signifies that He was rejected
(see above, n. 83). In the spiritual or internal sense, "slain" does not
mean slain in respect to the body, but in respect to the soul; and man
is slain in respect to the soul when he is no longer in any good of
faith, for he then has no spiritual life, but death instead, which is
called spiritual death. But this is not what the term "slain" signifies
when applied to the Lord, since the Lord is life itself, and gives
spiritual life to everyone; but it signifies either that He is rejected
or that He is not acknowledged; for with those who do not acknowledge,
and still more with those who deny, He is as nothing. The Lord Himself,
to be sure, and also His Divine, is acknowledged in the church, but in
respect to the Human as a mere man and not as God; thus it is that His
Divine Human is not acknowledged; this, therefore, is what is meant by
"a Lamb standing as if slain." But that the Lord is God also as to the
Human, can be seen in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem (n. 280-310),
and will be seen at the end of this work, where it will be plainly
shown. \[2\] Those who think solely from the sense of the letter of the
Word, and not at the same time from the doctrine of genuine truth, know
no otherwise than that "slain" in the Word means slain in respect to the
body; but that it means slain in respect to the soul will be seen from
the passages to be quoted presently. For it is acknowledged that the
Word in its inmost is spiritual, although in the sense of the letter it
is natural; and to be slain spiritually is to perish in respect to the
soul, as is the case with those who do not receive the life of heaven,
which is called "life eternal," and also simply "life," and who thus in
place of this have death, which is damnation. And because this is
acknowledged, it follows that "to be slain" means in the Word to perish
by falsities and evils. But spiritually the Lord is said "to be slain"
when the truth from Him is denied and the good from Him is rejected;
with these the Lord is also not acknowledged, for he who denies and
rejects what is from Him, denies and rejects Him also, for the Lord is
with man in his truths and goods. \[3\] But here His Divine Human is
treated of; that this is not acknowledged as yet, is known. I will state
the reasons: One is, that the popish body has transferred to its own
primate all Divine power that the Lord has, also that in respect to His
Human, and are unwilling to hear that it is Divine, since it is from His
Human. The other reason is, that those who are not of that body have
made faith alone the sole means of salvation, and not the life of
charity; and those who do this are unable to perceive the Lord's Human
as differing from the human of another man; they therefore abide blindly
in the doctrine of the Trinity from the creed of Athanasius, and cannot
be illustrated. \[4\] That "to be slain" in the Word signifies to be
slain spiritually, can be seen from the following passages. In Isaiah:
Thou, like an abominable shoot, the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with the sword: for thou hast destroyed thy land, thou
hast slain thy people. Prepare slaughter for His sons (Isa. 14:19-21).
This is said of Babylon, which signifies the profanation of good and
truth, and the consequent destruction of the church. It is compared to
"the raiment of those that are slain, who are thrust through with the
sword," because "the raiment of those that are slain" signifies
abominable falsity, defiling and destroying the things of the church;
they are therefore said "to be thrust through with the sword," because
"sword" signifies falsity destroying truth. Therefore it is said, "thou
hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people," "land" means the
church, and "people" those therein who are in truths; to "slay" these is
to destroy by falsities. "Prepare slaughter for his sons" signifies that
their falsities are to be destroyed, "his sons" meaning falsities. \[5\]
In Jeremiah: The slain of Jehovah shall be at that day from the end of
the earth unto the end of the earth (Jer. 25:33). "The slain of Jehovah
from the end of the earth unto the end of the earth" signify those with
whom all the truths of the church have been destroyed by falsities; "the
slain of Jehovah" signifying those with whom they have been destroyed,
and "from the end of the earth unto the end of the earth" signifying all
things of the church. \[6\] In the same: Therefore give their sons to
the famine, and make them flow down upon the hands of the sword, that
men may become rare, <span id="fr_87"></span>[315-1](#fn_87.md) slain with
death, their young men smitten with the sword in war (Jer. 18:21). "To
give the sons to the famine, and to make them flow down upon the hands
of the sword," signifies to extinguish the truths of the church through
failure of the knowledges of truth and through falsities, "sons" are
truths, "famine" is a failure of knowledges, and "sword" falsity
destroying truth; "that men may become rare, slain with death,"
signifies that there is no affection of truth or wisdom therefrom, "men"
signifying the affection of truth and wisdom therefrom (see above, n.
280); "their young men smitten with the sword in war" signifies because
truths have been destroyed by the assaults of falsity, "young men"
meaning truths, "sword" falsity destroying, and "war" the assault of
falsity. \[7\] In Ezekiel: Pass ye through Jerusalem, and smite; neither
let your eye spare; slay ye to destruction the old man, the young man,
and the virgin, and the infant; but come not near against any man upon
whom is the sign (Ezek. 9:5-6). This was said by "the man clothed in
linen," or by the angel, to other angels, and was heard by the prophet.
It does not mean that they should pass through Jerusalem, and should
smite and slay to destruction old men, young men, virgins, and infants;
but "Jerusalem" means the church in respect to doctrine, and it is meant
that the church is altogether vastated in respect to all the goods and
truths that constitute it; "old man" means wisdom which is of good;
"young man" intelligence which is of truth; "virgin" the affection of
these; and "infant" every good and truth in its birth, in a special
sense the good of innocence, by which all things of the church with man
are begotten; "the man \[vir\] upon whom was the sign and to whom they
should not come near," signifies truth from good. \[8\] In the same:
That they may stone them with a stone, may cleave them with swords, may
slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire
(Ezek 23:47). This was said of Samaria and Jerusalem, which are here
called Oholah and Oholibah; by which are signified the two churches,
namely, the spiritual and the celestial, here those churches devastated
by falsities and evils. "To stone with a stone, and to cleave with
swords," signifies the destruction of truth by falsities, for "stoning"
signified punishment and death because of violence offered to Divine
truth; "cleaving by swords" has a like signification. "To slay sons and
daughters" signifies to destroy all truths and goods, "sons" meaning
truths and "daughters" goods; and "to burn up the houses with fire"
signifies to destroy all things that are of love and charity by the
evils of the love of self and the world, "houses" mean man's interiors,
thus the things that are of his love, here that these are destroyed;
"fire" meaning love in both senses. \[9\] In Jeremiah: They have lain on
the earth, lad and old man in the streets; my virgins and my young men
have fallen by the sword; Thou hast slain in the day of Thine anger,
Thou hast not pitied (Lam. 2:21). Here, too, the church devastated is
treated of. "To lie on the earth and in the streets" signifies to be
destroyed by evils and falsities; "lad and old man, virgins and young
men have fallen by the sword," signifies here, as above, all goods and
truths with intelligence and wisdom; "thou hast slain in the day of
Thine anger, Thou hast not pitied," signifies their extinction, "the day
of anger" signifying the last state of the church, when judgment takes
place. Slaying, that is, extinguishing these things, is attributed to
Jehovah; but it is man himself, the sense of the letter being such as to
attribute to Jehovah what belongs to the man himself (see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 2447, 5798, 6071, 6991, 6997, 7533, 7632, 7643, 7679,
7710, 7877, 7926, 8227, 8282, 8483, 8632, 9010, 9128, 9306, 10431).
\[10\] In Amos: I will cut off the judge out of the midst of Moab, and
will slay all the princes thereof with him (Amos. 2:3). "Moab" in the
Word, means those who adulterate the goods of the church; the "judge who
will be cut off," and the "princes who will be slain," signify the good
which is adulterated, and the truths which are thereby falsified,
"judge" meaning good, and "prince" truth. \[11\] In Zechariah: A voice
of the howling of the shepherds, that their magnificence is devastated.
Thus said Jehovah my God, Feed the sheep of the slaughter, which their
possessors slay. I have fed the sheep of the slaughter for your sakes, O
miserable of the flock (Zech. 11:3-5, 7). "The sheep of the slaughter
which their possessors slay," signify those who are in good, and are led
astray by the falsities of doctrine; those are called "sheep" who are in
the good of charity; "shepherds" are those who teach truths, and by
means of these lead to good. \[12\] In David: We are slain every day; we
are reckoned as a flock for slaughter. Awake, O Lord, cast us not off
always (Ps. 44:22-23). "We are slain every day" signifies that of
ourselves we are constantly falling into falsities, and are being led
astray by them, especially in a time when falsities reign; this makes
clear what a "flock for slaughter" signifies; that we may be elevated
out of falsities by the Lord is signified by "Awake, O Lord, cast us not
off always." \[13\] In Ezekiel: They shall draw forth the swords upon
the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall profane thy radiance. They
shall bring thee down into the pit, and thou shalt die the death of the
slain (Ezek. 28:7-8). This is said of the prince of Tyre, by whom is
signified the intelligence that is from the knowledges of truth, here
that intelligence extinguished by falsities. "To draw forth swords upon
the beauty of thy wisdom" signifies its extinction by falsities; "to
bring down into the pit" signifies immersion in falsities; and "to die
the death of the slain" signifies destruction and damnation, the "slain"
signifying those with whom all truth is extinguished (Arcana Coelestia,
n. 4503, 9262), and "death" signifying damnation. \[14\] In Isaiah: Hath
he smitten him according to the stroke of him that smiteth him? Hath he
been slain according to the slaughter of his slain? (Isa. 27:7). This
treats of Jacob and Israel, by whom the church is signified, "Jacob" the
external church, and "Israel" the internal. The temptations of those who
are of the church are thus described, which are signified by "Hath he
smitten him according to the stroke of him that smiteth him?" And that
they should not succumb in temptations and thus perish is signified by
"Is he slain according to the slaughter of the slain?" "the slaughter of
the slain" signifying perdition by falsities. \[15\] "Slaughter"
signifies perdition and damnation in other places in the same prophet:
In the day of the great slaughter the towers shall fall (Isa. 30:25).
"The day of the great slaughter" signifies the Last Judgment, when the
wicked are condemned and perish, "towers" signifying the doctrines of
falsity. \[16\] In the same: I will kill thy root with famine, and he
shall slay thy remnant (Isa. 14:30). This was said respecting Philistia,
by which is signified truth without good, or faith without charity. "To
kill the root with famine" signifies to perish utterly from having no
good, "root" meaning everything from which a thing lives; therefore it
is also said, "he shall slay thy remnant," "remnant" signifying all the
remains of the church. \[17\] In Jeremiah: I have heard the voice of the
daughter of Zion; she sobbeth and spreadeth her hands, for my soul is
wearied by the slayers (Jer. 4:31). Thus is described the grief of a
church that is falling from truths into falsities. "The daughter of
Zion" is the church; "she sobbeth and spreadeth her hands" signifies
grief; "for my soul is wearied by the slayers" signifies by falsities
that extinguish spiritual life," "slayers" meaning such falsities.
\[18\] In Isaiah: Behold, Jehovah going forth out of His place to visit
the iniquity of the earth; then shall the earth reveal her bloods, and
shall no longer hide her slain (Isa. 26:21). This is said of the day of
visitation or judgment, when the iniquities of all shall be uncovered,
which is meant by "then the earth shall reveal her bloods, and shall no
longer hide her slain;" the "earth" signifies the church, here the evil
men in the church; "bloods" are the evils that have destroyed the goods
of the church; and the "slain" the falsities that have destroyed its
truths; whether it be said that the "slain" signify falsities or those
who are in falsities, it is the same, for they are in the falsities and
the falsities in them, and the falsities in them are what destroy. The
like is signified by the "slain" elsewhere in Isaiah: What will ye do in
the day of visitation and of devastation? They shall fall beneath the
slain (Isa. 10:3-4). Likewise in Revelation: In Babylon was found the
blood of the prophets and of the saints, and of all that have been slain
upon the earth (Rev. 18:24). What is here signified will be seen in what
comes after. \[19\] In Isaiah: I will visit evil upon the world.
Everyone that is found shall be thrust through; and everyone gathered
together shall fall by the sword (Isa. 13:11, 15). This also is said of
Babylon. That "everyone that is found shall be thrust through" signifies
that they shall perish by evil; and that "everyone gathered together
shall fall by the sword" signifies that they shall perish by falsity.
\[20\] In Matthew: In the end of the age they shall deliver you up unto
tribulation and shall slay you (Matt. 24:9). In John: They shall put you
out of the synagogues; yea, the hour cometh that everyone who killeth
you will think that he offereth sacred worship to God (John 16:2). This
was said to the disciples; and by "disciples," in the spiritual
representative sense, are meant all truths and goods of the church;
whence it is clear what is meant in that sense by "they shall kill
them," namely, that the truths and goods of the church shall then be
destroyed. \[21\] In Mark: In the consummation of the age, brother shall
deliver up brother to death, the father the children; children shall
rise up against parents, and shall cause them to be put to death (Mark
13:12). The consummation of the age is the last time of the church, when
falsities shall destroy truths and evils shall destroy goods. "Brother,"
"father," and "children," do not mean here brother, father, and
children, but falsity and truth, and good and evil. "Brother shall
deliver up brother to death" signifies that falsity shall destroy good;
especially that faith alone shall destroy charity, for faith in the Word
is called the brother to charity; "the father shall deliver up the
children to death" signifies that the good of the church shall perish by
the falsities of evil, "father" meaning the good of the church, and
"children" the falsities of evil; "children shall rise up against their
parents, and shall cause them to be put to death," signifies that the
falsities of evil shall assault the goods and truths of the church and
destroy them. \[22\] In Luke: The man who planted a vineyard sent a
servant that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard; but the
husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty. Again he sent another
servant; and beating him also, they sent him away empty. Again he sent a
third, and wounding him, they cast him out. Then said the lord of the
vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. But they said,
This is the heir; come, let us kill him; and casting him out of the
vineyard they killed him (Luke 20:10-16; Mark 12:2-9). This is said
respecting the church instituted among the Jews, and it describes the
perversion and falsification by traditions and by applications to self
of every truth they had from the Word. All the particulars here contain
a spiritual sense; for whatever the Lord spoke, He spoke also
spiritually, because from the Divine. The "vineyard which the man
planted," signifies the church that is in truths; the "servants whom he
sent thrice," mean the Word given them through Moses and the prophets;
there is mention of three times, because "three" signifies what is full
and complete; "their beating them, wounding them, and sending them away
empty out of the vineyard," signifies that they falsified and perverted
the truths contained in the Word; "to send away empty out of the
vineyard" signifies that they deprived the Word of its goods and truths.
"The beloved son" means the Lord in respect to Divine truth, who is
therefore called also the Word; "they cast him out of the vineyard and
killed him" signifies killing not only the Lord, but also all Divine
truth from Him (see also above, n. 83). \[23\] In Daniel: After sixty
and two weeks the Messiah shall be cut off, but not for Himself (Dan.
9:26). "The Messiah" also means the Lord in respect to Divine truth (see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 3008, 3009); "He shall be cut off" means not only
Himself, but also all Divine truth with that people; "but not for
Himself" signifies that with those who are in a new church Divine truth
will live again, like as before in the first chapter of Revelation: I am
the Living One, and I became dead; and behold I am alive unto the ages
of the ages (Rev. 1:18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="316.">316.</span></span>

Having seven horns, signifies who has omnipotence. This is evident from
the signification of a "horn," as being the power of truth against
falsity, but in reference to the Lord, as being all power or
omnipotence. The Lamb was seen to have horns seven in number, because
"seven" signifies all and it is predicated of what is holy (see above,
n. 257). A "horn" and "horns" signify power, because the power of horned
animals, as of oxen, rams, goats, and others, is in their horns. That
"horn" or "horns" signify the power of truth against falsity, and in the
highest sense, which treats of the Lord, signify omnipotence, and in a
contrary sense the power of falsity against truth, is evident from many
passages in the Word; and as it is thus made clear what is signified in
the Word by "horns," so often mentioned in Daniel, and also in
Revelation; and as they are still employed in the coronation of kings, I
will quote the passages here. \[2\] In Ezekiel: In that day I will make
a horn to bud forth unto the house of Israel, and I will give thee the
opening of the mouth in the midst of them; that they may know that I am
Jehovah (Ezek. 29:21). "To make a horn to bud forth unto the house of
Israel" signifies truth in abundance; "the house of Israel" is the
church; because this is signified by "horn," and "its budding forth," it
is also said, "and I will give thee the opening of the mouth," which
means the preaching of truth. \[3\] In the first book of Samuel: My horn
hath exalted itself in Jehovah; my mouth is enlarged against mine
enemies, because I am glad in Thy salvation. He shall give strength unto
His king, <span id="fr_88"></span>[316-1](#fn_88.md) and shall exalt the
horn of His anointed (1 Sam. 2:1, 10). This is a prophetical saying of
Hannah. "My horn hath exalted itself in Jehovah" signifies that Divine
truth filled her, and made her powerful against falsities; and because
this is the meaning, it is said, "my mouth is enlarged against mine
enemies;" "enlarging the mouth" is preaching truth with power, and
"enemies" are the falsities that disperse Divine truth. "He shall give
strength unto His king, and shall exalt the horn of His anointed,"
signifies the Lord's omnipotence from Divine good by Divine truth, for
"strength" in the Word has reference to the power of good, and "horn" to
the power of truth; and "the anointed of Jehovah" is the Lord in respect
to the Divine Human, which has omnipotence (see Arcana Coelestia, n.
3008-3009, 9954). \[4\] In David: Jehovah hath exalted the horn of His
people, the praise for all His saints, for the sons of Israel, a people
near unto Him (Ps. 148:14). "He hath exalted the horn of His people"
signifies that He hath filled with Divine truths; therefore it is said:
praise for His saints, for the sons of Israel, a people near unto Him,"
for those are called "saints" who are in Divine truths, since Divine
truth is what is called holy (see above, n. 204). "Israel" is the church
that is in truths, "sons of Israel" are truths, "a people" is also
predicated of those who are in truths, and a people conjoined with the
Lord by truths is said to be "near." \[5\] In the same: Jehovah God of
Hosts, Thou art the splendor of their strength; and by Thy good pleasure
Thou shalt exalt our horn (Ps. 89:8, 17). Here also "to exalt the horn"
signifies to fill with Divine truth, and thereby to give power against
falsities; therefore it is said, "Jehovah God of Hosts, Thou art the
splendor of their strength," "splendor" in the Word is predicated also
of the church, and of the doctrine of truth therein. \[6\] In the same:
The good man is gracious and lendeth. His righteousness standeth
forever; his horn shall be exalted with glory (Ps. 112:5, 9). That
"horn" signifies Divine truth is clear from this, that it is said, "his
righteousness standeth forever, and his horn shall be exalted with
glory;" "righteousness" in the Word is predicated of good, and "horn"
therefore of truth; for in every particular of the Word there is a
marriage of good and truth; "splendor" also signifies Divine truth.
\[7\] In Habakkuk: The brightness of Jehovah God shall be as the light;
He hath horns coming out of His hand; and in them is the hiding of His
strength (Hab. 3:4). Because "horns" signify Divine truth with power, it
is said, "the brightness of Jehovah God shall be as the light," and "in
the horns is the hiding of His strength;" "the brightness of Jehovah"
and "light" signify Divine truth; and "the hiding of His strength in the
horns" signifies the omnipotence of Divine good through Divine truth,
for all power of good is through truth, and in Divine truth lies
concealed the omnipotence that is of Divine good. \[8\] In David: I have
found David My servant; with the oil of holiness have I anointed Him;
with whom My hand shall be established; Mine arm also shall make him
mighty. My truth and My mercy shall be with him; and in My name shall
his horn be exalted (Ps. 82:20-21, 24). "David" means the Lord in
respect to Divine truth (see above, n. 205); and "his horn shall be
exalted" means His Divine power, which He has from Divine good through
Divine truth; therefore, it is said, "My truth and My mercy shall be
with him;" "mercy" in the Word, in the Word, in reference to Jehovah, or
the Lord, signifies the Divine good of the Divine love. Because "David"
means the Lord in respect to Divine truth proceeding from His Divine
Human, He is called "David, my servant," "servant" meaning, in the Word,
not a servant in the usual sense, but whatever serves, and it is
predicated of truth because truth serves good for use, here for power.
\[9\] In the same: I will make a horn to bud forth unto David; I will
set in order a lamp for Mine anointed (Ps. 132:17). Here by "David," and
also by "anointed" the Lord in respect to Divine truth is meant, and
"making His horn to bud forth" signifies the multiplication of Divine
truth in the heavens and on earth by Him; therefore it is also said, "I
will set in order a lamp for Mine anointed," which has a like meaning.
That the Lord in respect to Divine truth proceeding from His Divine
good, is called a "lamp" see above (n. 62). \[10\] In the same: Jehovah
my strength, my cliff, my fortress; my God, my rock, in which I confide,
my shield and the horn of my salvation (Ps. 18:1-2; 2 Sam. 22:2-3).
"Strength" and "cliff" in reference, as here, to Jehovah or the Lord,
signify omnipotence; "fortress" and "rock in which he confides" signify
defense; "shield" and "horn of salvation" signify consequent salvation;
"strength," "fortress," and "shield," in the Word are predicated of
Divine good; "cliff," "rock," and "horn" are predicated of Divine truth;
therefore these signify omnipotence, defense, and salvation, which
Divine good has through Divine truth. \[11\] In Luke: Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel; for He hath visited and redeemed His people, and
hath raised up a horn of salvation in the house of David; that He might
save us from our enemies (Luke 1:68-69, 71). This is a prophecy of
Zechariah respecting the Lord and His coming. "A horn of salvation in
the house of David" signifies omnipotence to save by Divine truth from
Divine good, "horn" is that omnipotence; "the house of David" is the
Lord's church; "the enemies from which He should save" are the falsities
of evil, for these are the enemies from which the Lord saves those who
receive Him; it is known that there were no other enemies from which the
Lord saved those who are here meant by his people. \[12\] In Micah: Rise
and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make thy horn iron, and I
will make thy hoofs brass, that thou mayest beat in pieces many peoples
(Micah 4:13). "Rise and thresh, O daughter of Zion" signifies the
dispersion of evil with those who are of the church, "to thresh" is to
disperse, and "daughter of Zion" is the church that is in the affection
of good; "I will make thy horn iron" signifies Divine truth mighty and
powerful; "I will make thy hoofs brass" has a like meaning, "hoofs"
meaning truths in ultimates; "that thou mayest beat in pieces many
peoples" signifies that thou mayest scatter falsities, for "peoples" are
predicated of truths, and in a contrary sense, of falsities. \[13\] In
Zechariah: I saw, and behold four horns, that have scattered Judah,
Israel, and Jerusalem. He showed me four smiths, and He said, These
horns that have scattered Judah, so that no man lifteth up his head;
these have come to terrify them, to cast down the horns of the nations
that lift up the horn against the land of Judah to scatter it (Zech.
1:18-21). This describes the vastation of the church, and its subsequent
restoration. "Judah," "Israel," and "Jerusalem," signify the church and
its doctrine; "the horns that scattered them" signify the falsities of
evil that have vastated the church; "smiths" signify the like as iron,
namely, truth in ultimates, which is mighty and powerful, thus the like
as the "horn of iron;" therefore it is said of them, "these have come to
cast down the horns of the nations that lift up the horn against the
land of Judah," "the horns of the nations" are the falsities of evil
that have vastated the church, and that are to be dispersed that it may
be restored. \[14\] In Lamentations: The Lord hath thrown in His fury
the strongholds of the daughter of Judah; He hath cast them down to the
earth; He hath profaned the kingdom and the princes thereof; He hath cut
off in the glowing of His anger every horn of Israel (Lam. 2:2-3). Here
the total vastation of the church is treated of. The last time when it
was laid waste is signified by the glowing of the Lord's anger; and its
total vastation is described by "He hath thrown down the strongholds of
the daughter of Judah, He hath cast them down to the earth. He hath
profaned the kingdom and the princes thereof;" "the daughter of Judah"
is the church; "her strongholds" are truths from good; "the kingdom and
princes" are its truths of doctrine; whence it is clear what is
signified by "He hath cut off every horn of Israel," namely, the cutting
off of all the power of truth in the church to resist the falsities of
evil. \[15\] In Daniel: Daniel saw in a dream four beasts coming up out
of the sea; the fourth exceedingly strong, having teeth of iron; it
devoured and broke in pieces; and it had ten horns: and I gave heed, and
behold another little horn came up among them, and three of the former
horns were plucked up by the roots before it; in this horn were eyes
like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things. I saw that
this horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; and that
it spoke words against the Most High. As to the ten horns, they are ten
kings, and it shall humble three kings (Dan. 7:3, 7-8, 21, 23, 25). Here
evidently "horns" means the falsities that destroy the truths of the
church, or the power of falsities against truths; "the beast coming up
out of the sea" signifies the love of self out of which spring all
evils; here the love of ruling over heaven and earth, to which things
holy serve as means; it is such a love that is meant by "Babylon" in
Revelation. This beast was seen "coming up out of the sea," because the
"sea" signifies the natural man separated from the spiritual; for the
natural man is then of such a character that he desires nothing so much
as to have dominion over all, and to confirm that dominion by the sense
of the letter of the Word. "The ten horns" signify falsities of every
kind, for "ten" means all; therefore it is further said, that "the ten
horns are ten kings," for "kings" signify truths, and in a contrary
sense, as here, falsities. "The little horn that came up among them,
before which three of the former horns were plucked up by the roots,"
signifies the complete perversion of the Word by the application of the
sense of its letter to confirm the love of dominion. This horn is called
"little," because it does not appear that the Word is perverted; and
what does not appear before the sight of man's spirit, or before his
understanding, is regarded either as nothing, or as little. In the
spiritual world such is the appearance of things that are apprehended by
a few only. "The three horns that were plucked up by the roots before
it," signify the truths of the Word there that have been thus destroyed
by falsifications; these truths are also signified by the "three kings"
that were humbled by the horn, "three" not meaning three, but what is
full, thus that truths were completely destroyed. As that "horn"
signifies the perversion of the Word in respect to the sense of its
letter, and as this sense appears before the eyes of men, as if it were
to be understood thus and not otherwise, and therefore not to be
gainsaid by anyone, it is said of this horn, "that in it there were eyes
like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things," "eyes"
signify understanding, and "eyes like the eyes of a man" an
understanding as if of truth, and "mouth" signifies thought and speech
from that understanding. From this it can now be seen what is meant by
all and by each of the particulars here mentioned; as by "the beast
coming up out of the sea, that had ten horns and teeth of iron, and
devoured and broke in pieces;" by "the little horn that came up among
them, before which three of the horns were plucked up by the roots, in
which were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great
things;" also by "it made war with the saints and prevailed against
them," and "it spoke words against the Most High;" and "the horns were
so many kings." \[16\] In the same: I saw in a vision one ram that had
two horns, and the horns were high; but one was higher than the other,
and the higher had come up last. It pushed westward, northward, and
southward. Then, behold, a he-goat of the goats came from the west over
the faces of the whole earth; he had a conspicuous horn between his
eyes. He ran upon the ram in the wrath of his strength, and he broke his
two horns, and he cast him down to the ground and trampled upon him. But
the great horn of the he-goat was broken; and in place of it there came
up four toward the four winds of the heavens. Presently out of one of
them came forth a little horn, which grew exceedingly towards the south,
and towards the east, and towards beauty. And it grew even to the host
of the heavens; and it cast down some of the host to the earth, and
trampled upon them. Yea, even to the prince of the host it magnified
itself, and the dwelling place of his sanctuary was cast down, because
it cast down truth to the earth (Dan. 8:2-12, 21, 25). This describes a
second thing that lays waste the church, namely, faith alone. The "ram"
signifies the good of charity and faith therefrom, and the "he-goat"
faith separate from charity, or faith alone, or, what is the same, those
who are in these; their "horns" signify truths from good and falsities
from evil, combating; truths from good are meant by the horns of the
ram, and falsities from evil by the horns of the he-goat. That the "ram
had two high horns, one higher than the other, and the higher came up
last" signifies the truth of faith from the good of charity; and this
was seen according to the influx of good and truth with man and spirit;
for all good is received behind, and all truth in front, as the
cerebellum is formed to receive the good, which is of the will, and the
cerebrum to receive the truth, which is of the understanding; "westward,
northward, and southward, toward which the ram pushed" signify the goods
and truths that those receive who are in charity and in faith therefrom,
by which they disperse evils and falsities; "the he-goat of the goats
that came over the faces of the whole earth" signifies faith separate
from charity, springing from evil of life; "the he-goat of the goats" is
that faith; the "west" evil of life; and "the earth" the church; "he had
a conspicuous horn between the eyes" signifies that this is from
self-intelligence; "he ran upon the ram in the wrath of his strength,
and brake his two horns, and cast him down to the earth, and trampled
upon him" signifies the entire destruction of charity and of faith
therefrom, for when charity is destroyed faith also is destroyed, for
the latter is from the former; "the great horn of the he-goat was
broken, and in place of it there came up four toward the four winds of
the heavens" signifies all falsities conjoined with evils there from,
"horns" signifying the falsities of evil, "four" their conjunction, and
"the four winds of the heavens" all, both falsities and evils; "out of
one of them came forth a little horn" signifies justification by faith,
for this is born of the principle of faith alone; it is said to be
"little" because it does not appear as a falsity. That this horn "grew
exceedingly towards the south, and towards the east, and towards beauty,
and grew even to the host of the heavens, and cast down some of the host
to the earth, and trampled upon them" signifies that it destroyed all
the truths and goods of the church; "the south" meaning where truth is
in the light, "the east" and "beauty" where good is in clearness through
truth, "the host of the heavens" all truths and goods of heaven and the
church; "to cast down the host to the earth, and to trample upon them"
signifies to destroy utterly; that "even to the prince of the host it
magnified itself," and that "the dwelling place of his sanctuary was
cast down" signifies the denial of the Lord's Divine Human, and the
consequent vastation of the church; "the prince of the host" is the Lord
in respect to the Divine Human, because from that proceed all the truths
and goods that constitute the church; "the dwelling place of the
sanctuary" is the church where these are; this plainly means the truths
destroyed by falsities, for it is said, "it cast down truth to the
earth." That this is the significance of the "ram," and the "he-goat,"
and "their horns," is clearly manifest from appearances in the spiritual
world; for when such as have confirmed themselves in the doctrine of
faith alone and of justification by faith, dispute there with those who
are in the doctrine of charity and of faith therefrom, there appear to
others who stand afar off he-goats, or a he-goat with similar horns, and
with like onset and fury against the rams or the ram, and he appears
also to tread the stars under his feet. These things have been seen by
me also, and at the same time by those standing by, who were thereby
confirmed that such things are meant in Daniel; and also that like
things are meant by "the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the
left" (Matt. 25:32 to the end), namely, by "sheep" those who are in the
good of charity, and by "goats" those who are in faith alone. From these
quotations from Daniel it can be seen in some measure what is signified
in Revelation by: The dragon that was seen having ten horns (Rev. 12:3);
The beast that was seen coming up out of the sea, which also had ten
horns (Rev. 13:1). The woman that was seen sitting upon a
scarlet-colored beast, that had seven heads and ten horns; respecting
which the angel said, The ten horns that thou sawest are ten kings (Rev.
17:3, 7, 12); but these things will be explained hereafter. \[17\] That
the power of falsity against truth is signified by "horn" or "horns" is
evident also from the following passages. In Jeremiah: The horn of Moab
is cut off, and his arm is broken (Jer. 48:25). "Moab" signifies those
who are in spurious goods, and in falsified truths therefrom, which in
themselves are falsities. The destruction of these falsities is
signified by "The horn of Moab is cut off," and the destruction of these
evils by "his arm is broken." \[18\] In Lamentations: Jehovah hath
caused the enemy to be glad over thee; He hath exalted the horn of thine
adversaries (Lam. 2:17). Evil is meant by "enemy," and the falsities of
evil by "adversaries;" "exalting the horn of the adversaries" is
falsities prevailing over truths and destroying them. \[19\] In Ezekiel:
Ye thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the sick sheep with
your horns till ye have scattered them abroad (Ezek. 34:21). "To thrust
with side and with shoulder" is with all strength and endeavor; to "push
the sick sheep with horns till ye have scattered them abroad" signifies
to destroy by falsities the well-disposed, who are not yet in truths
from good, and yet desire to be. \[20\] In Amos: In the day that I shall
visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will visit upon the
altars of Bethel, that the horns of the altar may be cut off, and fall
to the earth (Amos 3:14). "The altars of Bethel" signify worship from
evil, and "the horns of the altar" signify the falsities of that evil;
and that these are to be destroyed is signified by "the horns shall be
cut off and fall to the earth." \[21\] In the same: They who are glad
over a thing of nought; who say, Have we not taken to us horns by our
own strength? (Amos 6:13). "To take horns by our own strength" signifies
by the powers of self-intelligence to acquire falsities by which truths
will be destroyed. \[22\] In David: I said unto the boastful, Boast not;
and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn; Lift not up your horn on high;
speak not with a stiff neck. All the horns of the wicked will I cut off;
the horns of the righteous shall be exalted (Ps. 75:4-5, 10). "Lifting
up the horn on high" signifies to defend vigorously falsity against
truth; therefore it is also said, "speak not with a stiff neck." "To cut
off their horns" signifies to destroy their falsities; and "to exalt the
horns of the righteous" signifies to make powerful and strong the truths
of good. \[23\] Because "making high and exalting the horns" signifies
to fill with truths, and to make them powerful and strong against
falsities, therefore those truths are also called "the horns of a
unicorn," because these are high. As in Moses: The firstborn of his ox,
honor is his, and his horns are the horns of a unicorn; with them he
shall push the peoples together to the uttermost parts of the earth; and
they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of
Mannaseh (Deut. 33:17). This is said of Joseph, who in the highest sense
represents the Lord in respect to the Divine spiritual, or in respect to
Divine truth in heaven; from this "Joseph" signifies also those who are
in the Lord's spiritual kingdom (see Arcana Coelestia, n. 3969, 3971,
4669, 6417). "The firstborn of the ox, honor is his," signifies the good
of spiritual love; "his horns are the horns of a unicorn" signifies
truths in their fullness, and in their power therefrom; "to push the
peoples to the uttermost parts of the earth" signifies to instruct in
truths all who are of the church, and to scatter falsities by means of
truths; "the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh"
signify the plenty and abundance of truth and of wisdom therefrom and
the plenty and abundance of good and of love therefrom; "Ephraim," in
the Word, signifying the intellectual of the church, which is of truth,
and "Manasseh" the voluntary of the church which is of good (see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 3969, 5354, 6222, 6234, 6238, 6267, 6296); and "ten
thousands" and "thousands" signifying very many, thus plenty and
abundance. \[24\] In David: Save me from the lion's mouth; and from the
horns of the unicorn hear me (Ps. 22:21); "lion" signifying falsity
vehemently destroying truth; and "horns of unicorns" truths that prevail
against falsities. \[25\] In the same: My horn like the horn of a
unicorn (Ps. 92:10); "like the horn of a unicorn" signifying truth in
its fullness and power. \[26\] In Revelation: And the sixth angel
sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar
which is before God (Rev. 9:13). The altar of incense, which was called
also "the golden altar," was a representative of the hearing and
reception of all things of worship that are from love and charity from
the Lord, thus a representative of such things of worship as are
elevated by the Lord; "the horns of the altar" represented truths
proceeding from the good of love; this makes clear why a voice was heard
from the four horns of the altar, for it is through truths that good
acts and speaks. \[27\] Altars had horns for the reason that altars
represented the worship of the Lord from the good of love, and all
worship that is truly worship is offered from the good of love by
truths. That the altar of incense had horns is seen in Moses: Thou shalt
make four horns upon the altar of incense; they shall be from it. And
thou shalt overlay them with gold (Exod. 30:2-3, 10; 37:25-26); and the
altar of burnt-offering elsewhere in the same: Thou shalt make horns
upon the four corners of the altar of burnt-offering; its horns shall be
from it (Exod. 27:2; 38:2). That the horns were from the altar itself
signified that the truths, which the horns represented, must proceed
from the good of love, which the altar itself represented, for all truth
is from good. That there were four horns, one at each corner, signified
that they were for the four quarters in heaven, by which all things of
truth from good are signified. \[28\] Since all expiations and
purifications are effected by truths from good, expiation was made upon
the horns of the altars: Upon the horns of the altar of incense (Exod.
30:10; Lev. 4:7); And upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering
(Lev. 4:25, 30, 34; 8:15; 9:9; 16:18). And as all Divine protection is
by truths from good: Those who committed evils and were in fear of death
caught hold of the horns of the altar and were thus protected (1 Kings
1:50, 51, 53). When those who purposely and willfully committed evil
were not so protected (1 Kings 2:28-31). Moreover, because "horns"
signified truths from good, therefore when kings were anointed this was
done by oil out of a horn: That David was so anointed (1 Sam. 16:1, 13);
and Solomon (1 Kings 1:39); the "oil" signifying the good of love. From
this signification of horns, which was known to the ancients, it was
customary to make horns budding forth and fragrant; from this came the
word "cornucopia."

<span class="margnote"><span id="317.">317.</span></span>

And seven eyes, signifies and who has omniscience. This is evident from
the signification of "seven eyes" as being, in reference to the Lord,
omniscience; for as "eyes" in reference to man signify the
understanding, so in reference to the Lord they signify omniscience.
That "eyes" in reference to man signify the understanding, and in
reference to the Lord providence, as also Divine wisdom and
intelligence, which is omniscience, see above, (n. 152). "Seven eyes"
are mentioned, because "seven" signifies all things, and is predicated
of what is holy (as above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="318.">318.</span></span>

Which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth,
signifies that all wisdom and intelligence in heaven and in the church
are therefrom. This is evident from the signification of "the seven
spirits of God," as being Divine truth proceeding from the Lord (of
which above, n. 183); and as they signify Divine truth proceeding from
the Lord, they also signify the Divine wisdom or omniscience. It is
evident also from the signification of "sent forth into all the earth,"
as being that this is the source of all wisdom and intelligence in
heaven and in the church. "To be sent forth" signifies to be
communicated, and "all the earth" signifies the church both in the
heavens and on earth (see above, n. 304). Thence is clear why it is said
that "the seven eyes of the Lamb were the seven spirits of God, sent
forth into all the earth," for "seven eyes" signify the omniscience that
the Lord has from Divine good through Divine truth. From this are all
wisdom and intelligence, because man cannot from himself understand
truth and relish good, but only from the Lord; and all wisdom and
intelligence are of truth from good. Unless wisdom and intelligence be
formed from it, they are not wisdom and intelligence, but folly and
insanity, which appear before the ignorant and the evil like wisdom and
intelligence, because of their being able to speak and reason from the
memory. For what is man's own \[proprium\] is nothing but evil and
falsity; his own voluntary \[proprium ejus voluntarium\] is evil, and
his own intellectual therefrom \[proprium ejus intellectuale\] is
falsity; whatever therefore is from man's own \[ex proprio\] is contrary
to wisdom and intelligence; and what is contrary to wisdom is folly, and
what is contrary to intelligence is insanity. From this it can be seen
that unless man is elevated by the Lord from his selfhood \[a suo
proprio\], which is done when he receives Divine truth not only in the
memory but also in the life, it is utterly impossible for him to be wise
and intelligent. But this elevation by the Lord from the selfhood \[a
proprio\] is not apparent to man, nor is it perceived by him while he is
in the world, but it first becomes apparent when he comes into his
spirit, and this takes place when his spirit has been separated from his
material body; but even then it is perceived only by those who come into
heaven. It is said wisdom and intelligence, because wisdom is of truth
from good, for man then relishes good in truth; but intelligence is of
truth through which good comes, for then man has not yet a relish for
good in truth, but is affected by truth because it is truth. Those who
are in the Lord's celestial kingdom are in wisdom, because they are in
truths from good; but those who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom are
in intelligence, because they are in truths through which good comes.
(But of those who are in truths through which good comes, see in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 23; and of those who are in truths
from good, n. 24; and of the celestial kingdom and the spiritual
kingdom, in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 20-28.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="319.">319.</span></span>

Verse 7. And He came and took the book out of the right hand of Him that
sat upon the throne, signifies that these things are from His Divine
Human. This is evident from the signification of the "the Lamb," who
took the book out of the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, as
being the Lord in respect to the Divine Human (see above, n. 314); "the
right hand of Him that sat upon the throne" meaning the Lord in respect
to omnipotence and omniscience (see also above, n. 297, 298). From this
it is that "He came and took the book out of the right hand of Him that
sat upon the throne" signifies that these are from the Divine Human.
Omnipotence and omniscience are meant also because this is what is here
treated of, as can be seen from the preceding words, that "the Lamb had
seven horns and seven eyes;" "the seven horns" signifying omnipotence,
and "the seven eyes" omniscience (see just above, n. 316, 317), and "the
Lamb" the Divine Human (n. 314). That omnipotence and omniscience belong
to the Lord's Divine Human, can be seen from what has been said and
shown above (n. 10, 26, 32, 49, 52, 63, 77, 82, 97, 113-114, 135, 137,
151, 178, 200, 205 end, 209, 254, 297, 309).

<span class="margnote"><span id="320.">320.</span></span>

Verses 8-10. And when He had taken the book, the four animals and the
four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one
harps, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the
saints. And they sung a new song, saying, Worthy art Thou to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof; for Thou wast slain, and didst
redeem us to God in Thy blood, out of every tribe and tongue, and people
and nation. And Thou didst make us unto our God kings and priests: and
we shall reign upon the earth. 8. "And when He had taken the book,"
signifies after the acknowledgment that the Lord's Human is Divine, and
has omnipotence and omniscience (n. 321); "the four animals and the four
and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb," signifies the
acknowledgment and consequent glorification of the Lord by the angels of
the higher heavens (n. 322); "having everyone harps," signifies
confession from spiritual truths (n. 323); "and golden bowls full of
incense," signifies confession from spiritual goods (n. 324); "which are
the prayers of the saints," signifies from which is worship (n. 325). 9.
"And they sung a new song" signifies acknowledgment and confession from
joy of heart (n. 326); "saying, Worthy art Thou to open the book and to
loose the seals thereof," signifies that the Lord from the Divine Human
has omnipotence and omniscience (n. 327) "for Thou wast slain, and didst
redeem us to God in Thy blood," signifies separation of all from the
Divine, and conjunction with the Divine by the acknowledgment of the
Lord, and by reception of Divine truth from Him (n. 328, 329); "out of
every tribe and tongue," signifies by all who are in truths in respect
to doctrine and in respect to life (n. 330); "and people and nation,"
signifies who are of the Lord's spiritual church and of His celestial
church (n. 331). 10. "And didst make us unto our God kings and priests,"
signifies that from the Lord they are in the truths and goods of the
church and of heaven (n. 332); "and we shall reign upon the earth,"
signifies the power that belongs to the Lord alone through Divine truth
united to Divine good, and power and wisdom therefrom that those have
who are of the Lord's spiritual and celestial kingdoms (n. 333).

<span class="margnote"><span id="321.">321.</span></span>

Verse 8. And when He had taken the book, signifies after the
acknowledgment that the Lord's Human is Divine, and has omnipotence and
omniscience. This is evident from the series in the internal sense,
since this is the subject treated of just before (see n. 316, 319); and
in what now follows this is acknowledged, and on this account the Lord
is celebrated and glorified; and as this celebration and glorification
is a living acknowledgment that the Lord's Human is Divine, and has
omnipotence and omniscience, and this acknowledgment now follows, this
is signified by "when He had taken the book." The glorification of the
Lord (in what now follows) takes place in this order: first, by the
angels of the higher heavens; then by the angels of the lower heavens;
and afterwards by those who are beneath the heavens. The glorification
of the Lord by the angels of the higher heavens is contained in verses
8-10; the glorification of the Lord by angels of the lower heavens in
verses 11, 12; and the glorification by those who are beneath the
heavens in verse 13; but of this more specifically in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="322.">322.</span></span>

The four animals and the four and twenty elders fell down before the
Lamb, signifies the acknowledgment and consequent glorification of the
Lord by the angels of the higher heavens. This is evident from the
signification of "the four animals and the four and twenty elders," as
being, in general, the whole heaven, but especially the inmost heaven,
consequently the angels of the higher heavens (of which see above, n.
313); here especially the angels of those heavens, because in what
follows there is glorification by the angels of the lower heavens. Also
from the signification of "fell down before the Lamb," as being
acknowledgment from a humble heart. That "to fall down" signifies
humiliation, and in that state acknowledgment of heart, see above (n.
290). Acknowledgment of the Lord's Divine Human is clearly meant, for
that is signified by "the Lamb" (see above, n. 314). What the higher
heavens are, and what the lower heavens are, shall be told in a few
words. There are three heavens: the third or inmost heaven is where the
angels are who are in celestial love; the second or middle heaven is
where the angels are who are in spiritual love; the first or ultimate
heaven is where the angels are who are in spiritual-natural love. The
third or inmost heaven is conjoined with the second or middle by
intermediate angels, who are called celestial-spiritual and
spiritual-celestial angels; these intermediate angels, together with the
angels of the third or inmost heaven, constitute the higher heavens;
while the remainder of those in the second or middle heaven, together
with those who are in the first or outmost heaven, constitute the lower
heavens. The "four animals" signify specifically the third or inmost
heaven, and the "four and twenty elders" the second or middle heaven
that is in conjunction with the third or inmost; thus together they
signify the higher heavens. Respecting the intermediate angels, called
celestial-spiritual and spiritual-celestial, and the conjunction of the
third heaven with the second by these, see Arcana Coelestia (n. 1577,
1824, 2184, 4047, 4286, 4585, 4592, 4594, 6435, 6526, 8787, 8802, 9671).

<span class="margnote"><span id="323.">323.</span></span>

Having every one harps, signifies confession from spiritual truths. This
is evident from the signification of a "harp," as being confession from
spiritual truths. This is signified by "harps," because the harp was a
stringed instrument, and by such instruments spiritual things, or those
that are of truth, are signified, while wind instruments signify
celestial things, or those that are of good. Such things are signified
by musical instruments because of their sounds, for sound corresponds to
the affections; moreover in heaven affections are perceived by sounds;
and because there are various affections, and various sounds are
produced by musical instruments, therefore these instruments, by
correspondence and consequent agreement, signify affections. In general,
stringed instruments signify such things as belong to the affections of
truth, and wind instruments such as belong to the affections of good;
or, what is the same, some instruments belong to the spiritual class,
and some to the celestial class. That sounds correspond to the
affections has been made evident to me by much experience, so also
musical tones; also that angels are affected in accordance with sounds
and their variations; but to recite all such experience would occupy too
much space. I will mention only, what is a matter of general
observation, that discrete sounds excite the affections of truth, that
is, those are affected by them who are in the affections of truth; while
continuous sounds excite the affections of good, that is, those are
affected by them who are in the affections of good. Whether you say the
affections of truth or things spiritual, it is the same, or whether you
say the affections of good or things celestial, it is the same. (But
these things can be better comprehended from what has been related from
experience respecting sounds and their correspondence with affections,
in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 241.) From this it can now be seen
why in the Word, and especially in David, so many kinds of musical
instruments are mentioned, as psalteries, harps, flutes, cymbals,
timbrels, horns, organs, and others, namely, that it is because of their
correspondence with the affections, and at the same time with
articulations that are expressions containing things, and flowing from
them. \[2\] That harps especially signify the affections of truth
because they excite such affections, consequently that they also signify
confession made from spiritual truths with a cheerful heart, can be seen
from the following passages. In Isaiah: The new wine shall mourn, the
vine shall languish, all the glad of heart shall sigh. The joy of
timbrels shall cease, the noise of the merry shall leave off; the joy of
the harp shall cease. They shall not drink wine with a song (Isa.
24:7-9). This treats of the vastation of the spiritual church, that is,
of the good and truth thereof. Spiritual good, which is about to cease,
is signified by "the new wine shall mourn," and "the joy of timbrels
shall cease;" and that its truth is about to cease is signified by "the
vine shall languish," and "the joy of the harp shall cease;" for "new
wine" signifies spiritual good, and its joy is signified by the
"timbrel;" and the "vine" signifies spiritual truth, and its joy is
signified by the "harp." Since it is the affection of these that is
about to cease, it is said, "all the glad of heart shall sigh," and "the
noise of the merry shall leave off;" "gladness" and "mirth" in the Word
signifying spiritual gladness and mirth, all of which are from the
affections of truth and good. It is added, "they shall not drink wine
with a song," because "song" signifies the testification of gladness
from the affection of truth, and "wine" signifies truth. \[3\] In David:
Confess unto Jehovah with the harp; sing psalms unto Him with the
psaltery of ten strings. Sing unto Him a new song; play well with a loud
noise. For the word of Jehovah is right; and His work is done in truth
(Ps. 33:2-4). As a "harp" signifies confession from spiritual truths, it
is said, "confess unto Jehovah with the harp;" "a psaltery of ten
strings" signifies the corresponding spiritual good; therefore it is
said, "sing psalms unto Him upon a psaltery of ten strings;" and for the
same reason also it is said, "for the word of Jehovah is right, and all
His work is done in truth;" "the word of Jehovah is right" signifying
the truth of good; "His work is done in truth" signifying the good of
truth; the truth of good is the truth that proceeds from good, and the
good of truth is the good which is produced by truth. \[4\] In the same:
Send Thy light and Thy truth, let them lead me; let them bring me unto
the mountain of holiness, and to Thy tabernacles, that I may confess
unto Thee upon the harp, O God, my God (Ps. 43:3-4); the "harp"
evidently signifying confession from spiritual truths, for it is said "I
will confess unto Thee with the harp, O God, my God;" and it is also
said before, "send Thy light and Thy truth; let them lead me." \[5\] In
the same: I will confess unto Thee with the instrument of psaltery, even
Thy truth, O my God; unto Thee will I sing with the harp, O Holy One of
Israel (Ps. 71:22). As the "psaltery" signifies spiritual good, that is,
the good of truth, and the "harp" spiritual truth, that is, the truth of
good, and confession is made from each, it is said, "I will confess unto
Thee with the instrument of psaltery; unto Thee will I sing with the
harp." \[6\] In the same: I will sing, and I will sing psalms. Arouse
me, <span id="fr_89"></span>[323-1](#fn_89.md) my glory, arouse me,
psaltery and harp. I will confess unto Thee, O Lord, among the nations,
I will sing psalms unto Thee among the peoples (Ps. 57:7-9; 108:1-3).
Confession and glorification from the good of truth or from spiritual
good, and from truth of good or from spiritual truth, are expressed in
these several things, the good of truth by "singing," "being aroused by
the psaltery," and "confessing among the nations;" and the truth of good
by "singing psalms," "being aroused by the harp," and "singing psalms
among the peoples;" for "nations" in the Word mean those who are in
good, and "peoples" those who are in truth; here those in spiritual
truth. It is so said because where good is spoken of, in the Word, truth
also is spoken of, and this because of the marriage of these in every
particular of the Word (see above, n. 238 at end, 288). \[7\] In the
same: Answer unto Jehovah by confession; sing psalms with the harp unto
our God (Ps. 147:7). Here also confession from spiritual good and from
spiritual truth is expressed by "answer unto Jehovah by confession," and
"sing psalms with the harp unto our God;" from spiritual good by "answer
unto Jehovah;" and from spiritual truth by "sing psalms with the harp
unto God;" "Jehovah" being used where good is treated of, and "God"
where truth is treated of (see Arcana Coelestia, n. 709, 732, 2586,
2769, 2807, 2822, 3921, 4287, 4402, 7010, 9167). \[8\] In Ezekiel: I
will cause the noise of the songs to cease; and the voice of thy harps
shall be no more heard; I will give thee to the parchedness of the cliff
(Ezek. 26:13-14). This is said of Tyre, which signifies the church in
respect to the knowledges of good and truth. Its vastation is described
by these words; the vastation in respect to the knowledges of good by "I
will cause the noise of thy songs to cease;" and the vastation in
respect to the knowledges of truth by "the voice of harps shall be no
more heard;" desolation of all truth by "I will give thee to the
parchedness of the cliff;" "cliff" signifying truth, and its
"parchedness" desolation. \[9\] In David: Make a loud noise unto
Jehovah, all the earth; break forth, shout for joy, and sing psalms.
Sing psalms unto Jehovah with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of
a psalm. With trumpets and the sound of a cornet, make a loud noise
before the King, Jehovah (Ps. 98:4-6). The various kinds of affections
from which the Lord is confessed and glorified are here expressed by
various kinds of sounds and instruments; the various kinds of sounds in
"making a loud noise," "breaking forth," "shouting for joy," and
"singing psalms," and the various kinds of instruments, by "harps,"
"trumpets," and "cornets;" but to explain the signification of the
particulars is not in place here, but only what relates to the harp. "To
sing unto Jehovah with the harp, with the harp and the voice of a
psalm," signifies confession from the affection of spiritual good and
truth; for every affection, since it is from love, when it falls into
sound, produces a sound in accord with itself; consequently from the
sound that is in the speech, and in which, as it were, the expressions
of speech flow, the affection of the other is heard, and thus becomes
known to his companion; this is manifestly so in the spiritual world,
where all sounds of speech make manifest the affections. \[10\] So
elsewhere in David, as the following: Shout for joy unto God our
strength; make a joyful noise to the God of Jacob. Lift up the psalm and
strike the timbrel, the pleasant harp, with the psaltery. Blow the
cornet at the new moon (Ps. 81:1-3). It is good to confess unto Jehovah,
and to sing psalms unto Thy name, O Most High; with an instrument of ten
strings, and with the psaltery; and with resounding music on the harp
(Ps. 92:1-3). Let the sons of Zion exult in their King; let them praise
His name in the dance; let them sing psalms unto Him with the timbrel
and harp (Ps. 149:2-3). Praise God with the sound of the cornet; praise
Him with the psaltery and harp; praise Him with the timbrel and dance;
praise Him with stringed instruments and organ. Praise Him with cymbals
of soft sound; praise Him with cymbals of loud sound (Ps. 150:3-5).
\[11\] Because musical instruments and also dances signify varieties of
joy and gladness that spring from the affections, as well as the
affections themselves of the mind which their sounds excite, both singly
and in combination, therefore: David and the whole house of Israel
played before Jehovah upon wooden instruments of every kind, and upon
harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels; and on sistra, and on
cymbals (2 Sam. 6:5). \[12\] Because the "harp" signifies confession
from spiritual truths, and spiritual truths are those by which angels
who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom are affected, and which disperse
the falsities of evil, and with these the spirits themselves who are in
them, so: When the evil spirit was upon Saul, David took a harp and
played with his hand; and so rest was given to Saul, and the evil spirit
departed from him (1 Sam. 16:23). This was done because kings
represented the Lord in respect to the spiritual kingdom, and therefore
signified spiritual truths (see above, n. 31); but Saul then represented
the falsities that are opposed to these truths; and these were dispersed
by the sound of the harp, because the "harp" signified the spiritual
affection of truth. This then took place because with the sons of Israel
all things were representative and thus significative; it is otherwise
at this day. From the passages here quoted it can be seen what the
"harp" signifies, also in other places (as Isa. 30:31, 32; Ps. 49:3, 4;
137:1, 2; 1 Sam. 10:5; Rev. 14:2; 18:22; Job 30:31). \[13\] As most
things in the Word have also a contrary meaning, so do musical
instruments, in which sense they signify varieties of gladness and joy
that spring from the affections of falsity and evil; thus the "harp"
signifies the confession of falsity and the consequent exultation over
the destruction of truth. As in Isaiah: At the end of seventy years the
song of Tyre shall be even as the song of a harlot; take a harp, walk in
the city, thou harlot delivered over to forgetfulness; play elegantly,
multiply the song (Isa. 23:15-16). "Tyre" signifies the church in
respect to the knowledges of spiritual truth and good (as was said
above), here the church in which these are falsified; "harlot" signifies
the falsification of truth (see above, n. 141); and "to take a harp,
walk in the city," "play elegantly, and multiply the song," signifies
the exultation and boasting of falsity over the destruction of truth.
\[14\] In the same: Woe to them that rise early in the morning that they
may follow strong drink; to them that tarry until twilight till the wine
inflame them. And the harp and the psaltery and the timbrel and the pipe
and wine are at their feasts; but they do not look upon the work of
Jehovah, and they see not the working of His hands (Isa. 5:11-12). Here
"harp," "psaltery," "timbrel," "pipe," and also "wine," have the
contrary meaning, in which they signify exultation and boastings from
the falsities of evil. Such is evidently the meaning, for it is said,
"Woe to them; they do not look upon the work of Jehovah, and they see
not the working of His hands."

<span class="margnote"><span id="324.">324.</span></span>

And golden bowls full of incense, signifies confession from spiritual
goods. This is evident from the signification of "golden bowls," which
are also called "censers," and "incense pans," as being truths from
good; for "bowls," like all containing vessels, signify truths, and
"gold," of which they were made, signifies good, therefore "golden
bowls" are truths from good. (That "vessels" signify truths, because
truths serve good as recipient and containing vessels, see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 3068, 3079, 3316, 3318; also "the vessels of the altars,"
"of burnt offering," and "of incense," n. 9723, 9724; and that "gold"
signifies good, above, n. 242.) It is evident also from the
signification of "incense," as being those things of worship that are
done from spiritual good, or from the good of charity, and are therefore
gratefully perceived. Such things are signified by "incense," because
all things that are instituted in the Israelitish nation were
representative of celestial and spiritual things; so also were the
things relating to odor; things of pleasant odor represented pleasant
perception, but those of unpleasant odor unpleasant perception. On this
account incense was made of fragrant spices, myrrh, onycha, galbanum,
and frankincense. Moreover, there is a correspondence between odor and
perception, as can be seen from this, that in the spiritual world, where
all things perceived by the senses correspond, the perceptive of good
and truth is made sensible as fragrance from pleasant odors, and vice
versa (respecting this see what is shown from experience, Arcana
Coelestia, n. 1514, 1517-1519, 1631, 4626, 4628, 4630, 4631, 5711-5717).
From this it is that also in the common language of men, to smell means
to perceive; for such expressions, like many others, have come into
human discourse from correspondence; for the spirit of man is actually
in the spiritual world, although man is not conscious of it. Moreover,
the faculty of perception that man has, is what produces in his body the
sense of smell, and this too from correspondence. But this is an arcanum
that can with difficulty be credited, because it has been hitherto
unknown. It is to be noted that this sweet smell or fragrance is
produced by the good of love and charity, but by means of truth, not by
good itself without truth, still less by means of the truth that is
called truth of faith without good; for good without truth has nothing
perceptive, neither has truth without good. \[2\] "Incense" signifies
those things of worship that are done from spiritual good, because
spiritual good has its origin and existence from celestial good, which
good is the good of love to the Lord from the Lord, and is therefore the
very good of heaven, for that good is immediately from the Lord, and the
Lord is with angels in that good as in what is His. This is even so far
true that whether you say that the Lord is in them and they in the Lord,
or that the Lord is with them in that good and they are in the Lord when
in that good, it is the same. Spiritual good, which has its origin and
existence from celestial good, is the good of charity towards the
neighbor; worship from this good is what is signified by "incense." As
all worship of the Lord comes from good, although through truths, and as
there are two universal goods that make the heavens and distinguish them
into two kingdoms, namely, celestial good, which is the good of love to
the Lord, and spiritual good, which is the good of charity towards the
neighbor, therefore with the sons of Israel there were two altars, one
for burnt offerings, the other for incense-offerings; the altar of burnt
offering signifying worship from the good of celestial love, and the
altar of incense worship from the good of spiritual love; thence it is
clear what was represented by "incense." \[3\] That this is so can be
seen from passages in the Word where the two are mentioned. As in Moses:
Thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon; and thou shalt overlay it
with pure gold, and thou shalt put it before the veil that is over the
ark of the Testimony, before the mercy-seat. And Aaron shall burn
thereon incense of spices every morning, when dressing the lamps he
shall burn it, and in making the lamps to ascend between the evenings he
shall burn it, a perpetual incense before Jehovah in your generations.
Ye shall make no strange incense to ascend thereon, nor burnt-sacrifice,
nor meal-offering, nor drink-offering (Exod. 30:1-10). That this
"altar," and the "burning incense" upon it, signified worship from
spiritual good, is evident from its having been placed in the tent of
meeting without the veil, where also were the lamps; and the tent
signified the Lord's spiritual kingdom; while that part of the tent that
was within the veil signified the Lord's celestial kingdom, as can be
seen from what is shown in Arcana Coelestia (n. 9457, 9481, 9485)
respecting the tent, in which was the table for the bread of faces, and
in which was the altar of incense and the lampstand, also respecting the
ark, in which was the Testimony, and upon which was the mercy-seat (n.
9457, 9481, 9485, 10545). It is there shown that the things that were in
the tent without the veil, namely, the lamp stand, the altar of incense,
and the table for the bread, signified such things as are of the
spiritual kingdom, all of which have reference to spiritual good and its
truth. The "table, upon which was the bread of faces," signified the
reception of celestial good in spiritual good (see n. 9527); the
"lampstand" with the "lamps" signified the spiritual itself of that
kingdom (n. 9548, 9551, 9556, 9561, 9572, 9783); the "altar of incense"
signified worship from spiritual good; and because worship from
spiritual good was signified by burning incense upon that altar, and the
spiritual itself by the "lampstand," it was commanded that Aaron should
burn incense upon it every morning and evening, when he dressed the
lamps. (But these things are more fully explained in Arcana Coelestia,
n. 10176-10213, where these particulars are treated of.) \[4\] And
because spiritual good has its origin and existence from celestial good
(as was said above), not only was that altar placed near the veil that
was over the ark, but it was also commanded that when Aaron should make
atonement for himself and for his house, he should bring the incense
within the veil, which signified the influx, communication, and
conjunction of celestial good and spiritual good. Of this it is written
in Moses: When Aaron shall make an atonement for himself and for his
house he shall kill the bullock of the sin-offering; and he shall take a
censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before Jehovah,
and his hands full of the incense of spices, and he shall bring it
within the veil, that he may put the incense upon the fire before
Jehovah; and the cloud of the incense shall cover the mercy-seat that is
upon the Testimony, that he die not (Lev. 16:11-13). That "he should
take fire from off the altar of burnt-offering," and "should put incense
upon the fire," signified that spiritual good, which is the good of
charity, has existence and proceeds from celestial good, which is the
good of love to the Lord (that the "fire of the altar" signified that
good, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4489, 6314, 6832, 9714, and elsewhere).
This is why the fire for burning incense was not taken from anywhere
else than from the altar of burnt-offering. When Aaron made atonement
for himself and his house he was to burn the incense within the veil
because Aaron as chief priest represented the Lord in respect to the
good of love, and by his functions he represented the things that
proceed from that good, all of which relate to spiritual good; spiritual
good, unless it is from celestial good, is not good; except for this
Aaron's function could not have been from the Divine, or could not have
represented anything of the Divine; and this is why Aaron was threatened
with death unless he did as he was commanded. \[5\] For the same reason
also Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, were consumed by fire from
heaven because they burnt incense from other fire than the fire of the
altar of burnt-offering, which is offering worship from a love other
than love to the Lord; respecting which it is thus written in Moses:
Nadab and Abihu, sons of Aaron, took each of them his censer and put
strange fire therein, and laid incense thereon. Therefore fire went out
from before Jehovah and devoured them, and they died, afterwards they
were carried without the camp (Lev. 10:1-5). "They were carried without
the camp" signified that their worship was not from heaven, because not
from love to the Lord; for "the camp of the sons of Israel" represented
heaven and the (see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4236, 10038). \[6\] Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, with their company, were swallowed up by the earth,
although they took fire from the altar and burnt incense, because "their
murmuring against Moses and Aaron" signified the profanation of the good
of celestial love; for "Moses" and "Aaron" represented the Lord and "to
murmur" (that is, to rebel) against the Lord and at the same time to
perform holy offices, is profanation; but as they took the fire from the
altar, that fire was cast out, and their censers were made into a
covering for the altar; respecting which it is thus written in Moses:
Moses said to them that they should take fire and put it into their
censers which was also done; but they were swallowed up (Num. 16:1 to
the end). But afterwards it was commanded: That they should gather up
the censers, and scatter the fire hitherwards; and of the censers, which
were of brass, they should make broad plates, a covering to the altar,
because they had been sanctified (Num. 16:37-38). The censers had been
sanctified by the "fire of the altar," which signified Divine celestial
love. \[7\] Because spiritual good, which is the good of charity towards
the neighbor, derives its essence and soul from celestial good, which is
the good of love to the Lord, therefore also "frankincense," which
signifies spiritual good, was put upon the "bread of faces," which
signified celestial good; as can be seen from these words in Moses: And
frankincense shall be put upon the bread of faces which is upon the
table in the tent of meeting, that the bread may be for a memorial (Lev.
24:7). "That the bread may be for a memorial" signifies that the Lord
may receive and give heed; for all worship of the Lord which is truly
worship comes from celestial good through spiritual good; for spiritual
good, which is charity towards the neighbor, is an effect of celestial
good, for charity towards the neighbor is the performance of uses, and
living a moral life from a heavenly origin (respecting which see Heaven
and Hell, n. 390, 484, 529, 530-535; and The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem, n. 84-107), this, therefore, is spiritual good; while
celestial good is looking to the Lord and acknowledging that every good
and truth is from Him, and that from man, or from what is man's own,
there is nothing but evil. \[8\] That the incense was to be burned from
no other fire than the fire of the altar of burnt-offering, which
signified celestial good, which is the good of love to the Lord, is also
evident from other passages, as in Moses: When the congregation murmured
against Moses and Aaron, and were attacked by the plague, then Aaron
took fire from the altar, and put it in a censer, and placed incense on
it, and he ran into the midst of them; and the plague was stayed (Num.
16:41, 46-48). and also in Revelation (8:3-5). \[9\] That "incense" and
"frankincense" signify spiritual good, and "burning incense" worship
acceptable because of that good, and therefore hearing and reception by
the Lord, can be seen from the following. In Isaiah: A troop of camels
shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and of Ephah; all they from
Sheba shall come; they shall bring gold and frankincense; and they shall
proclaim the praises of Jehovah (Isa. 60:6). Here the Lord's coming is
treated of; the "troop of camels" and the "dromedaries of Midian and
Ephah" signify the knowledges of truth and good in abundance; "all they
from Sheba shall come" signifies from the knowledges of genuine truth
and good (that "Sheba" signified such knowledges, see Arcana Coelestia,
n. 1171, 3240); "gold and frankincense," which they shall bring, signify
worship from spiritual good that is from celestial good; "gold"
signifying celestial good, and "frankincense" spiritual good. Because
worship from these is signified it is said, "and they shall proclaim the
praises of Jehovah;" "proclaiming the praises of Jehovah" signifying the
proclamation of good tidings respecting the Lord, and worship of Him.
\[10\] In Matthew: The wise men from the east opened their treasures,
and offered gifts to the newborn Lord, gold, frankincense, and myrrh
(Matt. 2:11). "The wise men from the east" also signified those who are
in the knowledges of truth and good; the worship of such from celestial
good, spiritual good, and natural good is signified by "they offered
gold, frankincense, and myrrh;" for "gold" signifies celestial good,
"frankincense" spiritual good, and "myrrh" natural good. That these had
such a signification was still known to many in the east, therefore they
were also called "sons of the east," by whom in the Word those who are
in the knowledges of truth and good are meant (see Arcana Coelestia, n.
3249, 3762), for the knowledge of correspondences had remained among
them; therefore that they might testify their joy of heart they offered
such things as signified every good from first to last; and this is what
was predicted in Isaiah, that they "were to come from Sheba, and bring
gold and frankincense, and proclaim the praises of Jehovah" (of which
just above). \[11\] In Malachi: From the rising of the sun even unto its
going down My name shall be great among the nations; and in every place
incense shall be offered unto My name, and a clean meal offering (Mal.
1:11). "From the rising of the sun even unto its going down My name
shall be great among the nations" signifies that the church and worship
of the Lord shall be everywhere with those who are in good; "from the
rising of the sun to its going down" signifying every place where there
is good; "My name shall be great" signifying the acknowledgment and
worship of the Lord; and "nations" signifying those who are in good;
"incense shall be offered unto My name, and a clean meal offering"
signifies the worship of the Lord from spiritual good, which is the good
of charity towards the neighbor, and from celestial good, which is the
good of love to the Lord; worship from spiritual good is signified by
"incense offering," and from celestial good by "meal offering." (That a
"meal offering" signifies that good, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4581,
10079, 10137.) \[12\] "Incense" and "meal-offering" have a like
signification in David: Give ear unto my voice when I call unto Thee.
Let my prayers be accepted as incense before Thee; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening meal-offering (Ps. 141:1, 2). And in Isaiah: Thou
hast brought to Me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings, and thou
hast not honored Me with thy sacrifices. I have not made thee to serve
by a meal-offering, nor wearied thee by frankincense (Isa. 43:23). As
all worship of the Lord comes from spiritual good that is from celestial
good, therefore the two, "meal-offering" and "frankincense" are
mentioned separately in the letter, yet in the internal or spiritual
sense they are to be understood conjointly, but the one from the other.
\[13\] So in Jeremiah: They shall come from the cities of Judah, and
from the circuits of Jerusalem, bringing burnt-offering and sacrifice,
and meal-offering and frankincense (Jer. 17:26). Here "Judah" and
"Jerusalem" do not mean Judah and Jerusalem, but the Lord's church,
which is in the good of love and in the doctrine of charity therefrom;
worship from these is signified by "burnt-offering and sacrifice," also
by "meal-offering and frankincense." \[14\] Because "meal-offering"
signified the good of celestial love, and "frankincense" the good of
spiritual love, upon the meal-offering of fine flour were put oil and
frankincense, as appears in Moses: When a soul would offer the offering
of a meal-offering unto Jehovah, fine flour shall be his offering, upon
which he shall pour oil, and shall put upon it frankincense; and the
priest shall take out of it his handful of the fine flour and of the oil
thereof, with all the frankincense thereof, and he shall burn it for a
memorial upon the altar (Lev. 2:1-2). This meal-offering was instituted
because "fine flour" signifies genuine truth (see Arcana Coelestia, n.
9995); and since this truth is from good, namely, from celestial good,
and from consequent spiritual good, "oil and frankincense" were put upon
it; "oil" signifying the good of celestial love, and "frankincense" the
good of spiritual love; in the internal sense, the one from the other.
There were also other kinds of meal-offerings that were prepared with
oil that had a like signification. \[15\] In Ezekiel: Thou hast taken
the garments of thy embroidery, and hast covered the images of the male,
with which thou didst commit whoredom; and didst set My oil and My
incense before them (Ezek. 16:18-19). This is said of Jerusalem, which
signifies the church in respect to doctrine, here doctrine altogether
perverted. The "images of the male," which "she covered with the
garments of her embroidery, and with which she committed whoredom,"
signify the falsities that they made, by perverse interpretations, to
appear as truths, thus they signify falsified truths, "garments of
embroidery" meaning the knowledges of truth from the Word, and "to
commit whoredom" meaning to falsify; to set My oil and My incense before
them" signifies to adulterate both the good of celestial love and the
good of spiritual love; and these are adulterated when the Word is
applied to the loves of self and of the world. \[16\] In Moses: They
shall teach Jacob Thy judgments, and Israel Thy law; they shall put
incense in Thy nostrils, and a burnt-offering upon Thine altar (Deut.
33:10). This is the prophecy of Moses respecting Levi, by whom the
priesthood is signified, and because the priesthood was representative
of the Lord in respect to the good of love, both celestial and
spiritual, therefore it is said, "they shall put incense in Thy
nostrils, and a burnt-offering upon Thine altar;" "incense" signifying
worship from spiritual good, and "burnt offering upon the altar" worship
from celestial good; "in the nostrils" signifying to the perception.
\[17\] In David: I will go into Thy house with burnt-offerings; I will
pay my vows unto Thee. I will offer unto Thee burnt-offerings of
fatlings, rams with incense (Ps. 66:13, 15). "To offer burnt-offerings
of fatlings" signifies worship from the good of celestial love; "to
offer rams with incense" signifies worship from the good of spiritual
love; "incense" and "ram" signifying that good. \[18\] In Revelation:
Another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and
there was given unto him much incense, that he might offer it with the
prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar that was before the
throne. And the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints,
went up out of the angel's hand before God. Afterwards the angel took
the censer and filled it with the fire of the altar and cast it into the
earth (Rev. 8:3-5). What this means will be told in the explanation of
these words in what follows; here it need merely be said that "incense"
signifies worship from spiritual good, which is the good of charity
toward the neighbor. Such worship is signified also by "the prayers of
the saints;" it is therefore said "that there was given unto him much
incense, that he might offer it with prayers of the saints;" and then
that "the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, went up
before God." That the "prayers of the saints" signify worship from
spiritual good will be seen in the next paragraph, so also what is meant
by worship from spiritual good, or from the good of charity. \[19\] In
Isaiah: A people that provoke Me to anger continually before My faces;
that sacrifice in gardens, and burn incense upon bricks (Isa. 65:3).
Here "sacrificing" and "burning incense" have the contrary
signification, namely, worship from the falsities of doctrine that are
from self-intelligence; "gardens" signify intelligence, here
self-intelligence, and "bricks" falsities therefrom; "to sacrifice" and
"to burn incense" signify worship. (That the ancients held Divine
worship in gardens and groves in accordance with the significations of
the trees therein, but that this was forbidden among the Israelitish
nation, lest they should frame to themselves a worship from the selfhood
\[ex proprio\], see n. 2722, 4552.) \[20\] In Hosea: They sacrifice upon
the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under the
oak, and the poplar, and the terebinth, because the shadow thereof is
good, therefore your daughters commit whoredom, and your
daughters-in-law commit adultery Hos. 4:13). This describes worship from
the love of self and from the love of the world, and from the falsities
of doctrine therefrom; worship from the love of self is meant by
"sacrificing upon the tops of the mountains;" worship from the love of
the world, by "burning incense upon the hills;" and worship from the
falsities of doctrine, by "sacrificing and burning incense under the
oak, the poplar, and the terebinth;" the "top of the mountains"
signifying celestial love, here the love of self; "hills" spiritual
love, here, the love of the world; for the love of self is the contrary
of celestial love, and the love of the world is the contrary of
spiritual love; "the oak, the poplar, and the terebinth," signify the
lowest goods of truth and truths of good of the natural man, here the
evils of falsity and the falsities of its evil; "because the shadow
thereof is good" signifies complacence; the falsifications of spiritual
good therefrom are signified by "therefore your daughters commit
whoredom," and the adulteration of celestial good by "your
daughters-in-law commit adultery." \[21\] In Jeremiah: \[According to\]
the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the
number \[of the streets\] of Jerusalem have ye set up altars, altars to
burn incense unto Baal (Jer. 11:13, 17). "Cities" here do not mean
cities, nor "gods" gods, nor the "streets of Jerusalem" streets there;
but "cities" signify the doctrinals of falsity; "gods" the falsities
themselves; and the streets of Jerusalem the falsities of the doctrine
of the church. "To set up altars, altars to burn incense unto Baal,"
signifies worship from the love of self and from the love of the world
(as above). This nation did set up altars and burn incense to Baal; but
as all things of their worship were representative, the things that were
done according to the statutes were representative of things celestial
and spiritual; consequently the things that were done contrary to the
statutes were representative of things infernal; therefore by "altars
set up to the gods," and by "incense offered to Baal," these contrary
things are signified. \[22\] In the same: I will speak with them
judgments upon all their evil, in that they have forsaken Me and have
burned incense to other gods, and have bowed themselves down to the
works of their own hands (Jer. 1:16). "To burn incense to other gods,"
and "to bow themselves down to the works of their own hands," signifies
worship from the falsities that are from self-intelligence; "other gods"
meaning falsities, and the "works of their own hands" what is from
self-intelligence. \[23\] The like is signified by: Burning incense to
gods (Jer. 11:12; 44:3, 5, 8, 15, 18); Likewise burning incense to
graven images (Hos. 11:2); And burning incense to vanity (Jer. 18:15);
The like as above is signified by burning incense to Baal (Jer. 7:9;
Hos. 2:13); Likewise by burning incense to Melecheth, or the queen of
the heavens (Jer. 44:17-19, 21, 25). "Melecheth of the heavens"
signifies falsities in the whole complex. \[24\] Moreover, "burning
incense" signifies those things of worship that are perceived as
grateful, and "incense" signifies spiritual good, because all things
that were instituted in the Israelitish nation were representative of
things celestial and spiritual; for the church with them was not as the
church at this day, which is internal, but it was external; and the
externals represented and thus signified the internal things of the
church, such as were disclosed by the Lord in the Word of the New
Testament; for this reason their church was called a representative
church. The externals of that church consisted of such things in the
world of nature as corresponded to the affections of good and truth in
the spiritual world; consequently when those who were of that church
were in externals in respect to worship, those who were in the spiritual
world, that is, in heaven, were in the internals, and conjoined
themselves with those who were in externals; it was in this way that
heaven at that time made one with the men on the earth. \[25\] From this
it can be seen why there was a table for the bread in the tent of
meeting, and why there was a lampstand with lamps, and an altar for
incense. For "bread" represented and thence signified the good of love
proceeding from the Lord, or celestial good; the "lampstand with lamps"
represented and thence signified spiritual good and truth; and "incense"
represented and thence signified worship; and because all Divine worship
that is perceived as grateful is from spiritual good, therefore that
good was signified by "incense." In order that this gratification might
be represented the incense was made from fragrant spices, and this also
from correspondence; for fragrant odors correspond to the pleasantnesses
and delights that are in the thoughts and perceptions from the joy of
spiritual love. For this reason incense corresponded to such things as
are received as grateful by the Lord and perceived as grateful by
angels. This gratification is solely from spiritual good, or from the
good of charity towards the neighbor; for this good is celestial good,
which is the good of love to the Lord in effect; for celestial good,
which is the good of love to the Lord, is brought into effect solely
through spiritual good, which is the good of charity toward the
neighbor; consequently to be in this good and to exercise it is to love
and worship the Lord. (What charity toward the neighbor is, and what it
is to exercise it, see in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 84-107.)
\[26\] As the "oil" by which anointings were made signified celestial
good or the good of love to the Lord, and "incense" signified spiritual
good, or the good of charity towards the neighbor, and as the latter is
from the former (as was said above), therefore in Exodus (chapter 30)
the preparation of the anointing oil is first treated of, and
immediately afterwards the preparation of the incense; the preparation
of the anointing oil from verse 23 to 33, and the preparation of the
incense from verse 34 to 38. And as the incense-offering is here treated
of I will quote what is there commanded regarding the preparation of
incense, namely: Take unto thee fragrant spices, stacte, onycha, and
galbanum; fragrant spices and pure frankincense, like quantity with like
quantity shall it be. And thou shalt make it an incense, a perfume the
work of the perfumer, salted, pure, holy; and thou shalt beat some of it
very small, and put of it before the Testimony of the Tent of meeting,
where I will meet thee; it shall be unto you the holy of holies. And the
incense that thou makest ye shall not make in its quality for
yourselves; it shall be unto thee holy to Jehovah. The man who shall
make like unto it to smell thereof shall be cut off from his peoples
(Exod. 30:34-38). (But what these particulars signify, see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 10289-10310, where they are explained consecutively.) Here
it may be said merely that frankincense was the primary ingredient, and
the other three were added for the sake of their odor; therefore it is
said of the frankincense, that "a like quantity with a like quantity it
shall be," or as much of one as of the other; in like manner as with the
anointing oil, in which the oil of the olive was the primary ingredient,
and the other things in it were significative (Exod. 30:23-33). From
this it is clear why frankincense has the same signification as incense
when compounded, namely spiritual good. \[27\] As the fragrances
pertaining to odor correspond to spiritual pleasantnesses, or to the
pleasantnesses arising from spiritual good, so also what is received by
the Lord as most grateful is called an: Odor of rest (Exod. 29:18, 25,
41; Lev. 1:9, 13, 17; 2:2, 9, 12; 3:5; 4:31; 6:15, 21; 8:28; 23:8, 13,
18; Num. 15:3; 28:6, 8, 13; 29:2, 6, 8, 13, 36). In Ezekiel: By the odor
of rest I will be pleased with you (Ezek. 20:41). In Moses: If ye will
not walk in My precepts, but will go contrary to Me, I will not smell
the odor of your rest (Lev. 26:27, 31). And in Hosea: His branches shall
spread, and he shall be as the honor of the olive, and his odor as that
of Lebanon (Hos. 14:6). This is said of Israel; "the honor of the olive"
signifies celestial good, and "the odor of Lebanon" spiritual good, from
its gratefulness. (That "honor" is predicated of celestial good, see
above, n. 288; that the "olive" also signifies that good, see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 9277, 10261; that "odor" signifies what is perceived as
grateful according to the quality of love and faith, n. 1514-1519, 3577,
4624-4634, 4748, 5621, 10292; that the "odor of rest" signifies the
perceptive of peace, n. 925, 10054; what this is see in the work on
Heaven and Hell, n. 284-290.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="325.">325.</span></span>

Which are the prayers of the saints, signifies from which is worship.
This is evident from the signification of the "prayers of the saints,"
as being worship from spiritual good; "prayers," in the internal sense,
mean all things of worship; and "saints" things spiritual; for those who
are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom are called in the Word "saints" \[or
"holy"\], and those who are in His celestial kingdom are called
"righteous" \[or "just"\] (see above, n. 204). But in the internal sense
of the Word by "saints" are not meant saints \[holy men\], but things
holy, for the term "saints" involves persons, and in the internal sense
everything of person is put off, for things solely make that sense (see
above, n. 270); and that the angels, because they are spiritual, think
abstractly from persons (see also above, n. 99, 100). This is what
distinguishes the internal sense of the Word from its external sense,
which is the sense of the letter; and as "saints" thus mean things holy,
and "holy" in the Word means the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord,
and making His spiritual kingdom (as may be seen above, n. 204), so by
"saints" things spiritual are meant, and by the "prayers of the saints"
worship from spiritual good. That worship from that good is meant by the
"prayers of the saints" is evident from this, that it is said "they had
golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints;" and
"incense" signifies all things of worship that are from spiritual good
(as was shown in the preceding paragraph); from which it follows that
the "prayers of the saints" has a like signification. \[2\] As also in
David: Give ear unto my voice when I call unto Thee. Let my prayers be
received as incense before Thee; the lifting up of my hands as the
evening meal-offering. Guard the door of my lips; let not my heart
decline to evil, to do evil deeds in wickedness with the men who work
iniquity; for still my prayers are in their evils (Ps. 141:1-5). Here
also "prayers" are called "incense," and "the lifting up of the hands"
is called a "meal-offering;" and this because "prayers" and "incense"
have a similar signification, also "lifting up of the hands" and
"meal-offering." "Incense" signifies spiritual good, which is the good
of charity towards the neighbor; and "meal-offering" signifies celestial
good, which is the good of love to the Lord; thus both signifying
worship. And as prayers are not from the mouth, but from the heart by
the mouth, and all worship that is from the heart is from the good of
love and charity, for the heart signifies that, so it is also said,
"Guard the door of my lips; let not my heart decline to evil, to do evil
deeds in wickedness." And because David is lamenting that evils still
have power against him, he says, "for still my prayers are in their
evils." \[3\] That "prayers" have a similar meaning as "incense" is
evident also from other passages in Revelation: Another angel came and
stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him
much incense, that he might offer it with the prayers of all the saints,
upon the golden altar. And the smoke of the incense with the prayers of
the saints went up before God (Rev. 8:3-4). As "prayers" and "incense"
have here similar significance, namely, worship from spiritual good, it
is said, "there was given unto him much incense, that he might offer it
with the prayers of the saints;" likewise that "the smoke of the incense
went up with the prayers of the saints unto God." What is meant by
worship from spiritual good shall first be explained, and afterwards
that prayers signify such worship. Worship does not consist in prayers
and in external devotion, but in a life of charity; prayers are only its
externals, for they proceed from the man through his mouth, consequently
men's prayers are such as they themselves are in respect to life. It
matters not that a man bears himself humbly, that he kneels and sighs
when he prays; for these are externals, and unless externals proceed
from internals they are only gestures and sounds without life. In each
thing that a man utters there is affection, and every man, spirit, and
angel is his own affection, for their affection is their life; it is the
affection itself that speaks, and not the man without it; therefore such
as the affection is such is the praying. Spiritual affection is what is
called charity towards the neighbor; to be in that affection is true
worship; praying is what proceeds. From this it can be seen that the
essential of worship is the life of charity, and that its instrumental
is gesture and praying; or that the primary of worship is a life of
charity, and its secondary is praying. From this it is clear that those
who place all Divine worship in oral piety, and not in practical piety,
err greatly. \[4\] Practical piety is to act in every work and in every
duty from sincerity and right, and from justice and equity, and this
because it is commanded by the Lord in the Word; for thus man in his
every work looks to heaven and to the Lord, and thus is conjoined with
Him. But to act sincerely and rightly, justly and equitably, solely from
fear of the law, of the loss of fame or of honor and gain, and to think
nothing of the Divine law, of the commandments of the Word, and of the
Lord, and yet to pray devoutly in the churches, is external piety;
however holy this may appear, it is not piety, but it is either
hypocrisy, or something put on derived from habit, or a kind of
persuasion from a false belief that Divine worship consists merely in
this; for such a man does not look to heaven and to the Lord with the
heart, but only with the eyes; the heart looking to self and to the
world, and the mouth speaking from the habit of the body only and its
memory; by this man is conjoined to the world and not to heaven, and to
self and not to the Lord. From this it can be seen what piety is, and
what Divine worship is, and that practical piety is worship itself. On
this see also what is said in the work on Heaven and Hell, (n. 222, 224,
358-360, 528-530); and in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem (n. 123-129),
where also are these words: Piety is to think and speak piously; to
spend much time in prayer; to bear oneself humbly at such times; to
frequent churches, and listen devoutly to discourses there; to observe
the sacrament of the Supper frequently every year, and likewise the
other services of worship according to the appointments of the church.
But a life of charity is to will well and do well to the neighbor; to
act in every work from justice and equity, from good and truth, and also
in every duty; in a word, the life of charity consists in performing
uses. Divine worship consists primarily in such a life, and secondarily
in a life of piety; he, therefore, who separates the one from the other,
that is, who lives a life of piety and not at the same time a life of
charity, does not worship God. For a life of piety is valuable so far as
a life of charity is joined with it; for the life of charity is the
primary thing, and such as this is, such is the life of piety (n. 124,
128). \[5\] That the Lord insinuates heaven into man's practical piety,
but not into oral or external piety separate therefrom, has been
testified to me by much experience. For I have seen many who placed all
worship in oral and outward piety, while in their actual life they gave
no thought to the Lord's commandments in the Word, believing that what
is sincere and right, just and equitable, must be done not from regard
to religion, thus from a spiritual motive, but merely from regard to
civil law and also to moral law, that they might appear sincere and just
for the sake of reputation, and this for the sake of honor and gain,
believing that this would take them into heaven before others. According
to their belief, therefore, they were raised up into heaven; but when
the angels perceived that they worshiped God with the mouth only, and
not with the heart, and that their external piety did not proceed from
practical piety, which is of the life, they cast them down; afterwards
these became associated with those who were in a life like their own,
and were there deprived of their piety and sanctity, since these were
interiorly defiled by evils of life. From this also it was made clear,
that Divine worship consists primarily in a life of charity and
secondarily in external piety. \[6\] As Divine worship itself consists
primarily in the life, and not in prayers, the Lord said, that in
praying there should not be much speaking and repetition, in the
following words: In praying, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen
do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Do
not make yourselves, therefore, like them (Matt. 6:7-8). Now as Divine
worship itself consists primarily in a life of charity, and secondarily
in prayers, by "prayers," in the spiritual sense of the Word, worship
from spiritual good, that is, from the life of charity, is meant, for
that which is primary is what is meant in the spiritual sense, while the
sense of the letter consists of things secondary, which are effects, and
which correspond. \[7\] Prayers are mentioned, moreover, in many
passages of the Word; but as prayers proceed from the heart, and a man's
heart is such as is his life of love and charity, so "prayers," in the
spiritual sense, mean that life and worship from it, as in the
following. In Luke: Be ye wakeful at every season, praying that ye may
be accounted worthy to escape the things that are to come, and so stand
before the Son of man (Luke 21:36; Mark 13:33). "To be wakeful at every
season" signifies to procure to oneself spiritual life (see above, n.
187); therefore praying is also mentioned, because "praying" is an
effect of that life, or its external, which is of avail so far as it
proceeds from the life, for these two are one like soul and body, and
like internal and external. \[8\] In Mark: Jesus said, All things that
ye ask for, praying, believe that ye are to receive, and then it shall
be done for you. But when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have aught
against any (Mark 11:24-25). Here, also, in the spiritual sense, by
"praying," "asking for," and "supplicating," a life of love and charity
is meant; for to those who are in a life of love and charity it is given
from the Lord what they are to ask; therefore they ask nothing but what
is good, and that is done for them; and as faith also is from the Lord,
it is said, "believe that ye are to receive;" and as prayers proceed
from a life of charity, and are according to it, in order that it may be
done according to the prayers, it is said, "When ye stand praying,
forgive, if ye have aught against any." \[9\] "When ye stand praying"
signifies when in Divine worship, as is clear also from this, that the
like as is here said of those who pray is said also of those who offer a
gift upon the altar, in Matthew: If thou offer a gift upon the altar,
and rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave the gift
before the altar, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
coming offer the gift (Matt. 5:23-24). "Offering a gift upon the altar"
signifies all Divine worship, for the reason that Divine worship with
that nation consisted chiefly in offering burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, by which therefore all things of worship were signified (see
The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 214, 221). From this it can be
seen that "praying," or "supplicating," and "offering a gift upon the
altar," have a like meaning, namely, worship from the good of love and
charity. \[10\] In the same: Jesus said, It is written, My house shall
be called a house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of robbers (Matt.
21:13; Mark 11:17; Luke 19:46). The Lord's "house" signifies the church,
and "prayers" worship therein; and a "den of robbers" the profanation of
the church and of worship; and from this contrary sense it is also
evident that prayers signify worship from the good of love and charity.
\[11\] In David: I cried unto God with my mouth. If I had regarded
iniquity in my heart the Lord would not have heard; but God hath heard;
He hath attended to the voice of my prayer (Ps. 66:17-19). Since prayers
are such as the man's heart is, and thus are not prayers of any worship
when the heart is evil, it is said, "If I had regarded iniquity in my
heart the Lord would not have heard," which signifies that He would not
receive such worship. Man's "heart" is his love, and man's love is his
very life, consequently a man's prayers are such as his love is, that
is, such as his life is; from which it follows that "prayers" signify
the life of his love and charity, or that this life is meant by
"prayers" in the spiritual sense. \[12\] Many more passages might be
cited; but as man does not know that his life and his prayers make one,
and therefore does not perceive otherwise than that "prayers" where they
are mentioned in the Word mean merely prayers, these passages will be
omitted here. Moreover, when man is in a life of charity he is
constantly praying, if not with the mouth yet with the heart; for that
which is of the love is constantly in the thought, even when man is
unconscious of it (according to what is said in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem, n. 55-57); from which also it is clear that "praying" in the
spiritual sense is worship from love. But those who place piety in
prayers and not in the life have no relish for this truth, in fact their
thought is contrary to it; such do not even know what practical piety
is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="326.">326.</span></span>

Verse 9. And they were singing a new song, signifies acknowledgment and
confession from joy of heart. This is evident from the signification of
a "song," as meaning acknowledgment and confession from joy of heart,
here acknowledgment and confession that the Lord in respect to the
Divine Human has all power in the heavens and on earth. Confession
respecting this is meant because this is what is here treated of. "To
sing a song" signifies confession from joy of heart, because joy of
heart, when it is in fullness, expresses itself in song, this it does
because when the heart, and in consequence the thought also, is full of
joy, it pours itself forth in singing, the joy of the heart itself
through the sound of the singing, and the joy of the thought therefrom
through the song. The kind of joy of the thought is expressed by the
words of the song, which concur and agree with the matter that is in the
thought from the heart; the kind of joy of the heart is expressed by the
harmony, and the measure of this joy is expressed by the exaltation of
the sound and the words in it. All these flow as if spontaneously from
the joy itself, and for the reason that the whole heaven is formed
according to the affections of good and truth, the highest heaven
according to the affections of good, and the middle heaven according to
the affections of truth; it is therefore formed also for joys, for every
joy is from an affection, or from love; from this it is that in all
angelic discourse there is a kind of harmony. (But these things can be
more clearly known and concluded by what is said and shown in the work
on Heaven and Hell, namely, that the thoughts and affections of angels
go forth according to the form of heaven, n. 200-212, and 265-275;
therefore that there is a kind of harmony in their speech, n. 242; also
that the sound of the speech of angels corresponds to their affections;
and the articulations of sound, which are the words, correspond to the
ideas of thought, which are from the affection, n. 236, 241; also in
Arcana Coelestia, 1648, 1649, 2595, 2596, 3350, 5182, 8115.) From this
it is clear that harmony in song, and also the power of musical art to
express the various kinds of affections and to adapt itself to its
themes, are from the spiritual world, and not from the natural as is
believed (see also concerning this in the work on Heaven and Hell, n.
241). \[2\] For this reason many kinds of musical instruments were used
in sacred worship with the Jewish and Israelitish nation, some of which
had relation to the affections of celestial good, and some to the
affections of spiritual good, and to the joys therefrom, respecting what
was to be proclaimed. Stringed instruments had relation to the
affections of spiritual good, and wind instruments to the affections of
celestial good; to these was added the singing of songs, which gave form
to the agreements of things with the sounds of affections. Such were all
the psalms of David, therefore they are called psalms, from playing
\[psallere\], and also songs. This makes clear why the four animals and
twenty-four elders are said to have had harps, and also to have sung
this song. \[3\] That "singing" and "singing a song" signify
acknowledgment and confession from joy of heart is evident from the
following passages. In Isaiah: In that day thou shalt say, I will
confess to Jehovah; O God of my salvation, I will trust, I will not
dread; for Jah Jehovah is my strength and psalm, He is become my
salvation. Then shall ye draw waters from the fountains of salvation.
And in that day shall ye say, Confess ye to Jehovah, call upon His name,
sing psalms unto Jehovah. Break forth and shout, thou inhabitant of
Zion, for great in the midst of thee is the Holy One of Israel (Isa.
12:1-6). This describes confession from joy of heart because of the
Lord's coming and His Divine power to save the human race. Confession is
plainly meant, for it is first said, "I will confess to Jehovah," and
again afterwards, "Confess ye to Jehovah." Confession that the Lord from
His Divine power is about to save mankind is described by these words,
"O God of my salvation, I will trust, I will not dread, for He is my
strength, He is become my salvation. Then ye shall draw waters from the
fountains of salvation in that day; great in the midst of thee is the
Holy One of Israel;" "in that day" means when the Lord is to come; "the
Holy One of Israel" is the Lord; consequent joy, which is the joy of
confession, is described by "sing psalms unto Jehovah, break forth and
shout, thou inhabitant of Zion;" "inhabitant" and "daughter of Zion" are
the church where the Lord is worshiped; "Jah is my psalm" signifies here
celebration and glorification of the Lord. \[4\] In the same: Sing unto
Jehovah a new song, His praise, O end of the earth. Let the wilderness
and the cities thereof lift up their voice; let the inhabitants of the
cliff sing aloud, let them shout from the top of the mountains (Isa.
42:10-11). This also treats of the Lord's coming and the establishment
of the church with those who were outside of the church, that is, with
those where the Word was not, and the Lord was not before known. "To
sing a new song" signifies confession from joy of heart; "sing praise, O
end of the earth," signifies confession of those who are remote from the
church, "end of the earth" meaning where that which pertains to the
church ceases to be, "earth" meaning the church; "the wilderness and the
cities thereof that shall lift up the voice," signify those with whom
there is no good because there is no truth, and yet they desire it; "the
inhabitants of the cliff" signify the good of faith pertaining to them;
"the top of the mountains" signifies the good of love pertaining to
them; "to sing" and "to shout" signify consequent confession from joy of
mind and heart. \[5\] In the same: Jehovah will comfort Zion; He will
comfort all her desolations, and He will make her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of Jehovah; joy and gladness will be
found therein, confession and the voice of a psalm (Isa. 51:3; 52:8-9).
This also treats of the Lord's coming and the establishment of the
church, which at that time was laid waste or destroyed. "Zion" signifies
the church where the Lord is to be worshiped; "her desolations" signify
a lack of truth and good from an absence of knowledges; "to make her
wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of Jehovah"
signifies that they shall have truth and good in abundance; "wilderness"
is predicated of the absence of good, and "desert" of the absence of
truth; "Eden" signifies good in abundance, and the "garden of Jehovah"
signifies truth in abundance. As "psalm" and "song" signify confession
from joy of heart, it is said, "joy and gladness therein, confession and
the voice of a psalm," "voice of a psalm" meaning song. \[6\] In
Lamentations: The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from
singing; the joy of our heart hath ceased (Lam. 5:14-15). "The elders
have ceased from the gate" signifies that those who are in truths from
good, or in an abstract sense truths from good by which there is
admission into the church, are no more; "the young men have ceased from
singing" signifies that truths themselves are deprived of their
spiritual affection, and thence of their joy; and because this is
signified it is said, "the joy of our heart hath ceased." \[7\] In
Ezekiel: I will cause the tumult of thy songs to cease, and the voice of
harps shall be no more heard (Ezek. 26:13). "The tumult of songs"
signifies the joys of confessions; "the voice of harps" signifies
gladness from spiritual truths and goods. \[8\] In David: Jehovah is my
strength, and I am helped; my heart triumphs, and with my song will I
confess to Him (Ps. 28:7). Because "song" signifies confession from joy
of heart, it is said "my heart triumphs, and with my song will I confess
to Him." \[9\] In the same: Sing aloud, ye righteous in Jehovah. Confess
to Jehovah with the harp, sing psalms unto Him with the psaltery of ten
strings. Sing unto Him a new song, play well with a loud noise (Ps.
33:1-3). As joy of heart is both from celestial love and from spiritual
love, it is said, "Sing aloud, ye righteous, in Jehovah, confess to
Jehovah with the harp; sing psalms to Him with a psaltery of ten
strings;" "sing aloud, ye righteous," is predicated of those who are in
celestial love; "Confess on the harp, and sing psalms with the
psaltery," of those who are in spiritual love. That those who are in
celestial love are called "righteous" see above (n. 204), and that
"harp" and "psaltery" are predicated of those who are in spiritual good
(n. 323); and as "singing" means confession from the joy arising from
these loves, it is said, "Confess to Jehovah," "Sing unto Him a new
song." The exaltation of joy from its fullness is signified by "play
well with a loud noise." \[10\] In the same: I will praise the name of
God with a song, and will magnify Him by confession (Ps. 69:30). In the
same: When I shall have gone with them to the house of God, with the
voice of jubilee and confession, the multitude keeping a festival (Ps.
42:4). In the same: Confess ye to Jehovah, call upon His name. Sing unto
Him, sing psalms unto Him (Ps. 105:1-2; 149:1). In the same: I will
confess to Jehovah according to His righteousness, and I will sing
psalms unto the name of Jehovah most high (Ps. 7:17). In the same: My
heart is prepared, O God; I will sing, and sing psalms. Awake thee, my
glory; awake thee, psaltery and harp. I will confess unto Thee, O Lord,
among the nations; I will sing psalms unto Thee among the peoples (Ps.
57:7-9). Because "to sing a song" signifies confession from joy of
heart, in these passages two expressions are used, "to confess and to
sing," "confession and song," "voice of singing and voice of
confession." \[11\] Where the Lord's coming is treated of, the
expression "a new song" is used, and it is said that earth, sea, field,
forest, trees, Lebanon, wilderness, and many other things, should
"rejoice" and "exult," as in the following. In David: O sing unto
Jehovah a new song. Make a loud noise unto Jehovah, all the earth; break
forth, shout for joy, and sing psalms with the harp and the voice of a
psalm; with trumpets, and with the sound of a cornet, make a loud noise
before the King, Jehovah. Let the sea and the fullness thereof thunder;
the world and they that dwell therein. Let the rivers clap their hands;
let the mountains be joyful together (Ps. 98:1, 4-8). In the same: O
sing unto Jehovah a new song; sing unto Jehovah, all the earth. Sing
unto Jehovah, bless His name; proclaim His salvation from day to day.
The Heavens shall be glad, and the earth shall exult; the sea shall be
moved, and all the fullness thereof; the field shall triumph, and all
that is therein; then shall all the trees of the forest sing aloud (Ps.
96:1-2, 11-12). In the same: Sing unto Jehovah a new song, His praise in
the assembly of the saints. Let Israel be glad in his makers, the sons
of Zion in their King. Let them praise his name in the dance; let them
sing psalms unto Him with timbrel and harp (Ps. 149:1-3). In Isaiah:
Sing unto Jehovah a new song; His praise, O end of the earth. Let the
wilderness and the cities thereof lift up the voice (Isa. 42:10-11). In
the same: Sing, O ye heavens, for Jehovah hath done it; shout for joy,
ye lower parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains, O
forest and every tree therein; for Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, and hath
shown Himself glorious in Israel (Isa. 44:23; 49:13). Here the Lord, His
coming, and salvation through Him are treated of; and because these
things were about to take place it is said, "a new song." The joy on
this account is described not only by "singing," "singing psalms,"
"breaking forth," "being joyful," "clapping the hands," but also by
various musical instruments of accordant sounds; also that the rivers,
the sea, the field, the forests, the trees therein, Lebanon, the
wilderness, the mountains, and many other things, should "rejoice
together," "exult," "sing," "shout for joy," "clap the hands," and "cry
aloud," together. Like things are predicated of these objects because
they signify such things as are of the church, and therefore such things
as are with the man of the church; "rivers" the things that are of
intelligence; "sea" the things of knowledge \[scientiae\] that are in
agreement with truths and goods; "field" the good of the church;
"forests" the truths of the natural man; "trees" knowledges; "Lebanon"
spiritual truth and good; "wilderness" a desire for truth that good may
be gained, and "mountains" the goods of love. All these things are said
"to sing," "to break forth," "to shout for joy," "to cry aloud," and "to
clap the hands," when they are from heaven, for then heavenly joy is in
them, and through them in man; for man is not in heavenly joy unless the
things in him, which are truths and goods, are from heaven; from these
is joy of heart that is truly joy, and from these is the joy of the man
with whom they are. From this it can be seen why the like is said of
these things as of man, namely, because joy is in them, and with man
through them. Such joy is in every spiritual and celestial good, and
therefrom with those with whom these goods are; for heaven flows in with
its joy, that is, the Lord through heaven, into the goods and thence
into their truths that are from Him in man, and through these into the
man, but not into the man who is destitute or devoid of them. These
goods and the truths therefrom are what "exult," "shout for joy," "break
forth," "sing," "sing psalms," that is, are glad because of the influx
from heaven, and from these the heart of man is glad also. \[12\] As
there are various affections of good and truth, and each expresses
itself by an appropriate sound, so in the Word, especially in David,
various kinds of instruments are mentioned, which signify corresponding
affections. One who knows the internal sense of the Word, and also the
sounds of the instruments there named, can know what affection is there
signified and described. The angels know this from the mere mention of
the instruments when a man is reading the Word, and also from the matter
described there in its own words. Thus, for example, in David: Clap your
hands, all ye peoples; shout unto God with the voice of a song. God is
gone up with a shout, Jehovah with the voice of a trumpet. Sing psalms
unto God, sing psalms unto our King, for God is King of all the earth;
sing ye psalms with understanding (Ps. 47:1, 5-7). They have seen Thy
goings, O God, the goings of my God. The singers went before, the
minstrels after, in the midst of maidens playing with timbrels (Ps.
68:24, 25). In the same: Shout with joy unto God our strength; shout
unto the God of Jacob. Lift up a psalm, and strike the timbrel, the
pleasant harp with the psaltery. Sound with the trumpet in the new moon
(Ps. 81:1-3). In the same: Praise God with the sound of the trumpet,
with the psaltery and harp, with the timbrel and dance, with stringed
instruments and the organ, with cymbals of soft sound, with cymbals of
loud sound (Ps. 150:1, 3-5). All the instruments here mentioned signify
affections, each its own, and this from the correspondence of their
sound; for the affections are what produce the varieties of sounds with
men, consequently from the sounds also the affections are known, as was
said above in this article. \[13\] I will add to this an arcanum: the
angels who constitute in heaven the Lord's celestial kingdom, when man
is reading the Word, draw from his affection alone the internal sense of
it, which affection arises from the sound of the words in the original
tongue; but the angels who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom draw the
internal sense from the truths that the words contain; therefore the man
who is in spiritual affection has from the celestial kingdom joy of
heart, and from the spiritual kingdom confession from that joy. The
sounds of the musical instruments that are here mentioned elevate the
affection, and the truths give form to it. That this is so is well known
to those skilled in the art of music. For this reason the Psalms of
David are called "psalms," from psallere \[to play\]; they are also
called "songs" from singing; for they were played and sung with the
accompanying sounds of various instruments. That they were called
"psalms" by David is known, as most of them are so inscribed. Those that
are called songs are the following, Ps. 18:1; 33:1, 3; 45:1; 46:1; 48:1;
65:1; 66:1; 67:1; 68:1; 75:1; 76:1; \[83:1;\] 87:1; 88:1; 92:1; 96:1;
98:1; 108:1; 120:1; 121:1; 122:1; 123:1; 124:1; 125:1; 126:1; 127:1;
128:1; 129:1; 130:1; 131:1; 132:1; 133:1; 134:1. Many other passages
might be cited from the Word respecting singing and song, and it might
be shown that they signify confessions from joy of heart, but they are
omitted because of their number; those already referred to are
sufficient.

<span class="margnote"><span id="327.">327.</span></span>

Saying, Worthy art Thou to open <span id="fr_90"></span>[327-1](#fn_90.md)
the book and to loose the seals thereof, signifies that the Lord from
the Divine Human has omnipotence and omniscience. This is evident from
all that precedes; for the subject treated of up to this point is that
the Lord from the Divine Human has omnipotence and omniscience, and that
judgment, therefore, belongs to Him. That this is meant by "worthy art
Thou to open the book and to loose the seals thereof" is clear from the
series of the things explained from the beginning of this chapter to the
present verse, which I will here present in their order, as follows: "I
saw in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne," signifies the
Lord in respect to omnipotence and omniscience (n. 297); "a book written
within and on the back, sealed with seven seals," signifies the states
of the life of all in heaven and on earth altogether hidden (n. 299,
300); "I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a great voice, Who is
worthy to open the book and to loose the seals thereof?" signifies
exploration whether there is anyone such that he may know and perceive
the state of the life of all (n. 302, 303); "no one was able, in heaven
nor upon the earth nor under the earth, to open the book," signifies
that no one from himself can do this at all (n. 304); "behold the Lion
that is from the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath overcome to
open the book and to loose the seven seals thereof," signifies the Lord
\[as able to do this\] because from His own power He subjugated the
hells and reduced all things in the heavens to order, and this by Divine
good united to Divine truth in His Human (n. 309, 310); "I saw a Lamb
standing, having seven horns and seven eyes," signifies the Lord in
respect to the Divine Human, that from it He has omnipotence and
omniscience (n. 314, 316, 317); "and He came and took the book out of
the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne," signifies that these
things are from His Divine Human (n. 319). From this it is now clear
that here "worthy art Thou to take the book and to loose the seals
thereof," signifies that the Lord from the Divine Human has omnipotence
and omniscience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="328.">328.</span></span>

For thou wast slain, and didst redeem us to God in Thy blood, signifies
the separation of all from the Divine, and the conjunction with the
Divine by the acknowledgment of the Lord, and by the reception of Divine
truth from Him. This is evident from the signification of "being slain,"
as being, in reference to the Lord, the separation of all from the
Divine, for "to be slain" signifies in the Word to be spiritually slain,
that is, to perish by evils and falsities (see above, n. 315); and
because the Lord with such is not, for He is denied, therefore "being
slain" signifies, in reference to the Lord, not acknowledged (as above,
n. 315) and also denied; and when the Lord is denied He is as it were
slain with such as deny, and by the denial they are separated from the
Divine; for such as deny the Lord, that is, His Divine, separate
themselves altogether from the Divine. For the Lord is the God of the
universe, and He is one with the Father, and the Father is in Him and He
in the Father, and no one cometh to the Father but by Him, as the Lord
Himself teaches; consequently those in the church who do not acknowledge
His Divine, and still more those who in heart deny it, are altogether
separated from the Divine. \[2\] Denying the Divine is here meant by
slaying Him with themselves. In the internal sense of the Word the same
is meant by "crucifying the Lord" (see above, n. 83, 195); for the Jews,
with whom the church then was, denied that he was the Christ, and
thereby separated themselves from the Divine and therefore they gave Him
up to death, or crucified Him. Moreover, at this day those who deny His
Divine do the same; it is therefore frequently said by preachers that
those who lead an evil life and blaspheme the Lord crucify Him with
themselves. This, therefore, is what is here signified by "Thou wast
slain." This is evident also from the signification of "thou didst
redeem us to God in Thy blood," as being that He conjoined us to the
Divine by the acknowledgment of Him, and by the reception of Divine
truth from Him; for "to redeem" signifies to liberate from hell, and
thereby to appropriate men to Himself, and thus enjoin them to the
Divine, as will be seen from the passages in the Word in which "to
redeem" and "redemption" are mentioned, which will be quoted below. The
"blood of the Lord" signifies Divine truth proceeding from Him; and
because man by the reception of Divine truth from the Lord is liberated
from hell and conjoined to Him, therefore "Thou didst redeem us to God
in Thy blood" signifies conjunction with the Divine by the reception of
the Divine truth from the Lord. \[3\] That this sense lies hidden in
these words no one can see who abides in the mere sense of the letter,
for in that sense nothing else can be seen except that "Thou wast slain"
means that He was crucified and "Thou didst redeem us in Thy blood"
means that He has reconciled us to His Father by the passion of the
cross. Because this meaning is the meaning of the letter, and because it
has hitherto been unknown that in the particulars of the Word there is
an internal sense which is spiritual, from that sense, namely, the sense
of the letter, it has been made a doctrine of the church that the Divine
Itself which they call the Father cast away from Him the whole human
race, and that the Lord by the passion of the cross made reconciliation,
and that thus those for whom He intercedes are saved. Who that has any
illumination of understanding cannot see that this doctrinal is contrary
to the Divine Itself? For the Divine Itself never casts away any man
from Him for He loves all, and therefore desires the salvation of all.
It is also contrary to the Divine Itself to be reconciled by the
shedding of blood, and to be brought back to mercy by beholding the
passion of the cross which His own Son sustained, and from this to have
mercy, and not from Himself. Although this doctrine is so contrary to
the Divine essence, yet to believe this is called essential faith or
justifying faith. \[4\] Again, who can think from enlightened reason
that the sins of the whole world were transferred to the Lord, and that
the sins of anyone who merely has that faith are thereby taken away? But
although this is the doctrine of those who never think beyond the sense
of the letter, yet the angels who are with men have no perception of
these things according to that sense, but according to the spiritual
sense, for they are spiritual and therefore think spiritually and not
naturally. To angels, "redeeming man in His blood" means liberating man
from hell, and thus claiming and conjoining man to Himself by the
acknowledgment of Him, and by the reception of Divine truth from Him.
Moreover, the church may know that this is so; for it may know that no
one is conjoined to the Divine by blood, but by the reception of the
Divine truth, and the application of it to the life. \[5\] Liberation
from hell by the Lord was accomplished by His assuming the Human, and
through it subjugating the hells, and reducing to order all things in
the heavens, which could have been done in no way except by the Human;
for the Divine operates from firsts through ultimates, thus from Himself
through the things that are from Himself in ultimates, which are in the
Human. This is the operation of Divine power in heaven and in the world.
(On this see some things above, n. 41; also in Heaven and Hell, n. 315;
and in Arcana Coelestia, n. 5897, 6239, 6451, 6465, 8603, 9215, 9216,
9824, 9828, 9836, 10044, 10099, 10329, 10335, 10548.) Liberation from
hell by the Lord was also accomplished by His glorifying His Human, that
is, making it Divine; for thus and not otherwise could He hold the hells
in subjection forever; and as the subjugation of the hells and the
glorification of His Human was accomplished by means of temptations
admitted into his Human, His passion of the cross was His last
temptation and complete victory. That "He bore the sins of all"
signifies that He admitted into Himself all the hells when He was
tempted, for from the hells all sins or evils ascend, and enter into man
and are in him; therefore the Lord's "bearing sins" signifies that He
admitted the hells into Himself when tempted; and His "taking away sins"
means that He subjugated the hells, in order that evils may no more rise
up from them, with those who acknowledge the Lord and receive Him, that
is, who receive in faith and life the Divine truth proceeding from Him,
and who are thus conjoined to the Lord. It was said that "Thou didst
redeem us to God in Thy blood" signifies conjunction with the Divine by
the acknowledgment of the Lord, and the reception of Divine truth from
Him; and as the church is founded on this, I will state briefly how
conjunction is thereby effected. \[6\] The primary thing is to
acknowledge the Lord, to acknowledge His Divine in the Human, and His
omnipotence to save the human race; for by that acknowledgment man is
conjoined to the Divine, since there is no Divine except in Him; for the
Father is there; for the Father is in Him, and He in the Father, as the
Lord Himself teaches; consequently they who look to another Divine near
Him, or at His side, as those are wont to do who pray to the Father to
have mercy for the sake of the Son, turn aside from the way and worship
a Divine elsewhere than in Him. Moreover, they then give no thought to
the Divine of the Lord, but only to the Human, when yet these cannot be
separated; for the Divine and the Human are not two, but a single
person, conjoined like soul and body, according to the doctrine received
by the churches from the Athanasian Creed. Therefore to acknowledge the
Divine in the Lord's Human, or the Divine Human, is the primary thing of
the church, by which there is conjunction; and because it is the primary
it is also the first thing of the church. It is because this is the
first thing of the church, that the Lord, when He was in the world, so
often said to those whom He healed, "Believest thou that I can do this?"
and when they answered that they believed, He said, "Be it done
according to thy faith." This He so often said that they might believe,
in the first place, that from His Divine Human He had Divine
omnipotence, for without that belief the church could not be begun, and
without that belief they could not have been conjoined with the Divine,
but must have been separated from it, and thus would not have been able
to receive anything good from him. \[7\] Afterwards the Lord taught how
they were to be saved, namely, by receiving Divine truth from Him; and
truth is received when it is applied to the life and implanted in it by
doing it; therefore the Lord so often said that they should do His
words. From this it can be seen that these two things, namely, believing
in the Lord and doing His words, make one, and can by no means be
separated; for he who does not do the Lord's words does not believe in
Him; so also he who thinks that he believes in Him and does not do His
words does not believe in Him, for the Lord is in His words, that is, in
His truths, and by them He gives faith to man. From these few things it
can be known that conjunction with the Divine is effected through the
acknowledgment of the Lord and the reception of Divine truth from Him.
This, therefore, is what is signified by "the Lamb redeeming us to God
in His blood." That "the Lamb" signifies the Lord in respect to the
Divine Human, see above (n. 314). (On this more may be seen in Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem, n. 293-297, and in the quotations from Arcana
Coelestia, n. 300-306, as also at the end of that work, where the Lord
is particularly treated of.) That "blood" signifies the Divine truth
proceeding from the Lord, and "salvation by His blood" signifies by the
reception of Divine truth from Him, will be explained in the following
article. \[8\] That "to redeem" signifies to deliver and to make free,
and, in reference to the Lord, to deliver and free from hell, and thus
to set apart and conjoin to Himself, can be seen from the following
passages. In Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom, walking in the
multitude of his power? I that speak in righteousness, great to save.
For the day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed
hath come. In all their straitness He was in straitness and the angel of
His faces saved them; because of His love and His pity He redeemed them;
and He took them up and carried them all the days of eternity (Isa.
63:1, 4, 9). This treats of the Lord and His temptation-combats, by
which He subjugated the hells. "Edom from which He cometh" signifies His
Human, so also does "the angel of His faces." His Divine power from
which He fought is signified by "walking in the multitude of His power;"
the casting down into hell of those who rose up against Him and the
elevation of the good into heaven is meant by "righteousness," thus by
these words, "I that speak in righteousness, great to save. For the day
of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my redeemed hath come." His
Divine love from which He did these things is described by "In all their
straitness He was in straitness, and the angel of His faces saved them;
because of His love and His pity He redeemed them; and He took them up
and carried them all the days of eternity." From this it is clear that
"the redeemed" and "those whom He redeemed" signify those whom He
rescued from the fury of those who are from hell, and whom he saved.
\[9\] In the same: Thus hath said Jehovah thy Creator, O Jacob, and thy
Former, O Israel; for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy
name; thou art Mine (Isa. 43:1). That "to redeem" signifies to free from
hell, and to set apart and conjoin to Himself so that they may be His,
is clear, for it is said, "I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by
thy name; thou art Mine;" because this is effected through reformation
and regeneration by the Lord, therefore it is said, "Jehovah thy
Creator, O Jacob, and thy Former, O Israel." He is called Creator
because "to create" in the Word signifies to regenerate (see above, n.
294). "Jacob" and "Israel" signify those who are of the church, and are
in truths from good. \[10\] In the same: Say ye to the daughter of Zion,
Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, His reward is with Him, and the
wages of His work are before Him. And they shall call them a people of
holiness, the redeemed of Jehovah (Isa. 62:11-12). This also treats of
the Lord's coming, and the establishment of a church by Him. "Daughter
of Zion" signifies the church which is in love to the Lord; His coming
is meant by "Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, His reward is with
Him, and the wages of His work are before Him;" those who are reformed
and regenerated by Him are meant by "the redeemed of Jehovah." \[11\]
These are called the "redeemed" because they have been freed from evils
by regeneration, and are set apart by the Lord and are conjoined to Him.
In the same: No lion shall be there, and the ravenous of the wild beasts
shall not be found therein; but the redeemed shall go; and the ransomed
of Jehovah shall return, and come to Zion with singing, and the gladness
of eternity shall be upon their head (Isa. 35:9-10). This also treats of
the Lord's coming, and the salvation of those who suffer themselves to
be regenerated by the Lord. That with such there shall not be falsity
destroying truth nor evil destroying good, is signified by "No lion
shall be there, and the ravenous of the wild beasts shall not be found
therein;" that such are delivered from evils and freed from falsities is
signified by "the redeemed shall go; so shall the ransomed of Jehovah
return;" their eternal happiness is signified by "they shall come to
Zion with singing, and the gladness of eternity shall be upon their
head," "Zion" meaning the church. What "singing" signifies see just
above (n. 326). There are two, words in the original by which "to
redeem" is expressed, one signifying deliverance from evils, the other
liberation from falsities; these two words are used here; thus it is
said, "the redeemed shall go," and "the ransomed of Jehovah shall
return." (These two words are also used in Hosea 13:14; and in David,
Ps. 69:18; 107:2.) \[12\] "To redeem" signifies to deliver from evils
and to free from falsities, and also to deliver and free from hell,
because all evils and falsities with man arise out of hell; and since
the Lord removes these by reformation and regeneration, reformation and
regeneration also are signified by "to redeem" or "redemption," as in
the following passages. \[13\] In David: Rise up as a help to us, and
ransom us for Thy mercy's sake (Ps. 44:26); to "ransom" here meaning to
free and to reform. In the same: God hath ransomed my soul from the hand
of hell; and He will accept me (Ps. 49:15). "To ransom from the hand of
hell" means to free; "to accept me" means to set apart and to conjoin to
Himself, or to make His own, as servants sold and redeemed. In Hosea:
Out of the hand of hell will I ransom them; I will redeem them from
death (Hos. 13:14). "To redeem" meaning to deliver and free from
damnation. In David: Bless Jehovah, O my soul, who hath redeemed thy
life from the pit (Ps. 103:1, 4). "To redeem from the pit" means to free
from damnation; "the pit" meaning damnation. In the same: Draw nigh unto
my soul, redeem it, and because of my enemies ransom me (Ps. 69:18). "To
draw nigh to the soul" signifies to conjoin it to Himself; "to redeem
it" signifies to deliver from evils; "because of my enemies ransom me"
signifies to free from falsities, "enemies" meaning falsities. In the
same: Let the redeemed of Jehovah say, whom He hath redeemed out of the
hand of the distressing enemy (Ps. 107:2). "The redeemed of Jehovah"
means those who are delivered from evil; "whom He hath redeemed out of
the hand of the distressing enemy" means those whom He has freed from
falsities. In Jeremiah: I am with thee, to save thee and to rescue thee;
and I will rescue thee out of the hand of the evil, and I will ransom
thee out of the hand of the violent (Jer. 15:20-21). "To ransom out of
the hand of the violent" means to free from falsities that offer
violence to the good of charity; the "violent" signifying such
falsities, consequently those also who are in them. \[14\] In David: Let
Israel hope in Jehovah, for with Jehovah there is mercy, and in Him is
much ransom, and He shall ransom Israel out of all his iniquities (Ps.
130:7-8). "Ransom" means liberation; "Israel" the church; and to reform
those who are of the church and free them from falsities is signified by
"He shall ransom Israel out of all his iniquities." In the same: Let
integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I have waited for thee.
Ransom Israel, O God, out of all his distresses (Ps. 25:21-22). "To
ransom Israel out of distresses" means here also to free those who are
of the church from falsities, which straiten. In Isaiah: Is My hand
shortened, that there is no ransoming? or is there no power in Me to
rescue? (Isa. 50:2). That "ransoming" means liberation is evident, for
it is said also, "Is My hand shortened, or is there no power in Me to
rescue." In David: God shall hear my voice; He shall ransom my soul in
peace (Ps. 55:17-18); "to ransom" here means to free. In the same: Unto
Thee will I sing psalms with the harp, Thou Holy One of Israel. My lips
shall praise; and my soul, which Thou hast ransomed (Ps. 71:22-23). "To
ransom the soul" means to free from falsities; for "soul" in the Word
signifies the life of faith, and "heart" the life of love; therefore "to
ransom the soul" signifies to free from falsities and to give the life
of faith. \[15\] In the same: Ransom me from the oppression of man, that
I may keep Thy precepts (Ps. 119:134). "To ransom from the oppression of
man" signifies to free from the falsities of evil, for "man" signifies
the spiritual affection of truth and wisdom therefrom, and in the
contrary sense, as here, the lust of falsity and insanity therefrom; the
"oppression of man" signifies the destruction of truth by falsities. In
the same: Into Thine hand I will commend my spirit; Thou hast ransomed
me, O Jehovah, God of truth (Ps. 31:5); "to ransom" means to free from
falsities and to reform by means of truths; and because this is
signified by "ransom" it is said, "O Jehovah, God of truth." In the
same: Crime is in the hands of sinners, and their right hand is full of
a bribe. But as for me, I walk in mine integrity; ransom me, and be
merciful unto me (Ps. 26:10-11); "to ransom" meaning to free from
falsities and to reform. In the same: He shall redeem their soul from
fraud and violence; and precious shall their blood be in His eyes. And
he shall live, and to him shall He give of the gold of Sheba; and He
shall pray for him continually; all the day shall He bless them (Ps.
72:14-15). The "needy" are here treated of, by whom those are signified
who desire truths from spiritual affection; of these it is said that "He
shall redeem their soul from fraud and violence," which signifies
liberation from falsities and evils that destroy the goods of love and
the truths of faith; the reception of Divine truth by them is signified
by "precious shall their blood be in His eyes;" their reformation is
described "he shall live, and to him shall He give of the gold of Sheba;
and He shall pray for him continually; all the day shall He bless him;"
"the gold of Sheba" is the good of charity; "to pray for him
continually" signifies that they shall constantly be withheld from
falsities and kept in truths; and "all the day shall He bless him"
signifies that they shall constantly be in the good of charity and
faith, for this is a Divine benediction; while to withhold from
falsities and to keep in truths is "to pray for him continually." \[16\]
In Isaiah: Thus said Jehovah, For nought ye have been sold, and not by
silver shall ye be redeemed. My people went down into Egypt to sojourn
there, but Assyria oppressed them for nought (Isa. 52:3-4). This treats
of the desolation of truths by knowledges and by the reasonings of the
natural man from them; for "My people went down into Egypt to sojourn
there" signifies the instruction of the natural man in knowledges and
cognitions of truth; "Egypt" signifies knowledges and also cognitions,
but such as are from the sense of the letter of the Word; and "to
sojourn" signifies to be instructed; "Assyria oppressed them for nought"
signifies the falsification of knowledges by the reasonings of the
natural man; "Assyria" signifying reasonings, and "to oppress for
nought" falsifications, for falsities are nought because there is
nothing of truth in them. Knowledges are thus falsified when the natural
man separate from the spiritual forms conclusions; this is why it is
said, "For nought ye have been sold, and not by silver shall ye be
redeemed;" "for nought to be sold" signifies from self or from the
selfhood to alienate oneself from falsities and renounce them; and "not
by silver to be redeemed" signifies that one cannot be delivered by
means of truth from the falsities of evil; "silver" signifying truth,
and "to be redeemed" signifying to be delivered from the falsities of
evil and to be reformed. \[17\] In Zechariah: I will bring them
together, because I will ransom them; and then shall they be multiplied;
I will sow them among the peoples; and I will bring them back out of the
land, and will bring them together out of Assyria; and I will lead them
to the land of Gilead and to Lebanon (Zech. 10:8-10). This treats of the
restoration of the church, and reformation by means of truth from good;
and "I will bring them together, because I will ransom them" signifies
the dispersion of falsities and reformation by means of truths;
therefore it is said, "they shall be multiplied, and I will sow them
among the peoples," which signifies the multiplication and insemination
of truth from good; "to bring them back out of the land of Egypt, and to
bring them together out of Assyria" signifies (as above) to withdraw
them from the falsifying of truth that they are in by their reasonings
from knowledges; "to lead them to the land of Gilead and to Lebanon"
signifies to the good of the church, which is the good of charity, and
to the good and truth of faith; the former is "the land of Gilead" and
the latter "Lebanon." \[18\] From this it can be seen what is signified
in the spiritual sense by Jehovah's "leading the people out of Egypt"
and "ransoming them," as in Moses: I will rescue you from bondage, and I
will redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with great judgments
(Exod. 6:6). I led you out of Egypt with a stretched-out arm, and I
ransomed you out of the house of bondmen (Deut. 7:8; 9:26-29; 13:5;
15:15; 24:18). Thou in Thy mercy hast led Thy people whom Thou hast
redeemed; Thou hast guided them in the strength of Thy hand to the
habitation of Thy holiness (Exod. 15:13). And in Micah: I made thee to
go up out of the land of Egypt, and ransomed thee out of the house of
bondage (Micah 6:4). This means in the sense of the letter that they
were led by the Divine power out of Egypt, where they had been made
bondmen; but in the internal or spiritual sense no such thing is meant,
but it means that those who are of the church, that is, those that are
reformed by the Lord by means of truths and a life according to them,
are delivered and freed from evils and from the falsities thence, for
these are the things that make man a bondsman; this is the spiritual
sense of these words, and in this sense are the angels when man is in
the sense of the letter. \[19\] Moreover, by "redemption" the angels
understand deliverance from evils and liberation from falsities in the
following passages. In Moses: I will put a ransom between My people and
Pharaoh's people (Exod. 8:23). In David: He hath sent a ransom unto His
people; He hath commanded His covenant for ever; holy and fearful is His
name (Ps. 111:9). In Matthew: What is a man profited if he shall gain
the whole world, but shall cause the loss of his soul? or what price
shall a man give sufficient for the redemption of his soul? (Matt.
16:26; Mark 8:36-37); "redemption" here meaning deliverance from
damnation. \[20\] From this it can be seen what the Lord's redeeming
mankind signifies, namely, that He delivered and freed them from hell
and from the evils and falsities that continually rise up therefrom and
bring man into condemnation, and that He continually delivers them and
frees them. This deliverance and liberation was effected by His
subjugating the hells; and the continual deliverance and liberation by
His glorifying His Human, that is, making it Divine, for thereby He
keeps the hells continually subjugated; this, therefore is what is
signified by His redeeming man, and by His being called in the Word
"Redeemer," as in the following passages. In Isaiah: Fear not, thou worm
of Jacob, and ye mortals of Israel; I am He that helpeth thee, and thy
Redeemer the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 41:14). Thus said Jehovah, the
Redeemer of Israel, His Holy One, because of Jehovah who is faithful,
the Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee (Isa. 49:7). Our Redeemer
is Jehovah of Hosts, His name the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 47:4). Thus
said Jehovah your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel (Isa. 43:14). That
all flesh may know that I Jehovah am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the
Mighty One of Jacob (Isa. 49:26). That thou mayest know that I Jehovah
am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob (Isa. 60:16). By
the "Holy One of Israel," and the "Mighty One of Jacob," who is here
called "Redeemer," is meant the Lord in respect to the Divine Human, and
by "Jehovah" is meant His Divine Itself. The Lord in respect to His
Divine Human is called "the Holy One of Israel," and "the Mighty One of
Jacob," and the "Strong One of Jacob," because "Israel" and "Jacob"
signify the church, thus those who are regenerated and reformed, that
is, redeemed by the Lord, for these alone are of the church, that is,
constitute the church of the Lord. \[21\] That the Lord's Divine Human
is what is called "the Holy One" is evident in Luke: The angel said unto
Mary, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most
High shall overshadow thee; therefore the Holy Thing born of thee shall
be called the Son of God (Luke 1:35). And that the Lord in respect to
the Divine Human is "the Strong One of Jacob," and the "Mighty One of
Jacob;" in the same: The angel said unto Mary, Behold, thou shalt
conceive in the womb, and bring forth a Son. He shall be great, and He
shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of His kingdom there
shall be no end (Luke 1:30-33). "The house of Jacob" evidently means the
Lord's church, not the Jewish nation. \[22\] Because the Lord's Human
was equally Divine with His Divine Itself that took on the Human,
Jehovah is called "the Redeemer" in the following passages. In Isaiah:
Thus said Jehovah thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, I am Jehovah thy
God (Isa. 48:17). Jehovah of Hosts is His name; and thy Redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel the God of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa.
54:5). In David: O Jehovah, my <span id="fr_91"></span>[328-1](#fn_91.md)
Rock and my Redeemer (Ps. 19:14). In Jeremiah: Their Redeemer is strong;
Jehovah of Hosts is His name (Jer. 50:34). In Isaiah: Thou, O Jehovah,
art our Father, our Redeemer; from everlasting is Thy <span
id="fr_92"></span>[328-2](#fn_92) name (Isa. 63:16.md). From this it can
now be seen how this saying of the Lord is to be understood: The Son of
man came to give His soul a redemption for many (Matt. 20:28; Mark
10:45); namely, that they might be delivered and freed from hell; for
the passion of the cross was the last combat and complete victory by
which He subjugated the hells, and by which He glorified His Human (see
The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 293-297, 300-306).

<span class="margnote"><span id="329.">329.</span></span>

Since it is said, "thou didst redeem us to God in thy blood," and since
this is understood within the church entirely according to the sense of
the letter, and not according to any spiritual sense, I will also show
that "blood" does not mean blood, or the Lord's suffering on the cross,
but Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, and the reception of it by
man; thus that "thou didst redeem us in Thy blood" means that He has
delivered and freed from hell those who acknowledge Him, and receive
Divine truth from Him (as was said above, n. 328). In illustration of
this matter I will cite the following. Because all things that were
commanded in the Israelitish Church were representative of things
celestial and spiritual, and not the least thing was not so, it was also
commanded, when the paschal supper was first instituted: That they shall
take of the blood, and put it on the two side posts and on the lintel
upon the houses wherein they shall eat \[the paschal lamb\]; and the
blood shall be for you for a sign upon the houses where ye are; and when
I see the blood I will pass over you, nor shall there be a plague upon
you from the destroyer when I shall smite the land of Egypt. And
further: Ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that
is in the basin, and shall touch the lintel and the two side posts with
the blood that is in the basin; and not a man of you shall go out of the
entrance of his house until the morning. And Jehovah will pass through
to smite Egypt; and when he shall see the blood upon the lintel and upon
the two side posts, Jehovah will pass over the door, and will not suffer
the smiter to come into your houses to strike you (Exod. 12:7, 13,
22-23). He who does not know that there is a spiritual sense in the Word
believes that "blood" here signifies the Lord's blood upon the cross;
but this is not at all the meaning in heaven; but to the angels there
the paschal supper here described has a like meaning as the holy supper
instituted by the Lord, in which, in place of the paschal lamb, there
are the bread and the wine; and the Lord then said that the bread was
His flesh and the wine was His blood; and everyone knows, or may know,
that bread and wine are what nourish the body, bread as food and wine as
drink, and that in the Word, which in its bosom is spiritual, these
things also must be spiritually understood, "bread" standing for all
spiritual food, and "wine" for all spiritual drink. \[2\] Spiritual food
is all the good that is communicated and given to man by the Lord, and
spiritual drink is all the truth that is communicated and given to man
by the Lord. These two, namely, good and truth, or love and faith, make
man spiritual; it is said, or love and faith, because all good is of
love, and all truth is of faith. From this it can be seen that "bread"
means the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love, and in reference to
man, this good received by him; also that "wine" means the Divine truth
that proceeds from the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love, and in
reference to man, this truth received by him. Since the Lord says that
His flesh is bread, and His blood is wine, it can be seen that "the
Lord's flesh" means the Divine good of His Divine love, and "to eat" it
means to receive it, and make it one's own, and thus to be conjoined to
the Lord; and that "the Lord's blood" means the Divine truth that
proceeds from the Divine good of His Divine love, and that "drinking" it
means to receive that truth and make it one's own, and thus be conjoined
to the Lord. \[3\] Again, spiritual nourishment is from the good and
truth that proceed from the Lord, as all nourishment of the body is from
food and drink; their correspondence also is from this, which is such
that where anything of food, or that serves for food, is mentioned in
the Word, good is meant, and where anything of drink, or that serves for
drink, is mentioned, truth is meant. From this it can be seen that the
"blood" from the Paschal Lamb, which the sons of Israel were commanded
to put upon the two side posts and upon the lintel of their houses,
means Divine truth proceeding from the Lord; this, when received in
faith and life, protects man against the evils that rise up out of hell;
for in His Divine truth the Lord is with man, for this is the Lord's own
with man, yea, it is Himself with man. Who that thinks from sound reason
cannot see that the Lord is with a man not in His blood, but in His
Divine, which is the good of love and the good of faith received by man.
(But what the particulars here signify, namely, "the two side posts" and
"the lintel," "the destroyer" and "smiter," and "Egypt," and many other
things in this chapter, can be seen in Arcana Coelestia, where they are
explained.) \[4\] From what has now been said, without further
explanation, the significance of the Lord's words when He instituted the
Holy Supper is evident: As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and
blessed, broke, and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is
My body. And He took the cup, and having given thanks, He gave to them,
saying, Drink of it, all of you; for this is My blood of the new
covenant, which is shed for many. I say unto you that I will not drink
henceforth of this product of the vine until that day when I shall drink
it with you in the kingdom of God (Matt. 26:26-29; Mark 14:22-25; Luke
22:15-20). As "wine" means Divine truth nourishing the spiritual life,
therefore the Lord says to them, "I say unto you that I will not drink
henceforth of this product of the vine until that day when I shall drink
it with you new in the kingdom of God," which shows clearly that
something spiritual is meant, for He says that "He is to drink with
them," and "in the kingdom of God," or in heaven, and also that "He is
to eat" with them of the Paschal Lamb there (Luke 22:16). \[5\] What has
now been said also makes clear what is signified by these words of the
Lord: The bread that I will give is My flesh. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye
have not life in you. He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood hath
eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For My flesh is
truly food, and My blood is truly drink. He that eateth My flesh and
drinketh My blood abideth in Me, and I in him. This is the bread that
cometh down out of heaven (John 6:51-58). That the Lord's "flesh" is
Divine good, and His "blood" Divine truth, both of them from Him, can be
seen from this, that these are what nourish the soul; it is therefore
said, "My flesh is truly food, and My blood is truly drink." And as a
man is conjoined to the Lord by Divine good and truth, therefore it is
further said, "He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood shall have
eternal life, and he abideth in Me and I in him." The Lord spoke in this
way, namely, saying His "flesh" and His "blood," and not His Divine good
and His Divine truth, in order that the sense of the letter of the Word
might be made up of such things as correspond to things spiritual, in
which the angels are; thus and in no other way could there be, by means
of the Word, a conjunction of the men of the church with the angels (see
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 252, 258-262; and Heaven and Hell, n.
303-310). \[6\] Since "blood" signifies the Divine truth proceeding from
the Lord, and conjunction with the Lord is effected by man's reception
of it, therefore blood is called "the blood of the covenant," for
"covenant" signifies conjunction. Blood is called "the blood of the
covenant" by the Lord when He instituted the Holy Supper, for He said:
Drink of it, all of you; for this is My blood of the new covenant \[or
testament\] (Matt. 26:27, 28; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20). It is also called
"the blood of the covenant" in Moses, where is the following: Moses came
from Mount Sinai, and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all
the judgments. And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah, and rose up
early in the morning, and built an altar under the mount. And he sent
young men of the sons of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings,
and sacrificed bullocks as peace-offerings unto Jehovah. And Moses took
half of the blood and put it in basins; and half of the blood he
sprinkled on the altar. And he took the book of the covenant, and read
in the ears of the people; and they said, All that Jehovah hath spoken
will we do and hear. And he took the blood and sprinkled it on the
people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah hath
concluded with you upon all these words. And they saw the God of Israel,
and under His feet as it were a work of sapphire stone, and as the
substance of the heavens for purity (Exod. 24:3-11). That "blood" here
signifies Divine truth proceeding from the Lord and received by man, and
conjunction therefrom, is evident, for half of it was sprinkled on the
altar and half on the people; for the "altar" signified all worship that
is from the good of love, and the "people" those who offer worship and
receive the good of love by means of truths; for all reception of Divine
good is effected by truths made truths of life, and consequent
conjunction is by means of the good in such truths. That there is
conjunction by means of the good in such truths, that is, by means of
truths made truths of life, and that "blood" was a representative
thereof, is very clear from the words there, for this was done when
Moses descended from Mount Sinai, from which the law was promulgated,
and also the statutes and judgments that were to be observed; and it is
said that "Moses wrote all these words of Jehovah, and read them in the
ears of the people," who said, "All that Jehovah hath spoken will we do
and hear," which words they said twice (see verses 3 and 7). \[7\] Words
or truths become truths of life by doing; and as Moses wrote these
words, he called them, "The Book of the Covenant," which signifies that
there is conjunction by means of them. The law promulgated by Jehovah
from Mount Sinai, and the statutes and judgments that were also
commanded at that time, signified all Divine truth, or the Divine truth
in its whole complex. This is why they are called "the Book of the
Covenant," and why the ark in which was that book is called "The Ark of
the Covenant," "covenant" signifying conjunction. Because Divine truth,
by which there is conjunction, proceeds from the Lord, the Lord appeared
to the people "under the feet as it were a work of sapphire stone;" that
He so appeared "under the feet" signifying that Divine truth is such in
ultimates. Divine truth in ultimates is Divine truth in the sense of the
letter of the Word; "work of sapphire stone" signifies the translucence
of this sense from Divine truth in the internal or spiritual sense; "the
God of Israel" is the Lord. (That "sapphire stone" signifies
translucence from internal truths, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 9407; and
that "the God of Israel" is the Lord in respect to the Divine Human, see
above, n. 328.) From this it is now clear that a "covenant" or
conjunction is effected by means of Divine truth, and that the blood
sprinkled on the altar and half of it on the people was a representative
of it, since "blood" signifies Divine truth proceeding from the Lord and
received by man, as was said above. (That "covenant" signifies
conjunction, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038, 1864, 1996,
2003, 2021, 6804, 8767, 8778, 9396, 10632. That the law in a strict
sense means the ten commandments of the Decalogue, and in a broad sense,
the whole Word, thus all Divine truth, n. 2606, 3382, 6752, 7463, 9417.
That from this "Mount Sinai" signifies heaven where the Lord is, from
whom is Divine truth, or from whom is the law, both in the strict and
the broad sense, n. 8399, 8753, 8793, 8805, 9420; and that the altar was
the principal representative of the Lord, and of the worship from the
good of love, n. 921, 2777, 2811, 4489, 4541, 8935, 8940, 9388-9389,
9714, 9963-9964, 10123, 10151, 10242, 10245, 10642.) \[8\] Since "blood"
signifies Divine truth proceeding from the Lord and received by man,
from which is conjunction, therefore all things that were representative
of things Divine proceeding from the Lord which are called celestial and
spiritual were inaugurated by oil and by blood, and were then called
holy. They were inaugurated by oil and blood that they might be
representative, because "oil" signified the Divine good of the Divine
love, and "blood" the Divine truth proceeding therefrom, for truth
proceeds from good. That inaugurations and sanctifications were made by
means of oil will be seen in what follows, where they are treated of in
their paragraph. Here let some things in which blood was used be
mentioned, as: When Aaron and his sons were to be sanctified, blood was
sprinkled upon the horns of the altar, and round about the altar, and
upon Aaron and his sons, and upon their garments (Exod. 29:12, 16,
20-21; Lev. 8:24). Blood was sprinkled seven times before the veil that
was over the ark, and upon the horns of the altar of incense (Lev.
4:6-7, 17-18). Before Aaron entered within the veil to the mercy-seat,
he should sacrifice and burn incense, and should sprinkle the blood with
the finger seven times upon the mercy-seat eastward (Lev. 16:12-15). The
blood of the burnt-offering and of the sacrifice should be sprinkled
upon the altar, around the altar, and at the base of the altar (Lev.
1:5, 11, 15; 3:2, 8, 13; 4:25, 30, 34; 5:9; 8:15, 24; 17:6; Num. 18:17;
Deut. 12:27). The blood should be sprinkled upon the horns of the altar
and thus expiation should be made for the altar (Exod 30:10; Lev.
16:18-19). Blood from the burnt-offerings and sacrifices was sprinkled
and poured out upon the altar, around the altar, or at its base, because
the altar with the burnt-offerings and sacrifices upon it represented
and thence signified all worship from the good of love and the truths
therefrom; and as truths proceed from good, therefore the blood was
sprinkled on and poured out around the altar, for "around" signifies
proceeding. \[9\] (But these things can be better seen from what has
been shown respecting burnt offerings and sacrifices in the Arcana
Coelestia, as follows: "burnt-offerings" and "sacrifices" signified all
things of worship from the good of love, and the truths therefrom, n.
923, 6905, 8680, 8936, 10042. Therefore burnt-offerings and sacrifices
were called bread, n. 2165, because "bread" signifies everything that
nourishes the spiritual life, n. 2165, 3478, 4976, 5147, 5915, 6118,
8410, 8418, 9323, 10686. Burnt-offerings and sacrifices signified
celestial Divine and spiritual Divine things, which are the internals of
the church, from which are all things of worship, n. 2180, 2805, 2807,
2830, 3519; with a difference according to the differences of worship,
n. 2805, 6905, 8936. Therefore there were many kinds of burnt-offerings
and sacrifices, and in them various processes and consisting also of
various animals, n. 2830, 9391, 9990. The various things they specially
signified can be known from the particulars of the procedure unfolded by
the internal sense, n. 10042. The rituals and procedures of the
sacrifices contain arcana of heaven, n. 10057. In general they contain
the arcana of the glorification of the Lord's Human, and in a relative
sense, the arcana of man's regeneration and his purification from evils
and falsities, n. 9990, 10022, 10042, 10053, 19057. What was signified
by the "meal-offerings," which were bread and cakes, which were also
sacrificed, n. 10079; what by the "drink-offering," which was wine, n.
4581, 10137.) \[10\] When these things are understood it can be known
that "the blood of the sacrifice" in other places also in the Word
signifies Divine truth, as in Ezekiel: Say to the bird of every wing and
to the beast of the field, Come together and come; gather yourselves
from round about to My sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, a great
sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel; that ye may eat flesh and drink
blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty and drink the blood of the
princes of the earth. And ye shall eat fat to satiety, and drink blood
to drunkenness, of My sacrifice which I sacrifice for you. And ye shall
be satiated at My table with horse, with chariot, with every man of war.
So will I give My glory among the nations (Ezek. 39:17-21). This treats
of the restoration of the church; and "Israel" and "Jacob" mean all who
are of the church, respecting whom these things therefore are said; "a
great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel" signifies all things of
their worship; "flesh" and "fat" signify the good of love, and "blood"
the truth from that good; worship is from these; an abundance of both is
described by their "eating flesh and fat to satiety," and "drinking
blood to drunkenness," and this "of the sacrifice;" it is therefore
further said, "Ye shall be satiated at My table with horse, chariot, and
every man of war," for "horse" signifies the understanding of truth,
"chariot" doctrine, and the "man of war" truth fighting against falsity
and destroying it. Who cannot see that "blood" here does not mean blood,
as that they "should drink the blood of the princes of the earth," and
"drink blood even to drunkenness, of the sacrifice?" "The princes of the
earth" signify the principal truths of the church; therefore their
"blood" signifies spiritual nourishment from those truths. Because such
things are signified, therefore it is also said, at the end of this
chapter, respecting Israel, by whom the church is signified: Then will I
not hide My faces any more from them; for I will pour out My spirit upon
Israel (Ezek. 39:29). It is said, "Say to the bird of every wing and to
the beast of the field," because "bird of every wing" signifies
spiritual truth in the whole complex, and "beast of the field" the
affection of good. (That "birds" in the Word signify things spiritual,
n. 745, 776, 866, 988, 991, 3219, 5149, 7441; likewise "wings," n. 8764,
9514; that "beasts" signify affections, and "beasts of the field" the
affections of good, n. 2180, 3218, 3519, 5198, 9090, 9280, 10609; and
that both birds and beasts were for this reason used in sacrifices, n.
1823, 3519, 7523, 9280.) \[11\] In confirmation that the "beast of the
field" and "bird" signify such things, I will quote here one passage
only from the Word: In that day I will make a covenant for them with the
beast of the field, and with the bird of the heavens, and with the
creeping thing of the earth; and I will break the bow and the sword and
war from the earth. And I will betroth thee unto Me for ever; and I will
betroth thee unto Me in justice and in judgment, and in mercy and in
compassions, and I will betroth thee unto Me in truth (Hos. 2:18-20).
"To make a covenant with the beast of the field and with the bird of the
heavens" signifies with the affections of good and with spiritual
truths, for with these the Lord is conjoined to man, since the Lord is
in these with man; therefore it is called "a covenant" with them,
"covenant" meaning conjunction. That "beasts" signify the affections of
good, and "birds" things spiritual, will be fully shown in their
paragraphs in what follows. \[12\] Because "fat" in sacrifices signified
Divine good, and "blood" Divine truth, both from the Lord, and because
by both when received by man conjunction was effected, therefore the
posterity of Jacob, that is, the Jews and Israelites, were forbidden to
eat any fat or any blood (see Lev. 3:17; 7:23-27; 17:11-14; Deut. 12:17,
23-25; 15:23). This was because that nation was not in any good of love,
nor in any truth of good, but in the falsities of evil; and "to eat fat
and blood" signified with them the mingling of truth from good with the
falsity from evil, which is profanation; from which also it can be seen
that "blood" signifies Divine truth. (That "fat" or "fatness" in the
Word signifies the good of love, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 353, 5943,
6409, 10033; and that the Jews and Israelites were solely in things
external and not in things internal, and consequently not in spiritual
truths and good, but in the falsities of evil; and that all things of
their worship were external separated from what is internal, and that
still by things external they could represent the internal things of
worship, see in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 248.) \[13\]
Because "blood" in the sacrifices signified Divine truth, therefore
also: They were forbidden to sacrifice the blood of the sacrifice upon
what was leavened (Exod. 23:18; 34:25); for "leaven" signifies falsity,
and "what was leavened" truth falsified (see Arcana Coelestia, n. 2342,
7906, 8051, 9992). \[14\] The Lord's "flesh" signifies the Divine good
of the Divine love, and His "blood" signifies the Divine truth
proceeding from that good, because there are two things that proceed
from the Lord's Divine Human, namely, Divine good and Divine truth, the
latter is His blood, and the former His flesh. That which proceeds is
the celestial Divine and the spiritual Divine; and these constitute the
heavens in general and in particular. (But this can be seen better from
what has been shown in the work on Heaven and Hell, under the following
heads. The Divine of the Lord makes Heaven, n. 7-12; the Divine of the
Lord in Heaven is Love to Him and Charity towards the Neighbor, n.
13-19; The Whole Heaven, therefore, as a Whole and in Its Parts, answers
to One Man, n. 59-77; This is from the Lord's Divine Human, n 78-87. and
further from what is said of The Sun in Heaven, and Light and Heat
therefrom, and that Heat is the Divine Good, and Light Divine Truth,
both proceeding from the Lord, n. 116-140.)116-140.) From this it can in
some measure be comprehended why the Divine proceeding is meant by the
"flesh and blood," that is, the Divine good by "flesh," and the Divine
truth by "blood." \[15\] With man also there are two things that
constitute his spiritual life, namely the good of love and the truth of
faith. With him the will is the receptacle of the good of love, and the
understanding is the receptacle of the truth of faith. All things
belonging to the mind, that is, belonging to the will and understanding,
have a correspondence with all things belonging to the body,
consequently the latter are moved at the nod of the former. In general,
the correspondence of the will is with the flesh, and the correspondence
of the understanding with the blood; consequently the voluntary that is
man's own \[proprium voluntarium\] is meant in the Word by "flesh," and
the intellectual that is his own \[proprium intellectuale\] by "blood,"
as in Matthew: Jesus said to Simon, blessed art thou, for flesh and
blood hath not revealed it unto thee (Matt. 16:17). These things are
mentioned that it may be known that in the Word things voluntary and
intellectual, that is, spiritual things, are meant by "flesh and blood"
when man is referred to, and things Divine when the Lord is referred to.
But these things are for those whose minds can be elevated above natural
ideas and can see causes. \[16\] This also is what is signified by the
"blood and water" that issued out of the Lord's breast; which is
described as follows in John: One of the soldiers pierced His side, and
straightway there came out blood and water. And he that saw beareth
witness, and his witness is true; he knoweth that he saith true things,
that ye also may believe (John 19:34-35). These things were done to
signify the Lord's conjunction with the human race through Divine truth
proceeding from the Divine good of His love; "breast" signifies Divine
love; "blood and water" signify Divine truth proceeding, "blood" the
Divine truth that is for the spiritual man, and "water" the Divine truth
that is for the natural man; for all things that are related in the Word
respecting the Lord's passion are also significative (see above, n. 83,
195 at end). And because these things signify His love, and man's
salvation by means of Divine truth proceeding from Him, therefore the
evangelist adds, "He that saw beareth witness, and his witness is true;
he knoweth that he saith true things, that ye also may believe." \[17\]
To what has already been mentioned I will add the following from the
Word. In Zechariah: Exult exceedingly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O
daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King cometh. And He shall speak peace
unto the Gentiles; and His dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and
from the river even to the uttermost parts of the earth. As for thee
also, by the blood of thy covenant I will send forth thy bound ones out
of the pit wherein is no water (Zech. 9:9-11). This is said of the Lord,
and of the establishment of the church by Him among the nations; "the
blood of the covenant" here meaning Divine truth, by means of which
there is conjunction of the Lord with those who are to be of His church
(as above); it is therefore further said, "I will send forth thy bound
ones out of the pit wherein is no water," for by these the nations that
are in falsities from ignorance are signified; "the pit wherein is no
water" signifying where there is no truth, and "sending them forth"
signifying to free them from falsities. That "water" signifies the truth
of the church, see above (n. 71); and that "the bound in the pit"
signifies those who are in falsities from ignorance, and yet in a desire
to know truths, see Arcana Coelestia (n. 4728, 4744, 5038, 6854, 7950).
\[18\] In David: God shall save the souls of the needy; He shall redeem
their soul from fraud and violence; and precious shall their blood be in
His eyes. And he shall live, and to him shall He give of the gold of
Sheba, and shall pray for him continually; all the day shall He bless
him. Upon the top of the mountains his fruit shall be shaken (Ps.
72:13-16); this treats of the "needy," by whom those who desire truths
from spiritual affection are signified; of these it is said, that "He
shall redeem their soul from fraud and violence," which signifies their
liberation from evils and falsities, which destroy the goods of love and
the truths of faith. The reception of Divine truth by them as being
acceptable and grateful, is signified by "precious shall their blood be
in His eyes," "blood" here meaning Divine truth received. Their
reformation is described by "he shall live, and to him shall He give of
the gold of Sheba, and shall pray for him continually; all the day shall
He bless him;" the "gold of Sheba" meaning the good of charity; "to pray
for him continually" signifying that they shall be continually withheld
from falsities and kept in truths, and "He shall bless him" signifying
that they shall be continually in the good of charity and faith; it is
therefore said further, "upon the top of the mountains his fruit shall
be shaken;" the "top of the mountains" signifying heaven, from which
they have the good of love from the Lord, which is "fruit." \[19\] In
Moses: The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come; who shall bind to the vine his
ass's foal, and to the noble vine the son of his she-ass, whilst he
shall wash his vesture in wine, and his covering in the blood of grapes
(Gen. 49:10-11). This prophecy treats of the Lord, of whom it is said,
"he shall bind to the vine his ass's foal, and to the noble vine the son
of his she-ass," and "he shall wash his vesture in wine, and his
covering in the blood of grapes;" "vine" signifying the church, and
"wine" and the "blood of grapes" Divine truth. (For what the other
things signify, see the explanation of these words in Arcana Coelestia,
n. 6371-6377.) The like is meant by the "blood of grapes" in Deuteronomy
(32:14); where the ancient church reformed by Divine truth is treated
of. \[20\] From what has been shown in this and the preceding article it
can be seen by those who acknowledge the spiritual sense of the Word
that "Thou didst redeem us to God in Thy blood" means conjunction with
the Divine by the acknowledgment of the Lord, and by the reception of
Divine truth from Him; also that the like is meant by "blood" in the
twelfth chapter of this prophetic book, where it is said: That Michael
and his angels overcame the dragon by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their <span id="fr_93"></span>[329-1](#fn_93.md) testimony (Rev.
12:11). It is said, "the blood of the Lamb" and "the word of testimony,"
because "the blood of the Lamb" signifies the reception of Divine truth
from the Lord, and "the word of testimony" the acknowledgment of His
Divine Human. \[21\] That "blood" signifies Divine truth is still
further evident from its contrary sense, in which "blood" signifies
violence offered to Divine truth by the falsities of evil, and its
destruction by these; and as what is signified in the genuine sense is
also manifested by these contrary meanings, I will cite some passages in
which "blood" and "bloods" have that significance. It is to be known
that most things in the Word have also a contrary sense, and that from
that sense it can be known what is signified in the genuine sense. The
following will serve for illustration. In Revelation: The second angel
poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became as the blood of one
dead, and every living animal in the sea died. And the third angel
poured out his bowl into the rivers and into the fountains of the
waters, and they became blood (Rev. 16:3-4). And elsewhere: The two
witnesses have power over the waters to turn them into blood (Rev.
11:6). In Isaiah: The waters of Nimrim shall be desolations; and the
waters of Dimon are full of blood (Isa. 15:6, 9). In David: He sent
darkness and made it dark. He turned their waters into blood, and made
their fish to die (Ps. 105:28-29). It is clear from these passages what
"blood" signifies in the contrary sense; for blood in the genuine sense
signifies Divine truth, and with those who receive it truth from good;
so in the contrary sense it signifies violence offered to Divine truth,
and with those who do that, it signifies falsity from evil. This
contrary meaning is clear from its being said that the "waters" of "the
sea," of "rivers," and of "fountains," "were turned into blood;" for
"waters" signify truths, therefore "blood" here signifies falsities that
destroy truths. The "living animal in the sea," and the "fish," signify
truths known \[vera scientifica\]; so their "dying" and "being slain" by
blood signify such truths also destroyed. (That "waters" signify truths,
see above, n. 71; and that "fish" signify truths known \[vera
scientifica\] of the natural man, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 40, 991.)
\[22\] Again in Revelation: I saw when He had opened the sixth seal, and
behold there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as
sackcloth, and the whole moon became blood (Rev. 6:12). In Joel: I will
show wonders in the heavens and in the earth; blood, and fire, and
columns of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon
into blood, before the great day of Jehovah come (Joel 2:30-31). Here
also it is known from the contrary meaning that "blood" signifies
violence offered to the Divine truth; for "sun" in the Word signifies
the celestial Divine, which is the Divine good, and "moon" signifies the
spiritual Divine, which is the Divine truth; it is therefore said that
"the moon shall be turned into blood." (That this is the signification
of "moon" see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 118, 119.) \[23\] In
Isaiah: He that walketh in righteousness, and speaketh uprightness, that
stoppeth his ear lest he hear bloods, and shutteth his eyes lest he see
evil (Isa. 33:15); "to stop the ear lest he hear bloods" meaning
evidently not to hear falsities from evil. In David: Thou wilt destroy
those that speak falsehood; the man of blood and deceit Jehovah
abhorreth (Ps. 5:6); "the man of blood and deceit" meaning those who are
in falsities from evil; it is therefore said, "Thou wilt destroy those
that speak falsehood," "falsehood" in the Word signifying falsities. In
Isaiah: And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion and he
that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be called holy to Him, everyone that
is written unto life in Jerusalem. When the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have washed away the
bloods of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment
and by the spirit of cleansing \[burning\] (Isa. 4:3-4). Because
"Jerusalem" signifies the church in respect to doctrine, therefore it is
said, "When He shall have washed away its blood out of the midst
thereof," "bloods" signifying the falsities of evil. The "spirit of
judgment" signifies Divine truth, and because this purifies it is said,
"by the spirit of cleansing" \[burning\]. \[24\] In Ezekiel: In the day
wherein thou wast born I passed by beside thee, and I saw thee trodden
down in thy bloods, and I said unto thee, In thy bloods, live; yea, I
said unto thee, In thy bloods live. I washed thee, and I washed away thy
bloods from upon thee, and I anointed thee with oil (Ezek. 16:5-6, 9,
22, 36, 38). This also treats of Jerusalem, which signifies the church
in respect to the doctrine of truth, here first of the falsities of evil
in which it was before it was reformed, and afterwards of its
reformation; the falsities of evil are signified by its being seen
"trodden down in bloods;" and its reformation by "he washed, and washed
away the bloods, and anointed with oil;" "to wash" signifying to purify
by truths; "to wash away bloods" signifying to remove the falsities of
evil; and "to anoint with oil" signifying to endow with the good of
love. \[25\] In Lamentations: For the sins of the prophets of Jerusalem,
and the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just
in the midst of her. They have wandered blind in the streets, they have
been polluted with blood, what they cannot pollute they touch with their
garments (Lam. 4:13-14). "Prophets of Jerusalem" signify those who are
to teach the truths of doctrine, and "priests" those who are to lead by
truths to good; here mentioned in a contrary sense, since it is said,
"for their sins;" "to shed the blood of the just" signifies to falsify
truths and adulterate goods; it is therefore said, "they have wandered
blind in the streets, they have been polluted with blood, what they
cannot pollute they touch with their garments;" "to wander blind in the
streets" signifies not to see truths at all, "streets" meaning truths;
"polluted with bloods" signifies to be wholly in falsities; "what they
cannot pollute they touch with their garments" signifies that what they
cannot pervert they nevertheless falsify, "garments" meaning the truths
that invest interior things, which truths are the truths of the sense of
the letter of the Word. In Isaiah: All uproar shall be whirled about by
the earthquake, and the garment is polluted with bloods (Isa. 9:5);
"earthquake" signifying the perversion of the church by the
falsification of truth, and the "garment polluted with bloods" the
falsification of the sense of the letter of the Word. \[26\] In
Jeremiah: Thou hast taught evils thy ways; also in thy skirts is found
the blood of the souls of the innocents; I found them not in digging
through, but upon all these (Jer. 2:33-34). Here "blood found in the
skirts" signifies the like as above by "what they cannot pollute they
touch with their garments," "skirts" are the "garments." "I found them
not in digging through, but upon all these" signifies that they dared
not destroy the truths themselves, but that they falsified the truths of
the sense of the letter, "skirts" signifying those truths. \[27\] In
Isaiah: Your hands are full of bloods (Isa. 1:15). Your hands are
polluted with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have
spoken lies, and your tongue hath meditated perverseness. Their feet run
to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are
thoughts of iniquity (Isa. 59:3, 7). "Hands polluted with blood, and
fingers with iniquity" signifies that in all things belonging to them
there is falsity and the evil of falsity; "hands" and "fingers" signify
power, thus all things with them that have power. Because this is the
meaning it is also said, "your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue
hath meditated perverseness," "lies" meaning falsities, and
"perverseness" the evil of falsity; "their feet make haste to shed
innocent blood" signifies their hastening to destroy the good of love
and charity; this is signified by "shedding innocent blood." The good of
innocence is that from which is every good and truth of heaven and the
church (see Heaven and Hell, n. 276-283). From this it can be seen what
is signified in a general sense by "bloods," in the plural, namely,
violence offered both to the truths and the goods of the Word and of the
church. As "shedding innocent blood" signifies to destroy the good of
love and of charity, every kind of precaution was taken that innocent
blood should not be shed; and if it were shed: That expiation shall be
made for the land (Deut. 19:10, 13; 21:1-9); for the "land" signifies
the church. \[28\] In Isaiah: Jehovah goeth forth from His place to
visit the iniquity of the earth; then shall the earth reveal her bloods,
and shall no more cover her slain (Isa. 26:21). The "bloods" that the
earth shall reveal signify all the falsities and evils that have
destroyed the truths and goods of the church, the "earth" being the
church where these are; the "slain" signify those that have perished by
falsities and evils. (That the "slain" signify those that have perished
by falsities and evils, see above, n. 315.) In Revelation: In Babylon
was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that have been
slain upon the earth (Rev. 18:24); "the blood of prophets and of saints"
meaning truths and goods extinguished; and the "slain" those who have
perished by falsities and evils (as just above). \[29\] The like is
meant by: The blood of the prophets which was shed upon the earth, from
the blood of Abel the just even to the blood of Zachariah, the son of
Barachiah, whom they slew between the temple and the altar (Matt. 23:30,
34-35; Luke 11:50-51). In the spiritual sense, by "Abel" those who are
in the good of charity are meant, and, abstractly from person, that good
itself; and by "Cain" those who make faith alone the sole means of
salvation, and the good of charity of no account, thus rejecting and
slaying it; and by "Zachariah" those who are in the truths of doctrine
are meant, and abstractly from person the truth itself of doctrine;
therefore the "blood" of these two signifies the extinction of all good
and truth; "whom they slew between the temple and the altar" signifies
in the spiritual sense every kind of rejection of the Lord; for "temple"
signifies the Lord in respect to Divine truth, and "altar" the Lord in
respect to Divine good, and "between them" signifies both together.
(That "Abel" in a representative sense is the good of charity, see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 342, 354, 1179, 3325; and that "Cain" is faith
alone, separated from charity, n. 340, 347, 1179, 3325. That "prophet"
signifies the doctrine of truth, n. 2534, 7269. That "temple" signifies
the Lord in respect to Divine truth, and "altar" the Lord in respect to
Divine good, and in a relative sense the Lord's kingdom and church in
respect to truth and good, n. 2777, 3720, 9714, 10642. That "between"
the two signifies where there is a marriage of Divine truth and Divine
good, n. 10001, 10025.) \[30\] In the Word it is often said of those
condemned to death, that "their bloods should be upon them," which
means, in the spiritual sense, that damnation should be upon them
because of the falsities and evils by which they had destroyed the
truths and goods of the church; for in general "bloods" signify all the
falsities of doctrine, of life, and of worship, by means of which come
the evils that destroy the church. These evils are in part enumerated in
Ezekiel (18:10-13); these are also signified by "bloods" in John: As
many as received Him, to them gave He power to become sons of God, to
them that believe on His name; who were born, not of bloods nor of the
will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God (John 1:12, 13).
"The Lord's name" means all truths and goods by which He is to be
worshiped; "bloods" mean all the falsities and evils that destroy; "the
will of the flesh" and "the will of man" signify all the evils of love
and the falsities of faith, for "flesh" signifies the voluntary that is
man's own \[proprium volutarium\] from which is every evil, and "man"
\[vir\] signifies the intellectual that is man's own \[proprium
intellectuale\], from which is every falsity, "will" meaning where these
things are; "to be born of God" is to be regenerated by means of the
truths of faith, and by means of a life according to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="330.">330.</span></span>

Out of every tribe and tongue, signifies by all who are in truths in
respect to doctrine and in respect to life. This is evident from the
signification of "tribe," as being all truths and goods in the complex
(of which see above, n. 39); for these are meant by the twelve tribes,
and therefore each tribe signifies something of truth and good,
therefore "out of every tribe" signifies out of all who are in any kind
of truth and good. It is evident also from the signification of
"tongue," as being the doctrine of life and faith. That "tribes" signify
all truths and goods in the complex will be shown more fully below in
its own paragraph; likewise that "tongue" signifies the doctrine of life
and faith, thus religion. (Here will be presented only what is shown in
Arcana Coelestia respecting the signification of "tribes," namely, that
the twelve tribes of Israel represented and thence signified all truths
and goods in the complex, n. 3858, 3926, 4060, 6335; that the twelve
apostles of the Lord have a like signification, n. 2129, 3354, 3488,
6397; that there were twelve because "twelve" signifies all, n. 577,
2089, 2129, 2130, 3272, 3858, 3913. Because the twelve tribes
represented and thus signified all the truths and goods in the complex
they therefore represented heaven and the church, n. 6337, 6637, 7836,
7891, 7996. That the twelve tribes signify various things according to
the order in which they are named, thus in different ways all things of
heaven and the church, n. 3862, 3926, 3939, 4603 seq., 6337, 6640,
10335; therefore responses could be given and were given by the Urim and
Thummim, where the names of the twelve tribes of Israel were engraven on
precious stones, n. 3858, 6335, 6640, 9863, 9865, 9873, 9874, 9905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="331.">331.</span></span>

And people and nation, signifies who are of the Lord's spiritual church,
and of His celestial church. This is evident from the signification of
"people" and "nation" in the Word, "people" signifying those who are in
spiritual good, thus those who are of the Lord's spiritual church, and
"nation" those who are in celestial good, thus those who are of the
Lord's celestial church. That there are two kingdoms into which the
heavens are divided, namely, the celestial kingdom and the spiritual
kingdom, and that those who are in the good of love to the Lord are in
the celestial kingdom, and those who are in the good of charity towards
the neighbor are in the spiritual kingdom, see in the work on Heaven and
Hell, (n. 20-28). These two kingdoms, however, are not only in the
heavens but also on the earth, and on the earth they are called the
celestial church and the spiritual church. Few know what is signified in
the Word specifically by a "people" or "peoples," and what by a "nation"
or "nations." I will therefore present from the Word some passages where
the two are named together, from which it will be clear that "people"
and "nations" have distinct significations, for unless they had distinct
significations they would not both be named together, as in the
following passages. \[2\] In Isaiah: The strong people shall glorify
Thee, the city of the formidable nations shall fear Thee. Jehovah will
swallow up in this mountain the faces of the covering, that covereth
over all peoples, and the veil that is veiled over all nations (Isa.
25:3, 7). Here a distinction is made between "peoples" and "nations,"
because "peoples" signify those who are of the Lord's spiritual kingdom,
and "nations" those who are of His celestial kingdom, thus those who are
in spiritual good and those in celestial good. Spiritual good is the
good of charity towards the neighbor, thus the good of faith, and
celestial good is the good of love to the Lord, and thence the good of
mutual love. The truth of this good is what is meant by "the city of
formidable nations," for "city" signifies the doctrine of truth, or the
truths of doctrine; "to swallow up the covering over all peoples, and
the veil veiled over all nations," signifies to dispel the shade that
has so covered the understanding that the truths are not seen or the
goods perceived that pertain to heaven and the church. \[3\] In the
same: Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye peoples; let the
earth hear, and the fullness thereof (Isa. 34:1). Because "nations"
signify those who are in the good of love, and "peoples" those who are
in the good of charity and in the truths of faith therefrom, it is said
of the nations that they should "come near," and of the peoples that
they should "hearken;" to "come near" signifies to be conjoined by love,
and to "hearken" signifies to obey and to be instructed; it is therefore
said, "let the earth hear, and the fullness thereof," "earth" signifying
the church in respect to good, and "the fullness thereof" truths. \[4\]
In the same: I Jehovah have called thee in righteousness, and I will
hold thine hand and I will give thee for a covenant to the people, for a
light of the nations (Isa. 42:6). In the same: Bring forth the blind
people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. Let all the nations
be brought together, and let the peoples gather together (Isa. 43:8-9).
In the same: I have given him for a witness to the peoples, a prince and
lawgiver to the nations (Isa. 55:4). In the same: Thus said the Lord
Jehovih, Behold, I will lift up Mine hand towards the nations, and lift
up My standard towards the peoples (Isa. 49:22). In the same: The
peoples that walk in darkness have seen a great light. Thou hast
multiplied the nation, thou hast made great to it gladness (Isa. 9:2-3).
And in the same: It shall be in that day that the root of Jesse, which
standeth for an ensign of the peoples, the nations shall seek. And He
shall lift up an ensign for the nations, and shall gather together the
outcasts of Israel (Isa. 11:10, 12). All these things are said of the
Lord; and "peoples" and "nations" mean all who are of His church; for
all who are of the Lord's church are either of His celestial kingdom or
of His spiritual kingdom; not any except those who are in these two
kingdoms can possibly be of the church. Moreover, there are two things
that constitute the church, good and truth, both from the Lord;
"nations" mean those who are in good, and "peoples" those who are in
truth; and, abstractly from persons, "nations" signify the goods of the
church, and "peoples" its truths; "peoples" signify the truths of the
church because spiritual good, or the good of charity towards the
neighbor, in which those are who are meant by "peoples," in its essence
is truth. (See Arcana Coelestia, n. 8042, 10296; why it is so, n. 863,
875, 895, 927, 1023, 1043, 1044, 1555, 2256, 4328, 4493, 5113, 9596;
thence what the distinction is between those who are of the celestial
kingdom and those who are of the spiritual kingdom, n. 2088, 2669, 2708,
2715, 3235, 3240, 4788, 7068, 8521, 9277, 10295.) \[5\] In the same: In
that time a present unto Jehovah of Hosts shall be brought; a people
distracted and plundered: and a nation meted out and trodden down, whose
land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of Jehovah of
Hosts, to Mount Zion (Isa. 18:2, 7). This treats of the invitation of
all to the church; therefore also "people" and "nation" are both
mentioned. "Mount Zion" signifies the church, to which they are invited;
"a people distracted and plundered" signifies those with whom truths
have been taken away, changed, or perverted by those who are in the
falsities of doctrine; "a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land
the rivers have spoiled," signifies those with whom goods have been
treated in like manner, "rivers" meaning falsities and reasonings
therefrom. \[6\] In Zechariah: Yet there shall come peoples, and the
inhabitants of great cities, to entreat the faces of Jehovah, and many
peoples and numerous nations shall come to seek Jehovah of Hosts in
Jerusalem (Zech. 8:20-22). Here, too, "peoples" and "nations" signify
all who are of the Lord's church; "peoples" those who are of His
spiritual church, and "nations" those who are of His celestial church.
"Jerusalem," to which they shall come, is the church. \[7\] In David:
Thou wilt set me for the head of the nations; a people I have not known
shall serve me (Ps. 18:43). In the same: Jehovah will subdue the peoples
under us, and the nations under our feet. God reigneth over the nations.
The willing ones of the peoples are gathered together (Ps. 47:3, 8-9).
In the same: That \[Thy way\] may be known on the earth, Thy salvation
among all nations. The peoples shall confess Thee, O God: the nations
shall be glad and shout for joy; for Thou shalt judge the peoples in
uprightness, and shalt lead the nations into the land (Ps. 67:2-4).
Remember me, O Jehovah, in good pleasure towards Thy people; that I may
be glad in the joy of Thy nations (Ps. 106:4-5). I will confess Thee, O
Lord, among the nations. I will sing psalms unto Thee among the peoples
(Ps. 57:9; 108:3). In these passages also "peoples" and "nations" are
mentioned, by which are meant all who are in truths and goods. Moreover,
the very words that are applied to peoples are words that are predicated
of truths, and those applied to nations are those that are predicated of
goods. That no other are meant by "nations" is evident also from the
fact that these things were said by David, who was an enemy of the
Canaanitish nations. \[8\] In Luke: Mine eyes have seen Thy salvation,
which Thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for a
revelation to the nations (Luke 2:30-32). In Zephaniah: The remnant of
My people shall spoil them, and the remainder of My nation shall inherit
them (Zeph. 2:9). In Moses: When her two sons were struggling in her
womb, Rebekah went to inquire of Jehovah, and Jehovah said unto her, Two
nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be separated from thy
bowels (Gen. 25:22-23). Remember the days of the age, when the Most High
gave to the nations an inheritance; when He separated the sons of man he
set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the sons of
Israel (Deut. 32:7-8). "The sons of man" have the same signification as
"peoples," namely, those who are in spiritual truths and goods;
therefore it is said of them, "when He separated the sons of man He set
the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the sons of
Israel;" "the sons of Israel" signifying the spiritual church, and the
"number" of them, or of the twelve tribes named from them, signifying
all the truths and goods therein (see just above, n. 330); such
therefore are called "peoples;" "to separate" them and "to set their
bounds" signifies to alienate from falsities and to bestow truths; and
"to give an inheritance to the nations" signifies heaven and conjunction
with those who are in the good of love. \[9\] In Daniel: All peoples,
nations, and tongues shall worship Him; His dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall
not perish (Dan. 7:14). This is said of the Lord; and "peoples" and
"nations" mean all who are in truths and goods; and "all tongues" mean
all of whatever doctrine or religion; for the Lord's church is
universal, since it exists with all who are in the good of life, and who
from their doctrine look to heaven, and thereby conjoin themselves to
the Lord (of whom see Heaven and Hell, n. 318-328). Because "nations"
signify those who are in the good of love, and "peoples" those who are
in the good of charity and in the truths of faith therefrom, it is said,
"His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom shall not pass
away;" "dominion" in the Word is predicated of good, and "kingdom" of
truth; for this reason the Lord is called "Lord" from Divine good, and
"king" from Divine truth. There are other passages besides these that
might be quoted to prove that "peoples" signify those who are of the
spiritual church, and "nations" those who are of the celestial church.
So far those only have been presented in which "peoples" and "nations"
are mentioned together; to these some shall be added in which "nations"
alone are mentioned. \[10\] In Isaiah: Open the gates, that the
righteous nation that keepeth faithfulness may enter in. Thou hast added
to the nation, O Jehovah, Thou hast added to the nation; Thou hast been
glorified: Thou hast removed all the ends of the earth (Isa. 26:2, 15).
In David: All the ends of the earth shall turn unto Jehovah; and all the
families of the nations shall worship before Thee. For the kingdom is
Jehovah's; and He it is that ruleth among the nations (Ps. 22:27-28). In
Isaiah: The nations shall walk to Thy light, and kings to the brightness
of Thy rising. Thy heart shall be enlarged, because the multitude of the
sea shall turn unto Thee, the army of the nations shall come unto Thee
(Isa. 60:3, 5). All nations shall see Thy righteousness, and all kings
Thy glory (Isa. 62:2). In these passages "nations" and "peoples" are not
mentioned together, but still in the last two "nations" and "kings"
because "kings" signify the like as "peoples," namely, those who are in
truths (see above, n. 31); and it is because "nations" signify those who
are in good, and "Kings" those who are in truths, that it is said of the
nations that they "shall see Thy righteousness," and of the kings that
they shall "see Thy glory;" "righteousness" in the Word being predicated
of good, and "glory" of truth. (That "righteousness" is predicated in
the Word of Divine good, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 2235, 9857; and
"glory" of Divine truth, n. 4809, 5922, 8267, 8427, 9429.) \[11\] From
the contrary sense it can yet be seen that "peoples" signify those who
are in truths, and "nations" those who are in good; for in that sense
"peoples" signify those who are in falsities, and "nations" those who
are in evils, as in the following. In Isaiah: O Assyrian, the rod of
Mine anger, I will send him against a hypocritical nation, and against
the people of My wrath will I command him (Isa. 10:5-6). In the same:
The voice of a multitude in the mountains; the voice of a tumult of the
kingdoms of the nations gathered together. They come from a land afar
off, from the end of the heavens, even Jehovah with the vessels of His
indignation to destroy the whole land (Isa. 13:4-5). Jehovah that
smiteth the peoples with a stroke not curable, that ruleth with anger
the nations (Isa. 14:6). In the same: At the noise of the tumult let the
peoples flee away; and before Thine exaltation let the nations be
dispersed (Isa. 33:3). In Jeremiah: Behold, a people cometh from the
land of the north, and a great nation shall be stirred up from the sides
of the earth. They lay hold on the bow and spear; they are cruel, and
have no mercy (Jer. 6:22-23). In Ezekiel: I will not cause thee to hear
any more the calumny of the nations, and the reproach of the peoples
thou shalt not bear any more (Ezek. 36:15). In David: Thou makest us a
byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples (Ps.
44:14). In the same: Jehovah bringeth the counsel of the nations to
nought; He overthroweth the thoughts of the peoples (Ps. 33:10). In
these passages "peoples" mean those who are against the truths of the
spiritual church, thus in falsities; and "nations" those who are against
the goods of the celestial church, thus in evils. This is also the
signification of the peoples and nations that were driven out of the
land of Canaan. To this let what was said above (n. 175) be added.

<span class="margnote"><span id="332.">332.</span></span>

Verse 10. And hast made us unto our God kings and priests, signifies
that from the Lord they are in the truths and goods of the church and of
heaven, as can be seen from what was shown above (n. 31), where there
are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="333.">333.</span></span>

And we shall reign upon the earth, signifies the power that belongs to
the Lord alone through Divine truth united to Divine good, and power and
wisdom therefrom that those have who are of the Lord's spiritual and
celestial kingdoms. This is evident from the signification of "to
reign," as being to be in truths and goods, and thence to be from the
Lord in the power to resist the evils and falsities which are from hell;
and since truths and goods are from the Lord alone, and truths have all
power from good, "to reign" signifies the power that belongs to the Lord
alone through Divine truth united to Divine good, and the power
therefrom that those have who are in the Lord's spiritual and celestial
kingdoms. He who has no right understanding of the Word in the spiritual
sense will suppose that such are to be like kings and priests, and are
to reign with the Lord; but in the spiritual sense "kings" mean truths,
and "priests" goods, abstractly from persons, that is, the truths and
goods that are in persons from the Lord; from which it follows that it
is truths from good that are to reign, thus the Lord alone from whom
these are. The angels, indeed, are in great power, but not one of them
from himself; yea, if anyone in heaven believes that he has power from
himself he is instantly deprived of it, and then becomes wholly
powerless. It is said in the sense of the letter that these are to
reign, because the sense of the letter is personal; when therefore it is
said in that sense that they are to be "kings and priests," it is also
said that they are "to reign;" but in the spiritual sense everything of
person is put off, and thus everything of dominion belonging to person,
and dominion is left to the Lord alone. \[2\] These are like those
things that the Lord said to His disciples: That they were to sit upon
twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel (Matt. 19:28; Luke
22:30); so also what the Lord said to Peter: That he had the keys of the
kingdom of the heavens (Matt. 16:19); which does not mean that the
disciples and Peter were to have that power, but the Lord alone, since
in the spiritual sense the "twelve disciples" mean all the truths and
goods of the church, which are from the Lord, and "Peter" means truth
from good, which is from the Lord. (That "disciples" mean all truths and
goods of the church, which are from the Lord, see above, n. 100, 122.
That "Peter" signifies truth from good, which is from the Lord, see The
last Judgment, n. 57; and above, n. 9, 206, 209. That all power belongs
to truth from good, which is from the Lord, thus to the Lord alone, and
that angels have power thence, see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n.
228-233.) "We shall reign" also signifies that they have wisdom from the
Lord, because "kings and priests" signify truths and goods, and all
wisdom is from truths that are from good from the Lord. It is said that
they shall reign upon the earth, because the "earth" means the Lord's
church in the heavens and on the earth (see above, n. 304). It is clear,
moreover, that "earth" here does not mean the earth, just as it is not
meant that they were to be kings and priests. "To reign" signifies to be
in truths from good, and thus in power and wisdom from the Lord, because
"kingdom" signifies heaven and the church in respect to truths, and
"king" truth from good. (That "kingdom" in the Word signifies heaven and
the church in respect to truths, see above, n. 48; and "king" truth from
good, also above, n. 31. "To reign" has a like signification in chap.
20:4, 6; 22:5.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="334.">334.</span></span>

Verses 11-12. And I saw, and I heard the voice of many angels round
about the throne, and the animals, and the elders; and the number of
them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands; saying with a
great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive the power and
riches and wisdom and honor and glory and blessing. 11. "And I heard the
voice of many angels round about the throne, and the animals, and the
elders," signifies the acknowledgment and consequent glorification of
the Lord by the angels of the lower heavens (n. 335); "and the number of
them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands," signifies the
innumerable who are in truths, and the innumerable who are in goods (n.
336). 12. "Saying with a great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain," signifies the acknowledgment from the heart that every thing
Divine is from the Lord's Divine Human unacknowledged, and by many
denied (n. 337); "to receive the power and riches and wisdom," signifies
that to Him belong omnipotence, omniscience, and Divine Providence (n.
338); "and honor and glory," signifies that to Him belong Divine good
and Divine truth (n. 339); "and blessing," signifies the acknowledgment
and glorification of the Lord on that account, and thanksgiving that
from Him is every good and truth, and thence heaven and eternal
happiness to those who receive (n. 340).

<span class="margnote"><span id="335.">335.</span></span>

Verse 11. And I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne,
and the animals, and the elders, signifies the acknowledgment and
consequent glorification of the Lord by the angels of the lower heavens.
This is evident from what has been said above (n. 322), namely, that
they acknowledged and glorified the Lord in this order; first the angels
of the higher heavens, then the angels of the lower heavens, and lastly
those who are below the heavens; for "the four animals" and "the four
and twenty elders" who first glorified signify the angels of the higher
heavens (see above, n. 322), but these now mentioned, who were "round
about the throne" and "round about the animals and the elders," mean the
angels of the lower heavens; and by "every creature that is in heaven
and in the earth, and under the earth and in the sea" (of which see just
below, verse 13) those who are below the heavens are meant. That the
angels of the lower heavens are here meant is clear also from this, that
they are said to be "round about the throne, the animals, and the
elders," and "round about" means in the Word what is in the remote
borders, thus what is distant; but where heaven is treated of, it means
what is distant in degree of intelligence and wisdom, thus what is
below. For the heavens are higher and lower, differing from each other
according to the reception of Divine truth and good, thus according to
degrees of intelligence and wisdom. (But respecting the degrees
according to which the heavens, and consequently the angels who are in
them, are distant from each other, see in the work on Heaven and Hell,
n. 33, 34, 38, 39, 208, 209, 211, 425.) What is below in accordance with
these degrees is what is signified by "round about;" in like manner
also, elsewhere in the Word, "round about," "circuit," "afar,"
"distant," "uttermost parts," and the like, have a like signification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="336.">336.</span></span>

And the number of them was myriads of myriads and Thousands of
thousands, signifies the innumerable who are in truths, and the
innumerable who are in goods. This is evident from the signification of
"number" as being quantity and quality, quantity in the natural sense,
and quality in the spiritual sense, the number employed determining the
quantity and quality. But still all numbers in the Word signify
something pertaining to the thing, as "two," "three," "four," "five,"
"seven," "ten," and "twelve," as has been shown where these are treated
of; it is similar with "myriad" and "thousand," which are here
mentioned. The number "seven," for example, signifies not seven, but
all, what is full and whole (see above, n. 257). But what "myriads" and
"thousands" signify shall now be said. "Myriads" signify things
innumerable, "thousands" the like; but "myriads" are predicated of
truths, and "thousands" of goods; this is why "myriads of myriads, and
thousands of thousands," signify the innumerable who are in truths, and
the innumerable who are in goods. \[2\] Those in the lower heavens of
whom these things are said, in like manner as those in the higher
heavens who were treated of above, are from two kingdoms, namely the
spiritual kingdom and the celestial kingdom; those who are of the
spiritual kingdom are meant by those who are in truths, while those who
are of the celestial kingdom are meant by those who are in goods; the
innumerableness of the latter is signified by "thousands of thousands,"
and the innumerableness of the former by "myriads of myriads;" but in an
abstract sense, which is the true spiritual sense, innumerable truths
and innumerable goods are signified. "Myriads" and "thousands" signify
things innumerable, because "ten," and consequently also "a hundred," "a
thousand," and "ten thousand" signify many; for numbers that are
multiples of a similar number have a like signification as the simple
numbers of which they are multiples (see n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973). But
when innumerable things that are infinitely many are to be expressed,
they are called "myriads of myriads," and "thousands of thousands."
\[3\] Moreover when two numbers related by multiplication, one larger
and the other smaller, and having a like signification, are mentioned
together, as "ten and a hundred," or "a hundred and a thousand," then
the smaller is predicated of goods, and the larger of truths; and for
the reason that each good consists of many truths; for good is formed
out of truths, and thence good is produced by truths; on which account
the larger number is predicated of truths, and the smaller of goods; in
like manner here "myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands." That
it is so may be illustrated by this, that a single delight of affection
may be presented by many ideas of thought, and be expressed by various
things in speech; the delight of affection is what is called good, and
the ideas of thought and the various things in the speech that proceed
from that delight or good are what are called truths. It is similar with
one thing of the will in respect to many things of its understanding,
and also with one thing of love in respect to many things that express
it. From this it is that "many" and "multitude" in the Word are
predicated of truths, and "great" and "greatness" of good, for what is
great contains in itself many things. But these things are said for
those who can be enlightened by examples, that they may know why it is
that "thousands," the same as "myriads," signify things innumerable, but
that "myriads" are predicated of truths, and "thousands" of goods. \[4\]
That these numbers have such significations can be seen from the
following passages. In Moses: In the firstborn of his bullock he hath
honor, and his horns are the horns of a unicorn; with them he shall push
the peoples together to the uttermost parts of the earth; and these are
the myriads of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasseh (Deut.
33:17). These things are said of Joseph, who in a representative sense
signifies the Lord in respect to the spiritual Divine and in respect to
His spiritual kingdom (see Arcana Coelestia, n. 3969, 3971, 4669, 6417);
his two sons "Ephraim" and "Manasseh" signify the two constituents of
that kingdom, namely, intellectual truth and voluntary good, "Ephraim"
intellectual truth, and "Manasseh" voluntary good; it is therefore said
"the myriads of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh." (That "Ephraim"
and "Manasseh" have this signification, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 3969,
5351, 5353, 5354, 6222, 6234, 6238, 6267, 6296.) What is here signified
by the "firstborn of the bullock," and by the "horns of the unicorn,"
see above (n. 316). \[5\] In David: The chariots of God are two myriads,
thousands of angels of peace; the Lord is in them, Sinai in the
sanctuary (Ps. 68:17). "The chariots of God" signify the truths of
doctrine, and "the angels of peace" the goods of doctrine; therefore
"myriads" are predicated of the former, and "thousands" of the latter.
(That "chariots" signify the truths of doctrine, see Arcana Coelestia,
n. 2762, 5321, 8215; and that "peace" signifies the inmost of good, see
in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 284-290.) And because the Lord is
called "Lord" from good, and "Sinai" signifies heaven where and from
which is Divine truth, therefore it is said, "the Lord is in them, Sinai
in the sanctuary," "sanctuary" meaning heaven and the church where
Divine truth is. (That the Lord is called "Lord" from Divine good, and
"God" from Divine truth, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4973, 9167, 9194; and
that "Sinai" signifies heaven where the Lord is, from whom is Divine
truth, that is, from whom is the law, in a strict sense and in a broad
sense, n. 8399, 8753, 8793, 8805, 9420.) \[6\] In the same: Thou shalt
not fear for the dread of the night; for the arrow that flieth by day;
for the pestilence that creepeth in thick darkness; for the death that
wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and a myriad at
thy right hand (Ps. 91:5-7). This is said of falsities and evils that
are not known to be falsities and evils, and of falsities and evils that
are known to be such, and yet creep into the thought and into the will,
and destroy men. Falsities that are known to be falsities are meant by
"the arrow that flieth by day," and evils that are known to be evils and
yet gain entrance are meant by "the death that wasteth at noonday;" and
falsities that are not known to be falsities are meant by "the dread of
the night;" and evils that are not known to be evils by "the pestilence
that creepeth in thick darkness;" the destruction of these evils is
signified by "the thousand that shall fall at his side;" and the
destruction of the falsities by "the myriad that shall fall at his right
hand;" "the side at which they shall fall," also signifying good, and
"the right hand," the truth of good. "Thousand" is predicated of evils,
and "myriad" of falsities, because falsities are the contraries of
truths, and evils of goods; and in the Word opposites are expressed by
like words and similar numbers. \[7\] In the same: Our garners are full,
yielding from food to food; our flocks are thousands, myriads in our
streets (Ps. 144:13). "Garners" and "food" signify the goods and truths
of the church; for spiritual foods are the knowledges of truth and good,
by which there is intelligence; like things, but interior, are signified
by "flocks;" therefore the goods of the church are meant by "thousands,"
and its truths by myriads;" and because truths are meant by "myriads,"
it is said, "myriads in our streets," for the "streets" of a city
signify the truths of doctrine. (That "food" signifies both good and
truth, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 3114, 4459, 4792, 5147, 5293, 5340,
5342, 5410, 5426, 5576, 5582, 5588, 5655, 5915, 6277, 8418, 8562, 9003;
consequently also "garners," which are storehouses for food, have a like
signification. That "flocks" signify interior goods and truths, which
are called spiritual, see n. 1565, 2566, 3767, 3768, 3772, 3783, 3795,
5913, 6044, 6048, 8937, 10609.) \[8\] In Micah: Will Jehovah be pleased
with thousands of rams, with myriads of rivers of oil? (Micah 6:7).
Because "rams" signify spiritual goods, and "rivers of oil" truths
proceeding from good, "myriads" are predicated of the latter, and
"thousands" of the former. (That "rams" signify spiritual goods, see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 2830, 4170.) And as "oil" signifies the good of
love, "rivers" of it signify what proceeds from it, namely, truths.
\[9\] In Daniel: I held till thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of
Days did sit. A stream of fire issued and went forth from before Him; a
thousand of thousands ministered unto Him, and a myriad of myriads stood
before Him (Dan. 7:9-10). This treats of the Lord's coming, and the
"thrones that were cast down" signify the falsities of the church which
were destroyed; "the Ancient of Days" means the Lord from eternity; "the
stream of fire issuing and going forth from before Him" signifies the
Divine good of love and Divine truth therefrom; "a stream of fire
issuing," the Divine good of love and the same "going forth," Divine
truth proceeding; because both of these are signified it is said, "a
thousand of thousands ministered unto Him, and a myriad of myriads stood
before Him," "thousand" referring to Divine good, and "myriad" to Divine
truth; "ministering" also is predicated of good (see above, n. 155), and
"standing," as well as "going forth," is predicated of truth. \[10\] In
Moses: When the ark rested, Moses said, Return, O Jehovah, to the
myriads of the thousands of Israel (Num. 10:36). As the "ark" signified
the celestial Divine proceeding from the Lord, because of the law or
testimony that was in it, and as "Israel" signified the church in
respect to the reception of Divine good and Divine truth, therefore it
is said, "the myriads of the thousands of Israel," which signify truths
from good, which are in "Israel," that is, in the church. But what "a
chiliad" or "a thousand" \[chilias seu mille\] signifies when "ten
thousand," that is, a "myriad," is not joined with it, will be seen
hereafter in its own article; likewise what is signified by "number."

<span class="margnote"><span id="337.">337.</span></span>

Verse 12. Saying with a great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain,
signifies the acknowledgment from the heart that everything Divine is
from the Lord's Divine Human unacknowledged and by many denied. This is
evident from the signification of "saying with a great voice," as being
the acknowledgment from the heart (of which presently); also from the
signification of "worthy," as being, in reference to the Lord, merit and
justice (respecting which see above, n. 293, 303); here therefore it
signifies that from His own power, thus from merit, He acquired for
Himself everything Divine, and so from justice everything Divine is His.
That this is meant by "He is worthy," is evident from what immediately
follows, namely, "to receive the power and riches and wisdom and honor
and glory and blessing;" which in the complex signifies everything
Divine. This is evident also from the signification of "the Lamb," as
being the Lord in respect to the Divine Human (of which also above, n.
314); also from the signification of "was slain," as meaning
unacknowledged and by many denied (of which also above, n. 315, 328).
From this it is clear that "Saying with a great voice, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain," signifies the acknowledgment from the heart that
everything Divine is from the Lord's Divine Human unacknowledged and by
many denied. That everything Divine is in the Lord's Human, and from it,
in heaven and on earth, has been shown in many places, and will be seen
confirmed at the end of this work. That "saying with a great voice"
means the acknowledgment from the heart, here that it means what has now
been stated, can be seen from what precedes and what follows, in series;
moreover, "voice" signifies all the things that are afterward said, and
"a great voice" signifies that these things are from the heart. There
are two words that often occur in the Word, namely, "great" and "many,"
and "great" is there predicated of good, and "many" of truths (for the
reason see just above, n. 336); and as what proceeds from good proceeds
from the heart, here "saying with a great voice" signifies the
acknowledgment from the heart; moreover, "heart" from correspondence
signifies the good of love (see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 95,
447; and above, n. 167).

<span class="margnote"><span id="338.">338.</span></span>

To receive the power and riches and wisdom, signifies that to Him belong
omnipotence, omniscience, and Divine Providence. This is evident from
the signification of "power," as being, in reference to the Lord,
omnipotence; from the signification of "riches," as being, in reference
to the Lord, omniscience; and from the signification of "wisdom," as
being, in reference to the Lord, Divine Providence. This is what is
meant, because respecting the Lord nothing can be predicated except what
is above all things; when, therefore, it is said that He has power it is
meant that He has all power, which is omnipotence; and when it is said
that He has riches it is meant that He has all spiritual riches, which
signify intelligence and therefore omniscience (that "riches" in the
Word signify the knowledges of truth and good and thus intelligence, may
be seen above, n. 236); and when it is said that He has "wisdom," it is
meant that He has all wisdom, which is the Divine providence; for true
wisdom is to see what is conducive to anyone's life to eternity, and to
determine oneself according to that, which is done when man not only
knows these things and perceives them with his understanding, but also
wills and does them; but Divine wisdom is to provide these things with
man; thus it is Divine Providence. (What Divine Providence is further
may be seen in The New Jerusalem and Its Heavenly Doctrine, n. 267-279.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="339.">339.</span></span>

And honor and glory, signifies that to Him belong Divine good and Divine
truth. This is evident from the signification of "honor and glory," as
being, in reference to the Lord, Divine good and Divine truth (of which
see above, n. 288).

<span class="margnote"><span id="340.">340.</span></span>

And blessing, signifies the acknowledgment and glorification of the Lord
on that account, and thanksgiving that from Him is every good and truth,
and thence heaven and eternal happiness to those who receive. This is
evident from the signification of "blessing," as being the Lord, when
said of the acknowledgment, here the acknowledgment that to Him belong
omnipotence, omniscience, providence, Divine good, and Divine truth,
which are signified by "Worthy is He to receive the power, riches,
wisdom, honor, and glory," and as being also glorification on that
account. Moreover, "blessing," when said of the Lord, signifies
thanksgiving that from Him is every good of love and truth of faith, and
thence heaven and eternal happiness to those who receive. Because
"blessing" here signifies acknowledgment and glorification on that
account, and also thanksgiving, blessing is mentioned in the last place,
or as a conclusion by these angels, who were glorifying the Lord. These
things are signified by "blessing," when said of the Lord, because
nothing is a blessing except what is given by the Lord, for that alone
is blessed because it is Divine and eternal, and contains in itself
heaven and eternal happiness; all other things which have not in
themselves what is Divine and eternal are not blessings, even though
they may be so called (see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 269,
270). \[2\] That "blessing" when it is mentioned in the Word, has this
signification, can be seen from the places there when understood in the
internal sense. But in the first place, some passages shall be quoted in
which "blessed" and "blessing" are said of Jehovah, that is the Lord;
also where the expression "to bless God" is used, that it may be seen
that these signify the acknowledgment, glorification, and thanksgiving
that from Him is every good and truth, and thence heaven and eternal
happiness to those who receive. In Luke: The mouth of Zacharias was
opened, and he spoke, blessing God. And he said, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, for He hath visited and wrought redemption for His people
(Luke 1:64, 67-68). This Zacharias said when, filled with the Spirit, he
prophesied of the Lord; and "blessing God," and "blessed be the Lord God
of Israel," signify the glorification and thanksgiving that He frees and
delivers from hell those who receive Him; consequently it is also said,
"for He hath visited and wrought redemption for His people Israel;"
"redemption" signifying liberation from hell, and "His people" those who
are in truths from good, thus those who receive. That "redemption"
signifies liberation and deliverance from hell, see above (n. 328); and
that "people" signifies those who are in truths from good (n. 331).
\[3\] In the same: Simeon took the infant Jesus in his arms, and blessed
God: and said, Mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast
prepared before the face of all peoples (Luke 2:28-31). Here "to bless
God" evidently means to glorify and give thanks because the Lord was to
come into the world, to save all who receive Him; consequently he calls
the Lord "the salvation" which his eyes saw, which He prepares for all
people. Those are called "His people" who are in truths from good, thus
who by means of truths receive Him, as was said above. \[4\] In David:
They have seen Thy goings, O God. The singers went before, the minstrels
after, in the midst of the maidens playing on timbrels. Bless ye God in
the assemblies, the Lord from the fountain of salvation <span
id="fr_94"></span>[340-1](#fn_94) (Ps. 68:24-26.md). "To bless God in the
assemblies, the Lord from the fountain of salvation," signifies to
glorify the Lord from spiritual truths, which are truths from good.
"Assemblies" in the Word have a similar signification as "people,"
namely, those who are in spiritual truths, and abstractly, those truths
themselves; and "fountain of salvation" signifies spiritual good, since
salvation is by means of that good; spiritual good is the good of
charity towards the neighbor, and spiritual truth is the truth of faith
from that good. (That "assemblies" in the Word are predicated of
spiritual truths, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 6355, 7843.) Because "to
bless in the assemblies" signifies glorification from spiritual truths,
and "to bless from the fountain of salvation" signifies glorification
from spiritual good, therefore in the first case the name "God" is used,
and in the latter "Lord;" for the name "God" is used in the Word where
truths are treated of, and "Jehovah" and "Lord" where good is treated
of. It is clear that glorification is what is meant by "to bless," from
its immediately following after these words, "the singers went before,
the minstrels after, in the midst of the maidens playing on timbrels,"
which signifies glorification from spiritual truths and goods, as may be
seen above (n. 323, 326). \[5\] In the same: O sing unto Jehovah a new
song; sing unto Jehovah, all the earth. Bless His name; proclaim His
salvation from day to day. Tell ye His glory among the nations (Ps.
96:1-3). "To bless Jehovah" here evidently is to glorify Him and give
thanks unto Him; and because all glorification of Him is from spiritual
truths and from spiritual good, it is said, "Bless His name, proclaim
His salvation from day to day;" "name" having reference to truths, and
"salvation" to good. "To sing a song" signifies to glorify from such
truths and from such goods (see above, n. 323, 326). \[6\] In Moses:
Jehovah chose the sons of Levi to minister unto Him, and to bless in the
name of Jehovah (Deut. 10:8; 21:5). Because the sons of Levi were
appointed for Divine worship, and because all Divine worship is effected
from spiritual good and the truths therefrom, it is said that "Jehovah
chose them to minister unto Him, and to bless in His name;" "to
minister" signifying worship from spiritual good, and "to bless"
signifying worship from spiritual truths. That to "minister" has
reference to worship from good, see above (n. 155). \[7\] In David: O
Jehovah, Thou hast prevented the King with the blessings of goodness.
Thou hast set a crown of fine gold on his head. Glory and honor dost
Thou lay upon him. For Thou settest him blessings forever (Ps. 21:3,
5-6). "The King" here does not mean David, but the Lord, who is called
"King" from the spiritual Divine that proceeds from His Divine Human;
and because "blessing" signifies the acknowledgment, glorification, and
thanksgiving because every good and truth, and thence heaven and eternal
happiness, are from Him, it is evident what is signified by "Thou hast
prevented the King with the blessings of goodness," and by "Thou settest
him blessings for ever." "Blessings of goodness" signify truths from
good; "a crown of fine gold" signifies the good from which truths are;
"honor and glory" signify Divine good and Divine truth. (That "David" in
the Word means the Lord, see above, n. 205; likewise "king" in the
Psalms, n. 31; that the "crown of kings" signifies Divine good, n. 272;
likewise "gold," n. 242; and that "honor and glory signify Divine good
and Divine truth, n. 288.) \[8\] From this it can be seen what "blessed"
signifies when said of the Lord, as in the following passages: The
disciples cried with a great voice, Blessed is the King that cometh in
the name of the Lord (Luke 19:37-38). The throng cried, Hosanna to the
Son of David; Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord (Matt.
21:9; Mark 11:9, 10; John 12:12-13). Jesus said, Ye shall not see Me
henceforth, until ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of
the Lord (Matt. 23:39; Luke 13:35). The High Priest asked Jesus, Art
Thou then the Christ, the Son of the blessed (Mark 14:61). "Blessed is
He that cometh in the name of the Lord" signifies to be glorified
because all Divine truth and Divine good are from Him. The Lord's "name"
signifies everything by which He is worshiped; and as all this has
reference to the good of love and the truth of faith, therefore these
are signified by the Lord's "name." (That the Lord's "name" signifies
everything by which He is worshiped, see above, n. 102, 135, 148, 224;
and that the Lord is called "Lord" from Divine good, see Arcana
Coelestia, n. 4973, 9167, 9194.) \[9\] In Moses: Melchizedek blessed
Abram, and said, Blessed be Abram to God Most High, the possessor of
heaven and earth; and blessed be God Most High, who hath delivered thine
enemies into thy hand (Gen. 14:18-20). Here it is said, "Blessed be God
Most High, who hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand," signifying
that to Him belong glorification and thanksgiving on that account. Those
therefore who receive Divine good and Divine truth from the Lord, are
called: Blessed (Ps. 37:22; 115:15; Matt. 25:34). \[10\] That "blessing"
has no other meaning, when said of man, than the reception of Divine
truth and Divine good, because in them are heaven and eternal happiness,
can be seen from the following passages. In David: The clean in hands
and the pure in heart shall receive a blessing from before Jehovah, and
righteousness from the God of our salvation (Ps. 24:4-5). "The clean in
hands" signify those that are in truths from faith, and "the pure in
heart" those that are in good from love; of such it is said that they
"shall receive a blessing from before Jehovah, and righteousness from
the God of salvation," and "receiving a blessing" signifies the
reception of Divine truth, and "receiving righteousness" the reception
of Divine good. (That "righteousness" is predicated of good, see above,
n. 204; and Arcana Coelestia, n. 2235, 9857.) \[11\] In Moses: Thus
shall ye bless the sons of Israel, Jehovah bless thee and keep thee;
Jehovah make His faces to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee;
Jehovah lift up His faces upon thee, and give thee peace. Thus shall
they put My name upon the sons of Israel; and I will bless them (Num.
6:23-27). From this, unfolded by means of the internal sense, it is
evident what "blessing" as a whole involves-namely, that Jehovah, that
is, the Lord, from Divine love flows in with Divine truth and with
Divine good with those who receive; the Divine love, from which the Lord
flows in, being meant by "the faces of Jehovah;" the Divine truth, with
which the Lord flows in, by "Jehovah make His faces to shine upon thee;"
and the Divine good, with which He flows in, by "Jehovah lift up His
faces upon thee;" the protection from evils and falsities, which would
otherwise take away the influx, by "keep thee" and "be gracious unto
thee;" heaven and eternal happiness, which the Lord gives by means of
His Divine truth and His Divine good, by "give thee communication and
conjunction with those who receive, by "thus shall they put My name upon
the sons of Israel," "the name of Jehovah" signifying the Divine
proceeding, which is called in general Divine truth and Divine good, and
"the sons of Israel" signifying those who are of the church, thus who
receive, of whom it is therefore said, "and I will bless them." This is
the internal or spiritual sense of these words, as can be seen from
this, that "the faces of Jehovah" signify the Divine love; "to make them
to shine" signifies the influx of Divine truth, and "to lift them up"
signifies the influx of Divine good. That these things may be better
understood, the ground of these significations shall be told. The Lord
appears to the angels in heaven as a sun; for it is His Divine love that
so appears; this, therefore, is what is meant by the "face" of Jehovah;
the light that proceeds therefrom is Divine truth; this, therefore, is
what is meant by "making His faces to shine;" the heat that also
proceeds therefrom is Divine good; this, therefore, is what is meant by
"lifting up His faces," for "to lift up" signifies to reveal Himself,
which is effected from Divine good by means of Divine truth. (That the
Lord appears to the angels in heaven as a sun, and that it is His Divine
love that so appears, see in the work on Heaven and Hell, n. 116-125;
and that the light therefrom is Divine truth, and the heat therefrom
Divine good, n. 126-140. That "peace" signifies the heavenly delight
that inmostly affects with blissfulness every good, and that it
therefore signifies heaven and eternal happiness, see in the same, n.
284-290; and that "the sons of Israel" signify those who are of the
church, consequently the church, Arcana Coelestia, n. 6426, 8805, 9340.)
\[12\] In Ezekiel: I will give them the circuits of My hill as a
blessing, and I will send down the rain in its time; there shall be
rains of blessing. Then the tree shall yield its fruit, the land shall
yield its produce (Ezek. 34:26-27). He who sees the Word merely in its
natural sense believes no other than that "blessing" means such things
as are mentioned in that sense, namely, that rain should be given to
make fruitful the gardens and fields, and thus the tree should yield its
fruit and the land its produce; but it is a spiritual blessing that is
meant, for "rain" signifies everything Divine that flows into man from
the Lord out of heaven. That truths will produce good, and that good
will produce truths, is signified by "the tree shall yield its fruit,
and the land its produce," "land" and also the "garden," in which there
are trees, meaning the church; these and "the circuits of My hill which
are to be given as a blessing," signify the internal and external with
the men of the church, "circuit" signifying what is outside or below,
and "hill" what is within or above, especially where charity is, for
that is within. (That "hill" signifies where there is charity, see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 6435, 10438.) \[13\] In David: Blessed is everyone
that feareth Jehovah, that walketh in His ways. Thou shalt eat the labor
of thine hands; blessed art thou, and it is good with thee. Thy wife
shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house; thy sons like
olive plants around thy tables. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed
that feareth Jehovah. Jehovah shall bless thee out of Zion; that thou
mayest see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life; peace upon
Israel (Ps. 128:1-6). Here also "to be blessed" does not mean to be
blessed naturally, as that one is to eat the labor of his hands, that
his wife is to be fruitful, that many sons are to be about his tables,
and that this is to be in Zion and in Jerusalem, but it means to be
blessed spiritually; for "those that fear Jehovah" mean those who love
to do His commandments; it is therefore said, "Blessed is he that
feareth Jehovah, that walketh in His ways," "to walk in His ways"
signifying to do His commandments; "the labor of his hands which he
shall eat," signifies the pursuit of the life according to those
commandments; "the wife by the sides of the house" signifies the
affection of spiritual truth in all things that he thinks and does;
therefore it is added, "as a fruitful vine," for "vine" signifies the
spiritual church from the affection of truth; "sons around the tables"
signify the truths of good therefrom, "tables" meaning instructions;
therefore it is also said, "as olive-plants," "plants" signifying
truths, and "olives" goods; "Zion" signifies heaven whence these things
are; and "Jerusalem" doctrine. From this it is clear what is signified
by "Jehovah shall bless thee out of Zion, that thou mayest see the good
of Jerusalem all the days of thy life;" "peace upon Israel" signifies
all spiritual good in general and in particular, "Israel" meaning the
church. \[14\] In the same: Like the dew of Hermon, that cometh down
upon the mountains of Zion; for there hath Jehovah commanded the
blessing, life even forever (Ps. 133:3). This treats of the marriage of
good and truth and their fructification and multiplication; both are
meant by "the dew of Hermon, that cometh down upon the mountains of
Zion," "the mountains of Zion" signifying where the goods of celestial
love are; therefore it is added, "there hath Jehovah commanded the
blessing, life even forever." \[15\] In Moses: If ye harken to these
judgments, to keep and do them, Jehovah thy God will keep unto thee the
covenant and mercy; and He will love thee and bless thee. And He will
bless the fruit of thy belly, and the fruit of thy ground, thy corn, and
thy new wine, and thine oil, the young of thy kine and of the rams of
thy flock. Thou shalt be blessed above all peoples; there shall not be
male or female barren among you or among your cattle. And Jehovah will
take away from thee every disease, and all the evil sicknesses of Egypt
which thou knowest He will not lay upon thee, but will put them upon all
that hate thee. And thou shalt consume all the peoples that Jehovah thy
God shall deliver to thee; thine eye shall not spare them (Deut.
7:12-16). Things spiritual, thus spiritual blessings, are meant by all
this; these things are what are involved in and signified by the sense
of the letter, which is natural, and is for those who are in the natural
world, and therefore in natural ideas; consequently from the spiritual
sense of the Word what is meant in general and in particular by "being
blessed" can be seen. The "fruit of the belly, and the fruit of the
ground, the corn, the new wine, and oil, the young of the kine and of
the rams of the flock," mean the multiplications of truth and the
fructifications of good, thus spiritual blessings. (What is signified
specifically by each can be seen in various places in Arcana Coelestia,
and in the explanation of this prophetic book.) "There shall not be male
or female barren among you or among your cattle" signifies the
multiplication of truth and the fructification of good in the internal
and the external man; "and Jehovah will take away every disease, and all
the evil sicknesses of Egypt," signifies the removal of all evils and
falsities, "the evil sicknesses of Egypt" meaning falsities arising from
evils in the natural man. "Those that hate thee upon whom Jehovah will
put these," are those who are against the truths and goods of the
church. The dispersion of the evils and falsities that are against the
truths and goods of the church, is signified by "thou shalt consume all
the peoples that Jehovah thy God shall deliver to thee;" and continual
shunning of them is meant by "thine eye shall not spare them." That
through these things those who do the Lord's commandments are blessed,
is meant by "if ye hearken to these judgments, to keep and do them,
Jehovah thy God will keep unto thee the covenant and mercy; He will love
thee and bless thee;" "covenant and mercy" is conjunction from love by
means of these commandments; conjunction by good is meant by "covenant,"
and "He will love thee;" and conjunction by truth therefrom is meant by
"mercy" and "He will bless thee." \[16\] In the same: He shall bless
thee with the blessings of heaven from above, with the blessings of the
deep that coucheth below, with the blessings of the breasts and of the
womb (Gen. 49:25). These things are said of Joseph, who here signifies
the Lord's spiritual kingdom; and "the blessings of heaven from above"
mean the multiplications of truth from good in the internal or spiritual
man; "the blessings of the deep that coucheth below" mean the
multiplications of truth from good in the external or natural man; and
"the blessings of the breasts and of the womb" signify spiritual and
celestial goods. \[17\] In Joel: Who knoweth? Let him return, and
Jehovah God will repent, and He will leave behind Him a blessing, a
meal-offering and a drink-offering to Jehovah our God (Joel 2:14).
Because "blessing" signifies spiritual blessing, which in general has
reference to good and truth proceeding from the Lord and given to man,
therefore it is said, "He will leave behind Him a blessing, a
meal-offering and a drink-offering to our God," "the meal-offering,"
which was bread, signifying good, and "the drink-offering," which was
wine, signifying truth, both from the Lord, for it is said, "from our
God." \[18\] In Isaiah: In that day shall there be a highway out of
Egypt into Assyria, that Assyria may come into Egypt and Egypt into
Assyria, that the Egyptians may serve with Assyria. In that day shall
Israel be a third to Egypt and to Assyria, a blessing in the midst of
the land; whom Jehovah shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt My people,
and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine inheritance (Isa.
19:23-25). "Israel, Assyria, and Egypt," signify the three faculties
belonging to the men of the church, namely, the spiritual, the rational,
and the knowing; "Israel" the spiritual, "Assyria" the rational, and
"Egypt" the knowing. Because all man's rational is formed by means of
knowledges \[scientifica\], and both the rational and knowing faculties
are from the spiritual, which is from the Lord out of heaven (for from
that source is all understanding of truth and all application of
knowledges \[scientiarum\] to truths), it is said, "there shall be a
highway out of Egypt into Assyria, that Assyria may come into Egypt and
Egypt into Assyria, and that the Egyptians may serve with Assyria;" and
again, "Israel shall be a third to Egypt and to Assyria, a blessing in
the midst of the land." The "midst" signifies the inmost from which is
the rest, that is, from which is the whole (see above, n. 313); and the
"land" is the church where these things are. And as it is the spiritual
by which the rational and knowing faculties are applied to genuine
truths, Israel is called the "inheritance," that is, the heir of the
house who possesses all things; and Assyria is called "the work of My
hands," because the rational is formed from the spiritual; and Egypt is
called "a blessed people," because in the knowing faculty, as in their
ultimate, all things are together. From this also it is clear that
"blessing" in the Word means spiritual blessing. \[19\] In Zechariah: As
ye were a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel,
so will I save you that you may be a blessing (Zech. 8:13). These things
are said of the devastated church, and of the church to be established
by the Lord; "the house of Judah" and "the house of Israel" signifying
the church, here in both senses; the church devastated is called "a
curse," because therein are evil and falsity; but the church to be
established is called "a blessing" because therein are good and truth.
\[20\] In David: Salvation unto Jehovah, thy blessing upon thy people
(Ps. 3:8). "The blessing of Jehovah upon His people" signifies influx
and the reception of good and truth; those are called "the people of
Jehovah" who are in spiritual good (see above, n. 331). \[21\] In Moses:
I will make thee into a great nation, and I will bless thee, that thou
mayest become a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee and
curse them that curse thee; and in thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed (Gen. 12:2-3). In the same: In him there shall be a
blessing for all nations of the earth (Gen. 18:18). These things are
said of Abraham, and "Abraham" means in the highest sense the Lord, and
in a relative sense the Lord's celestial kingdom and the celestial
church. From this it is clear what is signified by "I will make thee
into a great nation, and I will bless thee, that thou mayest become a
blessing," namely, that therein shall be Divine good and Divine truth;
"great nation" being predicated of Divine good (see above, n. 331), and
"blessing" of Divine truth; "I will bless them that bless thee \[and
curse them that curse thee\]" signifies that those who receive will have
Divine truth, and those who do not receive will have the falsity of
evil; "in Thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed," and "in
Him there shall be a blessing for all the nations of the earth"
signifies that from the reception of Divine truth and Divine good they
will have heaven and eternal happiness; "the families of the earth"
signify those who are in truths from good, "families" meaning truths,
and "nations" goods; "blessing" signifying that from these they will
have heaven and eternal happiness. \[22\] There is a like signification
in the blessing of Israel and Jacob: Blessed be everyone that blesseth
thee, and cursed be everyone that curseth thee (Num. 24:9). Thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and shall break forth towards the
west, and towards the east, and towards the north, and towards the
south; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed, and
in thy seed (Gen. 28:14). "Israel" and "Jacob" also mean in the highest
sense the Lord, and in a relative sense the Lord's spiritual kingdom and
the spiritual church; "Israel" that church internal, "Jacob" that church
external. The "seed that shall be as the dust of the earth, and that
shall break forth towards the west, the east, the north, and the south"
signifies Divine truth proceeding from the Lord and received by those
who are of that church; the consequent fructification of good is
signified by "it shall break forth towards the west and the east," and
the consequent multiplication of truth is signified by "it shall break
forth towards the north and the south." (That these quarters have such
significations, see Heaven and Hell, n. 141-153.) \[23\] That the Lord
blessed the bread, wine, and fishes that He gave to the disciples and to
the people (Matt. 14:15, 19, 21, 22; 15:32, 36; 26:26, 27; Mark 6:41;
8:6, 7; 14:22, 23; Luke 9:16; 22:19; 24:30), signified communication of
His Divine, and thus conjunction with them by means of the goods and
truths, which are signified by the "bread and wine," and also by "the
fishes;" "bread and wine" signifying goods and truths in the spiritual
man, and "fishes" goods and truths in the natural. \[24\] In Isaiah: He
shall call His servants by another name; he that blesseth himself in the
earth shall bless himself by the God of truth; and he that sweareth by
the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former distresses
shall be forgotten (Isa. 65:15-16). "To bless oneself" signifies to
instruct oneself in Divine truths, and to apply them to life, and "to
swear" signifies to instruct oneself in Divine goods and to apply them
to life. "To swear" has this signification, because an oath in the
internal sense signifies confirmation in oneself and conviction that a
thing is so, and this is effected from good by means of truths; from no
other ground than good are truths with man confirmed and proved. Here a
new church is treated of; and "to call by another name" signifies its
quality in respect to truth and good. \[25\] In Jeremiah: Swear by the
living Jehovah, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; the nations
shall bless themselves in Him, and in Him shall thee glory (Jer. 4:2).
Here "to swear" and "to bless themselves" have a like signification as
above, the "nations" that shall bless themselves in Jehovah signifying
those who are in good. \[26\] "To bless," in the contrary sense,
signifies to love what is evil and false: and to be imbued with it as in
Isaiah: He that slaughters an ox smiteth a man; he that offereth
frankincense, blesseth vanity; they have chosen these things also in
their ways (Isa. 66:3). "To slaughter (or sacrifice) an ox," and "to
smite a man," signify to worship God in externals, and yet to reject all
truth. "To sacrifice an ox" signifies worship from those things that
represented natural good, for an "ox" means natural good; "and to smite
a man" signifies to reject and deny the truth, "man" in the Word meaning
truth; "to offer frankincense" and "to bless vanity" signifies to
worship God from such things as represented spiritual good, and yet to
love evil and falsity and to be imbued with them, an "offering of
frankincense" meaning the worship from spiritual good, and "vanity" the
evil and falsity of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="341.">341.</span></span>

Verse 13. And every created thing that is in heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and those that are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, Unto Him that sitteth upon the throne and unto the
Lamb, be the blessing and the honor and the glory and the might unto the
ages of the ages. 13. "And every created thing that is in heaven, and on
the earth, and under the earth, and those that are in the sea, and all
that are in them, heard I saying" signifies the acknowledgment and
consequent glorification of the Lord by the angels that are in the
lowest parts of heaven (n. 342); "Unto Him that sitteth upon the throne
and unto the Lamb" signifies the Lord in respect to Divine good and
Divine truth (n. 343); "blessing" signifies acknowledgment,
glorification, and thanksgiving that all good and truth, and thence
heaven and eternal happiness, are for those who receive (n. 344); "and
the honor and the glory," signifies that to Him alone belongs every
Divine good and Divine truth, and therefore, every good of love and
truth of faith, from which is all the wisdom and intelligence that
angels and men have (n. 345); "and the might unto the ages of the ages,"
signifies that to Him belongs omnipotence to eternity (n. 346).

<span class="margnote"><span id="342.">342.</span></span>

Verse 13. And every created thing that is in heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and those that are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, signifies the acknowledgment and consequent
glorification of the Lord by the angels that are in the lowest parts of
heaven. This is evident from the signification of "every created thing"
as being all who are reformed. That "to be created" signifies to be
reformed and regenerated, see above (n. 294); therefore "created thing"
signifies what is reformed and regenerated; but in reference to the
angels, of whom these things are said, it signifies those who were
reformed in the world, that is, created anew, for all such are in
heaven. "Created thing" here has a like meaning as "creature" in Mark:
Jesus said to the disciples, Go into all the world, preach ye the gospel
to every creature (Mark 16:15); where "every creature" means all who
receive the gospel and can be reformed by it; the rest are not meant by
"creatures," because they do not receive, but hear and reject. \[2\]
From this the nature of the Word in the sense of the letter can be seen,
namely, why the term "creature" is used, and why it is said "every
created thing that is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth,
and those that are in the sea, and all that are in them." He who does
not know that the sense of the letter is made up of such things as
appear before the eyes, and that these signify spiritual things, may
easily be led to believe that "every created thing that is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and those that are in the sea,
and all that are in them," mean the birds that fly in the sky, the
beasts that walk on the earth, and the fishes that are in the sea; and
the more because in various other passages in the Word, like things are
said of "the birds of heaven," the "beasts of the earth," and also of
"whales" and "fishes" (as in Ezek. 39:17; Ps. 148:7; Job 12:7, 8; Rev.
19:17; and elsewhere). Still those whose minds can be somewhat elevated
above the sense of the letter instantly perceive by interior sight that
these things mean the angels and spirits who are in heaven and under
heaven, and that it was these whom John heard when he was in the spirit;
for it is said, "heard I saying, Unto Him that sitteth upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb, be the blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and
the might, unto the ages of the ages;" from which it can be seen that
"every created thing" therein means the angels that are in the lowest
parts of heaven; moreover, this follows from the fact that the preceding
verses treat of the angels of the higher heavens and of the angels of
the lower heavens, that they acknowledged and glorified the Lord (see
above, n. 322, 335). \[3\] It shall now be explained who are meant by
those "in heaven," who by those "on the earth and under the earth," and
who by those "in the sea." All these mean those who are in the ultimates
of heaven, those "in heaven" meaning the higher there, those "on the
earth and under the earth" the lower there, and those "in the sea" the
lowest there. There are three heavens, and each heaven is divided into
three degrees; the same is true of the angels who are in them;
consequently in each heaven there are higher, middle, and lower angels;
these three degrees of the lowest heaven are meant by those "in heaven,"
those "on the earth," and those "in the sea." (Respecting this division
of the heavens and of each heaven, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 4938, 9992,
10005, 10017, 10068; and respecting the lowest degree, n. 3293, 3294,
3793, 4570, 5118, 5126, 5497, 5649, 9216; and in the work on Heaven and
Hell, n. 29-40.) It should be known, that in the spiritual world, where
spirits and angels are, all things have the same appearance as in the
natural world where men are, namely, there are mountains, hills, lands,
and seas (see above, n. 304). The angels who are in the third or inmost
heaven dwell upon the mountains, those who are in the second or middle
heaven dwell upon the hills, and those who are in the first or lowest
heaven dwell upon the earth and under the earth, and in the seas. But
the seas in which the lowest of that heaven dwell are not like the seas
in which the evil dwell; their waters are different. The waters of the
seas in which the well-disposed in the lowest heaven dwell are rare and
pure; but the waters of the seas in which the evil dwell are gross and
impure; thus they are entirely different seas. \[4\] These seas I have
several times been permitted to see, and also to converse with those who
are in them; and it was found that those were there who had been in the
world merely sensual, and yet well-disposed; and because they were
sensual they were unable to understand what the spiritual is, but only
what the natural is; nor could they apprehend the Word and the doctrine
of the church from the Word except sensually. All these appear to be as
if in a sea; but those who are in it do not seem to themselves to be in
a sea, but as it were in an atmosphere like that in which they had lived
while in the world; they appear to be in a sea only to those who are
above them. At this day there is an immense number there, because so
many at this day are sensual. This lowest part of heaven corresponds to
the soles of the feet. This is the reason why seas are so often
mentioned in the Word, and also fishes therein, "seas" there signifying
the generals of truth which belong to the natural man, and "fishes" the
sensual knowledges \[scientifica sensualia\], which are the lowest
things of the natural man, consequently such persons, that is, those who
are in these knowledges, are signified. (What sensual things and what
sensual men are, and that they may be either good or evil, see in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 50.) From this it can be known what is
meant by "every created thing that is in the heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and those that are in the sea, and all that are in
them." \[5\] Like things are signified in the following passages by
"seas," and by the things that are in them, which are called "fishes"
and "whales." In David: Let heaven and earth praise Jehovah, the seas,
and every thing that creepeth therein. For God will save Zion, and will
build the cities of Judah (Ps. 69:34-35). It is said also "every thing
that creepeth therein," meaning those who are sensual. "Zion, which God
will save," and "the cities of Judah, which He will build," mean the
celestial church and its doctrine, "Zion" that church, and "cities" the
doctrine. There is a like meaning in these words in David: Praise
Jehovah from the earth, ye whales and all deeps (Ps. 148:7); "whales"
meaning the same. For this reason Egypt also is called a "whale" (Ezek.
29:3); for "Egypt" signifies the knowing faculty in the natural man, and
"whale" knowing in general. \[6\] These things have a like signification
also elsewhere in the same: Thou madest him to rule over the works of
Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet; the flock and all
herds, and also the beasts of the field, the bird of heaven, and the
fishes of the sea (Ps. 8:6-8). This treats of the Lord, and His Divine
power over heaven and earth; and "the flocks and the herds, the beasts
of the field, the bird of heaven, and the fishes of the sea," mean the
men, spirits, and angels, in respect to spiritual and natural things
pertaining to them; and the "fishes of the sea" meaning those who are in
the ultimates of heaven (as above). In Job: Ask, I pray, the beasts, and
they shall teach thee, or the birds of heaven, and they shall tell thee,
or the shrub of the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the fishes of
the sea shall declare unto thee. Who knoweth not from all these that the
hand of Jehovah doeth this? (Job 12:7-10). \[7\] In Ezekiel: The angel
brought me back unto the entrance of the house; where behold, waters
went out from under the threshold of the house towards the east. Then he
said unto me, These waters go out toward the eastern border, and go down
into the plain, and come towards the sea; they are sent forth into the
sea that the waters may be healed; whence it cometh to pass that every
living soul that creepeth, whithersoever the brooks come, shall live;
whence it is that there are exceeding many fish, because these waters
come thither, and they are healed, that everything may live whither the
brook cometh. According to their kind shall the fish be, as the fish of
the great sea, exceeding many. The miry places thereof and the marshes
thereof are not healed; they are given to the salt (Ezek. 47:1, 8-11).
"The waters going out from under the threshold of the house towards the
east" signify truths from a celestial origin, "waters" meaning truths,
"the east" the good of heavenly love, and "house" heaven and the church;
the "plain into which the waters go down," and "the sea into which they
come," signify the ultimates of heaven and the church, consequently
those who are in ultimates (of whom above), namely, those who are only
in the knowledges of truth from the outmost sense of the Word, and
apprehend those knowledges naturally and sensually. When such are in
simple good, they receive the influx of the higher heavens, whence it is
that they also receive in their knowledges what is spiritual, and thus
some spiritual life. This is meant by "the waters are sent forth into
the sea, that the waters may be healed; whence it cometh to pass that
every living soul that creepeth, whithersoever the brooks come, shall
live;" likewise by these words, "whence it cometh that there are
exceeding many fish, because these waters come thither, and they are
healed." But those who are such, and are not good, are meant by these
words, "The miry places thereof and the marshes thereof are not healed;
they are given to salt;" "to be given to salt" signifying not to receive
spiritual life, but to remain in a life merely natural, which, separate
from spiritual life, is defiled by falsities and evils, which are "miry
places" and "marshes." \[8\] Like things are signified by "sea," and by
"fishes of the sea," in Isaiah: Behold, at My rebuke I dry up the sea, I
make the rivers into a wilderness; their fish stinketh because there is
no water, and dieth of thirst (Isa. 50:2). "Rebuke" signifies the
desolation of all truth; "sea" signifies where truth is in its outmost;
"water" signifies truth from a spiritual origin; "to die for thirst"
signifies desolation from lack of that truth; "fishes of the sea"
signify those who are in the ultimates of truth, in whom there is no
life from a spiritual origin. \[9\] "Fishes of the sea" have a like
signification in Ezekiel: In My zeal, in the fire of My fury I will
speak; that the fishes of the sea, and the fowl of the heavens, and the
wild beast of the field, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
ground may quake before Me (Ezek. 38:19-20). In Hosea: They commit
robbery, and bloods touch bloods; therefore the land shall mourn, and
everyone that dwelleth therein shall languish; as to the wild beast of
the field, and as to the fowl of the heavens, and also the fishes of the
sea shall be gathered together (Hos. 4:2-3). And in Zephaniah: In taking
away I will take away all things from upon the faces of the ground; I
will take away man and beast; I will take away the fowl of the heavens,
and the fishes of the sea (Zeph. 1:2-3). "Man and beast" when mentioned
together signify the interior and exterior affections of good (see
Arcana Coelestia, n. 7424, 7523, 7872); and "the fowl of the heavens and
the fishes of the sea" signify the affections of truth and the thoughts
spiritual and natural, but in the passages here cited, that these are
about to perish. \[10\] This significance of "sea" and "fishes" comes
from the appearance in the spiritual world; all societies there appear
surrounded by an atmosphere corresponding to their affections and
thoughts; those in the third heaven appear in an atmosphere pure as the
ethereal atmosphere; those in the second heaven appear in an atmosphere
less pure, like the aerial; while the societies in the lowest part of
heaven appear surrounded by an atmosphere, as it were watery; but those
in the hells appear surrounded by gross and impure atmospheres, some of
them as if in black waters, and others in other ways. It is the
affections and the thoughts therefrom that produce these appearances
around them; for spheres are exhaled from all, and these spheres are
changed into such appearances. (Of these spheres, see Arcana Coelestia,
n. 2489, 4464, 5179, 7454, 8630.) It is also from the appearance in the
spiritual world that those who are in spiritual affection and in thought
therefrom are signified by "the birds of heaven," and those who are in
natural affection and in thought therefrom by "fishes;" for both birds
and fishes appear there, birds over the lands, and fishes in the seas.
The affections and consequent thoughts of those who are there are what
so appear; this is known to all who are in that world; and both the
birds and the fishes have been many times seen by me: this appearance is
from correspondence. From this it can be seen why "seas" signify the
generals of truth, and "whales" and "fishes" the affections and thoughts
of those who are in the generals of truth. That "seas" signify the
generals of truth has been shown above (n. 275). \[11\] The quality of
those in the spiritual world who dwell in that watery atmosphere which
is meant by "seas," I will illustrate by a single example. When such
read these words in David: Everything that Jehovah willeth He doeth, in
heaven and on earth, in the seas and all deeps (Ps. 135:6); they do not
know otherwise than that "heaven" means the heaven that is visible
before our eyes, and "earth" the habitable earth, and "seas" and "deeps"
the seas and deeps, thus that Jehovah does in these whatsoever He wills;
and they cannot be led to believe that "heaven" means the angelic
heaven; "earth" those there who are below, and "seas" and "depths" those
there who are in the lowest parts. Because these things are spiritual,
and above the sense of the letter, they are not willing and are scarcely
able to perceive them because they see all things naturally and
sensually. \[12\] For this reason, from these words in Revelation: I saw
a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth
were passed away (Rev. 21:1). It has been understood heretofore that the
visible heaven and the habitable earth were to perish, and that a new
heaven and a new earth were to arise. That "heaven" here means the
heaven where angels are, and "earth" means the church where men are, and
that these are to become new, those who think merely naturally and
sensually are not willing to admit, and therefore do not understand; for
they do not suffer their mind to be elevated out of the natural light
into spiritual light. With such this is difficult, so much so that they
can hardly bear that the Word should have any meaning beyond what the
letter in its own sense declares and the natural man apprehends. Such
persons are not unlike those birds that see and sing in dark places, but
in the light of day blink with their eyes and see but little. The good
among such are like these birds, and also like flying fishes; but the
evil of this class are like night owls and horned owls, which altogether
shun the light of day, or like fishes that cannot be elevated into the
air without loss of life. The reason is that with the good of this class
the internal spiritual man receives some little spiritual influx from
heaven, consequently some perception that a thing is so although they do
not see it; while with the evil of this class the internal spiritual man
is entirely closed up. For everyone has an internal and an external man,
or a spiritual and a natural; the internal or spiritual man sees from
the light of heaven, but the external or natural man sees from the light
of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="343.">343.</span></span>

Unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, signifies the
Lord in respect to Divine good and to Divine truth. This is evident from
what has been said and shown above (n. 297), namely, that "throne"
signifies heaven; "Him that sitteth upon the throne" Divine good
proceeding, and "the Lamb" Divine truth proceeding, both of these
filling the heavens and constituting them. Because Divine good
proceeding from the Lord as a sun is received by the angels in His
celestial kingdom, and Divine truth by the angels in the spiritual
kingdom, therefore two are mentioned, namely, "He that sitteth upon the
throne" and "the Lamb;" but in the internal sense, the two mean the
Divine Proceeding from the Lord's Divine Human, which is Divine good
united to Divine truth, while in the sense of the letter it is
distinguished into two for the sake of reception. The Divine that
constitutes heaven and gives to angels and men love, faith, wisdom, and
intelligence, proceeds not immediately from the Lord's Divine Itself,
but through His Divine Human, and this Divine that proceeds is the Holy
Spirit (see above, n. 183). \[2\] In this way it is to be understood
what the doctrine of the church teaches, that the Son proceeds from the
Father, and the Holy Spirit through the Son, also that the Lord's Divine
and His Human are not two, but a single person or one Christ; for the
Lord's Divine is that which assumed the Human, and for that reason He
called it His Father; thus He did not call Father another Divine which
is at this day worshiped as His Father in place of His own Divine. And
the Divine Proceeding is what is called the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of
God, the Spirit of Truth, and the Paraclete; since this is the holy of
the Spirit, or the holy Divine which the Spirit speaks, and not another
Divine, which is worshiped as the third person of the Divinity. That
this is so all can understand who are in any light of heaven. And yet it
is declared in many places from the doctrine of the Trinity that was
given by Athanasius, that the three are one. Let anyone examine himself
when he says with the mouth that God is one, whether he does not think
of three, when yet there is but one God, and the three names of the
Divine are names of the one God. Athanasius, because he did not
understand this, believed the three names to be three Gods, though one
in essence. \[3\] And yet they cannot be said to be one in essence when
something is attributed to one and not to another, for thus the essence
is divided; consequently a personal name is given to each essence. But
they are one essence when the three are names of one person, namely, the
Divine Itself, called the Father; the Divine Human, called the Son; and
the Divine Proceeding, called the Holy Spirit (see The Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem, n. 280-310). These things have been said to show that "He
that sitteth upon the throne," and "the Lamb," do not mean two but one,
namely, the Lord in respect to the Divine Proceeding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="344.">344.</span></span>

Blessing, signifies the acknowledgment, glorification, and thanksgiving,
that all good and truth, and thence heaven and eternal happiness, are
for those who receive, as is evident from what has been said and shown
above (n. 340).

<span class="margnote"><span id="345.">345.</span></span>

And the honor and the glory, signifies that to Him alone belongs every
Divine good and Divine truth, and therefore every good of love and truth
of faith that angels and men have. This is evident from the
signification of "honor and glory," as being, when said of the Lord,
Divine good and Divine truth (see also above, n. 288). And as "honor and
glory" signify, when said of the Lord, Divine good and Divine truth, so
when said of man they signify every good of love and truth of faith,
from which are all the wisdom and intelligence that angels and men have.
These things were said by those who are in the lowest parts of heaven,
who know this, although they do not see and perceive it. For all who are
of the church know, because it is according to doctrine, that every good
and truth is from God; and those who live a good life retain and believe
this without investigating how it comes; for this reason these also are
in heaven, although in its lowest part. But those who have become
spiritual not only know but also see and perceive that this is so;
consequently these are in the higher heavens. When such come into the
spiritual world they see truths and perceive them in the light of
heaven; nor do they admit the rule accepted by many in the world, that
the understanding must be under some blind obedience to faith. With
those who are in the lowest parts of heaven it is otherwise, because
they do not see and perceive; these remain in that rule, but still they
are instructed, and when instructed they know truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="346.">346.</span></span>

And the might, unto the ages of the ages, signifies that to Him alone
belongs omnipotence to eternity. This is evident from the signification
of "might," as being, in reference to the Lord, omnipotence; and as the
Lord has omnipotence from Divine good by means of Divine truth,
therefore it is said, "the honor and the glory and the might;" for
"honor and glory" signify Divine good and Divine truth. (That Divine
good has all power by means of Divine truth, see in the work an Heaven
and Hell, n. 231-232, 539; and above, n. 209, 333.) "Might" is here
mentioned last, and by the angels of the lowest heaven, because "might,"
in reference to the Lord, is predicated of Divine power in its fullness,
and it is in its fullness in ultimates. (That the Divine is in its
fullness, thus in its power in ultimates, see Arcana Coelestia, n. 5897,
6451, 8603, 9828, 9836, 10099, 10548; and in the work on Heaven and
Hell, n. 315.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="347.">347.</span></span>

Verse 14. And the four animals said, Amen; and the four and twenty
elders fell down and worshiped Him that liveth unto the ages of the
ages. 14. "And the four animals said, Amen," signifies confirmation from
the Lord out of the inmost heaven (n. 348); "and the four and twenty
elders fell down and worshiped Him that liveth unto the ages of the
ages," signifies humiliation and acknowledgment from the heart of all
who are in truths from good, that the Lord alone lives, and that from
Him alone is eternal life (n. 349).

<span class="margnote"><span id="348.">348.</span></span>

Verse 14. And the four animals said, Amen, signifies confirmation from
the Lord out of the inmost heaven. This is evident from the
signification of the "four animals" or cherubim, as being, in the
highest sense, the Lord in respect to providence and because they guard
that the Lord be not approached except through the good of love (of
which see above, n. 152 at the end, 277); and in a relative sense, the
inmost or third heaven (n. 313, 322); also from the signification of
"Amen," as being confirmation from the Divine, and truth (respecting
which also see above, n. 34, 238). From this it is clear that "the four
animals said, Amen," signifies confirmation from the Lord out of the
inmost heaven. The things that have thus far been said by the angels of
the three heavens were confirmed by the Lord, because everything they
said was from the Lord, not from themselves; for it was the
acknowledgment of His Divine in the Human, a glorification on that
account, and a thanksgiving that all good and truth and therefore all
wisdom and intelligence are from Him; these things the angels could not
say from themselves, but from the Lord by interior dictate or influx;
for the angels, like men, cannot from themselves even name the Lord,
consequently they cannot from themselves acknowledge and glorify Him;
for this reason the things they said were confirmed from the Lord by
"Amen," which signifies the truth of faith, and faith itself. Moreover,
it is according to Divine order for the Lord to confirm the truths that
an angel or a man speaks as if from himself, though not from himself;
these He confirms in their hearts by an assurance not ascending
manifestly into their thought, yet by a full acquiescence of mind
proceeding from internal affection, which is from peace and its delight.
This is the confirmation that it meant in the genuine internal sense by
this manifest announcement heard by John.

<span class="margnote"><span id="349.">349.</span></span>

And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshiped Him that liveth
unto the ages of the ages, signifies the humiliation and acknowledgment
from the heart of all who are in truths from good, that the Lord alone
lives, and that from Him alone is eternal life. This is evident from the
signification of "four and twenty elders," as being all who are in
truths from good (of which above, n. 270); from the signification of
falling down and worshiping, as being humiliation and acknowledgment
from the heart that every good and truth that has life in itself is from
the Lord (of which see above, n. 290, 291); and from the signification
of "Him that liveth," as being, when said of the Lord, that He alone
lives, and that from Him is eternal life (of which also above, n. 82-84,
186, 289, 291). \[2\] Since it is at this day believed in the world that
the life that each one has was given and implanted, and is thus one's
own, and does not flow in continuously, I desire to say something
respecting it. The opinion that life is in man in such a way as to be
his own is merely an appearance that springs from the perpetual presence
of the Lord, and from His Divine love, in that He wills to be conjoined
to man, to be in him, and to impart to him His life, for such is the
Divine love; and because this is perpetual and continuous man supposes
that life is in him as his own; yet it is known that there is not a good
or a truth in man, but that they come from above, thus that they flow
in. It is the same with love and faith; for everything of man's love is
from good, and everything of his faith is from truth; for what a man
loves is good to him, and what he believes is truth to him. This makes
clear in the first place that no good and no truth, so neither love nor
faith, is in man, but that they flow in from the Lord. Life itself is in
good and truth, and nowhere else. The receptacle of the good of love
with man is the will, and the receptacle of the truth of faith with him
is the understanding; and to will good does not belong to man, nor to
believe truth. These are the two faculties in which is the whole life of
man; outside of these there is no life. This also makes clear that the
life of these faculties, and accordingly the life of the whole man, is
not in man but flows in. It is also by influx that evil and falsity, or
the will and love of evil and the understanding and faith of falsity,
are with man; but this influx is from hell. For man is kept in the
freedom of choosing, that is, of receiving good and truth from the Lord
or of receiving evil and falsity from hell, and man is kept in this for
the sake of reformation, for he is kept between heaven and hell, and
thence in spiritual equilibrium, which is freedom. Neither is this
freedom itself in the man, but it is together with the life that flows
in. (On Man's Freedom and its origin, see in the work on Heaven and
Hell, n. 293, 537, 540, 541, 546, 589-596 597-603; and in The Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem, n. 141-147.) \[3\] Those also who are in hell live
by the influx of life from the Lord, for good and truth in like manner
flow into them; but the good they turn into evil, and the truth into
falsity; and this takes place because they have inverted their interior
recipient forms by a life of evil, and all influx is varied according to
the forms. It is the same as when man's thought and will act upon
members distorted from birth, or upon injured organs of sensation; and
as when the light of heaven flows into objects that vary in their
colors, and as when the heat of heaven flows into the same, which vary
in their odors according to their interior receptive forms. But it
should be known that the life itself is not changed and varied, but the
life produces an appearance of the recipient form by which and from
which the life is transmitted; much as by the same light different
persons appear in a mirror each such as he is. \[4\] Moreover, all the
senses of man, namely, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch, are none
of them in man, but are excited and produced from influx; in man there
are only the organic recipient forms, in these there is no sense until
what is adapted thereto from without flows in. The like is true of the
internal organs of sensation which belong to thought and affection and
receive influx from the spiritual world, as of the external organs of
sensation which receive influx from the natural world. That there is one
only fountain of life, and that all life is therefrom and flows in
continually, is well known in heaven, and is never called in question by
any angel in the higher heavens, for these perceive the influx itself.
That all lives are streams, as it were, from the only and perennial
fountain of life, has been testified to me also from much experience,
and seen in the spiritual world with those who believed that they lived
from themselves, and were not willing to believe that they lived from
the Lord. When influx into the thought was in some part withheld from
these, they lay as if deprived of life, but as soon as the influx
reached them, they as it were revived from death; and then the same
confessed that the life in them is not theirs, but continually flows
into them, and that men, spirits, and angels are only forms receptive of
life. \[5\] That this is so the wise there conclude from this: that
nothing can exist and subsist from itself but only from what is prior to
itself, so neither can what is prior exist and subsist from itself but
only in successive order from a First; and thus life itself, regarded in
itself, is only from Him who alone is Life in Himself. From this,
moreover, they know, and from a spiritual idea they also perceive, that
every thing, that it may be anything, must be in connection with a
First, and that it is, according as it is in this connection. From this
it is clear how foolishly those think who derive the origin of life from
nature, and believe that man learns to think by an influx of interior
nature and its order, and not from God, who is the very Esse of life,
and from whom is all the order of both worlds, the spiritual as well as
the natural, in accordance with which life flows in, life eternal with
those who can be disposed to receive life according to Divine order, but
the opposite life, which is called spiritual death, with those who
cannot be so disposed, thus who live contrary to Divine order. The
Divine good that proceeds from the Lord is that from which order comes,
and the Divine truths are the laws of order (as may be seen in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, n. 279). \[6\] Everyone should guard
against the belief that the Divine life with anyone, even with the evil
and in hell, is changed; for, as was said above, the life itself is not
changed or varied, but the life produces an appearance of the recipient
form, through which and from which the life is transmitted; much as
everyone appears in a mirror such as he is through the light, the light
remaining unchanged, and simply presenting the form to the sight; and
just as the same life presents itself to be perceived according to the
form of the bodily organ, thus after one manner in the eye, after
another manner in the hearing, and otherwise in the smell, taste, and
touch. The belief that life is varied and changed is from an appearance,
which is a fallacy like the fallacy from the appearance that influx is
physical, when yet influx is spiritual. (But on this subject see further
in Heaven and Hell, n. 9; to which may be added what is cited from
Arcana Coelestia, respecting the influx of life, in Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem, n. 277, 278; and on the Influx of Life with animals, in
Arcana Coelestia, n. 5850, 6211; and in Heaven and Hell, n. 39, 108,
110, 435, 567; likewise in Last Judgment, n. 25.) \[7\] These things
have been said to make known that there is one only life, and that
whatever things live, live from that life. It shall now be shown that
the Lord is that Life itself, or that He alone lives, since this is what
is signified by "Him that liveth unto the ages of the ages." That there
is one only Divine, and that is not to be divided into three persons
according to the faith of Athanasius, can be seen from what has been
several times said above, and especially from what will be said
particularly on this subject at the end of this work. And as the Lord's
Divine, which is the one only Divine, took on a Human, and made that
also Divine, therefore both of these are the Life from which all live.
That this is so may be known from the words of the Lord Himself, in the
following passages. In John: As the Father raiseth the dead and maketh
them live, so also the Son maketh whom He will to live. As the Father
hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself (John 5:21, 26). "Father" here means the Lord's Divine Itself,
which took on the Human, for this Divine was in Him from conception, and
because He was conceived from this, He called it, and no other,
"Father." The "Son" means the Lord's Divine Human; that this, in like
manner, is life itself, the Lord teaches in express words, saying, "as
the Father maketh to live, the Son also maketh whom He will to live;"
and "as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself." "To have life in Himself" is to be Life itself;
the others are not life, but they have life from that Life. \[8\] In the
same: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no one cometh unto the
Father but through Me (John 14:6). "I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life," was said of the Lord's Human; for He also says, "no one comes
unto the Father but through Me," His "Father" being the Divine in Him,
which was His own Divine. This makes clear that the Lord also, in
respect to His Human, is Life, consequently that His Human also in like
manner is Divine. \[9\] In the same: Jesus said, I am the Resurrection
and the Life; he that believeth in Me, though he die yet shall he live.
Everyone that liveth and believeth in Me shall not die forever (John
11:25-26). This, too, the Lord said of His Human; and as He is Life
Itself, and all have life from Him, and those who believe in Him have
life eternal, therefore He says that He is "the Resurrection and the
Life," and "he that believeth in Me shall not die forever;" "to believe
in the Lord" signifies to be conjoined to Him in love and faith, and
"not to die" signifies not to die spiritually, that is, not to be
damned, for the life of the damned is called "death." \[10\] In the
same: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God
was the Word. In Him was life; and the life was the light of men. And
the Word became flesh, and dwelt in us (John 1:1, 4, 14). It is known
that "the Word" means the Lord; His Human is evidently the Word, for it
is said, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt in us;" and that His Human
was equally Divine with the Divine Itself that took on the Human is
evident from this, that a distinction is made between them, and that
each is called God, for it is said, "the Word was with God, and God was
the Word," and "in Him was life." That all live from Him is meant by
"the life was the light of men;" "the light of men" is the life of their
thought and understanding; for the Divine Proceeding, which is specially
meant by "the Word," appears in heaven as the light which enables angels
not only to see, but also to think and understand, and according to its
reception to be wise (see Heaven and Hell, n. 126-140). This light
proceeding from the Lord is life itself, which not only enlightens the
understanding, as the sun of the world does the eye, but also vivifies
it according to reception; and when this light is received in the life,
it is called "the light of life" in the same: Jesus said, I am the light
of the world; he that followeth Me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life (John 8:12). \[11\] He is also called "the bread
of life" in the same: The bread of God is he that cometh down out of
heaven, and giveth life unto the world. I am the Bread of life (John
6:33, 35, 47-48, 51). "The Bread of God" and "the Bread of life" is that
from which all have life. Since the life that is called intelligence and
wisdom is from the Lord, it follows also that life in general is from
Him; for the particular things of life, which make its perfection and
which are insinuated into man according to reception, all belong to the
general life. This life is perfected to the extent that the evils into
which man is born are removed from it. \[12\] That those who are
conjoined to the Lord by means of love and faith receive eternal life,
that is, the life of heaven, which is salvation, is evident from the
following passages. In John: I am the Vine, and ye are the branches; he
that abideth in Me, and I in him, the same beareth much fruit; for
without Me ye cannot do anything. If a man abide not in Me he is cast
forth, and as a branch he withereth (John 15:5-6). In the same: Everyone
who believeth in Me hath eternal life (John 3:14-16). In the same: He
that believeth on the Son hath eternal life; but he that believeth not
the Son shall not see life, but the anger of God abideth on him (John
3:36). In the same: Whoever believeth on the Son hath eternal life, and
I will raise him up at the last day (John 6:40, 47-48, 54). In the same:
The sheep follow Me; and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall
not perish forever (John 10:27-28). And in the same: Search the
Scriptures, they bear witness of Me: but ye will not come unto Me, that
ye may have life (John 5:39-40). "To believe in God" and "to believe the
things that are from God" are mentioned in the Word; and "to believe in
God" is the faith that saves, but "to believe the things that are from
God" is an historical faith, which without the former does not save, and
therefore is not true faith; for "to believe in God" is to know, to
will, and to do; but "to believe the things that are from God" is to
know, and this is possible without willing and doing. Those who are
truly Christians know, will, and do; but those who are not truly
Christians only know; but the latter are called by the Lord "foolish,"
and the former "prudent" (Matt. 7:24, 26). Revelation 6 1. And I saw
when the Lamb had opened the first of the seals, and I heard one of the
four animals saying as with the voice of thunder, Come and see. 2. And I
saw, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him had a bow; and
there was given to him a crown; and he went forth conquering and that he
might conquer. 3. And when he had opened the second seal I heard the
second animal saying, Come and see. 4. And there went forth another
horse that was red; and to him that sat upon him, to him it was given to
take peace from the earth, that they should slay one another; and there
was given unto him a great sword. 5. And when he had opened the third
seal I heard the third animal saying, Come and see. And I saw, and
behold a black horse; and he that sat upon him had a balance in his
hand. 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four animals saying, A
measure of wheat for a denarius, and three measures of barley for a
denarius, and the oil and the wine hurt thou not. 7. And when he had
opened the fourth seal I heard the voice of the fourth animal saying,
Come and see. 8. And I saw, and behold a pale horse, and he that sat
upon him his name was Death, and Hell followed with him. And there was
given unto them the authority to kill over the fourth part of the earth,
with sword and with famine and with death and by the beasts of the
earth. 9. And when he had opened the fifth seal I saw under the altar
the souls of those slain because of the Word of God and because of the
testimony that they held. 10. And they cried out with a great voice
saying, How long, O Lord, who art holy and true, dost Thou not judge and
avenge our blood on those that dwell on the earth? 11. And there was
given to each one of them white robes; and it was said unto them that
they should rest yet a little time until their fellow-servants, and
their brethren, who were to be killed as they also were, should be
fulfilled. 12. And I saw when he had opened the sixth seal, and behold
there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of
hair, and the moon became as blood. 13. And the stars of heaven fell
upon the earth, as a fig-tree casteth her unripe figs when shaken by a
great wind. 14. And the heaven withdrew as a book rolled up; and every
mountain and island were moved out of their places. 15. And the kings of
the earth, and the great ones and the rich, and the commanders of
thousands, and the mighty, and every servant, and every freeman, hid
themselves in the caves, and in the rocks of the mountains. 16. And they
said to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us and hide us from the
face of Him that sitteth on the throne, and from the anger of the Lamb.
17. For the great day of His anger is come; and who is able to stand?

<span class="margnote"><span id="350.">350.</span></span>

EXPOSITION. Verses 1, 2. And I saw when the Lamb had opened the first of
the seals, and I heard one of the four animals saying as with the voice
of thunder, Come and see. And I saw, and behold a white horse; and he
that sat upon him had a bow; and there was given to him a crown; and he
went forth conquering and that he might conquer. 1. "And I saw,"
signifies manifestation of the states of those who are of the church
where the Word is (n. 351); "when the Lamb had opened the first of the
seals," signifies the first manifestation of the Lord (n. 352); "and I
heard one of the four animals saying as with a voice of thunder,"
signifies out of the inmost heaven from the Lord (n. 353); "Come and
see," signifies attention and perception (n. 354). 2. "And I saw and
behold a white horse," signifies the understanding of truth from the
Word (n. 355); "and he that sat upon him had a bow," signifies the
doctrine of charity and faith, by which there is combat against evils
and falsities, and by which they are dispersed (n. 356, 357); "and there
was given to him a crown," signifies eternal life, which is the reward
of victory (n. 358); "and he went forth conquering and that he might
conquer," signifies the removal of evils and of falsities thence at the
end of life, and afterwards to eternity (n. 359).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[304-1](ae07.htm#fr_84.md) Photolithograph has
"breadth" for "wings," Apocalypse Revealed n. 861; Arcana Coelestia n.
1613, 4482, 9487 have "wings."

<span id="fn_85"></span>[304-2](ae07.htm#fr_85.md) "Jezreel" for "Israel;"
see n. 375; Arcana Coelestia n. 3580, where we read "Jezreel."

<span id="fn_86"></span>[313-1](ae07.htm#fr_86.md) Photolithograph has
eorum \[their\]; Apocalypse Explained n. 886 has tuum \[thy\].

<span id="fn_87"></span>[315-1](ae07.htm#fr_87.md) Photolitograph has
"rari;" see n. 386; AR n. 323, also AE, n. 280.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[316-1](ae07.htm#fr_88.md) Photolithograph has
"Uncto," "anointed;" see n. 684.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[323-1](ae07.htm#fr_89.md) Photoliograph has "me,"
so also AR, n. 276, but AE, n. 326 has "te," "thee."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[327-1](ae07.htm#fr_90.md) The photolithograph has
"take."

<span id="fn_91"></span>[328-1](ae07.htm#fr_91.md) The photolithograph has
"our;" see n. 411.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[328-2](ae07.htm#fr_92.md) The photolithograph has
"His;" see AR, n. 21.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[329-1](ae07.htm#fr_93.md) The photolithograph has
"His."

<span id="fn_94"></span>[340-1](ae07.htm#fr_94.md) "Salvation." In AE n.
439, 449, 483 it reads "Israel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 351-400](ae08.md)
