[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yor07)  [Next](yor09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

### THE IN-DWELLING SPIRITS AND SOULS OF MEN.

IN the first volume of this series we found that the Tshi-speaking
peoples believe that every man has dwelling in him a spirit termed a
*kra*, which enters him at birth and quits him at death, and is entirely
distinct from the soul, which, at the death of the body, proceeds to the
Land of the Dead, and there continues the life formerly led by the man
in the world. In the second volume, we found that the Ewe speaking
peoples have a similar belief, the indwelling spirit being by them
termed a *luwo*. The Gã-speaking tribes, situated geographically between
the Tshi and Ewe tribes, have modified this belief, and they assign to
each individual two indwelling spirits, called *kla*, one male and one
female, the former being of a bad and the latter of a good disposition.
Each *kla*, like the *kra* and the *luwo*, is a guardian-spirit, but-and
this is a new departure-they give good or bad advice, and prompt good or
bad actions, according to their respective dispositions. The Yorubas
also have modified what appears to be the original theory of one
in-dwelling and guardian-spirit, and they hold that each man has three
spiritual inmates, the first of whom, *Olori*, dwells in the head, the
second, *Ipin ijeun*, in the stomach, and the third, *Ipori*, in the
great toe.

Olori (*Oni-ori*, owner, or lord, of the head) sometimes called *Ori*
(head, faculty, talent), seems to be the spirit which answers to the
*kra* or *luwo*. He is the protector, guardian, and guide. Offerings are
made to him, chiefly fowls, as with the *kra* and *luwo*, and some of
the blood, mixed with palm-oil, is rubbed upon the forehead. *Olori*
brings good-fortune, whence the proverb, "*Olori* causes the owner of
the head to prosper, and not the crab on the bank of the river." The
symbol of *Olori* is half a calabash studded over with cowries.

Ipin ijeun, or *ipin ojehun* (*ipin*, share, portion; *ijeun*, act of
eating, from *je ohun*, to eat; hence "he who shares in the food"), is
perhaps considered the most important of the three indwelling spirits,
but as he shares in all that the man eats, he has no special sacrifice
offered to him. A proverb says, "There is no *orisha* like the stomach;
it receives food every day." In some respects hunger (*ebi*) seems to be
personified, and to be considered the agent of *Ipin ijeun*; for he is
said to communicate to the man, by pinching his stomach, the desire of
his principal for food. Curiously enough, *Ipin ijeun* is connected with
fire-worship. There is among the Yorubas no god of fire, answering to
the Ewe god *Dso*, but fire (*ina*) was probably once personified, for
it is still spoken of as Abanigbele, "the Inmate." It is not clear by
what process fire-worship came to be blended with that of the indwelling
spirit of the stomach; but the natives explain the connection between
the two by saying that fire is necessary for the preparation of food,
and food is necessary to *Ipin ijeun*, therefore he takes fire under his
protection, and takes care that it is not extinguished. A proverbial
saying runs, "*Ipin ijeun* does not allow fire to depart from the
earth." When fire could only be produced by the tedious process of
rubbing together two sticks, it was no doubt important to keep one or
two embers of a fire always smouldering.

Ipori, the great toe, is the least important of the three guardian
spirits, and sacrifice is rarely offered to him, except when a man is
about to set out on a journey; in which case he anoints the great toe
with a mixture of fowl's blood and palm-oil. Waterfowl are apparently
"unclean" for this purpose, for a proverb says, "A waterfowl is not fit
for the worship of *Ipori*."

The ghost-man, or soul, the "vehicle of individual personal existence,"
is called *iwin*, or *olcan*, but the latter also means "heart." Another
word is *ojiji*, or *oji*, which has the meanings of ghost, shade, or
shadow. After the death of the body, the ghost-man goes to *Ipo-oku*,
"the Land of the Dead" (*Ipo*, place; *oku*, dead), which is beneath the
earth, and where each man does that which he has been accustomed to do,
and holds the same social position as he did in the world. To enable the
ghost to reach this land it is essential that he should have the
prescribed funeral rites performed over him. Should they be omitted, the
ghost wanders about the world, cold, hungry, and homeless, and he runs
the risk of being seized by some of the evil spirits which roam about
the earth in great numbers, and cast by them into *Orun-apadi*, "the
unseen world of potsherds," an uncomfortable place like a pottery
furnace, heaped up with charcoal and the *débris* of broken earthen
pots. Funeral rites cannot, of course, be performed at the moment that
breath leaves the body, but as an earnest of their intention to perform
them, and to prevent the evil spirits from seizing the ghost, the
relations at once offer a sacrifice to propitiate them; and when the
corpse is buried, a fowl, called *Adire-iranna*,\[1\] "the fowl that
buys the road," that is, "that opens a right of way," is sacrificed.

A comparison of the beliefs held by uncivilised peoples concerning the
dead, seems to show that when in a very low state of culture, the ghost,
no doubt from the association of ideas, is held to remain in the
vicinity of the grave in which the body was interred; and that the
notion of a distinct and separate place of abode for the dead, or
Deadland, is only formed when a higher degree of culture is attained.
The first belief often lingers on alongside the second, as in England,
where the churchyard is considered to be the most likely place in which
to see a ghost; and a similar survival among the Yorubas, or a trace of
the former belief, is found in the word *iboji*, "a grave," which means,
literally, "place of the ghost" (*ibi*, place; *oji*, ghost).

The dead often return to earth, and are born again in the families to
which they belonged in their former life. In fact, one might say that
they always return, since every mother sends for a *babalawo* to tell
her

\[1. *Adire*, a fowl; *iranna*, the act of purchasing a right of way,
from *ra*, to buy, and *ona*, road,\]

what ancestral ghost has animated her new-born child, and the *babalawo*
always tells her which it is. As the births at least equal in number the
deaths, and the process of being re-born is supposed to have gone on
"from the beginning," logically there ought to be few, if any, departed
souls in Deadland; but the natives do not critically examine such
questions as this, and they imagine Deadland to be thickly populated,
and at the same time every now-born child, or almost every one, to be a
re-born ghost. As was mentioned in the volume on the Ewe-speaking
peoples,\[1\] this belief in metempsychosis is probably a result of a
confusion between the *ñoli*, or disembodied *luko* (in Tshi, the
*sisa*), and the soul or ghostman, and we may here endeavour to sketch
in the origin and probable development of these vaxious beliefs.

There can be little reasonable doubt but that the notion that man
possesses a soul, an entity that continues his personality after death,
arose from dreams, after the manner shown by Mr. Herbert Spencer in his
"Principles of Sociology." \[2\] A man dreams that he is going through
various adventures, but, as the evidence of his companions shows him
that he has not really left their company, he comes to the conclusion
that he has a second individuality, something that is himself and yet is
detachable, something that can go out of him, and does so go out when he
is asleep. Among the lower races all over the world, dreams are believed
to be the adventures of

\[1. Pp. 114 and 115.

2\. Pp. 148 *et seq.*\]

the spiritual man while detached from the bodily man during sleep. Then,
as he dreams of men whom he knows to be dead and buried, and naturally
dreams of them as he was accustomed to see them, he concludes that this
second individuality can and does exist, entirely independently of the
body, after death, and preserves the appearance and characteristics of
the bodily-man. At this stage of belief the spiritual-man, or
life-phantom, and the soul, or ghost-man, are one and the same. Then,
seemingly, in some cases, this second individuality becomes divided into
two separate entities-one, a life-phantom, which enters the body at
birth, goes out and indulges in adventures during the sleep of the body,
and quits it at death; the other, a soul, or death-phantom, which, after
death, continues the life. and personality of the former bodily-man.

It is possible that this conception of two different entities was
brought about, partly at least, by the desire to explain the
reproduction by heredity of physical characteristics. Children generally
resemble their parents, and frequently reproduce their mannerisms most
remarkably. As soon as the savage begins to speculate at all, he begins
to think of this phenomenon, which cannot fail to arrest his attention.
He can, and no doubt often does, come to the conclusion that the dead
are reborn again in their descendants; he invents the doctrine of
metempsychosis; but in some cases, and the negro tribes of the Gold and
Slave Coasts seem to be examples, he appears to feel that this
explanation is unsatisfactory. And for this reason. He still dreams of
persons who are dead, whence he believes that they exist after death;
and he must often dream of dead friends or relations whose
characteristics have been reproduced in their children, or, since they
had a common ancestor, in some collateral member of the same family. He
cannot, then, in these cases, conclude that the dead have returned to
earth in the persons of their descendants; for the evidence of his
dreams proves to him that they still exist as ghost-men, and are in
every respect as they were when alive in the world. On the other hand,
the evidence of his eyes shows him that their physical peculiarities are
reborn in children now living. He therefore divides the second
individuality into two -from, so to say, the *kra-soul*, which was one
entity, he makes two, the *kra* and the soul, the former of which
inhabits the body during life, and after death enters a new human body
in the same family; while the latter remains dormant, as it were, during
life, but after death continues the existence of the man as an
individual. The reproduction of features, mannerisms, &c., is thus
accounted for by the *kra*, while the theory of the soul satisfactorily
accounts for what the uncivilised man believes to be the incontestable
evidence of his dreams.\[1\]

If this view be correct it will probably be found that several other
races have divided the originally conceived entity into two. The *genius
natalis* of the

\[1. The Awunas, an Eastern Ewe tribe, say that the lower jaw is the
only part of the body which a child derives from its mother, all the
rest being derived from the. ancestral luwoo (the Tshi *kra*). The
father furnishes nothing.\]

Romans resembled the *kra* in that it was a gnardian-spirit which
entered man at birth, but, unlike the *kra*, it perished at his death.
It was certainly quite separate and distinct from the soul, or
ghost-man, which went to Hades. We say advisedly that the *genius
natalis* dwelt in the man from birth, because to practise abstinence was
"to defraud one's *genius*," and to eat, drink, and be merry was "to
indulge one's *genius*," \[1\] thus showing that the *genius* was bound
up with the man just as is the *kra*. As with the *kra*, the birthday
was particularly set apart for the worship of the *genius*.
Subsequently, the Romans, under the influence of dualism, just as the
Gã-tribes have done, divided the *genius* into two-one of a good
disposition and one of a bad.

Similar conceptions of two entities, the *kra*, or life-phantom, and the
soul, or death-phantom, among the Navajo and Algonquin Indians of North
America, the Karens of Burma, and the Fijians, were mentioned in the
last volume,\[2\] but whether these people believe in metempsychosis is
uncertain; and to them we may now add the Greenlanders,\[3\] and the
ancient Egyptians, whose *ka* appears to closely resemble the
*kra*.\[4\] A correspondent informs me that the Irish peasants of County
Mayo also believe in an entity like the *kra*. They call it the
"spirit," consider it to be perfectly distinct from the soul, and liable
to be stolen by the fairies during the sleep of its possessor, who, on
awakening, is ignorant of his loss, but

\[1. See *Tibullus*, Bohn's Edition, note 1, p. 126.

2\. Pp. 16 and 17.

3\. Cranz, *Grönland*, p. 251.

4\. S. Laing, *Human Origins*, p. 119

gradually fades away and dies. It is also liable to be seized by the
fairies, at the moment of death of the person whose body it bas
tenanted.

The Yorubas, it seems probable, have arrived at the doctrine of
inetempsychosis after having passed through a phase of belief similar to
that now held by the Tshi and Ewe tribes. The belief in one indwelling
spirit has been changed into a belief in three indwelling spirits, and
this multiplication has caused confusion. These indwelling spirits do
not, at the death of the body, enter a new-born human child in the same
family, so that the phenomena of heredity cannot be explained as being
due to their agency; and the Yorubas have reverted to the theory of
metempsychosis to account for them. The belief in the spirits called
*abiku* is very probably a corruption of the former *kra*-a belief, for
if a *sisa*, or disembodied *kra*, enters a human body it causes
sickness and death, just as the *abiku* does.

The souls of the dead are sometimes reborn in animals, and occasionally,
though but rarely, in plants. In the ideas of the natives, animals,
though they differ in shape from a man, possess passions and moral
qualities identical with those of the human being. Animals also possess
souls which, like the souls of men, go to Deadland. Hence, as men and
animals have so many characteristics in common, it does not require any
great stretch of iniagination for the native to fancy that the soul may
be re-born in an animal. When a plant is concerned the difference is
greater; but if, as we hold, the Yoruba tribes passed through a phase of
belief similar to that held by the Tshi tribes at the present day, they
at one time believed that trees, shrubs, &c., and, in fact, all things
not made by human hands, were animated by kras, which may account for
the extension of the doctrine of metempsychosis to objects so unlike
man.

The animal in which human souls are most commonly re-born is the hyena,
whose half-human laugh may perhaps account for the belief. Human souls
are also reborn in different kinds of monkeys, but chiefly in the
solitary yellow monkey, called *oloyo*; and in these cases the human
appearance and characteristics of monkeys no doubt furnishes the key to
the belief.

As has been said, the re-birth of a human soul in a plant is rarely
spoken of, and usually we can discover the reason for the supposed
transmigration, as in the following tale:

"There were two boys, brothers, who knew and sang the popular songs of
the country so well, that they were in great demand for festive
occasions.

"One day they were asked to go to a festival at a neighbouring village,
and their mother gave them permission.

"They went to the village, where the people were assembled to play, and
they sang their songs and beat their drums so well that the people
rewarded them highly. They gave to each boy a thousand cowries, and
plenty to eat and drink. Then they dismissed them next morning to return
home.

"On the way back the elder boy, covetous of the thousand cowries that
had been given to the younger, led him off the path into the forest, and
murdered him. Then he took the thousand cowries, added them to those
which he already had, and returned home.

"When he came back alone, his mother asked him where was his brother. 'I
left him behind on the road,' said the boy.

"The day passed, and night began to fall, and still the younger brother
had not returned home. Then his mother and her neighbours went to look
for the child, but they could not find him. They searched for him for
many days, but found him not. They concluded that someone had carried
him off to sell him.

"Some months afterwards the mother went into the forest to look for
leaves for medicine, and she came to the place where the child had been
murdered. The body of the boy had already decayed, and from his bones
had sprung up an *olu*.\[1\] The *olu* was very fine and large, and when
the mother saw it she cried, I Oh! what a fine *olu*.' She was stooping
down to pick it, when the *olu* began singing\~--

'Do not pluck me, mother,  
Do not pluck me, mother,  
Do not pluck me, mother,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.

I went to the village frolic,  
I went to the village frolic,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.  
I was given a thousand cowries,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.

\[1. Olu, an edible fungus.\]

'Do not pluck me, mother,  
Do not pluck me, mother,  
Do not pluck me, mother,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.

'My brother receivcd a thousand cowries,  
My brother received a thousand cowries,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.  
But he slew me here for *my* cowries,  
I'm a lowly plant on the ground.'

"When the mother heard the *olu* sing this she ran home, called her
husband, and the two returned to the forest. When the man saw the fine
*olu*, he stretched out his hand to gather it, and the *olu* sang again-

'Do not pluck me, father.'  
(etc., etc., as before.)

The father went to the king of the country, and told him all that had
happened. The king himself came to see the *olu*. He stooped to pick the
*olu*, and the *olu*, sang-

'Do not pluck me, *oba*.'\[1\]  
(etc., etc., as before.)

Then the king sent and ordered the elder brother to be brought before
him. And when the boy beard what the *olu* had sung he confessed. The
king said, 'As you took your brother and slew him, so will we now take
you and slay you. Then shall the child come back to life.'

"So the elder brother was killed and the younger came back to life, as
the king had said."

Here the connection between the *obu* and the dead

\[1. *Oba*, king.\]

child is obvious. It sprang from his bones, and was nourished by his
decaying body, so that it might well be imagined that the soul of the
child, which stayed with the remains instead of proceeding to Deadland,
because no funeral rites had been performed, passed into the fungus.

As we have said, the soul, or ghost-man, after the death of the body,
proceeds to Deadland, and food, drink, cowries, and property of various
kinds are placed in the grave with the corpse, to equip the ghost for
his new sphere; while, before the grave is filled up, a goat is
sacrificed to the deceased, and wishes offered for his safe journey,
such as "May you arrive in peace," "May you not stray from the right
path," &c.

It would certainly appear as if the dead were cognizant of and able to
influence the affairs of the living, for it is usual for offerings and
prayers to be made to them from time to time; and sometimes the skull of
the deceased is exhumed and placed in a small temple, where offerings
are made to it. Before taking the field for war, too, offerings are made
at the graves of warriors of renown, and their assistance in the coming
campaign is supplicated. Yet a proverb says, "As grass cannot grow in
the sky, so the dead cannot look out of the grave into the street," from
which it might be inferred that the dead are not cognizant of what is
taking place in the world, or at all events do not know what is
occurring till it is made known to them through the medium of sacrifice,
and several folk-lore tales point to this conclusion as well. The
following is an example:

A woman, an inhabitant of an inland town, who was going to the sea-shore
to make salt by boiling sea-water, a common industry, and who expected
to be away from home for some time, gave, on the eve of her departure,
and in the presence of witnesses, a necklace of valuable beads to a
neighbour, to be kept for her during her absence. The neighbour, a woman
with two boys, accepted the trust, and, for safe custody, made a hole in
the mud wall of her house, into which she put the necklace, and then
closed the aperture with fresh mud, which she smoothed down to conform
with the wall. Unfortunately the woman died before the owner of the
necklace returned, and the secret of its hiding-place died with her, so
that when the owner at last came back and claimed her property, it could
not be found.

The woman made a great commotion about the loss. She would not believe
the two children when they declared that they had not seen or even heard
of the necklace, and she took them before the chief, and charged them
with theft. The chief heard the case. The fact of the necklace having
been entrusted to the deceased woman was proved; the boys declared that
they knew nothing of it, but the chief held that they were responsible.
If they had not stolen it they knew where it was. They must restore it
or pay the value. Such was the chief's decision, and in order to compel
the elder boy to make restitution, he caused the younger to be "put in
log," and threatened to sell him if the missing property were not
recovered within a certain time.

In this dilemma the elder boy, knowing that human agency could avail him
nought, souoght assistance from the gods. He went to the head priest of
the *babalawos* at the town of Ife, unfolded his tale, and begged for
aid. The priest consulted the god Ifa, and Ifa replied that in order to
know what his mother had done with the necklace, the boy must go to
Deadland and ask her. The child said he was ready to go, but how was he
to get there? Then the oracle instructed him as follows:--

"Let the child in search of his mother  
Offer an ebon sheep to the dead,  
When night falls in the grove of Ifa.

Let the child in search of his mother  
Sprinkle his eyes with lustral water,  
Then shall the dead be visible to him.

Let the child in search of his mother  
Follow the shadows' noiseless footsteps,  
So shall he reach the land of the dead."

The *babalawo* instructed the boy that, upon making the necessary,
payment, the door-keeper of Deadland would allow him to enter, and he
warned him not to touch any of the dead, or else he would not be able to
return to earth. Supposing all went well, and he returned again to the
grove of Ifa, from which he would set forth, he must again sprinkle his
eyes with the water of purification, to restore their natural properties
to them, and then offer a living sacrifice to Ifa in gratitude for his
assistance.

The boy followed out his instructions to the letter, and arrived safely
in Deadland, where he saw his mother seated near a spring, around which
many other dead people were walking slowly or sitting down. He
approached his mother and called to her, whereupon she rose and came to
him, saying, "What brings thee here my son? Why hast thou come to the
land of the dead?" The boy replied, "The chief has put my brother in
log, and will sell him as a slave if the necklace which was given thee
to keep is not restored to our neighbour. Ifa the Great, the Unveiler of
Futurity, the Governor of Lots, has permitted me to come here to ask
thee where it is. Say, where is it?" His mother told him that it was
hidden in the wall, explaining to him how to find the exact spot, and
the boy was so overjoyed that, forgetting the warning of the priest, he
tried to embrace her; but she stepped back hastily and avoided him,
saying, "Touch me not my son, or the road to the world will be closed to
thee for ever. Go home and effect thy brother's deliverance, and make
frequent offerings to me, for I need them much." Then she turned away
and went and sat down again by the spring.

The boy came back to the world, and found himself in the grove of Ifa,
where he sprinkled his eyes as directed, and offered sacrifices. Then he
went to the chief and told him what had occurred; so the necklace was
found and his brother released. The two boys were not neglectful of
their mother's last request. Everyfifth day they placed fresh offerings
on her grave, and kept it always plentifully supplied with fresh water.

In this story the dead mother evidently did not know what was going on
in the world above, for she had to ask her son why he came, yet she was
able to reap the advantage of the offerings made on her grave.

Ordinarily, people do not have to undertake the dangerous journey to
Deadland in order to consult the dead. When the members of a family wish
to know how a departed relative is faring below, they apply to a priest,
who takes a young child, bathes his face in water of purification,
which, it may be remarked, is prepared with edible snails aud
shea-butter, offers a sacrifice in a new earthen vessel, digs a hole in
the earth in a sacred grove in the middle of the night, and bids the
child look into it. Through the magical properties of the lustral water,
the child, on looking down into the hole, is able to see into Deadland,
and so can tell the priest all that is going on there. When the priest
has obtained the information he requires, he again bathes the child's
eyes with the water of purification, which causes him instantly to lose
all recollection of what he has seen and heard. The priest thus remains
the sole possessor of the information, and be is able to tell the family
that employed him what he pleases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Measurements of Time.](yor09)
