[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yor05)  [Next](yor07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

### PRIESTS AND WORSHIP.

THE Yoruba priesthood is divided into recognised orders, but before
describing them it will be necessary to give some account of a secret
society which is inseparably connected with the priesthood, and which,
except in Jebu, Where it is called Oshogbo, is known as the Ogboni
Society.

The Ogboni Society really holds the reins of government, and kings
themselves are obliged to submit to its decrees. The members are
popularly believed to possess a secret from which they derive their
power, but their only secret appears to be that of a powerful and
unscrupulous organisation, each member of which is bound to assist every
other, while all are bound to carry out, and if necessary enforce, the
decrees of the body. Each town and village has its Ogboni "lodge," and
the members recognise each other by conventional signs and passwords..
At their meetings, which are held with a great affectation of mystery,
they deliberate upon all matters which interest the tribe or community.
The decisions of the Ogboni are final, and nothing of importance can be
done without their consent When the missionaries wished to establish
theniselves at Abeokuta, the king could not grant the necessary
permission till the Ogbonis had considered the matter and signified
their consent. The power of the Ogbonis, however, varies in different
states, and in Ibadan they seem to be little more than public
executioners.

Of course, since the organization is secret, little can really be known
about it. Death is said to be the penalty for betraying the secrets of
the order. According to native report, a member who has been convicted
of such an offence is placed in a narrow cell, with his legs protruding
through two holes in the wall into an adjoining cell, where they are
fastened to two stakes driven into the earthen floor. The executioner
sits in this adjoining cell, and the offender is tortured to death by
having the flesh scraped from his legs with sharp-edged shells. Whether
this is true or not it is impossible to say.

According to some natives the Ogboni Society has for its chief object
the preservation of established religious customs, while according to
others it is principally occupied with the civil power. It really
appears to concern itself with every matter of public interest, and
seems to resemble in all important particulars a very similar society,
called Porro, which is found among the Timnis of Sierra Leone. What is
quite certain is that the protecting deity of the Ogboni is the goddess
Odudua, who is generally spoken of by members by her title Ile (Earth).
It seems probable that the society was originally intended for the
initiation to manhood of youths who had arrived at puberty, like the
Boguera of the Beebuanas, the Niamwali of the Manganja, and the ceremony
of the Mpongwe, described by Mr. Winwood Reade,\[1\] and that its civil
and judicial functions are later usurpations. If this were so, it would
to some extent be connected with phallic worship, and phallic emblems
are very commonly seen carved on the doors of Ogboni lodges. The name
Ogboni is probably derived from Ogba, "Companion."

The Alafin of Yoruba is the chief of all the Ogboni, and he thus is able
to exert influence beyond the limits of his own kingdom. In most states
the chief of the Ogboni is the head of the priesthood, and is styled
*Ekeji Orisha*, "Next to the Gods." He convokes councils of priests on
extraordinary occasions, and decides disputed points. In Jebu every man
of rank is an Oshogbo, but in lbadan, as has been said, the Ogboni seem
chiefly to exercise the functions of executioners. Criminals are
delivered to them for execution and are put to death secretly in the
Ogboni lodge. The heads are afterwards fixed to a tree in the
market-place, but the bodies are never seen again, and the relatives are
thus unable to give them the rites of sepulture, which is considered a
great disgrace.

The Yoruba priesthood (*Olorisha*, priest) is divided into three orders,
each of which is further subdivided into ranks or classes.

The first order comprises three ranks, viz. (1) the *Babalawo*, or
priests of Ifa; (2) priests who practise medicine, and who serve Osanhin
and Aroni, gods of medicine; (3) priests of Obatala and Odudua. White

\[1. "Savage Africa," p. 246.\]

is the distinguishing colour of this order, and all priests belonging to
it invariably wear white cloths. The *Babalawo* wear armlets made of
palm-fibre, and carry a cow-tail (*iruke*), while priests of Obatala are
distinguished by necklaces of white beads. There are two high priests of
this order, one of whom resides at Ife and the other at Ika, some
distance to the north.

The second order comprises (1) the Oni-Shango, or priests of Shango; and
(2) priests of all other gods not before mentioned, except Orisha Oko.
Red and white are the distinguishing colours of this order, and all
members of it shave the crown of the head. Priests of Shango wear
necklaces of black, red, and white beads; those of Ogun an iron bracelet
on the left arm; and those of Oshun, one of Shango's wives, brass
armlets and anklets.

The third order consists of (1) priests of Orisha Oko, god of
Agriculture, and (2) priests of demi-gods, or deified men, such as
Huisi, who defended Oya against Shango. Priests of this order are
distinguished by a small white mark painted on the forehead.

The reason of the *Babalawo* taking the highest place in the priesthood
is that it is through his agency, as the priest of Ifa, the god of
divination, that man learns what is necessary to be done to please the
other gods. The priests of Ifa thus, to a certain extent, control and
direct the worship of the other gods, and in time of calamity, war, or
pestilence it is their business to declare what ought to be done to make
the gods propitious.

The Magba, or chief priest of Shango, has twelve assistants, who are
termed, in order of authority, right-hand (*Oton*), left-hand (*Osin*),
third, fourth, fifth, and so on. They reside near Kuso, the spot at
which Shango is said to have descended into the earth.

The priests, besides acting as intermediaries between the gods and men,
preside at all trials by ordeal, and prepare and sell charms, amulets,
&c. The priests of Ifa are diviners proper, but other priests also
practise divination, though not with palm-nuts and the board peculiar to
Ifa. The methods are various; one, called *keke*, is a casting of lots
by means of small sticks or stalks of grass, each of which represents a
particular individual; another, called *gogo*, is a drawing of lots. A
certain number of grass stalks, one of which is bent, are held in the
band or wrapped in a piece of cloth, so that the ends only show; and
each person in turn draws one, the bent stalk indicating the one who is
in fault. The person of a priest is sacred, and violence offered to one
is severely punished.

The office of priest is hereditary in the families of priests, but
members are recruited in other modes. Seminaries for youths and girls,
like those of the *kosio* of the Ewe tribes, are a regular institution,
and in them applicants for the priestly office undergo a novitiate of
two or three years, at the end of which they are consecrated and take a
new name. The ceremony of consecration is very similar to that described
in the last volume.\[1\]

\[1. Ewe-Speaking Peoples," p. 143.\]

The ordinary service of the temples is performed by the dependents of
the priesthood, the affiliated youths, and the "wives" of the gods, who
keep the vessels filled with water, and every fifth day sweep out the
temples. In the vicinity the affiliated young people practise the
religious dances and songs, and for hours together may be heard
repeating chants of only two or three notes, till they work themselves
up into a state of frenzy, and break out into loud shrieks and cries.

Temples are ordinarily circular huts built of clay, with conical roofs
thatched with grass; the interior is usually painted with the colour
sacred to the god, and the doors and shutters, and the posts which
support the overhanging eaves, are carved. The temples of the chief gods
are usually situated in groves of fine trees, amongst which one or two
large silk-cotton trees (*Bombaces*), which seem to be regarded with
veneration throughout all West Africa, tower above the rest. From the
summits of the trees, or from tall bamboos, long streamers flutter in
the wind and testify to the sanctity of the locality. Sometimes there is
a grove only, without any temple, but more frequently the grove or
avenue adjoins a shrine. These groves are regarded with superstitious
reverence, and have proper names; a grove sacred to Ifa and his
companion Odu is, for instance, called an Igbodu. Near the western
entrance of the town of Ode Ondo is a celebrated grove or sacred avenue,
to one side of which, in the adjoining bush, the sacrifice of human
victims and the execution of criminals takes place. Persons approaching
each other in opposite directions are not allowed to pass each other in
this avenue, one of them being required to turn back and wait till the
path is clear.

The temples of tutelary deities of towns are usually to be found in the
central square of the town, or near the principal gate, and those of the
tutelary deities of families or households near the house-door or in the
yard. In shape and construction they resemble the temples of the chief
gods, but those of the pro. tecting deities of households are mere
miniatures, and are sometimes only small sheds, open at the ends and
sides. Besides these structures, which are seen in every street, one
often finds larger huts, circular in shape, thatched with grass, and
larcre enough to contain a seated man. These, which might be mistaken
for temples but for the fact that they contain no images, are built for
the accommodation of pious persons who wish to meditate and pray. A
temple is called *Ile Orisha*, "House of the Orisha."

The Yoruba gods are almost invariably represented by images in human
form, which appear grotesque, but are not meant to be so, the
grotesqueness being merely the result of want of skill. These images are
regarded as emblems of absent gods. They themselves are not worshipped,
and there is no idolatry in the proper sense of the word, though no
doubt there is a tendency to confuse the symbol with the god. Likewise,
through a confusion of objective and subjective connection, there is an
idea that the god enters into the image to receive the sacrifices
offered by his faithful followers, and to listen to their adoration and
prayers. Earthen vessels receive the libations of blood -and palm-oil,
while the yolks of eggs, which here, as elsewhere in West Africa, are
regarded as offerings peculiarly proper to the gods, are smeared upon
the posts, door-sills, and threshold.\[1\] In important temples, and
also in the houses of kings and chiefs of high rank, a tall drum, called
a *gbedu*, is kept. It is usually covered with carvings representing
animals and birds, and the *phallus*. This drum is only beaten at
religious fetes and public ceremonies, and a portion of the blood of the
victims immolated is always sprinkled upon the symbolic carvings, upon
which palm-wine, the yolks of eggs, and the feathers of sacrificed
chickens are also smeared. In this case the offering is to the
protecting spirit of the drum, which is that of a slave who has been
sacrificed on it. This plan of supplying an artificial guardian-spirit
for objects, other than natural objects, which are considered of
importance, is a development of ghostworship, and on the Gold Coast such
guardians are provided for the "stools" of kings and chiefs, as well as
for temple and state drums.

Sacrifice is the most important part of ceremonial worship, and no god
can be consulted without it, the value of the offering varying with the
importance of the occasion. Besides the offerings thus made for special
purposes, or on special occasions, persons who are the followers of a
god-that is, those who wear his distinguishing badge and are believed to
be under his protection- make, as a rule, daily offerings of small

\[1. A purificatory egg was used to propitiate the goddess Isis
(Juvenal, Sat. vi. 518).\]

value, such as a few cowries, or a little maize-flour, palm-oil, or
palm-wine.

As has already been mentioned, each god has certain animals which it is
proper to sacrifice to him; to use the phraseology of the Old Testament,
every god has his "clean" and his "unclean" animals. Some sacrifices are
"unclean" to all the gods, as the turkey-buzzard (*gunu-gunu*), the
vulture (*akala*), and the grey parrot (*ofe*). As the two former devour
offal and carrion, and are, in fact, scavengers, we can see a reason for
considering them unclean; but why the grey parrot should also be so
considered is not evident. The natives endeavour to account for the
"uncleanliness" of these birds by two popular sayings, which run as
follows:--

"The turkey-buzzard was required to offer sacrifice, but he refused to
do so; the vulture was required to offer sacrifice, but he also refused.
When the pigeon was required to offer sacrifice, he did so."

"The grey parrot being required to offer sacrifice, refused to offer it;
but the green parrot took the sacrifice and offered it. After all, the
grey parrot is a citizen of Oyo (the capital of Yoruba) and the green
parrot an inhabitant of the country, and yet people thoughit that the
grey parrot was not wise."

As the turkey-buzzard, vulture, and grey parrot refused to offer
sacrifice, they became "unclean," while the pigeon and the green parrot,
which offered it, remained "clean." The latter part of the second saying
appears to be ironical, for the grey parrot, in consequence of its
uncleanliness, is never offered up, while the green parrot is
sacrificed.

On important occasions the priest designates to the suppliants the
sacrifice which he thinks necessary to induce the god to lend a
favourable ear. They prostrate themselves before the shrine with cries
of "*Toto, toto-huu*," an exclamation which denotes humiliation and
submission, while the priest, in a long harangue, presents their
petition, or case, to the god. He usually begins his address by
flattering the god, dwelling upon his fame and power, and showing how
his humble servitors are entirely dependent upon his good-will. Then he
calls attention to the self-abasement of the god's faithful followers
"So-and-so," to the value of the victim which they have brought him, and
begs him to be propitious and listen to their humble prayer. He then
sacrifices the victim, sprinkles some of the blood on the image, pours
the remainder on the ground,\[1\] and places the head and entrails in a
shallow earthen vessel in front of the temple.

Sacrifices are thus offered in the presence of the god, that is, before
his image, which he is supposed to animate for the time being, but there
is one exception to this general rule. This is, on occasions when
sacrifice is made at cross-roads, or at a point where several roads
meet, in order to avert an impending calamity. In this case the
sacrifice is probably made to the legion of spirits, mostly evil, who
are supposed to haunt the forests and uninhabited tracts of country; and
the general belief is that the approaching danger is diverted from the
proper road., and turned away from the community which it

\[1. Whence it is that tbe verb *da*, "to be poured out," has also the
meaniug "to be acceptable as a sacrifice."\]

threatened. In reference to this practice a proverb says, "The
cross-roads do not dread sacrifices."\[1\]

Sometimes, in response to the appeal of the priest, the god answers in a
bird-like, twittering voice, first heard whispering at a little distance
and then comingnearer. When this occurs, the worshippers lie prone with
their faces to the ground, awe-stricken, while the priest carries on a
conversation with the spirit voice, and subsequently interprets it to
the auditors. This conception that a spirit-voice should be a
twittering, chirping, or whistling sound is very wide-spread; as Dr.
Tyler has shown, it used to exist ainong the Greeks and Romans, and it
may at the present day be found aniong the Indian tribes of North
America, the Zulus, and the Polynesians.\[2\] The spirit-voice is no
doubt produced by a confederate priest, by incans of a blade of grass,
or a leaf, placed between the teeth.

The image of a god which is merely tutelar to one individual is only
treated with respect during the life of that individual, after which it
is thrown away. Since the god is personal to the individual, and has no
other purpose than to protect him, the image is only of use as a vehicle
of communication between them so long as the man lives. After his death
the god no longer enters or animates the image, which in consequelice
loses its sacred character, and becomes an ordinary object of no value.
Thus, whenever a man dies, his tutelary god, if he had one, is thrown
away

\[1. The ancients offered sacrifices -it the cross-roads to Hekate,
Goddess of Night. (Lucian, "Dialogues of the Dead," I.).

2\. "Primitive Culture," vol. i. p. 452\]

by the surviving members of the household, and the extraordinary belief,
held by some Europeans, that the negro makes and breaks his gods at
will, may probably be accounted for as a misconception of this practice.

Although human sacrifices occur amongst the Yoruba tribes, we find among
them no parallel to the wholesale slaughters which take place, or rather
used to take place, in Ashanti and Dahoini. The reason no doubt is, that
the Yoruba kings and chiefs are not sufficiently powerful to be able to
sacrifice life on a large scale; for the more powerful the monarch, the
more he can afford to disregard public opinion, and since the masses
supply the victims, human sacrifices are never regarded by them with
favour. Whether, when Yoruba was a homogeneous and powerful state, human
sacrifices were a state institution, as they were in Dahomi, we have no
means of ascertaining, but all the probabilities point in that
direction.

During the period that the Yorubas have been known to Europeans no large
number of victims has been put to death even on the occasion of the
death of a king. A king of Oyo died on April 27th, 1859, and only four
men were sacrificed, but forty-two of his wives poisoned themselves in
order to accompany him to the Land of the Dead. In Ondo about twenty
persons were sacrificed when a king died, and there was an established
procedure, one victim having to be immolated when the corpse was washed,
four at different entrances to the palace, and a sixth in the
market-place. On the day of the burial from eight to ten victims, with a
cat, were either killed and interred with the corpse or buried alive,
and during the three months which are required to elapse before a new
king can be installed there were occasional sacrifices. In 1882 the king
of Ondo entered into an engagement with the government of Lagos to put
an end to human sacrifices, but he does not appear to have kept it. At
the present day, amongst all the tribes, when a king or chief dies it is
usual for two of his wives to commit suicide, and should no volunteers
be forthcoming, two are selected and put to death. Horses are often
killed and buried with their owners.

There was until very recently, and perhaps still is, an annual human
sacrifice at Abeokuta, called the "basket-sacrifice," a euphemism
designed to conceal the real nature of the ceremony. The victim was
enclosed in a long basket, as in Dabomi, from whence perhaps the custom
was adopted, thrown down from a height, and despatched by a mob armed
with clubs. It was a national offering, but when times were prosperous
the victim was often spared and dedicated to a god, whose temple-slave
be then became. There used also to be an annual sacrifice of one human
victim at Ikoradu, and a similar offering every sixth year to the god
Ogun at Ikriku.

In times of great urgency human sacrifices are offered to some of the
gods, for example, to Shango, Ifa, Elegba, Ogun, Olokun, and Olosa; but
they are nearly always made at night, and the people are required to
remain in their houses. There is none of the publicity and display which
we found in Ashanti and Dahoini, and so the people escape the
brutalising effect which the frequent spectacle of scenes of bloodshed
must produce. Even the priests, always the last to be influenced by a
change of public opinion, seem to regard human sacrifice as something to
be deplored, but occasionally necessary. The victim is slaughtered
almost in secret, and the sound of the temple-drunis and the mournful
chants of the assistants alone inform the people of what is taking
place. The natives avoid any direct reference to the subject. "The night
is bad," they say. As on the Gold Coast, the victim is always
decapitated in front of the image, so that the blood from the severed
arteries may spurt over it. For Elegba the body is opened and the
entrails placed before him in a shallow dish. The body of a man
sacrificed to the sea-god Olokun is thrown into the sea, and that of a
man offered to Olosa into the lagoon.

The Commissioners who were sent to the interior in 1886 to break up the
camps of the belligerent tribes, succeeded in inducing the rulers of
Ijesa and Ekiti to sign an enactment abolishing human sacrifices, both
to the gods and at the funeral obsequies of men of rank. They
endeavoured to obtain a similar undertaking from the Ifes, but here they
met with some difficulty, Ife being the home of human sacrifice, and
though the chief men promised to put an end to the practice, only four
of the eighteen persons who composed the Ife Counoil signed the
agreement. The Oni of Ife said that sacrifice was made at Ife for the
whole human race, the white man not excepted; and that if the sacrifice
made on his behalf were to be discontinued, his superior knowled, and
the arts derived therefrom, would depart from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Egungun, Oro, Abiku, and Various
Superstitions.](yor07.md)
