[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tdp07)  [Next](tdp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter VII

Nanny Norrish and the Pixies.--The Ploughman's Breakfast.--The Pixy
Riders.--Jan Coo.

<span id="img_21"></span> ![](img/21.jpg)

 

IT has been observed that the pixies will sometimes visit with
punishment those who have spoken contemptuously of them, or who have
dared to doubt the power they are capable of exercising. And these
visitations have invariably compelled the scoffers to acknowledge
themselves to be in the wrong, and to be careful how they spoke of the
fairy elves in the future. Numerous are the instances of folks having
been pixy-led and obliged to wander about on the moor until the spell,
under the influence of which they were, has been withdrawn; and many are
the incidents related of people having been plagued or frightened in
various ways, who have gained the displeasure of the goblins. But the
following adventure of Nanny Norrish will suffice to show the folly of
treating the pixies with disdain.

NANNY NORRISH AND THE PIXIES.

In the days when the oldest man now living on the moor was but a child,
a village pedagogue dwelt in the parish of Widecombe whose name was John
Norrish.

His abode, which also served as his school-house, was at Dunstone
Cottage, near Widecombe church-town, and here honest John, who was
unfortunately a cripple, wielded the birch for the benefit (?) of the
youth of that moorland village.

The education to he acquired at John's establishment was of a most
elementary character, but while the good schoolmaster had not much
learning to impart to his pupils he was perfectly honest towards their
parents, for he took but little fee or reward; so little, indeed, that
had it not been for the earnings of his wife Nanny, he would have found
it an impossibility to "make the two ends meet." But her exertions were
such that they produced wherewith to supplement what the parents of
John's scholars paid him to such an extent as to enable them to live
very comfortably.

And in what manner was it that Nanny was able to contribute to the
income of the pedagogue? While his time was devoted to training the
young ideas, and instilling into their minds good moral precepts, she
found employment for hers at the wash-tub, visiting many farm-houses in
the course of a week, for the purpose of pursuing her very necessary
avocation.

A good-tempered old creature was Nanny. Never afraid of work, and never
grumbling if on her arrival at the scene of her day's labour she found
that a greater number of articles than usual needed the application of
her soap and water, but always entering heartily upon her duties, and
ceasing not until everything that had passed through her hands had been
spread out on the furze bushes to bleach. And then Nanny, after her
supper, would take the small wage she had earned by her day's labour and
trudge merrily homeward. Sometimes her walk would lead her for several
miles over the moor, but so well did old Nanny know her way about that
she never minded it, and whether it was summer or winter was all one to
her.

Often would the neighbours ask her whether she was not afraid of being
pixy-led when out so late at night, and on more than one occasion, when
she chanced to arrive home later than usual, her husband had exclaimed
as she entered the door, "Good gracious, Nanny, I'm mortal glad thou art
back safe; I was beginning to think thou hadst met with the pixies.' But
Nanny always laughed at such fears, and declared she knew how to take
care of herself, and was not to be frightened. "Pisgies, indeed," she
would say, "I can't believe what they say about mun; I never zeed wan,
an' what's more, if I ded I should'n be afeared." And so Nanny continued
her lonely walks after dark, and laughed at the pixies.

One evening, after having finished her day's work at a farm-house called
Dockwell, in the parish of Widecombe, she prepared to set off on her
homeward journey. The people of the house, who were in the kitchen' when
she left, bade her "Good night," and told her to be careful not to be
led away by the pixies. "Oh, drat the pisgies," exclaimed Nanny, as she
tied her bonnet strings, "I don't believe there's wan left. I've heerd
tell of yolks havin' zeed mun, but I can't believe it, till I zee wan
vor myself; but I knaw I shall never do that;" and bidding those
assembled "Good night," she stepped out into the yard, and gaining the
road, walked boldly on.

The stars were shining brightly, and as Nanny strode forward she very
soon forgot all about the pixies, and began thinking how pleased her
good man would be to see her home so early, for she was rather before
the time she had told him she should return.

But the pixies had not forgotten Nanny. Often had they heard her jeering
at them, but they had suffered her to go unmo!ested, for she had done
them no personal injury. On this particular night, however, she had
actually gone so far as to express her belief that none of the elfin
tribe remained, and they decided it was time that old Nanny should be
taught better, and should be made to speak more respectfully of them in
the future; so they determined upon giving her an ocular demonstration
of their existence.

Nanny trudged on, and when her thoughts were far away from the pixies
and all their works, she was suddenly startled by a loud hubbub, as of
numberless voices close to her, chattering in a shrill key, and as she
afterwards declared, "makin' sich a clatter, as you never heerd."

She stopped--and before she could well collect her senses she saw before
her an immense crowd of little people, standing on one another's heads,
and forming a living pyramid, reaching to an immense height--"piled up,"
as my informant of the circumstance put it, "tower high." (I remember
how the old man's eyes would sparkle when he spoke of the pixies
assembling in such numbers and reaching to such a height, and pictured
to himself Nanny's discomfiture.) But there the little creatures were,
perched one upon the other, "tower high," chattering with all their
might--a veritable tower of Babel--and Nanny Norrish knew she had met
the pixies at last.

The records do not tell us how poor Nanny reached her home. We hope in
safety, for we would fain believe that the pixies only desired to
frighten her, and had no wish to do her harm. The moral, however, is
plain. If you would avoid being molested by these little fairies don't
pretend to despise their power.

The following instance of the pixies' benevolence is worth recording, as
showing us that these merry little goblins are always ready to do an act
of kindness to the cheerful labouring man.

THE PLOUGHMAN'S BREAKFAST.

One beautiful morning a labourer on one of the Dartmoor farms was
engaged in ploughing a field. He had commenced his task at break of day,
and with his team and wooden plough--still called by its old name of
"sull" or "soil," on the moor--had completed many furrows, as the hour
for breakfast drew near. The keen moor air had sharpened his appetite to
such an extent that he more than once looked wistfully towards the gate
of the field, in order to see whether his little son was making his
appearance with his morning meal. But the boy was not to be seen, and
our labourer, trying to forget his hunger, determined to wait patiently,
continuing to plough steadily on, whistling merrily, and ever and anon
calling cheerfully to his team.

In the middle of the field in which he was engaged at work was a huge
granite block, which when the enclosure had been reclaimed from the moor
had been left where it stood, its size forbidding any attempts to clear
it away. As the ploughman passed near this rock on his way across the
field, he was startled at hearing voices, apparently proceeding from
beneath it. He listened, and distinctly heard one, in a louder tone than
the rest, exclaim, "The oven's hot!"

"Bake me a cake, then," instantly cried the hungry ploughman, in whose
mind the very mention of an oven had conjured up thoughts of appetising
cheer; "Bake me a cake, then."

He continued the furrow to the end of the field, when, turning his
plough, he set out on his return journey. When he approached the rock,
what was his surprise and delight at seeing, placed on its surface, a
nice cake, smoking hot. He knew at once that this was the work of the
obliging little pixies, who evidently had a resort under the rock, and
who had taken pity upon his hunger, and provided him with a morning
meal. Seizing the dainty morsel, and seating himself upon the stone, the
ploughman was almost as expeditious in causing it to disappear as the
pixies had been in providing it for him, but while satisfying his hunger
he failed not to feel grateful to the kind little people who, about to
enjoy their own breakfast, were not unmindful of the wants of the poor
labourer.

It is not an unusual thing for the manes of the Dartmoor ponies--or
colts, as they are always termed--to be found tangled in a most
intricate manner, and oft-times looped in such a curious fashion as to
very closely resemble the form of stirrups. This has been looked upon by
the peasants as the work of the pixies, and has helped to give rise to
various stories of the fondness of that diminutive race for riding the
wild colts at a rapid pace over the moor. Ponies have been known to get
their hinder legs entangled in these loops, which, preventing them from
rising, has caused their death.

Of the many tales related of these fairy riders, the following one will
suffice as an illustration.

THE PIXY RIDERS.

Some colts belonging to a farmer on the moor, which were running in a
large new-take, being required, a boy was despatched to fetch them. When
he reached the spot where the animals were, he was astonished to find
them galloping madly over the ground, while sitting astride on the neck
of each, was a diminutive rider, urging them on their wild career, and
shouting uproariously. In vain the boy attempted to stop them. Faster
and faster the terrified animals flew over the new-take, while their
riders twisted their manes, and forced them onward among the boulders of
granite in a most reckless manner.

At length the pixies, on gaining a corner of the new-take, suddenly
threw themselves off their steeds, which, covered with sweat and foam,
gathered closely together, gazing fearfully around them. Where the
pixies went to the boy could not tell, but the skilful manner in which
they managed the animals they bestrode convinced him, as he afterwards
said, that "twudn' the fust time that they piskies had been up to
thackey!"

Instances are recorded of persons having been spirited away by the
pixies in a manner most mysterious. These elves have probably some good
reason for this, although it has not at all times been discoverable. In
certain cases it has been known that the missing one had somehow
contrived to render himself obnoxious to the little goblins, but in
others, as in that of the boy at Rowbrook, whose fate we are about to
relate, no reasons for the pixies' interference have been apparent.

JAN COO.

At Dartmeet, the east and west branches of the river from which the
great moor derives its name mingle their waters, and the course of the
united stream, until it leaves the uplands, is through the deep and
narrow valley, overhung with rugged tors, which we have already briefly
described. An observer from one of the eminences crowning the sides of
this valley marks the course of the river, as it rushes along its rocky
channel, by the white flashes of foam. The grey granite sides of the
tors contrast: strikingly with the coppices of oak, and the whole scene
is one of great wildness.

On the left bank of the river rises the bold, conical pile of Sharp Tor,
and on the slope of this hill stands a solitary farm-house called
Rowbrook, overlooking the valley below. At this farm a boy was once
employed to tend the cattle--a quiet, inoffensive lad, who fulfilled his
duties to the satisfaction of his master. One evening in the winter
season, when he had been nearly twelve months on the farm, he came
hurriedly into the kitchen, exclaiming that he had heard someone
calling, and imagined it must be a person in distress. The farm
labourers who were gathered around the cheerful peat fire arose with
alacrity, supposing it not unlikely that some wayfarer had lost his way
in the valley. They quickly gained the spot where the boy said he had
heard the voice, and paused to listen. Nothing but the sound of the
rushing river below met their ears, and the men declared the boy must
have been mistaken. He, however, stoutly asserted that he was not, and
as if to bear him out in what he said, a voice was suddenly heard,
seemingly at no great distance, calling out, "Jan Coo! Jan Coo!"

The men shouted in reply, when the voice ceased. Lights were procured,
and they searched around the spot, but no traces of anyone could be
seen, so after spending some further time in calling, but without
obtaining any response, they re-entered the house, not knowing what to
think of the perplexing circumstance.

The next night came; the men were gathered around the hearth as on the
preceding evening, when the second time the boy rushed in with the
information that the voice might again be heard. Up jumped the men, and
running to the spot to which they had been directed on the occasion of
the first alarm, intently listened. Out on the stillness of the night
came the voice, calling again, "Jan Coo! Jan Coo!" They looked at one
another, but shouted not in reply, waiting until the voice should be
heard once more, ere doing so. And again upon the night air came the
cry, "Jan Coo! Jan Coo!" at which they gave a lusty shout, but waited in
vain for any response. All was silent, and after endeavouring by
repeated calls to get an answer from the mysterious visitor, they once
more sought the warmth of the chimney corner.

"Tis the pisgies, I'll warn," said an old man, as he settled down on his
low seat by the fire; "I've heerd mun say that you can't tell mun, when
they be callin', from a Christian."

"Ees, that's what that is, vor sartin; an' us had better let 'em bide,
and not meddle wi' em," said another, and it was consequently determined
to take no further notice of the strange voice, should it again be
heard.

And heard again it was. Not a night passed but, as soon as the men were
gathered around the fire after their evening meal, the mysterious voice
again rang through the valley--"Jan Coo! Jan Coo!"

The winter had nearly passed away, and the people at the farm were
looking forward to the fast-approaching spring, when the lad, with one
of the labourers, was mounting the slope that stretched from the house
down to the river. It was dusk, and they were returning home to their
supper, having finished their work for the day. Suddenly the voice was
heard in Langamarsh Pit, on the opposite side of the river, calling as
before, "Jan Coo! Jan Coo!" The boy instantly shouted in reply, when,
instead of the calls ceasing, as on the occasion when the men had
replied to them, they were heard again--"Jan Coo! Jan Coo!"

Once more the lad shouted, and again came forth the same cry--this time
louder than before.

"I'll go and see what 'tis," exclaimed the boy; and before his companion
could attempt to dissuade him from it he had commenced to run down the
hill towards the river. The many boulders in its rocky bed afforded
crossing places at certain points--when the stream was not swollen with
the rains--known to those living in the vicinity, and towards one of
these the boy made his way. His companion watched him but a short
distance, for in the deepening twilight he was speedily lost to view,
but as the man continued his ascent of the bill the voice still came
from Langamarsh Pit--"Jan Coo! Jan Coo!" Again, as he approached the
farm-house, could he hear it, and as he neared the door the sounds yet
rang through the valley--"Jan Coo! Jan Coo!" Gaining the threshold, he
paused before entering, with his hand holding the string which raised
the latch, and listened for the voice once more. It had ceased.

He waited, but no sound broke the stillness of the evening, and seeking
the kitchen he related what had happened to those gathered there, who
wondered what the lad would have to tell them when he came back. Hour
after hour passed away; the boy came not. The men went down to the river
and called him by name, but they received no reply; they waited in the
expectation of seeing him return, but he did not appear, and as no
tidings of him were ever obtained, and the mysterious voice ceased its
nightly calls, they came to the conclusion that he had been .spirited
away by the pixies.

There may be those whose scepticism will not permit them to admit the
agency of the pixies in this matter, but who will be ready to recognise
in the mysterious sounds the hooting of an owl, and in the disappearance
of the boy another proof of the truth of the rhyme:--

"River of Dart, Oh, River of Dart!  
Every year thou claimest a heart,"

It is not for me, as the chronicler of a pixy story, to say how this
is:--

"I cannot tell how the truth may be,  
I say the tale as 'twas said to me."

I can only aver from what I have been informed that, however much the
pixies' agency may be discredited, it was, at all events, firmly
believed in at the lonely farm of Rowbrook.

<span id="img_22"></span> ![](img/22.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: The Borrowed Colts.--The Boulder in the
Room.--Vickeytoad.--Modilla and Podilla](tdp09)
