## XII

## THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC AND RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS

We have now passed in review the misconceptions, injurious to the
spiritual life, which arise from ignoring the likeness and connections
of the spiritual life with the rest of life. And we turn now to note the
misconceptions which come from ignoring the real difference of the
spiritual life, its unique sphere and contribution.

In the first place, we may get into great darkness from forgetting that
the problems of religious faith have certain distinctive differences
from those in natural science; for to forget these differences is to
expect an impossible solution in religion.

This means, if we are to keep clear of delusion here, we must, first,
carefully observe science's threefold restriction of itself to
experience, to the tracing of purely causal connections, and to
phenomena.

The restriction to experience implies a clear recognition of the fact
that science cannot in any case anticipate results independent of
previous experience in the same or similar lines. And this really means
that the full cause of the next stage in the observed process is not
present for it in the stage now under observation, in even the most
favorable cases. Hume is right, here, in asserting that, in truth, we
never really see the causal connection. At most only a part of the
conditions disclose themselves to even the finest scientific analysis in
the finite things and properties. It seems plain that in this aspect,
then, natural science itself looks to and requires an ultimate ideal
view to complete it.

The restriction to the tracing of purely causal connections—though even
this, as we have just seen, is not ultimate—means that the one great
question for natural science is the question of process—how the thing
came to be—of mechanical explanation, not the question of meaning. Thus,
to use Paulsen's illustration, there are two quite different questions
as to a page of print: How did it come to be, what were the processes
involved? and what does the page mean? Now the question as to process is
the question of science. But the religious question is primarily and
necessarily one of meaning, of ideal interpretation. This distinction
holds, although it is to be not only granted but asserted, that in an
ultimate philosophical view the two questions cannot be kept absolutely
apart; there we must ask as to their mutual relations. Now it is to be
observed that religion's question of the meaning of things cannot be
solved in the same way as science's question of process; though
religion, desiring to know exactly how God has acted, must take full
account of all the facts brought out by scientific investigation, and
must grant absolute freedom of investigation. But when all science's
facts of process are fully set forth, the question of their meaning
still remains unanswered; and the precise point now to be noted, I
repeat, is that this question of meaning that presses upon the religious
inquiry, it is impossible to answer in the same way as the scientific
question of process. The attempt, therefore, to solve the problem of
religious thinking and living just as the scientific problem is solved,
is foredoomed to failure. We can know beforehand that such a solution is
impossible. The two problems differ widely.

Once more, science's restriction of itself to phenomena means that all
ultimate questions are left out of account as not so reachable. It is
this very fact, probably, that makes it so easily possible for
scientific investigators, when they turn from strict scientific inquiry
to philosophical questions, to lose sight of the far reaching character
of the assumptions involved in terms which they use as matters of
course. A method of investigation that deliberately—and for its own
limited questions, wisely—ignores all ultimate problems evidently will
not solve these ultimate problems. Upon these we can get light only by
extended inference from ascertained facts, guided by the laws and
demands of our own being. Even a single science, like chemistry, when it
tries to become in its own sphere a rational system of thought, is
obliged to go quite beyond the phenomenal and bring in much of
hypothesis and distant inference.

From the point of view, then, of any one of science's own three
restrictions of itself, it is plain that the religious problem is not
the same as the scientific problem, and hence cannot be solved in the
same way. Science, therefore, as such, does not bar the way to faith.

Moreover, in tracing out the difference between the scientific and
religious problem, it is worth noting that science itself is an ideal
construction of the world—an attempt to think the world into unity in
mathematico-mechanical terms. That is, science is itself an ideal which
the mind freely creates, cherishes, and seeks to realize; and, as itself
such an ideal, cannot, to follow Münsterberg's thought, legitimately
rule out other ideals—aesthetic, ethical, or religious. Rather, as James
suggests, the comparative success of science is an encouragement in the
pursuit of the other more difficult ideals of thinking the world into
unity in aesthetic, ethical, or religious terms.

Once more, the scientific problem may be called a purely intellectual
one; although even here, in the highest scientific questions,
imagination must be used; and Lange, though the sympathetic historian of
materialism, believed that the greatest scientific discoveries have
always been made by those who worked from the point of view of the
ideal. Still, in general, it may be truly affirmed that the scientific
problem is a purely intellectual one. In such investigations one may
wisely set aside all reference to feeling and volition. The question is
simply one of exact intellectual formulation, where any obtrusive
feeling, or thought of extraneous purpose would only hinder the result.

That is never true of really ultimate questions, and never true in real
living. We have already seen that even the problem of pure knowing
cannot be solved in merely intellectual terms. While, then, in its
proximate inquiries natural science may very properly cultivate the
coldly intellectual mood and ignore all other appeals; for religion to
do so would be to take the thoroughly unscientific position of ignoring
most important data, and so making a true solution impossible. This is
no attempt to evade truth, but the "appeal from a partial and
fragmentary truth to a fuller truth." The contrast between scientific
and religious faith may, perhaps, be put in this form: scientific faith
takes account, and needs to take account, only of intellectual data;
while religious faith takes account of the data involved in the feeling
of dependence, in æsthetic feelings and in ethical feelings. Where these
are overlooked, naturally, as Lotze says, "a very barren rationalism
takes the place of that which the whole reason, acting in all directions
would be able to produce."\[<a href="#foot23" id="text23">23</a>\] "The
whole man is the organ of the spiritual."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text23" id="foot23">23</a>\] Outlines of Philosophy of
Religion, p. 7.
