## VII

## NO MERELY THEORETICAL SOLUTIONS

All our knowing, then, once more is necessarily bound up with the whole
man and with the whole of life. And this must mean that in religion,
certainly, no merely theoretical solution of our problem is possible.
Everything that has been said in recent psychological literature as to
the importance of action and of the practical interests, particularly in
their relation to the solution of all our ultimate problems, shows
this.\[<a href="#foot6" id="text6">6</a>\] If, in body and in mind
alike, we are made for action, if we ourselves are prevailingly
practical, it need not seem so strange that our solutions of ultimate
questions must depend perhaps mainly on practical considerations. And if
we are made for action, it is most fitting, moreover, that those
convictions, which are to give support to action, should themselves be
wrought out in action. The principle of the laboratory method would be
justified here most of all. "In truth, when one thinks deeply enough
about it, he must see, further, that for the most fundamental problems
no other than a practical solution is possible in the nature of the
case. There can be no mere theoretical proof or disproof of the
trustworthiness of our faculties, for example. One could only use the
very faculties in question in such a proof. The only proof possible is
the practical power to use them."\[<a href="#foot7" id="text7">7</a>\]

To these more fundamental considerations it may be worth while to add a
number of brief suggestions that naturally connect themselves with this
discussion of the practical nature of our knowledge, and that meet
certain common difficulties of faith.

Mathematics has been so often extolled as the ideal of reasoning, and is
so commonly held to be a peculiarly good training for the reasoning
powers, that it is well worth insisting that there is no such thing as
mathematical demonstration possible in the world of concrete realities.
Indeed, the mathematician, on the contrary, is likely to be a
particularly poor reasoner in practical matters, if he allows his
mathematical point of view to dominate, just because his prevailing
habit of thought is abstract. Demonstration is possible, even in
mathematics, only because the mind itself makes the concepts with which
it deals; they are abstracts, capable of definition in a finite number
of terms. In every sphere of actual life, on the other hand, we are shut
up to concretes that cannot be so defined, and therefore are limited to
probable reasoning. To ask for overwhelming evidence in the sense of
demonstration in the spiritual life, then, is to ask for that which
never can be given us in any realm of the concrete.

Sometimes the demand for "overwhelming evidence" in the spiritual life
means that one wishes the conviction that comes from personal
experience, before fulfilling the conditions upon which alone that
experience can come. It seems to be true that we come into all the
higher experiences of life in one of two
ways:\[<a href="#foot8" id="text8">8</a>\] either the necessary course
of our lives thrusts the experience upon us, and though we did not
choose it and would not have chosen it, we find the actual experience
meaning to us what we could not have guessed beforehand, and then choose
it for its own sake; or, we have to make the venture with a kind of
desperate faith that the experience will be to us what others have found
it, for the highest things everywhere require the complete
commitment,—they give themselves only where all is risked. No
temporizing, half-hearted experiment here will give results. The meaning
of a genuinely unselfish love, for example, does not yield itself to any
calculating experiment. Either one is surprised into it, or he must
voluntarily venture all in complete self-abandonment, burning all his
bridges behind him. It should be no surprise to us, therefore, that in
the highest sphere of value, that of religion, with its preeminently
ethical and personal emphasis, there should be no way of getting the
conviction of individual experience before experience. There are, then,
two temperaments, and two ways of coming into the great values of life;
but there is no way of avoiding the need of experience.

A closely related suggestion needs also to be heeded if we are really to
recognize how impossible a merely theoretical solution is in religion;
though here, too, religion makes no peculiar demand. Throughout life we
are continually encountering experiences of which we instinctively
realize that it is useless to speak, except to those who have had a like
experience. It is useless to talk of color to a man born blind, or of
beauty to a man who never had the living emotion of the beautiful. Our
words in all such cases are only the names for experiences; they cannot
disclose the experiences themselves. The very meaning of the words here
is not chiefly a thought product at all. We have lived the meaning, and
know it only so far as we have lived it. After all, the one great
teacher is life, and our best words to another of even the deepest in us
must fall resultless, until life has brought to the other the experience
out of which the words can be interpreted. We can only bear witness. How
impossible, then, is it by any logical means to bring home the full
reality of the spiritual world, where the conditions of the possible
experience are not fulfilled! In Whitman's putting:

 

> > > > "No one can acquire for another—not one,  
> > > >  No one can grow for another—not one.  
> > > >  The song is to the singer, and comes back  
> > > >             most to him.  
> > > >  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back  
> > > >             most to him.  
> > > > And no man understands any greatness or  
> > > > goodness but his own, or the indication  
> > > >             of his own."

 

We cannot inherit the sense of reality in the spiritual world. There is
no reality in religion without a living experience of our own.

So, too, one cannot thoughtfully face the broad facts of human
experience without feeling how unreasonable is the seeming expectation,
frequently cherished, of ability to meet all the difficulties of the
reality of the spiritual world at once and out of hand. The
considerations just passed over show how often one must wait for the
interpreting power of experience. Moreover, even when our conclusions
are really sound, we may be quite unable fully to state the reasons. The
grounds of our faith, we have seen, the whole trend of modern psychology
shows to be not merely intellectual, but interwoven with a great complex
of human interests, only slowly appreciated. The truth is, probably,
always greater than our reasons for holding it.

But even if the problem be regarded in a given case as purely
intellectual, it must still be remembered that real speculative power is
neither very common, nor is it developed early in life. It is peculiarly
appropriate, therefore, to suggest to the young that unrest must
naturally be the result of a large reading of speculative authors before
there have been acquired such mental development and dialectic skill as
will enable one to overcome the pressure of the author in hand. Why
should one expect, without very wide and special training in these
themes, at once and out of hand to meet and settle all the points a
subtle mind can raise in a labored work? Is it sensible to suppose that
there is no answer to our difficulty, because an answer is not
immediately suggested? The universal human interest in these deeper
questions involved in the religious life must of course lead to much
general thinking; but there seems still dire need of reminding many that
men are not born philosophers and born theologians any more than born
botanists. However reluctantly, one is simply compelled to recognize
sometimes colossal ignorance in this sphere on the part of men otherwise
well educated. Let the young, at least, be content to let the
philosophers devour one another for the time being, while they go on
with their living. One may well remind himself, here, of Augustine
Birrell's dictum that "the verdict to be striven for is not
'well-guessed', but 'well-done.'"

Again, many seem to think it incumbent upon them, when overtaken by
doubts in the religious life, to begin their inquiry as if the questions
were wholly new, to be solved by them from the beginning; although they
would hardly dream of taking such a course in other matters. Is it true,
indeed, that nothing has been proved so far? Are the history and
experience of the centuries to count for nothing? The man, for example,
who takes up Christianity to-day, as a new problem, to be solved by him
as if Christ had just come, it is manifest, deliberately throws away a
very large factor in the solution of the problem.

It is a perfectly legitimate use of the appeal to consequences which
Newman Smyth makes, when he urges, "Not growing discord, which betrays a
method which is wrong, but growing peace, which shows that the method of
life is right, is the world's experience of Christianity." This broader
appeal to what the consequences are in the long run—like the scientific
verifying of an hypothesis by appeal to experience—is rightly insisted
upon in present-day philosophy, and can be logically set aside only by
one, who is willing to deny the fundamental assumption of our
thinking,—that we are dealing with an honest world. "For," as Professor
Seth Pattison contends,\[<a href="#foot9" id="text9">9</a>\] "the ultima
ratio of every creed, the ultima ratio of truth itself, is that it
works; and no greater condemnation can be passed upon a doctrine or
system than that, if it were true, human life, as it has been lived by
the best of the race, would cease to be reasonable, or rather, would
become a phenomenon whose emergence it was impossible to explain."

Mr. Shorthouse, in his Spiritual Romance of John Inglesant, has made his
seeker after truth reach this final conclusion: "We find ourselves
immersed in physical and psychological laws, in accordance with which we
act, or from which we diverge. Whether we are free to act or not, we can
at least fancy we resolve. Let us cheat ourselves, if it be a cheat,
with this fancy, for we shall find that by so doing we actually attain
the end we seek. . . . . We shall find man has attained any position of
vantage he may occupy by following the laws, which our instinct and
conscience tell us are Divine." The argument is a good one against the
confirmed and persistent doubter. But on what possible scheme of
thought, pray, can that freedom, and those laws, by means of which it is
granted we obtain whatever of value life possesses, be regarded as
"cheats"? It is pure illusion to talk of proofs at all, if freedom were
not so proved. The healthful mind cannot be brought to believe in any
such hideous discord in the nature of things. Augustine Birrell speaks
of sentimental sceptics "who, after laboring to demolish what they call
the chimera of superstition, fall to weeping as they remember they have
now no lies to teach their children."

In any case, it is particularly true in the matter of the religious
life, that the questions are not new. Entirely decisive and universally
convincing answers, doubtless, we are still unable to give; but, even if
no reasons can be suggested why our answers are not more decisive, we
may at least recognize that the difficulties, also, are not essentially
new. We need to learn the calm and patience of history. No generation
has had to face a greater intellectual revolution than our own; and yet
it cannot be honestly said that the religious questions and difficulties
of our time are greatly different in their essence from those of other
days. The contrary assumption is often made, and proves a real
hindrance; but we have a right to urge, particularly with the young,
that the way to a reasonable religious faith is not more difficult now
than at any previous time, but rather is in all probability easier than
ever, as it ought to be, if men are profiting at all by the experience
of the past.

Psychology's rightful recognition of the practical and of the whole man,
may remind us again that, in finding our way into satisfactory religious
living and thinking, there is real danger of over-rating intellectual
difficulties and particularly merely negative criticism. A single
difficulty is sometimes made the end of all faith. But we may be sure
that no single difficulty, like that of the relativity of human
knowledge, for example, easily phrased and still more easily misapplied,
sums up all of philosophy or of life, or furnishes reason for forthwith
setting aside all hitherto held as true. The great broad teaching of
human life and experience may not be so easily nullified. We need not be
in haste. There is particular danger here for those of the preeminently
practical temperament, and especially where strong desire or passion is
involved. As soon as the full reason for a hitherto trusted moral or
religious principle is not immediately forthcoming, the desire, held in
leash by the principle, is given full rein. I think it was Clerk
Maxwell, who wrote in a private letter, after various intellectual
excursions of this kind: Old Chap! I have read up many queer religions;
there is nothing like the old thing after all. I have looked into most
philosophical systems, and I have seen that none will work without a
God." It is easy to overestimate the difficulties.

An incidental suggestion of Lotze's may well be added here. "We are
accustomed," he says, "to estimate one and the same idea very
differently when it comes before us as a conjecture, and when it is
offered as the expression of a
fact."\[<a href="#foot10" id="text10">10</a>\] We may scout a view as
utterly preposterous and unthinkable beforehand, that, as a proved fact,
we later find wholly reasonable, and assimilate with entire equanimity.
Let one think, for example, of the fact of alternate generation among
some of the lower animals, and of the now undoubted parthenogenesis of
the drone bees. So, in much of our thinking, especially along the lines
of ultimate philosophical and religious inquiry, quite too great weight
may be easily given to a priori objections.

And it needs also clearly to be recognized that we can nowhere rest in
merely negative criticism. A quite unreasonable importance, it is
certain, has been accorded in theistic argument to this kind of
criticism. What Professor Bowne says so vigorously of philosophical
scepticism holds of all merely negative criticism: "The sceptic acquires
importance, not through the doubts he utters, but through those which he
rationally justifies. The judicial critic, therefore, must compel the
sceptic to take his place along with other theorists, and give reasons
for the unfaith that is in him. Until he does this, his position is
arbitrary, capricious, and irrational. Strangely enough, this manifest
dictate of logic has often been overlooked in the history of
speculation; and dogmatic denial, especially if it be of some important
practical interest, has been judged to have high speculative
significance. The ease with which good people have been stampeded by
unsupported denial is one of the humorous features of the history of
philosophy."\[<a href="#foot11" id="text11">11</a>\] The serious
thinker, says Seth Pattison, "will always repeat the words of Kant, that
in itself doubt is not a permanent resting place for human reason. Its
justification is relative, and its function
transitional."\[<a href="#foot12" id="text12">12</a>\]

Once more, in considering the psychological conditions of the sense of
reality in the spiritual life, we may not forget the natural results
that come from a long ignoring of facts. Here, too, the religious life
is not at all peculiar. The law is one common to all the spheres of our
living. Our entire consciousness is characterized, the Psychologists
tell us, by a constant selective activity. To certain elements in our
environment we attend; certain others we persistently ignore. These
ignored elements practically drop out of our life; they have for us no
real existence. For all practical purposes, they have ceased to be. So
too, no doubt, the seeming unreality of the spiritual world in the case
of many is due, in no small degree, to the long ignoring of the facts of
the spiritual world in their previous lives and habits of thought. "We
hear much," writes Professor Peabody, "of the reasons which lead men to
abandon prayer, but in most such instances the loss of the prayer habit
does not happen because of profound philosophizing or serious
conviction, but through sheer inertia. There are so many other things to
do, that, as a young man once said, 'One does not get around to his
prayers!' "\[<a href="#foot13" id="text13">13</a>\] The fact of the
existence of God, as he is revealed to us in Christ, is no barren truth.
The rational inferences to be drawn from it will bear on every detail of
life. But here is a man, perhaps, (I am very far from believing that
this is a universal explanation) into whose life for years no conscious
recognition of God and the spiritual life has come; who has acted
precisely as if they were not; who has thus virtually denied their
existence in every act; whose thoughts, plans, purposes, have been all
apart from God; who has settled habits of thought and life, that are
logically consistent only with denial of the existence of God and a
spiritual life. Will those habits have no influence on his spiritual
insight? Is he to come now, at one bound, into the clear and simple
vision of God and divine truth, which may have belonged to his
childhood? And shall he refuse to have patience to take the toilsome way
back to those early convictions from which his lack of earnestness, his
carelessness, his indifference, his neglect, his worldliness, and his
sin have separated him? Verily, I sometimes think, it were a strange
thing, if the spiritual life were not obscure to many of us. If the
voice within us were not indeed divine, long since would it have been
smothered under the heaped up rubbish of the years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text6" id="foot6">6</a>\] Cf. King: Rational Living, pp. 154
ff.

\[<a href="#text7" id="foot7">7</a>\] King: Rational Living, pp.
165-166.

\[<a href="#text8" id="foot8">8</a>\] Cf. King: Personal and Ideal
Elements in Education, pp. 151 ff.

\[<a href="#text9" id="foot9">9</a>\] Man's Place in the Cosmos, p. 307.

\[<a href="#text10" id="foot10">10</a>\] Microcosmus, Vol. II, p. 140.

\[<a href="#text11" id="foot11">11</a>\] Theory of Thought and
Knowledge, p. 269.

\[<a href="#text12" id="foot12">12</a>\] Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Article, Scepticism.

\[<a href="#text13" id="foot13">13</a>\] Mornings in the College Chapel.
Second Series, p. 9.
