## XXVI

## THE TEST OF PRESENT TRENDS OF THOUGHT—HISTORICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, SCIENTIFIC, ETHICAL, AND SOCIAL

We shall do well to preface our positive discussion of the way into
reality in religious thought and life by a brief but comprehensive
survey of the presumptive evidence of the reality and significance of
the spiritual life, in view of its connections with the great present
trends of thought, and in view of the inevitably fundamental nature of
religion.

If the spiritual life is to become for us an assured and significant
reality, it must seem to us, as we have seen, both to be inextricably
knit up with all else that we count most real, and also to have its own
distinct and valuable contribution to make to life. Both things must be
true, if the spiritual life is to become for us of fundamental
importance. This chapter and the next are devoted to showing briefly how
Christianity meets the first demand,—to pointing out the indissoluble
connection of the Christian thought and life with the realest trends of
our own times.

If one thinks, then, of those trends of thought which are realest for
our own time, and seeks to test the spiritual life by them, he would
probably have to say: that first, religion must meet the test of
psychology; secondly, the test of a social, and therefore an ethical
consciousness; and that would mean, in the third place, that the
spiritual life must be fully awake to the reality and meaning of the
personal; fourth, it must possess a scientific sense of law and unity;
and, finally, it must be able, as well, to meet the historical and
philosophical test.

The limits of this book do not permit a full treatment of any of these
different tests; but we may consider briefly, in reverse order, their
application to Christianity.

Christianity, then, may not shrink from either a historical or
philosophical investigation. Least of all, in a scientific age, can it
claim the right to withdraw itself from the testing of long experience.
And the Christian religion can retain for the modern man its full
significance only if it can meet just this test. And, in the same way,
if a careful historical study of Christianity, as it manifests itself in
the life of the race, side by side with other religions, does not prove
the superiority of Christianity, its supreme claims cannot seem to us
ultimately justified. Inevitably, whether it will or not, every religion
is steadily undergoing such a test, and is being tried out by a
relentless application of the principle of the survival of the fittest.
It is hardly open to doubt, that, so tested, the teaching, ideals, and
religion of Jesus verify themselves to an extent scarcely approached by
any other point of view.

In a similar sense, Christianity cannot withdraw itself from
philosophical investigation. However great may be one's sympathy with
many of Ritschl's positives, the thoughtful man can hardly deny the
justice of Dr. Bruce's criticism of Ritschl because of his refusal to
recognize that philosophy has any legitimate task in the realm of
religion. As Dr. Bruce says: "The horror of metaphysics is a reaction to
be transcended." "The Christian religion implies a theory of the
universe." "If Christ's doctrine is true, there ought to be something in
the world to verify it." Quite in harmony with this criticism, was
Professor Everett's belief that the mistake of the Ritschlians lay in
separating wholly from philosophy, from the great movements of history,
and from natural religion. There are plain dangers, then, in a view that
tries to withdraw Christianity from the philosophical test. First, there
is the danger of failing to see that one may so over-emphasize the
uniqueness of the revelation of God in Christ as to take it out of its
connection with all other reality, and so tend to make it unreal. A
second danger is that of underestimating the revelation of God in our
own natures. These, too, we may not forget, are, upon any sane view,
from God,—the same God who has revealed himself in Christ. There will
probably be some indication of this identity of origin. Christianity
must fit human nature and the whole man. And the way in which
Christianity fits man must finally be regarded as its greatest proof,
and must even underlie our belief in Christ himself.

Still another danger of such a view is that it should fail to see the
necessity of a unified Christian view of the world. If the Christian is
to be at the same time a thinker, he cannot avoid the attempt to bring
the different sides of his experience into relation to each other, and
into a final unity. It is quite true that this philosophical attempt is
not the introduction to religion, and is not its foundation; but it is a
needed supplement for, at least, the intellectual peace of even the
individual Christian soul. And so long as this need of an ultimate unity
is not met, the Christian religion must still seem in some degree
irrational and unreal; for it will not seem to one to fit the world as
he finds it.

The believer in the Christian thought and life, therefore, if he sees
things aright, must himself desire that philosophy should freely apply
its own tests to Christianity, though he may have a clear sense that the
philosophical consideration must at best be no adequate measure of the
whole significance of religion. The most direct proof that Christianity
does not fail to meet the test of the best philosophical thought of our
time is found, perhaps, in the general acceptance of the Christian
ethical ideal, and in the predominant ethical note of our ablest
philosophical thinkers, and the way in which they make even metaphysics
root in ethics. The significance, even for philosophy, of the great
personalities of history is also a growing conviction.

So, too, it is quite impossible for one to belong to the present
generation and not demand that religion shall show, from the scientific
point of view, some sense of law and unity in the spiritual life. This
will mean, no doubt, on the one hand, the growing recognition of the
immanence of God, and, on the other hand, the perception that the laws
of the spiritual world are chiefly the laws of personal relations. On
the one hand, then, as Professor Coe has
said,\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\] "the sense of a divine
presence can and does penetrate all human faculties. It is not limited
to special occasions, or to moments of exaltation. . . . . In a word,
the religious experience is what we should expect it to be if the
doctrine of the immanence of God is true." And, on the other hand, if
the spiritual life is the highest life of spirits, of persons, then its
fundamental laws, it would seem, must be the laws of deepening personal
relations with men and with God. Subsidiary laws, doubtless, there will
be, but all closely related to these fundamental laws. Christianity is
quite able to meet this scientific demand. Indeed, science's assertion
of the universality of law is only a "disguised expression" for the
final Unity of things, so strongly asserted by a theistic view. And the
more surely the Christian believes in a "faithful Creator," the more
surely will he rest in the great recognized laws of the spiritual, as
well as the material world.

And, again, for a generation to which the personal means more than to
any that has preceded, religion must be peculiarly marked with a sense
of the value and sacredness of the person.

And this sense can hardly fail to dominate any theology that is to meet
the deeper demand of our times.

In a precisely similar way, our conception of religion must meet the
very marked social and ethical consciousness of our time. When one tries
to see exactly what the social consciousness involves, it will be found
to include the sense of the fundamental likeness of men, of their
inevitable mutual influence, of the value and sacredness of the
individual person, as well as the sense of obligation to others, and
love. The very statement of these elements of the social consciousness
suggests how surely akin they are to the demands of the Christian
spirit, how certainly, indeed, they have grown naturally, out of
Christ's conception of every man as a child of God. And that "rational
ethical democracy," to which the social evolution looks, is hardly other
than the "civilization of brotherly men" of the Kingdom of
God.\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] The Religion of a Mature Mind, pp.
342-343.

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] For the detailed argument cf.
King: Theology and the Social Consciousness, Chapters V-XII.
