## VI

## KNOWLEDGE NEVER MERELY PASSIVE

In the same way, no rational conception of the spiritual life can afford
to forget the modern psychological emphasis upon the central importance
of will and action. This conviction will plainly affect the entire point
of view, and may easily change, as we shall see, what have come to seem
commonplaces in religious thinking and living. A misconception, that is,
of the psychological facts here must inevitably affect our spiritual
insight and the success of our spiritual living.

In particular, the psychological emphasis on the central importance of
will and action means that religious thinking must not forget the
practical nature of all knowledge and belief.

Certainly this principle means that knowledge is never a merely passive
process, as probably it is commonly conceived. It involves at every
stage the creative activity of the mind. In the most passive experience
conceivable, the mind itself has something to contribute. A purely
passive impression is a psychological abstraction, never an actual fact.
In no case, whether in our relation to the world of the senses, or in
our relation to other minds, or in our relation to God, can there be any
literal transfer of thought or feeling. We get partial data only, which
we complete and then interpret. In even the closest personal
intercourse, it is worth noticing, the words spoken are, after all, only
signs of ideas that must be created on both sides. Even the receiving
mind must actively create the ideas, suggested by the words spoken by
the other, in view of its own entire experience. There is no possible
way, in even the directest knowledge, of getting rid of this
interpretation of given data, out of experience. The conditions of
religious knowledge, therefore, are in no way unique in this respect.
The principle has its immediate bearing upon the reality of prayer, and
of inspiration, and of revelation from God. For it requires that there
should always be a human interpretive element in all these experiences.

A chief difficulty, for example, in prayer is no doubt found for many in
the lack of a felt presence, and the lack of a definite response, such
as the person feels that he gets in his relation to the outer world, or
to another person. As to this difficulty it might be said at once, as
Hinton suggests, that all the final forces, even in external nature, are
unseen and not as they seem to us. The constant pressure of the air, the
motion of the earth, we do not feel at all. We have no sensible
knowledge, of any kind, of the existence or nature of atoms. The ether
vibrations are quite beyond the reach of any sense.

But the principle which we are here considering—that knowledge is never
merely passive—contains a more adequate answer to the difficulty. There
is really a very close analogy between the knowledge of the outer world,
which we gain through sensations, and the knowledge of the spiritual
world which comes from the data of our inner life. In neither case can
it be said that there are immediate knowledge and revelation. In both,
what we call our immediate knowledge has been a long time building, and
has involved not only the first impressions, but comparison, memory, and
reasoning. In neither case is a literal transfer of full-fledged thought
or knowledge possible. God's revelation of himself cannot be a literal
transfer of a message as by a written note; and even if there were
literal words spoken or written, they would still require
interpretation, and be capable of very different meanings, as
interpreted out of different experiences.

Lotze, in a thoughtful passage in his Microcosmus, brings out carefully
this comparison between our relation to the world of sense and to the
world of spirit:\[<a href="#foot5" id="text5">5</a>\]

"Every sensuous impression regarded in itself is but a way in which we
are affected, some phase of our own condition; in itself it gives no
knowledge of any matter of fact, taken alone it constitutes no
experience. Here again it is only our thought which, mastering the
manifold revelations of sense, compares and combines them, or interprets
given combinations, thus arriving through them at the knowledge of some
fact. We can hardly picture to ourselves the workings of God upon the
heart otherwise than after this pattern; we cannot imagine the
recognition of any fact as something that can be simply communicated,
something that reaches the mind ready-made and without any activity on
its part; we can only imagine that occasion can be given to the mind to,
as it were, produce such recognition by exercising this activity, and in
this it is that every appropriation of a truth must consist. As sense in
itself furnishes merely an impression, so also this divine influence
would produce merely a feeling, a mood, a mode of affection; what is
thus experienced becomes a revelation only through some work of
reflection which analyzes its content and reduces it to coherence by
clear notions that are capable of being combined with our ideas of the
real world." That we have these inner data, as a sufficient and
legitimate basis for our gradually developing knowledge of the spiritual
world, it is hardly open to any thoughtful observer of the ways of his
own spirit to question. Doubtless God's response in our spiritual life
is not made without our own active cooperation; but he does answer, and
we have had that answer in a thousand different quickenings, glimpses,
times of conviction, and "sober and strenuous moods". The really needed
guidance and cooperation of God must be constant, rather than here and
there by some marked interference; and his answer to us, therefore, in
the life of prayer is not merely at the time of our prayer, or through
consciously definite leadings. Rather is he always at work with us; and
the justification of our faith is, that in the long retrospect there is
plain growth in this inner life, increasing assurance of the spiritual,
and that our relation to God is coming to mean more and more as we go
on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text5" id="foot5">5</a>\] Vo1- II, p. 662.
