[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist024) 
[Next](hist026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xxii"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xxii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXIII. How the holy Pope Gregory sent Augustine, with other monks, to preach to the English nation, and encouraged them by a letter of exhortation, not to desist from their labour. \[596 A. D.\]

<span id="v.i.xxii-p1"></span>IN the year of our Lord 582, Maurice, the
fifty-fourth from Augustus, ascended the throne, and reigned twenty one
years. In the tenth year of his reign, Gregory, a man eminent in
learning and the conduct of affairs, was promoted to the Apostolic see
of Rome, and presided over it thirteen years, six months and ten days.
He, being moved by Divine inspiration, in the fourteenth year of the
same emperor, and about the one hundred and fiftieth after the coming of
the English into Britain, sent the servant of God, Augustine, and with
him divers other monks, who feared the Lord, to preach the Word of God
to the English nation. They having, in obedience to the pope’s commands,
undertaken that work, when they had gone but a little way on their
journey, were seized with craven terror, and began to think of returning
home, rather than proceed to a barbarous, fierce, and unbelieving
nation, to whose very language they were strangers; and by common
consent they decided that this was the safer course. At once Augustine,
who had been appointed to be consecrated bishop, if they should be
received by the English, was sent back, that he might, by humble
entreaty, obtain of the blessed Gregory, that they should not be
compelled to undertake so dangerous, toilsome, and uncertain a journey.
The pope, in reply, sent them a letter of exhortation, persuading them
to set forth to the work of the Divine Word, and rely on the help of
God. The purport of which letter was as follows:

<span id="v.i.xxii-p2"></span>"Gregory, the servant of the servants of
God, to the servants of our Lord. Forasmuch as it had been better not to
begin a good work, than to think of desisting from one which has been
begun, it behoves you, my beloved sons, to fulfil with all diligence the
good work, which, by the help of the Lord, you have undertaken. Let not,
therefore, the toil of the journey, nor the tongues of evil-speaking
men, discourage you; but with all earnestness and zeal perform, by God’s
guidance, that which you have set about; being assured, that great
labour is followed by the greater glory of an eternal reward. When
Augustine, your Superior, returns, whom we also constitute your abbot,
humbly obey him in all things; knowing, that whatsoever you shall do by
his direction, will, in all respects, be profitable to your souls.
Almighty God protect you with His grace, and grant that I may, in the
heavenly country, see the fruits of your labour, inasmuch as, though I
cannot labour with you, I shall partake in the joy of the reward,
because I am willing to labour. God keep you in safety, my most beloved
sons. Given the 23rd of July, in the fourteenth year of the reign of our
most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, the thirteenth year
after the consulship of our lord aforesaid, and the fourteenth
indiction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. How he wrote to the bishop of Arles to entertain them.
\[596 A.D.\]](hist026)
