[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist133.md) 
[Next](hist135.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xvi"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xvi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVII. What he likewise wrote of the place of our Lord’s Ascension, and the tombs of the patriarchs.

<span id="v.v.xvi-p1"></span>CONCERNING the place of our Lord’s
Ascension, the aforesaid author writes thus. "The Mount of Olives is
equal in height to Mount Sion, but exceeds it in breadth and length; it
bears few trees besides vines and olives, and is fruitful in wheat and
barley, for the nature of that soil is not such as to yield thickets,
but grass and flowers. On the very top of it, where our Lord ascended
into heaven, is a large round church, having round about it three
chapels with vaulted roofs. For the inner building could not be vaulted
and roofed, by reason of the passage of our Lord’s Body; but it has an
altar on the east side, sheltered by a narrow roof. In the midst of it
are to be seen the last Footprints of our Lord, the place where He
ascended being open to the sky; and though the earth is daily carried
away by believers, yet still it remains, and retains the same
appearance, being marked by the impression of the Feet. Round about
these lies a brazen wheel, as high as a man’s neck, having an entrance
from the west, with a great lamp hanging above it on a pulley and
burning night and day. In the western part of the same church are eight
windows; and as many lamps, hanging opposite to them by cords, shine
through the glass as far as Jerusalem; and the light thereof is said to
thrill the hearts of the beholders with a certain zeal and compunction.
Every year, on the day of the Ascension of our Lord, when Mass is ended,
a strong blast of wind is wont to come down, and to cast to the ground
all that are in the church."

<span id="v.v.xvi-p2"></span>Of the situation of Hebron, and the tombs
of the fathers, he writes thus. "Hebron, once a habitation and the chief
city of David’s kingdom, now only showing by its ruins what it then was,
has, one furlong to the east of it, a double cave in the valley, where
the sepulchres of the patriarchs are encompassed with a wall foursquare,
their heads lying to the north. Each of the tombs is covered with a
single stone, hewn like the stones of a church, and of a white colour,
for the three patriarchs. Adam’s is of meaner and poorer workmanship,
and he lies not far from them at the farthest end of the northern part
of that wall. There are also some poorer and

<span id="v.v.xvi-p3"></span>smaller monuments of the three women. The
hill Mamre is a mile from these tombs, and is covered with grass and
flowers, having a level plain on the top. In the northern part of it,
the trunk of Abraham’s oak, being twice as high as a man, is enclosed in
a church."

<span id="v.v.xvi-p4"></span>Thus much, gathered from the works of the
aforesaid writer, according to the sense of his words, but more briefly
and in fewer words, we have thought fit to insert in our History for the
profit of readers. Whosoever desires to know more of the contents of
that book, may seek it either in the book itself, or in that abridgement
which we have lately made from it;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. How the South Saxons received Eadbert and Eolla, and the
West Saxons, Daniel and](hist135.md)
