[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist065) 
[Next](hist067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.x"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.x-p0.1"></span>CHAP. X. How the dust of that place prevailed against fire. \[After 642 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.x-p1"></span> ABOUT the same time, another traveller, a
Briton, as is reported, happened to pass by the same place, where the
aforesaid battle was fought. Observing one particular spot of ground
greener and more beautiful than any other part of the field, he had the
wisdom to infer that the cause of the unusual greenness in that place
must be that some person of greater holiness than any other in the army
had been killed there. Ide therefore took along with him some of the
dust of that piece of ground, tying it up in a linen cloth, supposing,
as was indeed the case, that it would be of use for curing sick people,
and proceeding on his journey, came in the evening to a certain village,
and entered a house where the villagers were feasting at supper. Being
received by the owners of the house, he sat down with them at the
entertainment, hanging the cloth, with the dust which he had carried in
it, on a post in the wall. They sat long at supper and drank deep. Now
there was a great fire in the middle of the room, and it happened that
the sparks flew up and caught the roof of the house, which being made of
wattles and thatch, was suddenly wrapped in flames; the guests ran out
in panic and confusion, but they were not able to save the burning
house, which was rapidly being destroyed. Wherefore the house was burnt
down, and only that post on which the dust hung in the linen cloth
remained safe and untouched by the fire. When they beheld this miracle,
they were all amazed, and inquiring into it diligently, learned that the
dust had been taken from the place where the blood of King Oswald had
been shed. These wonderful works being made known and reported abroad,
many began daily to resort to that place, and received the blessing of
health for themselves and their friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. How a light from Heaven stood all night over his relics, and
how those possessed with devils were healed by them. \[679-697
A.D.\]](hist067)
