[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist134) 
[Next](hist136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xvii"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xvii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVIII. How the South Saxons received Eadbert and Eolla, and the West Saxons, Daniel and Aldhelm, for their bishops; and of the writings of the same Aldhelm. \[705 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.xvii-p1"></span>IN the year of our Lord 705, Aldfrid, king
of the Northumbrians, died before the end of the twentieth year of his
reign. His son Osred, a boy about eight years of age, succeeding him in
the throne, reigned eleven years. In the beginning of his reign, Haedde,
bishop of the West Saxons, departed to the heavenly life; for he was a
good man and a just, and his life and doctrine as a bishop were guided
rather by his innate love of virtue, than by what he had gained from
books. The most reverend bishop, Pechthelm, of whom we shall speak
hereafter in the proper place, and who while still deacon or monk was
for a long time with his successor Aldhelm, was wont to relate that many
miracles of healing have been wrought in the place where he died,
through the merit of his sanctity; and that the men of that province
used to carry the dust thence for the sick, and put it into water, and
the drinking thereof, or sprinkling with it, brought health to many sick
men and beasts; so that the holy dust being frequently carried away, a
great hole was made there.

<span id="v.v.xvii-p2"></span>Upon his death, the bishopric of that
province was divided into two dioceses. One of them was given to Daniel,
which he governs to this day; the other to Aldhelm, wherein he presided
most vigorously four years; both of them were fully instructed, as well
in matters touching the Church as in the knowledge of the Scriptures.
Aldhelm, when he was as yet only a priest and abbot of the monastery
which is called the city of Maildufus, by order of a synod of his own
nation, wrote a notable book against the error of the Britons, in not
celebrating Easter at the due time, and in doing divers other things
contrary to the purity of doctrine and the peace of the church; and
through the reading of this book many of the Britons, who were subject
to the West Saxons, were led by him to adopt the Catholic celebration of
our Lord’s Paschal Feast. He likewise wrote a famous book on Virginity,
which, after the example of Sedulius, he composed in twofold form, in
hexameters and in prose. He wrote some other books, being a man most
instructed in all respects, for he had a polished style, and was, as I
have said, of marvellous learning both in liberal and ecclesiastical
studies. On his death, Forthere was made bishop in his stead, and is
living at this time, being likewise a man very learned in the Holy
Scriptures.

<span id="v.v.xvii-p3"></span>Whilst they administered the bishopric, it
was determined by a synodal decree, that the province of the South
Saxons, which till that time belonged to the diocese of the city of
Winchester, where Daniel then presided, should itself have an episcopal
see, and a bishop of its own. Eadbert, at that time abbot of the
monastery of Bishop Wilfrid, of blessed memory, called Selaeseu, was
consecrated their first bishop. On his death, Eolla succeeded to the
office of bishop. He also died some years ago, and the bishopric has
been vacant to this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. How Coinred, king of the Mercians, and Offa, king of the
East Saxons, ended their days at](hist136)
