[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist057.md) 
[Next](hist059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. II. How, among innumerable other miracles of healing wrought by the wood of the cross, which King Oswald, being ready to engage against the barbarians, erected, a certain man had his injured arm healed. \[634 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span> THE place is shown to this day, and held
in much veneration, where Oswald, being about to engage in this battle,
erected the symbol of the Holy Cross, and knelt down and prayed to God
that he would send help from Heaven to his worshippers in their sore
need. Then, we are told, that the cross being made in haste, and the
hole dug in which it was to be set up, the king himself, in the ardour
of his faith, laid hold of it and held it upright with both his hands,
till the earth was heaped up by the soldiers and it was fixed.
Thereupon, uplifting his voice, he cried to his whole army, "Let us all
kneel, and together beseech the true and living God Almighty in His
mercy to defend us from the proud and cruel enemy; for He knows that we
have undertaken a just war for the safety of our nation." All did as he
had commanded, and accordingly advancing towards the enemy with the
first dawn of day, they obtained the victory, as their faith deserved.
In the place where they prayed very many miracles of healing are known
to have been wrought, as a token and memorial of the king’s faith; for
even to this day, many are wont to cut off small splinters from the wood
of the holy cross, and put them into water, which they give to sick men
or cattle to drink, or they sprinkle them therewith, and these are
presently restored to health.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span> The place is called in the English tongue
Hefenfelth, or the Heavenly Field,which name it undoubtedly received of
old as a presage of what was afterwards to happen, denoting, that the
heavenly trophy was to be erected, the heavenly victory begun, and
heavenly miracles shown forth to this day. The place is near the wall in
the north which the Romans formerly drew across the whole of Britain
from sea to sea, to restrain the onslaught of the barbarous nations, as
has been said before. Hither also the brothers of the church of
Hagustald, which is not far distant, long ago made it their custom to
resort every year, on the day before that on which King Oswald was
afterwards slain, to keep vigils there for the health of his soul, and
having sung many psalms of praise, to offer for him in the morning the
sacrifice of the Holy Oblation. And since that good custom has spread,
they have lately built a church there, which has attached additional
sanctity and honour in the eyes of all men to that place;and this with
good reason; for it appears that there was no symbol of the Christian
faith, no church, no altar erected throughout all the nation of the
Bernicians, before that new leader in war, prompted by the zeal of his
faith, set up this standard of the Cross as he was going to give battle
to his barbarous enemy.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span> Nor is it foreign to our purpose to
relate one of the many miracles that have been wrought at this cross.
One of the brothers of the same church of Hagulstald, whose name is
Bothelm, and who is still living, a few years ago, walking carelessly on
the ice at night, suddenly fell and broke his arm; he was soon tormented
with a most grievous pain in the broken part, so that he could not lift
his arm to his mouth for the anguish. Hearing one morning that one of
the brothers designed to go up to the place of the holy cross, he
desired him, on his return to bring him a piece of that sacred wood,
saying, he believed that with the mercy of God he might thereby be
healed. The brother did as he was desired; and returning in the evening,
when the brothers were sitting at table, gave him some of the old moss
which grew on the surface of the wood. As he sat at table, having no
place to bestow the gift which was brought him, he put it into his
bosom; and forgetting, when he went to bed, to put it away, left it in
his bosom. Awaking in the middle of the night, he felt something cold
lying by his side, and putting his hand upon it to feel what it was, he
found his arm and hand as sound as if he had never felt any such pain.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. How the same King Oswald, asking a bishop of the Scottish
nation, had Aidan sent him, and granted him an episcopal see in the Isle
of Lindisfarne. \[635A.D.\]](hist059.md)
