[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist118) 
[Next](hist120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v"></span>

## <span id="v.v-p0.1"></span>BOOK V

<span id="v.v.i"></span>

### <span id="v.v.i-p0.1"></span>CHAP. I. How Ethelwald, successor to Cuthbert, leading a hermit’s life, calmed a tempest by his prayers when the brethren were in danger at sea. \[687-699 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.i-p1"></span>THE venerable Ethewald succeeded the man of
God, Cuthbert, in the exercise of a solitary life, which he spent in the
isle of Fame before he became a bishop. After he had received the
priesthood, he consecrated his office by deeds worthy of that degree for
many years in the monastery which is called Inhrypum. To the end that
his merit and manner of life may be the more certainly made known, I
will relate one miracle of his, which was told me by one of the brothers
for and on whom the same was wrought; to wit, Guthfrid, the venerable
servant and priest of Christ, who also, afterwards, as abbot, presided
over the brethren of the same church of Lindisfarne, in which he was
educated.

<span id="v.v.i-p2"></span>"I came," says he, "to the island of Fame,
with two others of the brethren, desiring to speak with the most
reverend father, Ethelwald. Having been refreshed with his discourse,
and asked for his blessing, as we were returning home, behold on a
sudden, when we were in the midst of the sea, the fair weather in which
we were sailing, was broken, and there arose so great and terrible a
tempest, that neither sails nor oars were of any use to us, nor had we
anything to expect but death. After long struggling with the wind and
waves to no effect, at last we looked back to see whether it was
possible by any means at least to return to the island whence we came,
but we found that we were on all sides alike cut off by the storm, and
that there was no hope of escape by our own efforts. But looking
further, we perceived, on the island of Fame, our father Ethelwald,
beloved of God, come out of his retreat to watch our course; for,
hearing the noise of the tempest and raging sea, he had come forth to
see what would become of us. When he beheld us in distress and despair,
he bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in prayer for
our life and safety; and as he finished his prayer, he calmed the
swelling water, in such sort that the fierceness of the storm ceased on
all sides, and fair winds attended us over a smooth sea to the very
shore. When we had landed, and had pulled up our small vessel from the
waves, the storm, which had ceased a short time for our sake, presently
returned, and raged furiously during the whole day; so that it plainly
appeared that the brief interval of calm had been granted by Heaven in
answer to the prayers of the man of God, to the end that we might
escape."

<span id="v.v.i-p3"></span>The man of God remained in the isle of Fame
twelve years, and died there; but was buried in the church of the
blessed Apostle Peter, in the isle of Lindisfarne, beside the bodies of
the aforesaid bishops.’ These things happened in the days of King
Aldfrid, who, after his brother Egfrid, ruled the nation of the
Northumbrians for nineteen years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. How Bishop John cured a dumb man by his blessing. \[687
A.D.\]](hist120)
