[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist005.md) 
[Next](hist007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.iii"></span>

### <span id="v.i.iii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. III. How Claudius, the second of the Romans who came into Britain, brought the islands Orcades into subjection to the Roman empire; and Vespasian, sent by hint, reduced the Isle of Wight under the dominion of the Romans. \[44 AD\]

<span id="v.i.iii-p1"></span>In the year of Rome 798, Claudius, fourth
emperor from Augustus, being desirous to approve himself a prince
beneficial to the republic, and eagerly bent upon war and conquest on
every side, undertook an expedition into Britain, which as it appeared,
was roused to rebellion by the refusal of the Romans to give up certain
deserters. No one before or after Julius Caesar had dared to land upon
the island. Claudius crossed over to it, and within a very few days,
without any fighting or bloodshed, the greater part of the island was
surrendered into his hands. He also added to the Roman empire the
Orcades, which lie in the ocean beyond Britain, and, returning to Rome
in the sixth month after his departure, he gave his son the title of
Britannicus. This war he concluded in the fourth year of his reign,
which is the forty-sixth from the Incarnation of our Lord. In which year
there came to pass a most grievous famine in Syria, which is recorded in
the Acts of the Apostles to have been foretold by the prophet Agabus.

<span id="v.i.iii-p2"></span>Vespasian, who was emperor after Nero,
being sent into Britain by the same Claudius, brought also under the
Roman dominion the Isle of Wight, which is close to Britain on the
south, and is about thirty miles in length from east to west, and twelve
from north to south; being six miles distant from the southern coast of
Britain at the east end, and three at the west. Nero, succeeding
Claudius in the empire, undertook no wars at all; and, therefore, among
countless other disasters brought by him upon the Roman state, he almost
lost Britain; for in his time two most notable towns were there taken
and destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. How Lucius, king of Britain, writing to Pope Eleutherus,
desired to be made a Christian.](hist007.md)
