[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist056) 
[Next](hist058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

## <span id="v.iii-p0.1"></span>BOOK III

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.i-p0.1"></span>CHAP. I. How King Edwin’s next successors lost both the faith of their nation and the kingdom; but the most Christian King Oswald retrieved both. \[633 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span> EDWIN being slain in battle, the kingdom
of the Deiri, to which province his family belonged, and where he first
began to reign, passed to Osric, the son of his uncle Aelfric, who,
through the preaching of Paulinus, had also received the mysteries of
the faith. But the kingdom of the Bernicians—for into these two
provinces the nation of the Northumbrians was formerly divided —passed
to Eanfrid, the son of Ethelfrid, who derived his origin from the royal
family of that province. For all the time that Edwin reigned, the sons
of the aforesaid Ethelfrid, who had reigned before him, with many of the
younger nobility, lived in banishment among the Scots or Picts, and were
there instructed according to the doctrine of the Scots, and were
renewed with the grace of Baptism. Upon the death of the king, their
enemy, they were allowed to return home, and the aforesaid Eanfrid, as
the eldest of them, became king of the Bernicians. Both those kings, as
soon as they obtained the government of their earthly kingdoms, abjured
and betrayed the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom to which they had
been admitted, and again delivered themselves up to defilement and
perdition through the abominations of their former idolatry.

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span> But soon after, the king of the Britons,
Caedwalla, the unrighteous instrument of rightful vengeance, slew them
both. First, in the following summer, he put Osric to death; for, being
rashly besieged by him in the municipal town, he sallied out on a sudden
with all his forces, took him by surprise, and destroyed him and all his
army. Then,when he had occupied the provinces of the Northumbrians for a
whole year,not ruling them like a victorious king, but ravaging them
like a furious tyrant, he at length put an end to Eanfrid, in like
manner, when he unadvisedly came to him with only twelve chosen
soldiers, to sue for peace. To this day, that year is looked upon as
ill-omened, and hateful to all good men; as well on account of the
apostacy of the English kings, who had renounced the mysteries of the
faith, as of the outrageous tyranny of the British king. Hence it has
been generally agreed, in reckoning the dates of the kings, to abolish
the memory of those faithless monarchs, and to assign that year to the
reign of the following king, Oswald, a man beloved of God. This king,
after the death of his brother Eanfrid,advanced with an army, small,
indeed, in number, but strengthened with the faith of Christ; and the
impious commander of the Britons, in spite of his vast forces, which he
boasted nothing could withstand, was slain at a place called in the
English tongue Denisesburna, that is, the brook of Denis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. How, among innumerable other miracles of healing wrought by
the wood of the cross, which King Oswald, being ready to engage against
the barbarians, erected, a certain man had his injured arm healed. \[634
A.D.\]](hist058)
