[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist000.md) 
[Next](hist002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

### <span id="ii-p0.1"></span>EDITOR'S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p1"></span>The English version of the "Ecclesiastical
History" in the following pages is a revision of the translation of Dr.
Giles, which is itself a revision of the earlier rendering of Stevens.
In the present edition very considerable alterations have been made, but
the work of Dr. Giles remains the basis of the translation. The Latin
text used throughout is Mr. Plummer's. Since the edition of Dr. Giles
appeared in 1842, so much fresh work on the subject has been done, and
recent research has brought so many new facts to light, that it has been
found necessary to rewrite the notes almost entirely, and to add a new
introduction. After the appearance of Mr. Plummer's edition of the
Historical Works of Bede, it might seem superfluous, for the present at
least, to write any notes at all on the "Ecclesiastical History." The
present volume, however, is intended to fulfil a different and much
humbler function. There has been no attempt at any original work, and no
new theories are advanced. The object of the book is merely to present
in a short and convenient form the substance of the views held by
trustworthy authorities, and it is hoped that it may be found useful by
those students who have either no time or no inclination to deal with
more important works.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>Among the books of which most use has been made,
are Mr. Plummer's edition of the Ecclesiastical History, Messrs' Mayor
and Lumby's edition of Books III and IV, Dr. Bright's "Early English
Church History," and Dr. Hunt's "History of the English Church from its
foundation to the Norman Conquest." Many of the articles in the
"Dictionary of Christian Biography " and the "Dictionary of Christian
Antiquities," Dr. Mason's "Mission of St. Augustine," Dr. Rhys's "Celtic
Britain," and a number of other books, mentioned in the notes, have been
consulted.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>For help received in different ways I wish to
express my gratitude to various correspondents and friends. I am
particularly indebted to Mr. Edward Bell, who has kindly revised my
proofs and made many valuable suggestions. For information on certain
points I have to thank the Rev. Charles Plummer, Fellow of Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, Professor Lindsay of St. Andrews University,
Miss Wordsworth, Principal, and Miss Lodge, Vice-Principal of Lady
Margaret Hall, Oxford; and in a very special sense I wish to acknowledge
my obligations to Miss Paterson, Assistant Librarian at the University
Library, St. Andrews, whose unfailing kindness in verifying references,
and supplying me with books, has greatly lightened my labours.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](hist002.md)
