[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist132) 
[Next](hist134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xv"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVI. The account given in the aforesaid book of the place of our Lord’s Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection.

<span id="v.v.xv-p1"></span>HE wrote concerning the place of the
Nativity of our Lord, after this manner: "Bethlehem, the city of David,
is situated on a narrow ridge, encompassed on all sides with valleys,
being a mile in length from west to east, and having a low wall without
towers, built along the edge of the level summit. In the eastern corner
thereof is a sort of natural half cave, the outward part whereof is said
to have been the place where our Lord was born; the inner is called the
manger of our Lord. This cave within is all covered with rich marble,
and over the particular spot where our Lord is said to have been born,
stands the great church of St. Mary." He likewise wrote about the place
of His Passion and Resurrection in this manner: "Entering the city of
Jerusalem on the north side, the first place to be visited, according to
the disposition of the streets, is the church of Constantine, called the
Martyrium. It was built by the Emperor Constantine, in a royal and
magnificent manner, because the Cross of our Lord was said to have been
found there by his mother Helena. Thence, to the westward, is seen the
church of Golgotha, in which is also to be found the rock which once
bore the Cross to which the Lord’s body was nailed, and now it upholds a
large silver cross, having a great brazen wheel with lamps hanging over
it. Under the place of our Lord’s Cross, a crypt is hewn out of the
rock, in which the Sacrifice is offered on an altar for the dead that
are held in honour, their bodies remaining meanwhile in the street. To
the westward of this church is the round church of the Anastasis or
Resurrection of our Lord, encompassed with three walls, and supported by
twelve columns. Between each of the walls is a broad passage, which
contains three altars at three different points of the middle wall; to
the south, the north, and the west. It has eight doors or entrances in a
straight line through the three walls; four whereof face the south-east,
and four the east.’ In the midst of it is the round tomb of our Lord cut
out of the rock, the top of which a man standing within can touch with
his hand; on the east is the entrance, against which that great stone
was set. To this day the tomb bears the marks of the iron tools within,
but on the outside it is all covered with marble to the very top of the
roof, which is adorned with gold, and bears a large golden cross. In the
north part of the tomb the sepulchre of our Lord is hewn out of the same
rock, seven feet in length, and three handbreadths above the floor; the
entrance being on the south side, where twelve lamps burn day and night,
four within the sepulchre, and eight above on the edge of the right
side. The stone that was set at the entrance to the tomb is now cleft in
two; nevertheless, the lesser part of it stands as an altar of hewn
stone before the door of the tomb; the greater part is set up as another
altar, four-cornered, at the east end of the same church, and is covered
with linen cloths. The colour of the said tomb and sepulchre is white
and red mingled together."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. What he likewise wrote of the place of our Lord's
Ascension, and the tombs of the](hist134)
