[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist018) 
[Next](hist020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xvi"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xvi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVII. How Germanus the Bishop, sailing into Britain with Lupus, first quelled the tempest of the sea, and afterwards that of the Pelagians, by Divine power. \[429 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xvi-p1"></span>Some few years before their arrival, the
Pelagian heresy, brought over by Agricola, the son of Severianus, a
Pelagian bishop, had corrupted with its foul taint the faith of the
Britons. But whereas they absolutely refused to embrace that perverse
doctrine, and blaspheme the grace of Christ, yet were not able of
themselves to confute the subtilty of the unholy belief by force of
argument, they bethought them of wholesome counsels and determined to
crave aid of the Gallican prelates in that spiritual warfare. Hereupon,
these, having assembled a great synod, consulted together to determine
what persons should be sent thither to sustain the faith, and by
unanimous consent, choice was made of the apostolic prelates, Germanus,
Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus of Troyes, to go into Britain to confirm
the people’s faith in the grace of God. With ready zeal they complied
with the request and commands of the Holy Church, and put to sea. The
ship sped safely with favouring winds till they were halfway between the
coast of Gaul and Britain. There on a sudden they were obstructed by the
malevolence of demons, who were jealous that men of such eminence and
piety should be sent to bring back the people to salvation. They raised
storms, and darkened the sky with clouds. The sails could not support
the fury of the winds, the sailors’ skill was forced to give way, the
ship was sustained by prayer, not by strength, and as it happened, their
spiritual leader and bishop, being spent with weariness, had fallen
asleep. Then, as if because resistance flagged, the tempest gathered
strength, and the ship, overwhelmed by the waves, was ready to sink.
Then the blessed Lupus and all the rest, greatly troubled, awakened
their elder, that he might oppose the raging elements. He, showing
himself the more resolute in proportion to the greatness of the danger,
called upon Christ, and having, in the name of the Holy Trinity, taken
and sprinkled a little water, quelled the raging waves, admonished his
companion, encouraged all, and all with one consent uplifted their
voices in prayer. Divine help was granted, the enemies were put to
flight, a cloudless calm ensued, the winds veering about set themselves
again to forward their voyage, the sea was soon traversed, and they
reached the quiet of the wished-for shore. A multitude flocking thither
from all parts, received the bishops, whose coming had been foretold by
the predictions even of their adversaries. For the evil spirits declared
their fear, and when the bishops expelled them from the bodies of the
possessed, they made known the nature of the tempest, and the dangers
they had occasioned, and confessed that they had been overcome by the
merits and authority of these men.

<span id="v.i.xvi-p2"></span>In the meantime the bishops speedily filled
the island of Britain with the fame of their preaching and miracles; and
the Word of God was by them daily preached, not only in the churches,
but even in the streets and fields, so that the faithful and Catholic
were everywhere confirmed, and those who had been perverted accepted the
way of amendment. Like the Apostles, they acquired honour and authority
through a good conscience, learning through the study of letters, and
the power of working miracles through their merits. Thus the whole
country readily came over to their way of thinking; the authors of the
erroneous belief kept themselves in hiding, and, like evil spirits,
grieved for the loss of the people that were rescued from them. At
length, after long deliberation, they had the boldness to enter the
lists. They came forward in all the splendour of their wealth, with
gorgeous apparel, and supported by a numerous following; choosing rather
to hazard the contest, than to undergo among the people whom they had
led astray, the reproach of having been silenced, lest they should seem
by saying nothing to condemn themselves. An immense multitude had been
attracted thither with their wives and children. The people were present
as spectators and judges; the two parties stood there in very different
case; on the one side was Divine faith, on the other human presumption;
on the one side piety, on the other pride; on the one side Pelagius, the
founder of their faith, on the other Christ. The blessed bishops
permitted their adversaries to speak first, and their empty speech long
took up the time and filled the ears with meaningless words. Then the
venerable prelates poured forth the torrent of their eloquence and
showered upon them the words of Apostles and Evangelists, mingling the
Scriptures with their own discourse and supporting their strongest
assertions by the testimony of the written Word. Vainglory was
vanquished and unbelief refuted; and the heretics, at every argument put
before them, not being able to reply, confessed their errors. The
people, giving judgement, could scarce refrain from violence, and
signified their verdict by their acclamations.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. How the same holy man gave sight to the blind daughter of
a tribune, and then coming to St. Alban, there received of his relics,
and left other relics of the blessed Apostles and other martyrs. \[429
A.D.\]](hist020)
