[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist136) 
[Next](hist138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xix"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XX. How Albinus succeeded to the godly Abbot Hadrian, and Acca to Bishop Wilfrid. \[709 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.xix-p1"></span>THE next year after the death of the
aforesaid father, which was the fifth year of King 0sred, the most
reverend father, Abbot Hadrian, fellow labourer in the Word of God with
Bishop Theodore of blessed memory, died, and was buried in the church of
the Blessed Mother of God, in his own monastery, this being the
forty-first year after he was sent by Pope Vitalian with Theodore, and
the thirty-ninth after his arrival in England. Among other proofs of his
learning, as well as Theodore’s, there is this testimony, that Albinus,
his disciple, who succeeded him in the government of his monastery, was
so well instructed in literary studies, that he had no small knowledge
of the Greek tongue, and knew the Latin as well as the English, which
was his native language.

<span id="v.v.xix-p2"></span>Acca, his priest, succeeded Wilfrid in the
bishopric of the church of Hagustald, being likewise a man of zeal and
great in noble works in the sight of God and man. He enriched the
structure of his church, which is dedicated in honour of the blessed
Apostle Andrew with manifold adornments and marvellous workmanship. For
he gave all diligence, as he does to this day, to procure relics of the
blessed Apostles and martyrs of Christ from all parts, and to raise
altars in their honour in separate side-chapels built for the purpose
within the walls of the same church. Besides which, he industriously
gathered the histories of their martyrdom, together with other
ecclesiastical writings, and erected there a large and noble library. He
likewise carefully provided holy vessels, lamps, and other such things
as appertain to the adorning of the house of God. He in like manner
invited to him a notable singer called Maban, who had been taught to
sing by the successors of the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory in
Kent, to instruct himself and his clergy, and kept him twelve years, to
the end that he might teach such Church music as they did not know, and
by his teaching restore to its former state that which was corrupted
either by long use, or through neglect. For Bishop Acca himself was a
most skilful singer, as well as most learned in Holy Writ, sound in the
confession of the catholic faith, and well versed in the rules of
ecclesiastical custom; nor does he cease to walk after this manner, till
he receive the rewards of his pious devotion. For he was brought up from
boyhood and instructed among the clergy of the most holy and beloved of
God, Bosa, bishop of York. Afterwards, coming to Bishop Wilfrid in the
hope of a better plan of life, he spent the rest of his days in
attendance on him till that bishop’s death, and going with him to Rome,
learned there many profitable things concerning the ordinances of the
Holy Church, which he could not have learned in his own country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI. How the Abbot Ceolfrid sent master-builders to the King of
the Picts to build a church, and](hist138)
