[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist067.md) 
[Next](hist069.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XII. How a little boy was cured of a fever at his tomb.

<span id="v.iii.xii-p1"></span> SOME time after, there was a certain
little boy in the said monastery, who had been long grievously troubled
with a fever; he was one day anxiously expecting the hour when his fit
was to come on, when one of the brothers, coming in to him, said, "Shall
I tell you, my son, how you may be cured of this sickness? Rise, enter
the church, and go close to Oswald’s tomb; sit down and stay there quiet
and do not leave it; do not come away, or stir from the place, till the
time is past, when the fever leaves you: then I will go in and fetch you
away." The boy did as he was advised, and the disease durst not assail
him as he sat by the saint’s tomb; but fled in such fear that it did not
dare to touch him, either the second or third day, or ever after. The
brother that came from thence, and told me this, added, that at the time
when he was talking with me, the young man was then still living in the
monastery, on whom, when a boy, that miracle of healing had been
wrought. Nor need we wonder that the prayers of that king who is now
reigning with our Lord, should be very efficacious with Him, since he,
whilst yet governing his temporal kingdom, was always wont to pray and
labour more for that which is eternal. Nay, it is said, that he often
continued in prayer from the hour of morning thanksgiving till it was
day; and that by reason of his constant custom of praying or giving
thanks to God, he was wont always, wherever he sat, to hold his hands on
his knees with the palms turned upwards. It is also commonly affirmed
and has passed into a proverb, that he ended his life in prayer; for
when he was beset with the weapons of his enemies, and perceived that
death was at hand, he prayed for the souls of his army. Whence it is
proverbially said, "‘Lord have mercy on their souls,’ said Oswald, as he
fell to the ground."

<span id="v.iii.xii-p2"></span> Now his bones were translated to the
monastery which we have mentioned, and buried therein: but the king who
slew him commanded his head, and hands, with the arms, to be cut off
from the body, and set upon stakes. But his successor in the throne,
Oswy, coming thither the next year with his army, took them down, and
buried his head in the cemetery of the church of Lindisfarne, and the
hands and arms in his royal city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. How a certain person in Ireland was restored, when at the
point of death, by his relics.](hist069.md)
