[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist089.md) 
[Next](hist091.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. IV. How Bishop Colman, having left Britain, built two monasteries in the country of the Scots; the one for the Scots, the other for the English whom he had taken along with him. \[667 A. D.\]

<span id="v.iv.iv-p1"></span>IN the meantime, Colman, the Scottish
bishop, departing from Britain,took along with him all the Scots whom he
had gathered about him in the isle of Lindisfame, and also about thirty
of the English nation, for both these companies had been trained in
duties of the monastic life; and leaving some brothers in his church, he
went first to the isle of Hii,whence he had been sent to preach the Word
of God to the English nation. Afterwards he retired to a small island,
which is to the west of Ireland, and at some distance from it, called in
the language of the Scots, Inisboufinde, the Island of the White Heifer.
Arriving there, he built a monastery, and placed in it the monks he had
brought of both nations. But they could not agree among themselves, by
reason that the Scots, in the summer season, when the harvest was to be
brought in, leaving the monastery, wandered about through places known
to them; but returned again the next winter, and desired to use in
common what the English had provided. Colman sought to put an end to
this dissension, and travelling about far and near, he found a place in
the island of Ireland fitted to be the site of a monastery, which, in
the language of the Scots, is called Mageo? He bought a small part of it
of the chief to whom it belonged, to build his monastery thereon; upon
condition, that the monks dwelling there should pray to the Lord for him
who let them have the place. Then at once building a monastery, with the
assistance of the chief and all the neighbouring people, he placed the
English there, leaving the Scots in the aforesaid island. This monastery
is to this day occupied by English inhabitants; being the same that,
grown from a small beginning to be very large, is commonly called
Muigeo; and as all have long since been brought to adopt better customs,
it contains a notable society of monks, who are gathered there from the
province of the English, and live by the labour of their own hands,
after the example of the venerable fathers, under a rule and a canonical
abbot, in much continence and singleness of life.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Of the death of the kings Oswy and Eghert, and of the synod
held at the place Herutford, in](hist091.md)
