[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist112) 
[Next](hist114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxvii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxvii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVII. How Cuthbert, a man of God, was made bishop; and how he lived and taught whilst still in the monastic life. \[685 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xxvii-p1"></span>IN the same year in which King Egfrid
departed this life,he, as has been said, caused the holy and venerable
Cuthbertto be ordained bishop of the church of Lindisfarne. He had for
many years led a solitary life, in great continence of body and mind, in
a very small island, called Fame, in the ocean about nine miles distant
from that same church. From his earliest childhoodhe had always been
inflamed with the desire of a religious life; and he adopted the name
and habit of a monk when he was quite a young man: he first entered the
monastery of Mailros,which is on the bank of the river Tweed, and was
then governed by the Abbot Eata,a man of great gentleness and
simplicity, who was afterwards made bishop of the church of Hagustald or
Lindisfarne, as has been said above. The provost of the monastery at
that time was Boisil,a priest of great virtue and of a prophetic spirit.
Cuthbert, humbly submitting himself to this man’s direction, from him
received both a knowledge of the Scriptures, and an example of good
works.

<span id="v.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>After he had departed to the Lord,
Cuthbert became provost of that monastery, where he instructed many in
the rule of monastic life, both by the authority of a master, and the
example of his own behaviour. Nor did he bestow his teaching and his
example in the monastic life on his monastery alone, but laboured far
and wide to convert the people dwelling round about from the life of
foolish custom, to the love of heavenly joys; for many profaned the
faith which they held by their wicked actions; and some also, in the
time of a pestilence, neglecting the mysteries of the faith which they
had received, had recourse to the false remedies of idolatry, as if they
could have put a stop to the plague sent from God, by incantations,
amulets, or any other secrets of the Devil’s art. In order to correct
the error of both sorts, he often went forth from the monastery,
sometimes on horseback, but oftener on foot, and went to the
neighbouring townships, where he preached the way of truth to such as
had gone astray; which Boisil also in his time had been wont to do. It
was then the custom of the English people, that when a clerk or priest
came to a township, they all, at his summons, flocked together to hear
the Word; willingly heard what was said, and still more willingly
practised those things that they could hear and understand. And such was
Cuthbert’s skill in speaking, so keen his desire to persuade men of what
he taught, such a light shone in his angelic face, that no man present
dared to conceal from him the secrets of his heart, but all openly
revealed in confession what they had done, thinking doubtless that their
guilt could in nowise be hidden from him; and having confessed their
sins, they wiped them out by fruits worthy of repentance, as he bade
them. He was wont chiefly to resort to those places and preach in those
villages which were situated afar off amid steep and wild mountains, so
that others dreaded to go thither, and whereof the poverty and barbarity
rendered them inaccessible to other teachers. But he, devoting himself
entirely to that pious labour, so industriously ministered to them with
his wise teaching, that when he went forth from the monastery, he would
often stay a whole week, sometimes two or three, or even sometimes a
full month, before he returned home, continuing among the hill folk to
call that simple people by his preaching and good works to the things of
Heaven.

<span id="v.iv.xxvii-p3"></span>This venerable servant of the Lord,
having thus spent many years in the monastery of Mailros, and there
become conspicuous by great tokens of virtue, his most reverend abbot,
Eata, removed him to the isle of Lindisfarne, that he might there also,
by his authority as provost and by the example of his own practice,
instruct the brethren in the observance of regular discipline; for the
same reverend father then governed that place also as abbot. From
ancient times, the bishop was wont to reside there with his clergy, and
the abbot with his monks, who were likewise under the paternal care of
the bishop; because Aidan, who was the first bishop of the place, being
himself a monk, brought monks thither, and settled the monastic
institution there; as the blessed Father Augustine is known to have done
before in Kent, when the most reverend Pope Gregory wrote to him, as has
been said above, to this effect: "But in that you, my brother, having
been instructed in monastic rules, must not live apart from your clergy
in the Church of the English, which has been lately, by the will of God,
converted to the faith, you must establish the manner of conversation of
our fathers in the primitive Church, among whom, none said that aught of
the things which they possessed was his own; but they had all things
common."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. How the same St. Cuthbert, living the life of an
Anchorite, by his prayers obtained a spring](hist114)
