[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist022) 
[Next](hist024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xx"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xx-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXI. How, when the Pelagian heresy began to spring up afresh, Germanus, returning to Britain with Severus, first restored bodily strength to a lame youth, then spiritual health to the people of God, having condemned or converted the Heretics \[447 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xx-p1"></span>NOT long after, news was brought from the
same island, that certain persons were again attempting to teach and
spread abroad the Pelagian heresy, and again the holy Germanus was
entreated by all the priests, that he would defend the cause of God,
which he had before maintained. He speedily complied with their request;
and taking with him Severus, a man of singular sanctity, who was
disciple to the blessed father, Lupus, bishop of Troyes, and at that
time, having been ordained bishop of the Treveri, was preaching the Word
of God to the tribes of Upper Germany, put to sea, and with favouring
winds and calm waters sailed to Britain.

<span id="v.i.xx-p2"></span>In the meantime, the evil spirits, speeding
through the whole island, were constrained against their will to
foretell that Germanus was coming, insomuch, that one Elafius, a chief
of that region, without tidings from any visible messenger, hastened to
meet the holy men, carrying with him his son, who in the very flower of
his youth laboured under a grievous infirmity; for the sinews of the
knee were wasted and shrunk, so that the withered limb was denied the
power to walk. All the country followed this Elafius. The bishops
arrived, and were met by the ignorant multitude, whom they blessed, and
preached the Word of God to them. They found the people constant in the
faith as they had left them; and learning that but few had gone astray,
they sought out the authors of the evil and condemned them. Then
suddenly Elafius cast himself at the feet of the bishops, presenting his
son, whose distress was visible and needed no words to express it. All
were grieved, but especially the bishops, who, filled with pity, invoked
the mercy of God; and straightway the blessed Germanus, causing the
youth to sit down, touched the bent and feeble knee and passed his
healing hand over all the diseased part. At once health was restored by
the power of his touch, the withered limb regained its vigour, the
sinews resumed their task, and the youth was, in the presence of all the
people, delivered whole to his father. The multitude was amazed at the
miracle, and the Catholic faith was firmly established in the hearts of
all; after which, they were, in a sermon, exhorted to amend their error.
By the judgement of all, the exponents of the heresy, who had been
banished from the island, were brought before the bishops, to be
conveyed into the continent, that the country might be rid of them, and
they corrected of their errors. So it came to pass that the faith in
those parts continued long after pure and untainted. Thus when they had
settled all things, the blessed prelates returned home as prosperously
as they had come.

<span id="v.i.xx-p3"></span>But Germanus, after this, went to Ravenna to
intercede for the tranquillity of the Armoricans, where, after being
very honourably received by Valentinian and his mother, Placidia, he
departed hence to Christ; his body was conveyed to his own city with a
splendid retinue, and mighty works attended his passage to the grave.
Not long after, Valentinian was murdered by the followers of Aetius, the
patrician, whom he had put to death, in the sixth year of the reign of
Marcian, and with him ended the empire of the West.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. How the Britons, being for a time at rest from foreign
invasions, wore themselves out by civil](hist024)
