[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist103) 
[Next](hist105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xviii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xviii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVIII. Of John, the precentor of the Apostolic see, who came into Britain to teach. \[680 A. D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xviii-p1"></span>AMONG those who were present at this
synod, and confirmed the decrees of the Catholic faith, was the
venerable John, archchanter of the church of the holy Apostle Peter,and
abbot of the monastery of the blessed Martin, who had come lately from
Rome, by order of Pope Agatho, together with the most reverend Abbot
Biscop, surnamed Benedict,of whom mention has been made above. For the
said Benedict, having built a monastery in Britain, in honour of the
most blessed chief of the Apostles, at the mouth of the river Wear, went
to Rome with Ceolfrid,his companion and fellow-labourer in that work,
who was after him abbot of the same monastery; he had been several times
before at Rome, and was now honourably received by Pope Agatho of
blessed memory; from whom he also asked and obtained, in order to secure
the immunities of the monastery which he had founded, a letter of
privilege confirmed by apostolic authority, according to what he knew to
be the will and grant of King Egfrid, by whose consent and gift of land
he had built that monastery.

<span id="v.iv.xviii-p2"></span>He was also allowed to take the
aforesaid Abbot John with him into Britain, that he might teach in his
monastery the system of singing throughout the year, as it was practised
at St. Peter’s at Rome. The Abbot John did as he had been commanded by
the Pope, teaching the singers of the said monastery the order and
manner of singing and reading aloud, and committing to writing all that
was requisite throughout the whole course of the year for the
celebration of festivals; and these writings are still preserved in that
monastery, and have been copied by many others elsewhere. The said John
not only taught the brothers of that monastery, but such as had skill in
singing resorted from almost all the monasteries of the same province to
hear him, and many invited him to teach in other places.

<span id="v.iv.xviii-p3"></span>Besides his task of singing and
reading,, he had also received a commission from the Apostolic Pope,
carefully to inform himself concerning the faith of the English Church,
and to give an account thereof on his return to Rome. For he also
brought with him the decision of the synod of the blessed Pope Martin,
held not long before at Rome,with the consent of one hundred and five
bishops, chiefly to refute those who taught that there is but one
operation and will in Christ, and he gave it to be transcribed in the
aforesaid monastery of the most religious Abbot Benedict. The men who
followed such opinion greatly perplexed the faith of the Church of
Constantinople at that time; but by the help of God they were then
discovered and overcome.Wherefore, Pope Agatho, being desirous to be
informed concerning the state of the Church in Britain, as well as in
other provinces, and to what extent it was clear from the contagion of
heretics, gave this matter in charge to the most reverend Abbot John,
then appointed to go to Britain. The synod we have spoken of having been
called for this purpose in Britain, the Catholic faith was found
untainted in all, and a report of the proceedings of the same was given
him to carry to Rome.

<span id="v.iv.xviii-p4"></span>But in his return to his own country,
soon after crossing the sea, he fell sick and died; and his body, for
the sake of St. Martin, in whose monastery he presided, was by his
friends carried to Tours, and honourably buried; for he had been kindly
entertained by the Church there on his way to Britain, and earnestly
entreated by the brethren, that in his return to Rome he would take that
road, and visit their Church, and moreover he was there supplied with
men to conduct him on his way, and assist him in the work enjoined upon
him. Though he died by the way, yet the testimony of the Catholic faith
of the English nation was carried to Rome, and received with great joy
by the Apostolic Pope, and all those, that heard or read it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. How Queen Ethelthryth always preserved her virginity, and
her body suffered no corruption](hist105)
