[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist116.md) 
[Next](hist118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxxi"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxxi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXXI. Of one that was cured of a palsy at his tomb.

<span id="v.iv.xxxi-p1"></span>THERE was in that same monastery a
brother whose name was Badudegn, who had for no small time ministered to
the guests of the house, and is still living, having the testimony of
all the brothers and strangers resorting thither, of being a man of much
piety and religion, and serving the office put upon him only for the
sake of the heavenly reward. This man, having one day washed in the sea
the coverings or blankets which he used in the guest chamber, was
returning home, when on the way, he was seized with a sudden infirmity,
insomuch that he fell to the ground, and lay there a long time and could
scarce at last rise again. When he got up, he felt one half of his body,
from the head to the foot, struck with palsy, and with great trouble
made his way home by the help of a staff. The disease increased by
degrees, and as night approached, became still worse, so that when day
returned, he could scarcely rise or walk alone. Suffering from this
trouble, he conceived the wise resolve to go to the church, as best he
could, and approach the tomb of the reverend father Cuthbert, and there,
on his knees, humbly beseech the mercy of God that he might either be
delivered from that disease, if it were well for him, or if by the grace
of God it was ordained for him to be chastened longer by this
affliction, that he might bear the pain which was laid upon him with
patience and a quiet mind.

<span id="v.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>He did accordingly as he had determined,
and supporting his weak limbs with a staff, entered the church. There
prostrating himself before the body of the man of God, he prayed with
pious earnestness, that, through his intercession, the Lord might be
propitious to him. As he prayed, he seemed to fall into a deep sleep,
and, as he was afterwards wont to relate, felt a large and broad hand
touch his head, where the pain lay, and likewise pass over all that part
of his body which had been benumbed by the disease, down to his feet.
Gradually the pain departed and health returned. Then he awoke, and rose
up in perfect health, and returning thanks to the Lord for his recovery,
told the brothers what had been done for him; and to the joy of them
all, returned the more zealously, as if chastened by the trial of his
affliction, to the service which he was wont before to perform with
care.

<span id="v.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>Moreover, the very garments which had
been on Cuthbert’s body, dedicated to God, either while he was alive, or
after his death, were not without the virtue of healing, as may be seen
in the book of his life and miracles, by such as shall read it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. Of one who was lately cured of a disease in his eye at the
relics of St. Cuthbert.](hist118.md)
