[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist072) 
[Next](hist074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xvii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVII. How a prop of the church on which Bishop Aidan was leaning when he died, could not be consumed when the rest of the Church was on fire; and concerning his inward life. \[651 A. D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p1"></span>AIDAN was in the king’s township, not
far from the city of which we have spoken above, at the time when death
caused him to quit the body, after he had been bishop sixteen years; for
having a church and a chamber in that place, he was wont often to go and
stay there, and to make excursions from it to preach in the country
round about, which he likewise did at other of the king’s townships,
having nothing of his own besides his church and a few fields about it.
When he was sick they set up a tent for him against the wall at the west
end of the church, and so it happened that he breathed his last, leaning
against a buttress that was on the outside of the church to strengthen
the wall. He died in the seventeenth year of his episcopate, on the 31st
of August. His body was. thence presently translated to the isle of
Lindisfarne, and buried in the cemetery of the brethren. Some time
after, when a larger church was built there and dedicated in honour of
the blessed prince of the Apostles, his bones were translated thither,
and laid on the right side of the altar, with the respect due to so
great a prelate.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p2"></span> Finan,who had likewise been sent
thither from Hii, the island monastery of the Scots, succeeded him, and
continued no small time in the bishopric. It happened some years after,
that Penda, king of the Mercians, coming into these parts with a hostile
army, destroyed all he could with fire and sword, and the village where
the bishop died, along with the church above mentioned, was burnt down;
but it fell out in a wonderful manner that the buttress against which he
had been leaning when he died, could not be consumed by the fire which
devoured all about it. This miracle being noised abroad, the church was
soon rebuilt in the same place, and that same buttress was set up on the
outside, as it had been before, to strengthen the wall. It happened
again, some time after, that the village and likewise the church were
carelessly burned down the second time. Then again, the fire could not
touch the buttress; and, miraculously, though the fire broke through the
very holes of the nails wherewith it was fixed to the building, yet it
could do no hurt to the buttress itself. When therefore the church was
built there the third time, they did not, as before, place that buttress
on the outside as a support of the building, but within the church, as a
memorial of the miracle; where the people coming in might kneel, and
implore the Divine mercy. And it is well known that since then many have
found grace and been healed in that same place, as also that by means of
splinters cut off from the buttress, and put into water, many more have
obtained a remedy for their own infirmities and those of their friends

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p3"></span> I have written thus much concerning the
character and works of the aforesaid Aidan, in no way commending or
approving his lack of wisdom with regard to the observance of Easter;
nay, heartily detesting it, as I have most manifestly proved in the book
I have written, "De Temporibus"; but, like an impartial historian,
unreservedly relating what was done by or through him, and commending
such things as are praiseworthy in his actions, and preserving the
memory thereof for the benefit of the readers; to wit, his love of peace
and charity; of continence and humility; his mind superior to anger and
avarice, and despising pride and vainglory; his industry in keeping and
teaching the Divine commandments, his power of study and keeping vigil;
his priestly authority in reproving the haughty and powerful, and at the
same time his tenderness in comforting the afflicted, and relieving or
defending the poor. To be brief, so far as I have learnt from those that
knew him, he took care to neglect none of those things which he found in
the Gospels and the writings of Apostles and prophets, but to the utmost
of his power endeavoured to fulfil them all in his deeds.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p4"></span> These things I greatly admire and love
in the aforesaid bishop, because I do not doubt that they were pleasing
to God; but I do not approve or praise his observance of Easter at the
wrong time, either through ignorance of the canonical time appointed,
or, if he knew it, being prevailed on by the authority of his nation not
to adopt it. Yet this I approve in him, that in the celebration of his
Easter, the object which he had at heart and reverenced and preached was
the same as ours, to wit, the redemption of mankind, through the
Passion, Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven of the Man Christ Jesus,
who is the mediator between God and man. And therefore he always
celebrated Easter, not as some falsely imagine, on the fourteenth of the
moon, like the Jews, on any day of the week, but on the Lord’s day, from
the fourteenth to the twentieth of the moon; and this he did from his
belief that the Resurrection of our Lord happened on the first day of
the week, and for the hope of our resurrection, which also he, with the
holy Church, believed would truly happen on that same first day/ of the
week, now called the Lord’s day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Of the life and death of the religious King Sigbert
\[Circ. 631 A.D.\]](hist074)
