[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist102) 
[Next](hist104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xvii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xvii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XVII. Of the Synod held in the plain of Haethfelth, Archbishop Theodore being president. \[680 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xvii-p1"></span>ABOUT this time, Theodore being informed
that the faith of the Church at Constantinople was much perplexed by the
heresy of Eutyches, and desiring that the Churches of the English, over
which he presided, should remain free from all such taint, convened an
assembly of venerable bishops and many learned men, and diligently
inquired into the faith of each. He found them all of one mind in the
Catholic faith, and this he caused to be committed to writing by the
authority of the synod as a memorial, and for the instruction of
succeeding generations; the beginning of which document is as follows:

<span id="v.iv.xvii-p2"></span>"In the name of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, under the rule of our most pious lords, Egfrid, king of of
the Northumbrians, in the tenth year of his reign, the seventeenth of
September, the eighth indiction; Ethelred, king of the Mercians, in the
sixth year of his reign; Aldwulf king of the East Angles, in the
seventeenth year ofhis reign; and Hlothere, king of Kent, in the seventh
year of his reign, Theodore, by the grace of God, archbishop of the
island of Britain, and of the city of Canterbury, being president, and
the other venerable bishops of the island of Britain sitting with him,
the holy Gospels being laid before them, at the place which, in the
Saxon tongue, is called Haethfelth,we conferred together, and set forth
the right and orthodox faith, as our Lord Jesus Christ in the flesh
delivered the same to His disciples, who beheld His Presence and heard
His words, and as it is delivered by the creed of the holy fathers, and
by all holy and universal synods in general, and by the consent of all
approved doctors of the Catholic Church. We, therefore, following them,
in piety and orthodoxy, and professing accordance with their divinely
inspired doctrine, do believe agreeably to it, and with the holy fathers
confess the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to be properly and truly a
Trinity consubstantial in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, that is, one God
in three Subsistences or consubstantial persons, of equal glory and
honour."

<span id="v.iv.xvii-p3"></span>And after much more of the same sort,
appertaining to the confession of the right faith, this holy synod added
to its document, "We acknowledge the five holy and general councils of
the blessed fathers acceptable to God; that is, of the 318 assembled at
Nicaea, against the most impious Anus and his tenets; and at
ConstantinopIe, of 150, against the madness of Macedonius and Eudoxius,
and their tenets; and at Ephesus, for the first time, of 200, against
the most wicked Nestorius, and his tenets; and at Chalcedon, of 630,
against Eutyches and Nestorius, and their tenets; and again, at
Constantinople, in a fifth council, in the time of Justinian the
younger,against Theodorus, and the epistles of Theodoret and Ibas, and
their tenets in opposition to Cyril." And again a little lower, "the
synod held in the city of Rome, in the time of the blessed Pope
Martin,in the eighth indiction, and in the ninth year of the most pious
Emperor Constantine,we also acknowledge. And we glorify our Lord Jesus
Christ, as they glorified Him, neither adding aught nor taking away;
anathematizing with hearts and lips those whom they anathematized, and
receiving those whom they received; glorifying God the Father, Who is
without beginning, and His only-begotten Son, begotten of the Father
before the worlds, and the Holy Ghost proceeding ineffably from the
Father and the Son, even as those holy Apostles, prophets, and doctors,
whom we have above-mentioned, did declare. And all we, who, with
Archbishop Theodore, have thus set forth the Catholic faith, thereto
subscribe."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Of John, the precentor of the Apostolic see, who came into
Britain to teach. \[680 A. D.\]](hist104)
