[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist093.md) 
[Next](hist095.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.viii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VIII. How a little boy, dying in the same monastery, called upon a virgin that was to follow him; and how another nun, at the point of leaving her body, saw some small part of the future glory. \[675 A. D.?\]

<span id="v.iv.viii-p1"></span>THERE was, in the same monastery, a boy,
not above three years old, called Aesica; who, by reason of his tender
age, was being brought up among the virgins dedicated to God; there to
learn his lessons. This child being seized by the aforesaid pestilence,
when his last hour was come, called three times upon one of the virgins
consecrated to Christ, speaking to her by her own name, as if she had
been present, Eadgyth! Eadgyth! Eadgyth! and thus ending his temporal
life, entered into that which is eternal. The virgin, to whom he called,
as he was dying, was immediately seized, where she was, with the same
sickness, and departing this life the same day on which she had been
summoned, followed him that called her into the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="v.iv.viii-p2"></span>Likewise, one of the same handmaids of
God, being smitten with the same disease, and reduced to the last
extremity, began on a sudden, about midnight, to cry out to them that
ministered to her, desiring they would put out the lamp that was lighted
there. And, when she had done this many times, and yet no one did her
will, at last she said, "I know that you think I am raving when I say
this, but be assured that it is not so; for I tell you truly, that I see
this house filled with so great a light, that that lamp of yours seems
to me to be altogether dark." And when still no one replied to what she
said, or did her bidding, she added, "Burn your lamp, then, as long as
you will; but know, that it is not my light, for my light will come to
me at the dawn of day." Then she began to tell, that a certain man of
God, who had died that same year, had appeared to her, telling her that
at the break of day she should depart to the eternal light. The truth of
which vision was speedily proved by the maiden’s death as soon as the
day appeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Of the signs which were shown from Heaven when the mother of
that community departed this life. \[675 A.D.?\]](hist095.md)
