[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist042.md) 
[Next](hist044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vii"></span>

### <span id="v.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VII.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p1"></span> IN this king's reign, the blessed
Archbishop Laurentius was taken up to the heavenly kingdom: he was
buried in the church and monastery of the holy Apostle Peter, close by
his predecessor Augustine, on the 2nd day of the month of February.
Mellitus, who was bishop of London, succeeded to the see of Canterbury,
being the third archbishop from Augustine; Justus, who was still living,
governed the church of Rochester. These ruled the Church of the English
with much care and industry, and received letters of exhortation from
Boniface, bishop of the Roman Apostolic see, who presided over the
Church after Deusdedit, in the year of our Lord 619. Mellitus laboured
under the bodily infirmity of gout, but his mind was sound and active,
cheerfully passing over all earthly things, and always aspiring to love,
seek, and attain to those which are celestial. He was noble by birth,
but still nobler by the elevation of his mind.  
  
In short, that I may give one instance of his power, from which the rest
may be inferred, it happened once that the city of Canterbury, being set
on fire through carelessness, was in danger of being consumed by the
spreading conflagration; water was thrown on the fire in vain; a
considerable part of the city was already destroyed, and the fierce
flames were advancing towards the bishop's abode, when he, trusting in
God, where human help failed, ordered himself to be carried towards the
raging masses of fire which were spreading on every side. The church of
the four crowned Martyrs was in the place where the fire raged most
fiercely. The bishop, being carried thither by his servants, weak as he
was, set about averting by prayer the danger which the strong hands of
active men had not been able to overcome with all their exertions.
Immediately the wind, which blowing from the south had spread the
conflagration throughout the city, veered to the north, and thus
prevented the destruction of those places that had been exposed to its
full violence, then it ceased entirely and there was a calm, while the
flames likewise sank and were extinguished. And because the man of God
burned with the fire of divine love, and was wont to drive away the
storms of the powers of the air, by his frequent prayers and at his
bidding, from doing harm to himself, or his people, it was meet that he
should be allowed to prevail over the winds and flames of this world,
and to obtain that they should not injure him or his.  
  
This archbishop also, having ruled the church five years, departed to
heaven in the reign of King Eadbald, and was buried with his fathers in
the monastery and church, which we have so often mentioned, of the most
blessed chief of the Apostles, in the year of our Lord 624, on the 24th
day of April.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. How Pope Boniface sent the Pall and a letter to Justus,
successor to Mellitus](hist044.md)
