[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist038.md) 
[Next](hist040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

### <span id="v.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. III.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span> IN the year of our Lord 604, Augustine,
Archbishop of Britain, ordained two bishops, to wit, Mellitus and
Justus; Mellitus to preach to the province of the East Saxons, who are
divided from Kent by the river Thames, and border on the Eastern sea.
Their metropolis is the city of London, which is situated on the bank of
the aforesaid river, and is the mart of many nations resorting to it by
sea and land. At that time, Sabert, nephew to Ethelbert through his
sister Ricula, reigned over the nation, though he was under subjection
to Ethelbert, who, as has been said above, had command over all the
nations of the English as far as the river Humber. But when this
province also received the word of truth, by the preaching of Mellitus,
King Ethelbert built the church of St. Paul the Apostle, in the city of
London, where he and his successors should have their episcopal see. As
for Justus, Augustine ordained him bishop in Kent, at thc city of
Dorubrevis, which the English call Hrofaescaestrae, from one that was
formerly the chief man of it, called Hrof. It is about twenty-four miles
distant from the city of Canterbury to the westward, and in it King
Ethelbert dedicated a church to the blessed Apostle Andrew, and bestowed
many gifts on the bishops of both those churches, as well as on the
Bishop of Canterbury, adding lands and possessions for the use of those
who were associated with the bishops.  
  
After this, the beloved of God, our father Augustine, died, and his body
was laid outside, close by the church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and
Paul, above spoken of, because it was not yet finished, nor consecrated,
but as soon as it was consecrated, the body was brought in, and
fittingly buried in the north chapel a thereof; wherein also were
interred the bodies of all the succeeding archbishops, except two only,
Theodore and Bertwald, whose bodies are in the church itself, because
the aforesaid chapel could contain no more.' Almost in the midst of this
chapel is an altar dedicated in honour of the blessed Pope Gregory, at
which every Saturday memorial Masses are celebrated for the archbishops
by a priest of that place. On the tomb of Augustine is inscribed this
epitaph:  
  
"Here rests the Lord Augustine, first Archbishop of Canterbury, who,
being of old sent hither by the blessed Gregory, Bishop of the city of
Rome, and supported by God in the working of miracles, led King
Ethelbert and his nation from the worship of idols to the faith of
Christ, and having ended the days of his office in peace, died the 26th
day of May, in the reign of the same king"  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. How Laurentius and his bishops admonished the Scots to
observe the unity of the Holy Church, particularly in keeping of Easter,
and how Mellitus went to Rome.](hist040.md)
