[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist122.md) 
[Next](hist124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v"></span>

### <span id="v.v.v-p0.1"></span>CHAP. V. How he likewise recalled by his prayers a thegn’s servant from death.

<span id="v.v.v-p1"></span>AT another time also, being called to
consecrate the church of a thegn named Addi, when he had performed the
required duty, he was entreated by the thegn to go in to one of his
servants, who lay dangerously ill, insomuch that having lost all use of
his limbs, he seemed to be at the point of death; and moreover the
coffin had been made ready wherein to bury him after his death. The
thegn urged his entreaties with tears, earnestly beseeching him that he
would go in and pray for the servant, because his life was of great
moment to him; and he believed that if the bishop would lay his hand
upon him and give him his blessing, he would soon mend. So the bishop
went in, and saw him very near death, and by his side the coffin in
which he was to be laid for his burial, whilst all mourned. He said a
prayer and blessed him, and going out, spake the wonted words of
comfort, "Good health be yours and that speedily." Afterwards, when they
were sitting at table, the servant sent to his lord, desiring that he
would let him have a cup of wine, because he was thirsty. The thegn,
rejoicing greatly that he could drink, sent him a cup of wine, blessed
by the bishop; and, as soon as he had drunk it, he immediately got up,
and, shaking off the heaviness of his infirmity, dressed himself and
went forth, and going in to the bishop, saluted him and the other
guests, saying that he also would gladly eat and drink with them. They
bade him sit down with them at table, greatly rejoicing at his recovery.
He sat down, ate and drank and made merry, and behaved himself like the
rest of the company; and living many years after, continued in the same
health which he had gained. The aforesaid abbot says this miracle was
not wrought in his presence, but that he had it from those who were
present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. How Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome to be
baptised; and his successor Ini,](hist124.md)
