[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist027) 
[Next](hist029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xxv"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xxv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVI. How St. Augustine in Kent followed the doctrine and manner of life of the primitive Church, and settled his episcopal see in the royal city. \[597 A. D.\]

<span id="v.i.xxv-p1"></span>AS soon as they entered the dwelling-place
assigned to them, they began to imitate the Apostolic manner of life in
the primitive Church; applying themselves to constant prayer, watchings,
and fastings; preaching the Word of life to as many as they could;
despising all worldly things, as in nowise concerning them; receiving
only their necessary food from those they taught; living themselves in
all respects conformably to what they taught, and being always ready to
suffer any adversity, and even to die for that truth which they
preached. In brief, some believed and were baptized, admiring the
simplicity of their blameless life, and the sweetness of their heavenly
doctrine. There was on the east side of the city, a church dedicated of
old to the honour of St. Martin, (Note: St. Martin was regarded with
special reverence in Britain and Ireland. Possibly some of the earliest
missionaries may have been his disciples, e.g., St. Ninian and, St.
Patrick. The Roman church of St. Martin at Canterbury has been
frequently altered and partly rebuilt, so that "small portions only of
the Roman walls remain. Roman bricks are used as old materials in the
parts rebuilt") built whilst the Romans were still in the island,
wherein the queen, who, as has been said before, was a Christian, was
wont to pray. In this they also first began to come together, to chant
the Psalms, to pray, to celebrate Mass, to preach, and to baptize, till
when the king had been converted to the faith, they obtained greater
liberty to preach everywhere and build or repair churches.

<span id="v.i.xxv-p2"></span>When he, among the rest, believed and was
baptized, attracted by the pure life of these holy men and their
gracious promises, the truth of which they established by many miracles,
greater numbers began daily to flock together to hear the Word, and,
forsaking their heathen rites, to have fellowship, through faith, in the
unity of Christ’s Holy Church. It is told that the king, while he
rejoiced at their conversion and their faith, yet compelled none to
embrace Christianity, but only showed more affection to the believers,
as to his fellow citizens in the kingdom of Heaven. For he had learned
from those who had instructed him and guided him to salvation, that the
service of Christ ought to be voluntary, not by compulsion. Nor was it
long before he gave his teachers a settled residence suited to their
degree in his metropolis of Canterbury, with such possessions of divers
sorts as were necessary for them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. How St. Augustine, being made a bishop, sent to acquaint
Pope Gregory with what had](hist029)
