[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist123.md) 
[Next](hist125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.vi"></span>

### <span id="v.v.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VII. How Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome to be baptised; and his successor Ini, also devoutly journeyed to the same threshold of the holy Apostles. \[688 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.vi-p1"></span>In the third year of the reign of Aldfrid,
Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, having most vigorously governed his
nation for two years, quitted his crown for the sake of the Lord and an
everlasting kingdom, and went to Rome, being desirous to obtain the
peculiar honour of being cleansed in the baptismal font at the threshold
of the blessed Apostles, for he had learned that in Baptism alone the
entrance into the heavenly life is opened to mankind; and he hoped at
the same time, that being made clean by Baptism, he should soon be freed
from the bonds of the flesh and pass to the eternal joys of Heaven; both
which things, by the help of the Lord, came to pass according as he had
conceived in his mind. For coming to Rome, at the time that Sergius was
pope, he was baptized on the Holy Saturday before Easter Day, in the
year of our Lord 689, and being still in his white garments, he fell
sick, and was set free from the bonds of the flesh on the 20th of April,
and obtained an entrance into the kingdom of the blessed in Heaven. At
his baptism, the aforesaid pope had given him the name of Peter, to the
end, that he might be also united in name to the most blessed chief of
the Apostles, to whose most holy body his pious love had led him from
the utmost bounds of the earth. He was likewise buried in his church,
and by the pope’s command an epitaph was written on his tomb, wherein
the memory of his devotion might be preserved for ever, and the readers
or hearers thereof might be stirred up to give themselves to religion by
the example of what he had done.

<span id="v.v.vi-p2"></span>The epitaph was this :— "High estate,
wealth, offspring, a mighty kingdom, triumphs, spoils, chieftains,
strongholds, the camp, a home; whatsoever the valour of his sires,
whatsoever himself had won, Caedwal, mighty in war, left for the love of
God, that, a pilgrim king, he might behold, Peter and Peter’s seat,
receive at his font pure waters of life, and in bright draughts drink of
the shining radiance whence a quickening glory streams through all the
world. And even as he gained with eager soul the prize of the new life,
he laid aside barbaric rage, and, changed in heart, he changed his name
with joy. Sergius the Pope bade him be called Peter, himself his father,
when he rose born anew from the font, and the grace of Christ, cleansing
him, bore him forthwith clothed in white raiment to the heights of
Heaven. wondrous faith of the king, but greatest of all the mercy of
Christ, into whose counsels none may enter! For he came in safety from
the ends of the earth, even from Britain, through many a nation, over
many a sea, by many a path, and saw the city of Romulus and looked upon
Peter’s sanctuary revered, bearing mystic gifts. He shall walk in white
among the sheep of Christ in fellowship with them; for his body is in
the tomb, but his soul on high. Thou mightest deem he did but change an
earthly for a heavenly sceptre, whom thou seest attain to the kingdom of
Christ."

<span id="v.v.vi-p3"></span>"Here was buried Caedwalla, called also
Peter, king of the Saxons, on the twentieth day of April, in the second
indiction, aged about thirty years, in the reign of our most pious lord,
the Emperor Justinian, in the fourth year of his consulship, in the
second year of the pontificate of our Apostolic lord, Pope Sergius."

<span id="v.v.vi-p4"></span>When Caedwalla went to Rome, Ini succeeded
to the kingdom, being of the blood royal; and having reigned
thirty-seven years over that nation, he in like manner left his kingdom
and committed it to younger men, and went away to the threshold of the
blessed Apostles, at the time when Gregory was pope, being desirous to
spend some part of his pilgrimage upon earth in the neighbourhood of the
holy places, that he might obtain to be more readily received into the
fellowship of the saints in heaven. This same thing, about that time,
was wont to be done most zealously by many of the English nation, nobles
and commons, laity and clergy, men and women,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. How, when Archbishop Theodore died, Bertwald succeeded him
as archbishop, and, among](hist125.md)
