[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist082.md) 
[Next](hist084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxvii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVII. How Egbert, a holy man of the English nation, led a monastic life in Ireland. \[664 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> IN the same year of our Lord 664,
there happened an eclipse of the sun, on the third day of May,about the
tenth hour of the day. In the same year, a sudden pestilence depopulated
first the southern parts of Britain, and afterwards attacking the
province of the Northumbrians, ravaged the country far and near, and
destroyed a great multitude of men. By this plague the aforesaid priest
of the Lord, Tuda,was carried off, and was honourably buried in the
monastery called Paegnalaech.2 Moreover, this plague prevailed no less
disastrously in the island of Ireland. Many of the nobility, and of the
lower ranks of the English nation, were there at that time, who, in the
days of the Bishops Finan and Colman, forsaking their native island,
retired thither, either for the sake of sacred studies, or of a more
ascetic life; and some of them presently devoted themselves faithfully
to a monastic life, others chose rather to apply themselves to study,
going about from one master’s cell to another. The Scots willingly
received them all, and took care to supply them with daily food without
cost, as also to furnish them with books for their studies, and teaching
free of charge.

<span id="v.iii.xxvii-p2"></span> Among these were Ethelhun and
Egbert,two youths of great capacity, of the English nobility. The former
of whom was brother to Ethelwin,a man no less beloved by God, who also
at a later time went over into Ireland to study, and having been well
instructed, returned into his own country, and being made bishop in the
province of Lindsey, long and nobly governed the Church. These two being
in the monastery which in the language of the Scots is called
Rathmelsigi,and having lost all their companions, who were either cut
off by the plague, or dispersed into other places, were both seized by
the same sickness, and grievously afflicted. Of these, Egbert, (as I was
informed by a priest venerable for his age, and of great veracity, who
declared he had heard the story from his own lips,) concluding that he
was at the point of death, went out of the chamber, where the sick lay,
in the morning, and sitting alone in a fitting place, began seriously to
reflect upon his past actions, and, being full of compunction at the
remembrance of his sins, bedewed his face with tears, and prayed
fervently to God that he might not die yet, before he could forthwith
more fully make amends for the careless offences which he had committed
in his boyhood and infancy, or might further exercise himself in good
works. He also made a vow that he would spend all his life abroad and
never return into the island of Britain, where he was born; that besides
singing the psalms at the canonical hours, he would, unless prevented by
bodily infirmity, repeat the whole Psalter daily to the praise of God;
and that he would every week fast one whole day and night. Returning
home, after his tears and prayers and vows, he found his companion
asleep; and going to bed himself, he began to compose himself to rest.
When he had lain quiet awhile, his comrade awaking, looked on him, and
said, "Alas! Brother Egbert, what have you done? I was in hopes that we
should have entered together into life everlasting; but know that your
prayer is granted." For he had learned in a vision what the other had
requested, and that he had obtained his request.

<span id="v.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> In brief, Ethelhun died the next
night; but Egbert, throwing off his sickness, recovered and lived a long
time after to grace the episcopal office, which he received, by deeds
worthy of it; and blessed with many virtues, according to his desire,
lately, in the year of our Lord 729, being ninety years of age, he
departed to the heavenly kingdom. He passed his life in great perfection
of humility, gentleness, continence, simplicity, and justice. Thus he
was a great benefactor, both to his own people, and to those nations of
the Scots and Picts among whom he lived in exile, by the example of his
life, his earnestness in teaching, his authority in reproving, and his
piety in giving away of those things which he received from the rich. He
also added this to the vows which we have mentioned: during Lent, he
would eat but one meal a day, allowing himself nothing but bread and
thin milk, and even that by measure. The milk, new the day before, he
kept in a vessel, and skimming off the cream in the morning, drank the
rest, as has been said, with a little bread. Which sort of abstinence he
likewise always observed forty days before the Nativity of our Lord, and
as many after the solemnity of Pentecost, that is, of the fifty days’
festival.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. How, when Tuda was dead, Wilfried was ordained \[664
A.D.\]](hist084.md)
