[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist113.md) 
[Next](hist115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxviii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxviii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVIII. How the same St. Cuthbert, living the life of an Anchorite, by his prayers obtained a spring in a dry soil, and had a crop from seed sown by the labour of his hands out of season. \[676 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xxviii-p1"></span>AFTER this, Cuthbert, as he grew in
goodness and intensity of devotion, attained also to a hermit’s life of
contemplation in silence and solitude, as we have mentioned. But
forasmuch as many years ago we wrote enough concerning his life and
virtues, both in heroic verse and prose,it may suffice at present only
to mention this, that when he was about to go to the island, he declared
to the brothers, "If by the grace of God it shall be granted to me, that
I may live in that place by the labour of my hands, I will willingly
abide there; but if not, God willing, I will very soon return to you."
The place was quite destitute of water, corn, and trees; and being
infested by evil spirits, was very ill suited for human habitation; but
it became in all respects habitable, at the desire of the man of God;
for at his coming the wicked spirits departed. When, after expelling the
enemy, he had, with the help of the brethren, built himself a narrow
dwelling, with a mound about it, and the necessary cells in it, to wit,
an oratory and a common living room, he ordered the brothers to dig a
pit in the floor of the room, although the ground was hard and stony,
and no hopes appeared of any spring. When they had done this relying
upon the faith and prayers of the servant of God, the next day it was
found to be full of water, and to this day affords abundance of its
heavenly bounty to all that resort thither. He also desired that
instruments for husbandry might be brought him, and some wheat; but
having prepared the ground and sown the wheat at the proper season, no
sign of a blade, not to speak of ears, had sprouted from it by the
summer. Hereupon, when the brethren visited him according to custom, he
ordered barley to be brought him, if haply it were either the nature of
the soil, or the will of God, the Giver of all things, that such grain
rather should grow there. He sowed it in the same field, when it was
brought him, after the proper time of sowing, and therefore without any
likelihood of its bearing fruit; but a plentiful crop immediately sprang
up, and afforded the man of God the means which he had desired of
supporting himself by his own labour.

<span id="v.iv.xxviii-p2"></span>When he had here served God in solitude
many years, the mound which encompassed his dwelling being so high, that
he could see nothing from it but heaven, which he thirsted to enter, it
happened that a great synod was assembled in the presence of King
Egfrid, near the river Alne, at a place called Adtuifyrdi, which
signifies "at the two fords," in which Archbishop Theodore, of blessed
memory, presided, and there Cuthbert was, with one mind and consent of
all, chosen bishop of the church of Lindisfarne. They could not,
however, draw him from his hermitage, though many messengers and letters
were sent to him. At last the aforesaid king himself, with the most holy
Bishop and other religious and powerful men, sailed to the island; many
also of the brothers from the isle of Lindisfarne itself, assembled
together for the same purpose: they all knelt, and conjured him by the
Lord, with tears and entreaties, till they drew him, also in tears, from
his beloved retreat, and forced him to go to the synod. When he arrived
there, he was very reluctantly overcome by the unanimous resolution of
all present, and compelled to take upon himself the duties of the
episcopate; being chiefly prevailed upon by the words of Boisil, the
servant of God, who, when he had prophetically foretold all things that
were to befall him, had also predicted that he should be a bishop.
Nevertheless, the consecration was not appointed immediately; but when
the winter, which was then at hand, was over, it was carried out at
Easter, in the city of York, and in the presence of the aforesaid King
Egfrid; seven bishops coming together for his consecration, among whom,
Theodore, of blessed memory, was Primate. He was first elected bishop of
the church of Hagustald, in the place of Tunbert,who had been deposed
from the episcopate; but because he chose rather to be placed over the
church of Lindisfarne, in which he had lived, it was thought fit that
Eata should return to the see of the church of Hagustald, to which he
had been first ordained, and that Cuthbert should take upon him the
government of the church of Lindisfarne.

<span id="v.iv.xxviii-p3"></span>Following the example of the blessed
Apostles, he adorned the episcopal dignity by his virtuous deeds; for he
both protected the people committed to his charge by constant prayer,
and roused them, by wholesome admonitions, to thoughts of Heaven. He
first showed in his own life what he taught others to do, a practice
which greatly strengthens all teaching; for he was above all things
inflamed with the fire of Divine charity, of sober mind and patient,
most dilig entlyintenton devout prayers, and kindly to all that came to
him for comfort. He thought it stood in the stead of prayer to afford
the weak brethren the help of his exhortation, knowing that he who said
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," said likewise, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour." He was noted for penitential abstinence, and was always
through the grace of compunction, intent upon heavenly things. And when
he offered up to God the Sacrifice of the saving Victim, he commended
his prayer to the Lord, not with uplifted voice, but with tears drawn
from the bottom of his heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. How this bishop foretold that his own death was at hand to
the anchorite Herebert. \[687 A.D.\]](hist115.md)
