[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist081.md) 
[Next](hist083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxvi"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVI. How Colman, being worsted, returned home, and Tuda succeeded him in the bishopric, and of the state of the church under those teachers. \[664 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> THE disputation being ended, and the
assembly broken up, Agilbert returned home. Colman, perceiving that his
doctrine was rejected, and his party despised, took with him those who
wished to follow him, to wit, such as would not accept the Catholic
Easter and the tonsure in the form of a crown,(for there was no small
dispute about that also,) and went back into Scotland,to consult with
his people what was to be done in this case. Cedd, forsaking the
practices of the Scots, returned to his bishopric, having submitted to
the Catholic observance of Easter. This debate took place in the year of
our Lord 664, which was the twenty-second year of the reign of King
Oswy, and the thirtieth of the episcopate of the Scots among the
English; for Aidan was bishop seventeen years, Finan ten, and Colman
three.

<span id="v.iii.xxvi-p2"></span> When Colman had gone back into his own
country, Tuda, the servant of Christ, was made bishop of the
Northumbriansin his place, having been instructed and ordained bishop
among the Southern Scots, having also the crown of the ecclesiastical
tonsure, according to the custom of that province, and observing the
Catholic rule with regard to the time of Easter.He was a good and
religious man, but he governed the church a very short time; he had come
from Scotlandwhilst Colman was yet bishop, and, both by word and deed,
diligently taught all men those things that appertain to the faith and
truth. But Eata,who was abbot of the monastery called Mailros,a man most
reverend and gentle, was appointed abbot over the brethren that chose to
remain in the church of Lindisfarne, when the Scots went away. It is
said that Colman, upon his departure, requested and obtained this of
King Oswy, because Eata was one of Aidan’s twelve boys of the English
nation,whom he received in the early years of his episcopate, to be
instructed in Christ; for the king greatly loved Bishop Colman on
account of his innate discretion. This is that Eata, who, not long
after, was made bishop of the same church of Lindisfarne. Colman carried
home with him part of the bones of the most reverend Father Aidan, and
left part of them in the church where he had presided, ordering them to
be interred in the sacristy.

<span id="v.iii.xxvi-p3"></span> The place which they governed shows how
frugal and temperate he and his predecessors were, for there were very
few houses besides the church found at their departure; indeed, no more
than were barely sufficient to make civilized life possible; they had
also no money, but only cattle; for if they received any money from rich
persons, they immediately- gave it to the poor; there being no need to
gather money, or provide houses for the entertainment of the great men
of the world; for such never resorted to the church, except to pray and
hear the Word of God. The king himself, when occasion required, came
only with five or six servants, and having performed his devotions in
the church, departed. But if they happened to take a repast there, they
were satisfied with the plain, daily food of the brethren, and required
no more. For the whole care of those teachers was to serve God, not the
world—to feed the soul, and not the belly.

<span id="v.iii.xxvi-p4"></span> For this reason the religious habit was
at that time held in great veneration; so that wheresoever any clerk or
monk went, he was joyfully received by all men, as God’s servant; and
even if they chanced to meet him upon the way, they ran to him, and with
bowed head, were glad to be signed with the cross by his hand, or
blessed by his lips. Great attention was also paid to their
exhortations; and on Sundays they flocked eagerly to the church, or the
monasteries, not to feed their bodies, but to hear the Word of God; and
if any priest happened to come into a village, the inhabitants came
together and asked of him the Word of life; for the priests and clerks
went to the villages for no other reason than to preach, baptize, visit
the sick, and, in a word, to take care of souls; and they were so
purified from all taint of avarice, that none of them received lands and
possessions for building monasteries, unless they were compelled to do
so by the temporal authorities; which custom was for some time after
universally observed in the churches of the Northumbrians. But enough
has now been said on this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. How Egbert, a holy man of the English nation, led a
monastic life in Ireland. \[664 A.D.\]](hist083.md)
