[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist085) 
[Next](hist087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxx"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxx-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXX. How the East Saxons, during a pestilence, returned to idolatry, but were soon brought back from their error by the zeal of Bishop Jaruman. \[665 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxx-p1"></span> AT the same time, the Kings Sighere and
Sebbi, though themselves subject to Wulfhere, king of the Mercians,
governed the province of the East Saxons after Suidhelm, of whom we have
spoken above.When that province was suffering from the aforesaid
disastrous plague, Sighere, with his part of the people, forsook the
mysteries of the Christian faith, and turned apostate. For the king
himself, and many of the commons and nobles, loving this life, and not
seeking after another, or even not believing in any other, began to
restore the temples that had been abandoned, and to adore idols, as if
they might by those means be protected against the plague. But Sebbi,
his companion and co-heir in the kingdom, with all his people, very
devoutly preserved the faith which he had received, and, as we shall
show hereafter, ended his faithful life in great felicity.

<span id="v.iii.xxx-p2"></span> King Wulfhere, hearing that the faith of
the province was in part profaned, sent Bishop Jaruman,who was successor
to Trumhere, to correct their error, and recall the province to the true
faith. He acted with much discretion, as I was informed by a priest who
bore him company in that journey, and had been his fellow labourer in
the Word, for he was a religious and good man, and travelling through
all the country, far and near, brought back both the people and the
aforesaid king to the way of righteousness, so that, either forsaking or
destroying the temples and altars which they had erected, they opened
the churches, and gladly confessed the Name of Christ, which they had
opposed, choosing rather to die in the faith of resurrection in Him,
than to live in the abominations of unbelief among their idols. Having
thus accomplished their works, the priests and teachers returned home
with joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. How when Deusdedit died, Wigihard was sent to Rome to receive
the episcopate; but he dying](hist087)
