[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist032.md) 
[Next](hist034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xxx"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xxx-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXXI. How Pope Gregory, by letter, exhorted Augustine not to glory in his miracles. \[601 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xxx-p1"></span>At which time he also sent Augustine a
letter concerning the miracles that he had heard had been wrought by
him; wherein he admonishes him not to incur the danger of being puffed
up by the number of them. The letter was in these words:

<span id="v.i.xxx-p2"></span>"I know, dearly beloved brother, that
Almighty God, by means of you, shows forth great miracles to the nation
which it was His will to choose. Wherefore you must needs rejoice with
fear, and fear with joy concerning that heavenly gift; for you will
rejoice because the souls of the English are by outward miracles drawn
to inward grace; but you will fear, lest, amidst the wonders that are
wrought, the weak mind may be puffed up with self-esteem, and that
whereby it is outwardly raised to honour cause it inwardly to fall
through vain-glory. For we must call to mind, that when the disciples
returned with joy from preaching, and said to their Heavenly Master,
‘Lord, even the devils are subject to us through Thy Name;’ forthwith
they received the reply, ‘In this rejoice not; but rather rejoice,
because your names are written in heaven.’ For their minds were set on
private and temporal joys, when they rejoiced in miracles; but they are
recalled from the private to the common joy, and from the temporal to
the eternal, when it is said to them, **‘**Rejoice in this, because your
names are written in heaven.’ For all the elect do not work miracles,
and yet the names of all are written in heaven. For those who are
disciples of the truth ought not to rejoice, save for that good thing
which all men enjoy as well as they, and in which their joy shall be
without end.

<span id="v.i.xxx-p3"></span>"It remains, therefore, most dear brother,
that amidst those outward actions, which you perform through the power
of the Lord, you should always carefully judge yourself in your heart,
and carefully understand both what you are yourself, and how much grace
is bestowed upon that same nation, for the conversion of which you have
received even the gift of working miracles. And if you remember that you
have at any time sinned against our Creator, either by word or deed,
always call it to mind, to the end that the remembrance of your guilt
may crush the vanity which rises in your heart. And whatsoever gift of
working miracles you either shall receive, or have received, consider
the same, not as conferred on you, but on those for whose salvation it
has been given you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. How Pope Gregory sent letters and gifts to King Ethelbert.
\[601 A.D.\]](hist034.md)
