[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist054) 
[Next](hist056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xix"></span>

### <span id="v.ii.xix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIX.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p1"></span>  
THE same Pope Honorius also wrote to the Scots, whom he had found to err
in the observance of the holy Festival of Easter, as has been shown
above, with subtlety of argument exhorting them not to think themselves,
few as they were, and placed in the utmost borders of the earth, wiser
than all the ancient and modern Churches of Christ, throughout the
world; and not to celebrate a different Easter, contrary to the Paschal
calculation and the decrees of all the bishops upon earth sitting in
synod. Likewise John, who succeeded Severinus, successor to the same
Honorius, being yet but Pope elect, sent to them letters of great
authority and erudition for the purpose of correcting the same error;
evidently showing, that Easter Sunday is to be found between the
fifteenth of the moon and the twenty-first, as was approved in the
Council of Nicaea He also in the same epistle admonished them to guard
against the Pelagian heresy, and reject it, for he had been informed
that it was again springing up among them. The beginning of the epistle
was as follows:  
  
To our most beloved and most holy Tomianus, Columbanus, Cromanus,
Dinnaus, and Baithanus, bishops; to Cromanus, Ernianus, Laistranus,
Scellanus, and Segenus, priests; to Saranus and the rest of the Scottish
doctors and abbots, Hilarus, the arch-presbyter, and vice-gerent of the
holy Apostolic See; John, the deacon, and elect in the name of God;
likewise John, the chief of the notaries and vicegerent of the holy
Apostolic See, and John, the servant of God, and counsellor of the same
Apostolic See. The writings which were brought by the bearers to Pope
Severinus, of holy memory, were left, when he departed from the light of
this world, without an answer to the questions contained in them. Lest
any obscurity should long remain undispelled in a matter of so great
moment, we opened the same, and found that some in your province,
endeavouring to revive a new heresy out of an old one, contrary to the
orthodox faith, do through the darkness of their minds reject our
Easter, when Christ was sacrificed; and contend that the same should be
kept with the Hebrews on the fourteenth of the moon."  
  
By this beginning of the epistle it evidently appears that this heresy
arose among them in very late times, and that not all their nation, but
only some of them, were involved in the same.  
  
After having laid down the manner of keeping Easter, they add this
concerning the Pelagians in the same epistle:  
  
"And we have also learnt that the poison of the Pelagian heresy again
springs up among you; we, therefore, exhort you, that you put away from
your thoughts all such venomous and superstitious wickedness. For you
cannot be ignorant how that execrable heresy has been condemned; for it
has not only been abolished these two hundred years, but it is also
daily condemned by us and buried under our perpetual ban; and we exhort
you not to rake up the ashes of those whose weapons have been burnt. For
who would not detest that insolent and impious assertion, 'That man can
live without sin of his own free will, and not through the grace of
God?' And in the first place, it is blasphemous folly to say that man is
without sin, which none can be, but only the one Mediator between God
and men, the Man Christ Jesus, Who was conceived and born without sin;
for all other men, being born in original sin, are known to bear the
mark of Adam's transgression, even whilst they are without actual sin,
according to the saying of the prophet, 'For behold, I was conceived in
iniquity; and in sin did my mother give birth to me.'  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. How Edwin being slain, Paulinus returned into Kent, and had
the bishopric of Rochester conferred upon him. \[633 A.D.\]](hist056)
