[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist016.md) 
[Next](hist018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xiv"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XV. How the Angles, being invited into Britain, at first drove off the enemy; but not long after, making a league with them, turned their weapons against their allies.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p1"></span>In the year of our Lord 449, Marcian, the
forty-sixth from Augustus, being made emperor with Valentinian, ruled
the empire seven years. Then the nation of the Angles, or Saxons, being
invited by the aforesaid king, arrived in Britain with three ships of
war and had a place in which to settle assigned to them by the same
king, in the eastern part of the island, on the pretext of fighting in
defence of their country, whilst their real intentions were to conquer
it. Accordingly they engaged with the enemy, who were come from the
north to give battle, and the Saxons obtained the victory. When the news
of their success and of the fertility of the country, and the cowardice
of the Britons, reached their own home, a more considerable fleet was
quickly sent over, bringing a greater number of men, and these, being
added to the former army, made up an invincible force. The newcomers
received of the Britons a place to inhabit among them, upon condition
that they should wage war against their enemies for the peace and
security of the country, whilst the Britons agreed to furnish them with
pay. Those who came over were of the three most powerful nations of
Germany—Saxons, Angles, and Jutes. From the Jutes are descended the
people, of Kent, and of the Isle of Wight, including those in the
province of the West-Saxons who are to this day called Jutes, seated
opposite to the Isle of Wight. From the Saxons, that is, the country
which is now called Old Saxony, came the East-Saxons, the South-Saxons,
and the West Saxons. From the Angles, that is, the country which is
called Angulus, and which is said, from that time, to have remained
desert to this day, between the provinces of the Jutes and the Saxons,
are descended the East-Angles, the Midland-Angles, the Mercians, all the
race of the Northumbrians, that is, of those nations that dwell on the
north side of the river Humber, and the other nations of the Angles. The
first commanders are said to have been the two brothers Hengist and
Horsa. Of these Horsa was afterwards slain in battle by the Britons, and
a monument, bearing his name, is still in existence in the eastern parts
of Kent. They were the sons of Victgilsus, whose father was Vitta, son
of Vecta, son of Woden; from whose stock the royal race of many
provinces trace their descent. In a short time, swarms of the aforesaid
nations came over into the island, and the foreigners began to increase
so much, that they became a source of terror to the natives themselves
who had invited them. Then, having on a sudden entered into league with
the Picts, whom they had by this time repelled by force of arms, they
began to turn their weapons against their allies. At first, they obliged
them to furnish a greater quantity of provisions; and, seeking an
occasion of quarrel, protested, that unless more plentiful supplies were
brought them, they would break the league, and ravage all the island;
nor were they backward in putting their threats into execution. In
short, the fire kindled by the hands of the pagans, proved God’s just
vengeance for the crimes of the people; not unlike that which, being of
old lighted by the Chaldeans, consumed the walls and all the buildings
of Jerusalem. For here, too, through the agency of the pitiless
conqueror, yet by the disposal of the just Judge, it ravaged all the
neighbouring cities and country, spread the conflagration from the
eastern to the western sea, without any opposition, and overran the
whole face of the doomed island. Public as well as private buildings
were overturned; the priests were everywhere slain before the altars; no
respect was shown for office, the prelates with the people were
destroyed with fire and sword; nor were there any left to bury those who
had been thus cruelly slaughtered. Some of the miserable remnant, being
taken in the mountains, were butchered in heaps. Others, spent with
hunger, came forth and submitted themselves to the enemy, to undergo for
the sake of food perpetual servitude, if they were not killed upon the
spot. Some, with sorrowful hearts, fled beyond the seas. Others,
remaining in their own country, led a miserable life of terror and
anxiety of mind among the mountains, woods and crags.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. How the Britons obtained their first victory over the
Angles, under the command of](hist018.md)
