[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist126.md) 
[Next](hist128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.ix"></span>

### <span id="v.v.ix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. X. How Wilbrord, preaching in Frisand, converted many to Christ; and how his two companions, the Hewalds, suffered martyrdom. \[690 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.ix-p1"></span>WHEN the man of God, Egbert, perceived that
neither he himself was permitted to go and preach to the nations, being
withheld for the sake of some other advantage to the holy Church,
whereof he had been forewarned by a revelation; nor that Wictbert, when
he went into those parts, had availed to do anything; he nevertheless
still attempted to send holy and industrious men to the work of the
Word, among whom the most notable was Wilbrord, a man eminent for his
merit and rank as priest. They arrived there, twelve in number, and
turning aside to Pippin, duke of the Franks, were gladly received by
him; and as he had lately subdued the nearer part of Frisland, and
expelled King Rathbed, he sent them thither to preach, supporting them
at the same time with his sovereign authority, that none might molest
them in their preaching, and bestowing many favours on those who
consented to receive the faith. Thus it came to pass, that with the help
of the Divine grace, in a short time they converted many from idolatry
to the faith of Christ.

<span id="v.v.ix-p2"></span>Following their example, two other priests
of the English nation, who had long lived as strangers in Ireland, for
the sake of the eternal country, went into the province of the Old
Saxons, if haply they could there win any to Christ by their preaching.
They were alike in name as in devotion, Hewald being the name of both,
with this distinction, that, on account of the different colour of their
hair, the one was called Black Hewald and the other White Hewald. They
were both full of religious piety, but Black Hewald was the more learned
of the two in Scripture. When they came into the province, these men
took up their lodging in the guesthouse of a certain township-reeve, and
asked of him that he would conduct them to the ealdorman who was over
him, for that they had a message concerning matters of importance to
communicate to him. For those Old Saxons have no king, but many
ealdormen set over their nation; and when any war is on the point of
breaking out, they cast lots indifferently, and on whomsoever the lot
falls, him they all follow and obey during the time of war; but as soon
as the war is ended, all those ealdormen are again equal in power. So
the reeve received and entertained them in his house some days,
promising to send them to the ealdorman who was over him, as they
desired.

<span id="v.v.ix-p3"></span>But when the barbarians perceived that they
were of another religion,—for they continually gave themselves to
singing of psalms and prayer, and daily offered up to God the Sacrifice
of the saving Victim, having with them sacred vessels and a consecrated
table for an altar,— they began to grow suspicious of them, lest if they
should come into the presence of their ealdorman, and converse with him,
they should turn his heart from their gods, and convert him to the new
religion of the Christian faith; and thus by degrees all their province
should be forced to change its old worship for a new. Wherefore on a
sudden they laid hold of them and put them to death; and White Hewald
they slew outright with the sword; but they put Black Hewald to
lingering torture and tore him limb from limb in horrible fashion, and
they threw their bodies into the Rhine. The ealdorman, whom they had
desired to see, hearing of it, was very angry that strangers who desired
to come to him had not been suffered to come; and therefore he sent and
put to death all those villagers and burned their village. The aforesaid
priests and servants of Christ suffered on the 3rd of October.

<span id="v.v.ix-p4"></span>Miracles from Heaven were not lacking at
their martyrdom. For their dead bodies, having been cast into the river
by the pagans, as has been said, were carried against the stream for the
space of almost forty miles, to the place where their companions were.
Moreover, a long ray of light, reaching up to heaven, shone every night
above them wheresoever they chanced to be, and that too in the sight of
the very pagans that had slain them. Moreover, one of them appeared in a
vision by night to one of his companions, whose name was Tilmon, a man
of renown and of noble birth in this world, who having been a thegn had
become a monk, telling him that he might find their bodies in that
place, where he should see rays of light reaching from heaven to the
earth. And so it befell; and their bodies being found, were buried with
the honour due to martyrs; and the day of their passion or of the
finding of their bodies, is celebrated in those parts with fitting
veneration. Finally, Pippin, the most glorious duke of the Franks,
learning these things, caused the bodies to be brought to him, and
buried them with much honour in the church of the city of Cologne, on
the Rhine. And it is said that a spring burst forth in the place where
they were killed, which to this day affords a plentiful stream in that
same place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. How the venerable Suidbert in Britain, and Wilbrord at Rome,
were ordained bishops for](hist128.md)
