[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist087.md) 
[Next](hist089.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. II. How Theodore visited all places; how the Churches of the English began to be instructed in the study of holy Scripture, and in the catholic truth, and how Putta was made bishop of the Church of Rochester in the roam of Damianus. \[669 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span>THEODORE came to his Church in the second
year after his consecration, on Sunday, the 27th of May, and spent in it
twenty-one years, three months, and twenty-six days. Soon after, he
visited all the island, wherever the tribes of the English dwelt, for he
was gladly received and heard by all persons; and everywhere attended
and assisted by Hadrian, he taught the right rule of life, and the
canonical custom of celebrating Easter. This was the first archbishop
whom all the English Church consented to obey. And forasmuch as both of
them were, as has been said before, fully instructed both in sacred and
in secular letters, they gathered a crowd of disciples, and rivers of
wholesome knowledge daily flowed from them to water the hearts of their
hearers; and, together with the books of Holy Scripture, they also
taught them the metrical art, astronomy, and ecclesiastical arithmetic.
A testimony whereof is, that there are still living at this day some of
their scholars, who are as well versed in the Greek and Latin tongues as
in their own, in which they were born. Nor were there ever happier times
since the English came into Britain; for having brave Christian kings,
they were a terror to all barbarous nations, and the minds of all men
were bent upon the joys of the heavenly kingdom of which they had but
lately heard; and all who desired to be instructed in sacred studies had
masters at hand to teach them.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span>From that time also they began in all the
churches of the English to learn Church music, which till then had been
only known in Kent. And, excepting James, of whom we have spoken
above,the first teacher of singing in the churches of the Northumbrians
was Eddi, surnamed Stephen,invited from Kent by the most reverend
Wilfrid, who was the first of the bishops of the English nation that
learned to deliver to the churches of the English the Catholic manner of
life.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>Theodore, journeying through all parts,
ordained bishops in fitting places, and with their assistance corrected
such things as he found faulty. Among the rest, when he charged Bishop
Ceadda with not having been duly consecrated, he, with great humility,
answered, "If you know that I have not duly received episcopal
ordination, I willingly resign the office, for I never thought myself
worthy of it; but, though unworthy, for obedience sake I submitted, when
bidden to undertake it." Theodore, hearing his humble answer, said that
he should not resign the bishopric, and he himself completed his
ordination after the Catholic manner. Now at the time when Deusdledit
died, and a bishop for the church of Canterbury was by request ordained
and sent, Wilfrid was also sent from Britain into Gaul to be ordained;
and because he returned before Theodore, he ordained priests and deacons
in Kent till the archbishop should come to his see. But when Theodore
came to the city of Rochester, where the bishopric had been long vacant
by the death of Damian,he ordained a man named Putta,trained rather in
the teaching of the Church and more addicted to simplicity of life than
active in worldly affairs, but specially skilful in Church music, after
the Roman use, which he had learned from the disciples of the blessed
Pope Gregory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. How the above-mentioned Ceadda was made Bishop of the
province of Mercians. Of his life, death, and burial. \[669
A.D.\]](hist089.md)
