[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist049.md) 
[Next](hist051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xiv"></span>

### <span id="v.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIV.

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p1"></span> **\[627 A.D.\]**  
  
KING EDWIN, therefore, with all the nobility of the nation, and a large
number of the common sort, received the faith, and the washing of holy
regeneration, in the eleventh year of his reign, which is the year of
our Lord 627, and about one hundred and eighty after the coming of the
English into Britain. He was baptized at York, on the holy day of
Easter, being the 12th of April, in the church of St. Peter the Apostle,
which he himself had built of timber there in haste, whilst he was a
catechumen receiving instruction in order to be admitted to baptism. In
that city also he bestowed upon his instructor and bishop, Paulinus, his
episcopal see. But as soon as he was baptized, he set about building, by
the direction of Paulinus, in the same place a larger and nobler church
of stone, in the midst whereof the oratory which he had first erected
should be enclosed. Having, therefore, laid the foundation, he began to
build the church square, encompassing the former oratory. But before the
walls were raised to their full height, the cruel death of the king left
that work to be finished by Oswald his successor. Paulinus, for the
space of six years from this time, that is, till the end of the king's
reign, with his, consent and favour, preached the Word of God in that
country, and as many as were foreordained to eternal life believed and
were baptized. Among them were Osfrid and Eadfrid, King Edwin's sons who
were both born to him, whilst he was in banishment, of Quenburga, the
daughter of Cearl, king of the Mercians.  
  
Afterwards other children of his, by Queen Ethelberg, were baptized,
Ethelhun and his daughter Ethelthryth, and another, Wuscfrea, a son; the
first two were snatched out of this life whilst they were still in the
white garments of the newly-baptized, and buried in the church at York.
Yffi, the son of Osfrid, was also baptized, and many other noble and
royal persons. So great was then the fervour of the faith, as is
reported, and the desire for the laver of salvation among the nation of
the Northumbrians, that Paulinus at a certain time coming with the king
and queen to the royal township, which is called Adgefrin, stayed there
with them thirty-six days, fully occupied in catechizing and baptizing;
during which days, from morning till night, he did nothing else but
instruct the people resorting from all villages and places, in Christ's
saving Word; and when they were instructed, he washed them with the
water of absolution in the river Glen, which is close by. This township,
under the following kings, was abandoned, and another was built instead
of it, at the place called Maelmin.  
  
These things happened in the province of the Bernicians; but in that of
the Deiri also, where he was wont often to be with the king, he baptized
in the river Swale, which runs by the village of Cataract; for as yet
oratories, or baptisteries, could not be built in the early infancy of
the Church in those parts. But in Campodonum, where there was then a
royal township, he built a church which the pagans, by whom King Edwin
was slain, afterwards burnt, together with all the place. Instead of
this royal seat the later kings built themselves a township in the
country called Loidis. But the altar, being of stone, escaped the fire
and is still preserved in the monastery of the most reverend abbot and
priest, Thrydwulf, which is in the forest of Elmet.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. How the province of the East Angles received the faith of
Christ. \[627-628 A.D.\]](hist051.md)
