[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist077.md) 
[Next](hist079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXII. How under King Sigbert, through the preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons again received the faith, which they had before cast off \[653 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p1"></span>AT that time, also, the East Saxons, at
the instance of King Oswy, again received the faith, which they had
formerly cast off when they expelled Mellitus, their bishop.For
Sigbert,who reigned next to Sigbert surnamed The Little, was then king
of that nation, and a friend to King Oswy, who, when Sigbert came to the
province of the Northumbrians to visit him, as he often did, used to
endeavour to convince him that those could not be gods that had been
made by the hands of men; that a stock or a stone could not be proper
matter to form a god, the residue whereof was either burned in the fire,
or framed into any vessels for the use of men, or else was cast out as
refuse, trampled on and turned into dust. That God is rather to be
understood as incomprehensible in majesty and invisible to human eyes,
almighty, eternal, the Creator of heaven and earth and of mankind; Who
governs and will judge the world in righteousness, Whose eternal abode
must be believed to be in Heaven, and not in base and perishable metal;
and that it ought in reason to be concluded, that all those who learn
and do the will of Him by Whom they were created, will receive from Him
eternal rewards. King Oswy having often, with friendly counsel, like a
brother, said this and much more to the like effect to King Sigbert, at
length, aided by the consent of his friends, he believed, and after he
had consulted with those about him, and exhorted them, when they all
agreed and assented to the faith, he was baptized with them by Bishop
Finan, in the king’s township above spoken of, which is called At the
Wall,because it is close by the wall which the Romans formerly drew
across the island of Britain, at the distance of twelve miles from the
eastern sea.

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p2"></span> King Sigbert, having now become a
citizen of the eternal kingdom, returned to the seat of his temporal
kingdom, requesting of King Oswy that he would give him some teachers,
to convert his nation to the faith of Christ, and cleanse them in the
fountain of salvation. Wherefore Oswy, sending into the province of the
Midland Angles, summoned the man of God, Cedd, and, giving him another
priest for his companion, sent them to preach the Word to the East
Saxons. When these two, travelling to all parts of that country, had
gathered a numerous Church to the Lord, it happened once that Cedd
returned home, and came to the church of Lindisfarne to confer with
Bishop Finan; who, finding that the work of the Gospel had prospered in
his hands, made him bishop of the nation of the East Saxons, calling to
him two other bishops to assist at the ordination. Cedd, having received
the episcopal dignity, returned to his province, and pursuing the work
he had begun with more ample authority, built churches in divers places,
and ordained priests and deacons to assist him in the Word of faith, and
the ministry of Baptism,especially in the city which, in the language of
the Saxons, is called Ythancaestir,as also in that which is named
Tilaburg. The first of these places is on the bank of the Pant, the
other on the bank of the Thames. In these, gathering a flock of Christ’s
servants, he taught them to observe the discipline of a rule of life, as
far as those rude people were then capable of receiving it.

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p3"></span> Whilst the teaching of the everlasting
life was thus, for no small time, making daily increase in that province
to the joy of the king and of all the people, it happened that the king,
at the instigation of the enemy of all good men, was murdered by his own
kindred. They were two brothers who did this wicked deed; and being
asked what had moved them to it, they had nothing else to answer, but
that they had been incensed against the king, and hated him, because he
was too apt to spare his enemies, and calmly forgave the wrongs they had
done him, upon their entreaty. Such was the crime for which the king was
killed, because he observed the precepts of the Gospel with a devout
heart; but in this innocent death his real offence was also punished,
according to the prediction of the man of God. For one of those nobles
that murdered him was unlawfully married, and when the bishop was not
able to prevent or correct the sin, he excommunicated him, and commanded
all that would give ear to him not to enter this man’s house, nor to eat
of his meat. But the king made light of this command, and being invited
by the noble, went to a banquet at his house. As he was going thence,
the bishop met him. The king, beholding him, immediately dismounted from
his horse, trembling, and fell down at his feet, begging pardon for his
offence; for the bishop, who was likewise on horseback, had also
alighted. Being much incensed, he touched the prostrate king with the
rod he held in his hand, and spoke thus with the authority of his
office:

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p4"></span>"I tell thee, forasmuch as thou wouldest
not refrain from the house of that sinful and condemned man, thou shalt
die in that very house." Yet it is to be believed, that such a death of
a religious man not only blotted out his offence, but even added to his
merit; because it happened on account of his piety and his observance of
the commands of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p5"></span>Sigbert was succeeded in the kingdom by
Suidhelm, the son of Sexbald, who was baptized by the same Cedd, in the
province of the East Angles, in the royal township, called Rendlaesham,’
that is, Rendil’s Dwelling; and Ethelwald,king of the East Angles,
brother to Anna, king of the same people, received him as he came forth
from the holy font.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. How Bishop Cedd, having a place for building a monastery
given him by King Etheiwald, consecrated it to the Lord with prayer and
fasting; and concerning his death. \[659-664 A. D.\]](hist079.md)
