[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist129) 
[Next](hist131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xii"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIII. How another contrarywise before his death saw a book containing his sins, which was shown him by devils. \[704-709 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.xii-p1"></span>BUT contrarywise there was a man in the
province of the Mercians, whose visions and words, but not his manner of
life, were of profit to others, though not to himself. In the reign of
Coenred, who succeeded Ethelred, there was a layman who was a king’s
thegn, no less acceptable to the king for his outward industry, than
displeasing to him for his neglect of his own soul. The king diligently
admonished him to confess and amend, and to forsake his evil ways, lest
he should lose all time for repentance and amendment by a sudden death.
But though frequently warned, he despised the words of salvation, and
promised that he would do penance at some future time. In the meantime,
falling sick he betook himself to his bed, and was tormented with
grievous pains. The king coming to him (for he loved the man much)
exhorted him, even then, before death, to repent of his offences. But he
answered that he would not then confess his sins, but would do it when
he was recovered of his sickness, lest his companions should upbraid him
with having done that for fear of death, which he had refused to do in
health. He thought he spoke very bravely, but it afterwards appeared
that he had been miserably deceived by the wiles of the Devil.

<span id="v.v.xii-p2"></span>The disease increasing, when the king came
again to visit and instruct him, he cried out straightway with a
lamentable voice, "What will you now? What are you come for? for you can
no longer do aught for my profit or salvation." The king answered, "Say
not so; take heed and be of sound mind." "I am not mad," replied he,
"but I now know the worst and have it for certain before my eyes." "What
is that?" said the king. "Not long since," said he, "there came into
this room two fair youths, and sat down by me, the one at my head, and
the other at my feet. One of them drew forth a book most beautiful, but
very small, and gave it me to read; looking into it, I there found all
the good actions I had ever done in my life written down, and they were
very few and inconsiderable. They took back the book and said nothing to
me. Then, on a sudden, appeared an army of evil spirits of hideous
countenance, and they beset this house without, and sitting down filled
the greater part of it within. Then he, who by the blackness of his
gloomy face, and his sitting above the rest, seemed to be the chief of
them, taking out a book terrible to behold, of a monstrous size, and of
almost insupportable weight, commanded one of his followers to bring it
to me to read. Having read it, I found therein most plainly written in
hideous characters, all the crimes I ever committed, not only in word
and deed, but even in the least thought; and he said to those glorious
men in white raiment who sat by me, ‘Why sit ye here, since ye know of a
surety that this man is ours?’ They answered, ‘Ye speak truly; take him
and lead him away to fill up the measure of your damnation.’ This said,
they forthwith vanished, and two wicked spirits arose, having in their
hands ploughshares, and one of them struck me on the head, and the other
on the foot. And these ploughshares are now with great torment creeping
into the inward parts of my body, and as soon as they meet I shall die,
and the devils being ready to snatch me away, I shall be dragged into
the dungeons of hell."

<span id="v.v.xii-p3"></span>Thus spoke that wretch in his despair, and
soon after died, and now in vain suffers in eternal torments that
penance which he failed to suffer for a short time with the fruits of
forgiveness. Of whom it is manifest, that (as the blessed Pope Gregory
writes of certain, persons) he did not see these things for his own
sake, since they did not avail him, but for the sake of others, who,
knowing of his end, should be afraid to put off the time of repentance,
whilst they have leisure, lest, being prevented by sudden death, they
should perish impenitent. And whereas he saw diverse books laid before
him by the good and evil spirits, this was done by Divine dispensation,
that we may keep in mind that our deeds and thoughts are not scattered
to the winds, but are all kept to be examined by the Supreme Judge, and
will in the end be shown us either by friendly angels or by the enemy.
And whereas the angels first drew forth a white book, and then the
devils a black one; the former a very small one, the latter one very
great; it is to be observed, that in his first years he did some good
actions, all which he nevertheless obscured by the evil actions of his
youth. If, contrarywise, he had taken care in his youth to correct the
errors of his boyhood, and by well-doing to put them away from the sight
of God, he might have been admitted to the fellowship of those of whom
the Psalm says, "Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered." This story, as I learned it of the venerable
Bishop Pechthelm, I have thought good to set forth plainly, for the
salvation of such as shall read or hear it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. How another in like manner, being at the point of death, saw
the place of punishment](hist131)
