[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist070) 
[Next](hist072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xv"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XV. How Bishop Aidan foretold to certain seamen that a storm would arise, and gave them some holy oil to calm it. \[Between 642 and 645 AD.\]

<span id="v.iii.xv-p1"></span> How great the merits of Aidan were, was
made manifest by the Judge of the heart, with the testimony of miracles,
whereof it will suffice to mention three, that they may not be
forgotten. A certain priest, whose name was Utta,2 a man of great weight
and sincerity, and on that account honoured by all men, even the princes
of the world, was sent to Kent, to bring thence, as wife for King Oswy,
Eanfled, the daughter of King Edwin, who had been carried thither when
her father was killed. Intending to go thither by land, but to return
with the maiden by sea, he went to Bishop Aidan, and entreated him to
offer up his prayers to the Lord for him and his company, who were then
to set out on so long a journey. He, blessing them, and commending them
to the Lord, at the same time gave them some holy oil, saying, "I know
that when you go on board ship, you will meet with a storm and contrary
wind; but be mindful to cast this oil I give you into the sea, and the
wind will cease immediately; you will have pleasant calm weather to
attend you and send you home by the way that you desire.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p2"></span> All these things fell out in order, even
as the bishop had foretold. For first, the waves of the sea raged ,and
the sailors endeavoured to ride it out at anchor, but all to no purpose;
for the sea sweeping over the ship on all sides and beginning to fill it
with water, they all perceived that death was at hand and about to
overtake them. The priest at last, remembering the bishop’s words, laid
hold of the phial and cast some of the oil into the sea, which at once,
as had been foretold, ceased from its uproar. Thus it came to pass that
the man of God, by the spirit of prophecy, foretold the storm that was
to come to pass, and by virtue of the same spirit, though absent in the
body, calmed it when it had arisen. The story of this miracle was not
told me by a person of little credit, but by Cynimund, a most faithful
priest of our church,who declared that it was related to him by Utta,
the priest, in whose case and through whom the same was wrought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. How the same Aidan, by his prayers, saved the royal city
when it was fired by the enemy. \[Before 651 A.D.\]](hist072)
