[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist008) 
[Next](hist010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.vi"></span>

### <span id="v.i.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VI. Of the reign of Diocletian, and how he persecuted the Christians. \[286 AD\]

<span id="v.i.vi-p1"></span>In the year of our Lord 286, Diocletian, the
thirty-third from Augustus, and chosen emperor by the army, reigned
twenty years, and created Maximian, surnamed Herculius, his colleague in
the empire. In their time, one Carausius, of very mean birth, but a man
of great ability and energy, being appointed to guard the sea-coasts,
then infested by the Franks and Saxons, acted more to the prejudice than
to the advantage of the commonwealth, by not restoring to its owners any
of the booty taken from the robbers, but keeping all to himself; thus
giving rise to the suspicion that by intentional neglect he suffered the
enemy to infest the frontiers. When, therefore, an order was sent by
Maximian that he should be put to death, he took upon him the imperial
purple, and possessed himself of Britain, and having most valiantly
conquered and held it for the space of seven years, he was at length put
to death by the treachery of his associate Allectus. The usurper, having
thus got the island from Carausius, held it three years, and was then
vanquished by Asclepiodotus, the captain of the Praetorian guards, who
thus at the end of ten years restored Britain to the Roman empire.

<span id="v.i.vi-p2"></span>Meanwhile, Diocletian in the east, and
Maximian Herculius in the west, commanded the churches to be destroyed,
and the Christians to be persecuted and slain. This persecution was the
tenth since the reign of Nero, and was more lasting and cruel than
almost any before it; for it was carried on incessantly for the space of
ten years, with burning of churches, proscription of innocent persons,
and the slaughter of martyrs. Finally, Britain also attained to the
great glory of bearing faithful witness to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. How, when the persecution ceased, the Church in Britain
enjoyed peace till the time of the](hist010)
