[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist111.md) 
[Next](hist113.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxvi"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxvi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXVI. Of the death of the Kings Egfrid and Hiothere. \[684-685 A. D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xxvi-p1"></span>IN the year of our Lord 684, Egfrid, king
of the Northumbrians, sending his general, Berct,with an army into
Ireland, miserably laid waste that unoffending nation, which had always
been most friendly to the English; insomuch that the invading force
spared not even the churches or monasteries. But the islanders, while to
the utmost of their power they repelled force with force, implored the
assistance of the Divine mercy, and with constant imprecations invoked
the vengeance of Heaven; and though such as curse cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, yet it was believed, that those who were justly cursed
on account of their impiety, soon suffered the penalty of their guilt at
the avenging hand of God. For the very next year, when that same king
had rashly led his army to ravage the province of the Picts,greatly
against the advice of his friends, and particularly of Cuthbert,of
blessed memory, who had been lately ordained bishop, the enemy made a
feigned retreat, and the king was drawn into a narrow pass among remote
mountains, and slain, with the greater part of the forces he had led
thither, on the 20th of May, in the fortieth year of his age, and the
fifteenth of his reign.His friends, as has been said, advised him not to
engage in this war; but since he had the year before refused to listen
to the most reverend father, Egbert, advising him not to attack the
Scots, who were doing him no harm, it was laid upon him as a punishment
for his sin, that he should now not listen to those who would have
prevented his death.

<span id="v.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>From that time the hopes and strength of
the Anglian kingdom began to ebb and fall away for the Picts recovered
their own lands, which had been held by the English, and so did also the
Scots that were in Britain; and some of the Britonsregained their
liberty, which they have now enjoyed for about forty-six years. Among
the many English that then either fell by the sword, or were made
slaves, or escaped by flight out of the country of the Picts, the most
reverend man of God, Trumwine, who had been made bishop over them,
withdrew with his people that were in the monastery of Aebbercurnig,in
the country of the English, but close by the arm of the sea which is the
boundary between the lands of the English and the Picts. Having
commended his followers, wheresoever he could, to his friends in the
monasteries, he chose his own place of abode in the monastery, which we
have so often mentioned, of servants and handmaids of God, at
Streanaeshalch; and there for many years, with a few of his own
brethren, he led a life in all monastic austerity, not only to his own
benefit, but to the benefit of many others, and dying there, he was
buried in the church of the blessed Peter the Apostle, with the honour
due to his life and rank. The royal virgin, Elfled, with her mother,
Eanfled, whom we have mentioned before, then presided over that
monastery; but when the bishop came thither, that devout teacher found
in him the greatest help in governing, and comfort in her private life.
Aldfrid succeeded Egfrid in the throne, being a man most learned in the
Scriptures, said to be brother to Egfrid, and son to King Oswy; he nobly
retrieved the ruined state of the kingdom, though within narrower
bounds.

<span id="v.iv.xxvi-p3"></span>The same year, being the 685th from the
Incarnation of our Lord, Hlothere,king of Kent, died on the 6th of
February, when he had reigned twelve years after his brother Egbert,who
had reigned nine years: he was wounded in battle with the South Saxons,
whom Edric, the son of Egbert, had raised against him, and died whilst
his wound was being dressed. After him, this same Edric reigned a year
and a half. On his death, kings of doubtful title, or of foreign origin,
for some time wasted the kingdom, till the lawful king, Wictred, the son
of Egbert, being settled in the throne, by his piety and zeal delivered
his nation from foreign invasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. How Cuthbert, a man of God, was made bishop; and how he
lived and taught whilst still in](hist113.md)
