[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist096.md) 
[Next](hist098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xi"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XI. How Sebbi, king of the same province, ended his life in a monastery. \[694 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xi-p1"></span>AT that time, as the same little book
informs us, Sebbi **,** a very devout man, of whom mention has been made
above, governed the kingdom of the East Saxons. His mind was set on
religious acts, frequent prayer and pious fruits of almsgiving; he
esteemed a private and monastic life better than all the wealth and
honours of his kingdom, and he would have long before left his kingdom
and adopted that life, had not his wife firmly refused to be divorced
from him; for which reason many were of opinion and often said that a
man of such a disposition ought rather to have been made a bishop than a
king. When he had spent thirty years as a king and a soldier of the
heavenly kingdom, he fell into great bodily infirmity, of which he
afterwards died, and he admonished his wife, that they should then at
least together devote themselves to the service of God, since they could
no longer together enjoy, or rather serve, the world. Having with much
difficulty obtained this of her, he went to Waldhere, bishop of London,
who had succeeded Earconwald,and with his blessing received the
religious habit, which he had long desired. He also carried to him a
considerable sum of money, to be given to the poor, reserving nothing to
himself, but rather coveting to remain poor in spirit for the sake of
the kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="v.iv.xi-p2"></span>When the aforesaid sickness increased, and
he perceived the day of his death to be drawing near, being a man of a
royal disposition, he began to apprehend lest, when in great pain, at
the approach of death, he might commit anything unworthy of his
character, either by word or gesture. Wherefore, calling to him the
aforesaid bishop of London, in which city he then was, he entreated him
that none might be present at his death, besides the bishop himself, and
two of his own attendants. The bishop having promised that he would most
willingly grant his request, not long after the man of God composed
himself to sleep, and saw a consoling vision, which took from him all
anxiety concerning the aforesaid uneasiness; and, moreover, showed him
on what day he was to end his life. For, as he afterwards related, he
saw three men in shining garments come to him; one of whom sat down by
his bed, whilst his companions who had come with him stood and inquired
about the state of the sick man they had come to visit, and he said that
the king’s soul should quit his body without any pain, and with a great
splendour of light; and told him that he should die the third day after.
Both these things came to pass, as he had learnt from the vision; for on
the third day after, at the ninth hour, he suddenly fell, as it were,
into a light slumber, and without any sense of pain he gave up the
ghost.

<span id="v.iv.xi-p3"></span>A stone coffin had been prepared for his
burial, but when they came to lay him in it, they found his body a span
longer than the coffin. Hereupon they chipped away as much of the stone
as they could, and made the coffin about two inches longer; but not even
so would it contain the body. Wherefore because of this difficulty of
entombing him, they had thoughts either to get another coffin, or else
to shorten the body, by bending it at the knees, if they could, so that
the coffin might contain it. But Heaven interposed and a miracle
prevented the execution of either of those designs; for on a sudden, in
the presence of the bishop and Sighard, who was the son of that same
king and monk, and who reigned after him jointly with his brother
Suefred, and of no small number of men, that coffin was found to fit the
length of the body, insomuch that a pillow might even be put in at the
head; and at the feet the coffin was four inches longer than the body.
He was buried in the church of the blessed teacher of the Gentiles,by
whose doctrine he had learned to hope for heavenly things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. How Haedde succeeded Leutherius in the bishopric of the West
Saxons; how Cuichelm](hist098.md)
