<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j6000)  [Next](j6002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. VI*, tr. by E. B. Cowell and W. H. D. Rouse, \[1907\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> I returned to Cambridge in 1902,
Professor Cowell asked me to revise with him the translation of this
volume. We accordingly went through the first three stories, before his
death took place: his manuscripts were then handed over to me, and I
have supplied what he left undone. The translation was completed down to
page 338, excepting no. 541 and a few small gaps elsewhere; my portion
of the work therefore consists of no. 541 and page 338 to the end,
together with the shorter omissions which are indicated each in its
place, being altogether about half the book. I have also revised that
part of Professor Cowell's translation which we were unable to do
together. I have not felt at liberty to make any alterations in his
text, excepting very rarely, where there was some obvious mistake or
oversight. These are all indicated in the notes.

Since the proportion of verse is very large in this book, and the verse
is often obscure, scholars must be prepared to find a certain number of
difficulties which I have been unable to solve. The remarks on the text
accordingly are more numerous than usual: the doubtful points are
indicated in the notes.

I have to thank Mr. H. T. Francis for help kindly given in many places.

I have a peculiar satisfaction in completing this labour, because in
1888 I first suggested the work to Professor Cowell. I had originally
intended to carry it through myself; but circumstances modified this
plan to the great advantage of the work.

W. H. D. ROUSE.

*September* 1907.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Errata](j6002)

</div>
