<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j6002)  [Next](j6004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. VI*, tr. by E. B. Cowell and W. H. D. Rouse, \[1907\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### CONTENTS.

538\. MŪGA-PAKKHA-JĀTAKA [1](j6004.htm#page_1.md)

A prince pretends to be dumb and incapable. Various means are taken to
try to break through his reserve, but fail for sixteen years. At last,
as he is about to be buried, he opens his mouth and discourses on
religion to the charioteer. He then becomes an ascetic, and is followed
by his father.

539\. MAHĀJANAKA-JĀTAK [19](j6004.htm#page_19.md)

A prince suspected by his brother, without reason, rebels against him
and kills him. The king's consort, being with child, flees from the
city; her son is brought up without knowledge of his father, but when he
learns the truth, goes to sea on a merchant venture. He is wrecked, and
a goddess brings him to his father's kingdom, where after answering some
difficult questions, he marries the daughter of the usurper. By and by,
he becomes an ascetic, and is followed by his wife.

540\. SĀMA-JĀTAKA [38](j6006.htm#page_38.md)

A hunter's son marries a hunter's daughter, and both become ascetics.
The wife becomes pregnant without human intercourse, and bears a son.
The parents are both blinded by a snake, and the son attends upon them.
A king, coming out to hunt, sees the lad and shoots him with an arrow;
but on learning his dutiful affection he repents, and attends upon the
parents himself. The boy is miraculously cured and the parents recover
their sight.

541\. NIMI-JĀTAKA [53](j6007.htm#page_53.md)

A king, on the appearance of his first grey hair, becomes an ascetic.
Sakka explains to him that holy life is better than giving alms. Sakka's
charioteer takes him all round the heavens and the hells, and finally
brings him to Sakka.

542\. THE KHAṆḌAHĀLA-JĀTAKA [68](j6007.htm#page_68.md)

A king misled by a false judge decrees that all his family shall be put
to death in order that he may go to heaven. After various fluctuations
Sakka comes to the rescue and saves them.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

543\. BHŪRIDATTA-JĀTAKA [80](j6008.htm#page_80.md)

An ascetic is seduced by a Nāga-woman. Afterwards he becomes a king.
Scenes in the Nāga country are described. He has four sons, one of whom
becomes an ascetic. The feud between the Nāgas and the Garuḷas. A magic
spell, and the adventures of the prince in snake form.

544\. MAHĀNĀRADAKASSAPA-JĀTAKA [114](j6010.htm#page_114.md)

A king questions an ascetic as to the various moral duties. He is
himself devoted to pleasure, but his daughter is virtuous and tries to
deliver him from heretical beliefs, which is finally effected by the
help of the Buddha.

545\. VIDHURAPAṆḌITA-JĀTAKA. [126](j6010.htm#page_126.md)

Four kings, including Sakka, dispute as to which is the most virtuous
and they ask a solution from a wise man who decides that they are all
equal. The wife of the Nāga king is so enchanted at what she hears that
she desires the wise man's heart. The king promises his daughter's hand
to a Yakkha if he will bring the heart. The Yakkha visits the court
where the wise man is, defeats the king at dice, and claims the wise
man. The wise man asks for three days' delay to exhort his family. The
Yakkha tries to kill him, but fails. The wise man asks him what he
wants, and he tells him. The wise man then wins over the Yakkha and goes
to the Nāga king where no harm comes to him.

546\. THE MAHĀ-UMMAGGA-JĀTAKA [156](j6011.htm#page_156.md)

A story of four pretended wise men and one real wise man, of numerous
problems which the four failed to solve and the one succeeded, of many
attempts of the four to destroy the one and of his final triumph,
including wars, battles, sieges, and the description of a wonderful
tunnel full of machinery.

547\. VESSANTARA-JĀTAKA [246](j6012.htm#page_246.md)

A prince devoted to giving gifts falls into disrepute through giving a
magical elephant. He is banished with his family into the forest where
he gives away everything he has left, including his two children.
Ultimately the children are set free and all ends well.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 538.: Mūga-Pakkha Jātaka.](j6004.md)

</div>
