<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j6010)  [Next](j6012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. VI*, tr. by E. B. Cowell and W. H. D. Rouse, \[1907\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 545.

#### VIDHURAPAṆḌITA-JĀTAKA.

*"Thou art pale and thin and weak," etc.* The Master told this tale
while dwelling in Jetavana, concerning the Perfection of Wisdom. One day
the Brethren raised a discussion in the Hall of Truth, saying, "Sirs,
the Master has great and wide wisdom, he is ready and quick-witted, he
is sharp and keen-witted and able to crush the arguments of his
opponents, by the power of his wisdom he overthrows the subtil questions
propounded by Khattiya sages and reduces them to silence, and having
established them in the three Refuges and the moral precepts, causes
them to enter on the path which leads to immortality." The Master came
and asked what was the topic which the Brethren were debating as they
sat together; and on hearing what it was he said, "It is not wonderful,
Brethren, that the Tathāgata, having attained the Perfection of Wisdom,
should overthrow the arguments of his opponents and convert Khattiyas
and others. For in the earlier ages, when he was still seeking for
supreme knowledge, he was wise and able to crush the arguments of his
opponents. Yea verily in the time of Vidhurakumāra, on the summit of the
Black Mountain which is sixty leagues in height, by the force of my
wisdom I converted the Yakkha general, Puṇṇaka, and reduced him to
silence and made him give his own life as a gift"; and so saying he told
a story of the past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I.

Once upon a time in the Kuru kingdom in the city of Indapatta a king
ruled named Dhanañjaya-korabba. He had a minister named Vidhurapaṇḍita
who gave his instructions concerning temporal and spiritual matters; and
having a sweet tongue and great eloquence in discoursing of the law, he
bewitched all the kings of Jambudīpa by his

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

sweet discourses concerning the law as elephants are fascinated by a
favourite lute <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_140.md), \[256\] nor did he
suffer them to depart to their own kingdoms, but dwelt in that city in
great glory, teaching the law to the people with all a Buddha's power.
Now there were four rich Brahmin householders in Benares, friends, who,
having seen the misery of desires, went into the Himalaya and embraced
the ascetic life, and having entered upon the transcendental faculties
and the mystical meditations, continued to dwell a long time there,
feeding on the forest roots and fruits, and then, as they went their
rounds to procure salt and sour condiments, came to beg in the city
Kālacampā in the kingdom of Aṅga. There four householders who were
friends, being pleased with their deportment, having paid them respect
and taken their begging vessels, waited upon then with choice food, each
in his own house, and taking their promise arranged a home for them in
their garden. So the four ascetics having taken their food in the houses
of the four householders, went away to pass the day, one going to the
heaven of the Thirty-three, another to the world of the Nāgas, another
to the world of the Supaṇṇas, and the fourth to the park Migācira
belonging to the Koravya king. Now he who spent his day in the world of
the gods, after beholding Sakka's glory, described it in full to his
attendant, and so too did he who spent his day in the Nāga and Supaṇṇa
world, and so too he who spent his day in the park of the Koravya king
Dhanañjaya; each described in full the glory of that respective king. So
these four attendants desired these heavenly abodes, and having
performed gifts and other works of merit, at the end of their lives, one
was born as Sakka, another was born with a wife and child in the Nāga
world, another was born as the Supaṇṇa king in the palace of the Simbali
lake, and the fourth was conceived by the chief queen of King
Dhanañjaya; while the four ascetics were born in the Brahma world. The
Koravya prince grew up, and on his father's death assumed his kingdom
and ruled in righteousness, but he was famed for his skill in dice. He
listened to the instruction of Vidhurapaṇḍita and gave alms and kept the
moral law and observed the fast. One day when he had undertaken the
fast, he went into the garden, determining to practise pious meditation,
\[257\] and, having seated himself in a pleasant spot, he performed the
duties of an ascetic. Sakka also, having undertaken to keep the fast,
found that there were obstacles in the world of the gods, so he went
into that very garden in the world of men, and, having seated himself in
a pleasant spot, performed the duties of an ascetic. Varuṇa also, the
Nāga king, having undertaken to keep the fast, found that there were
obstacles in the Nāga world, so he went into that same garden, and,
having seated himself in a pleasant place, performed the duties of an
ascetic. The Supaṇṇa king also, having

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

undertaken to keep the fast, found that there were obstacles in the
Supaṇṇa world, so he went into that same garden, and, having seated
himself in a pleasant spot, performed the duties of an ascetic. Then
these four, having risen from their places at evening time, as they
stood on the bank of the royal lake, came together and looked at one
another, and, being filled with their old kindly affection, they woke up
their former friendship and sat down with a pleasant greeting. Sakka sat
down on a royal seat, and the others seated themselves as befitted the
dignity of each. Then Sakka said to them, "We are all four kings,—now
what is the preeminent virtue of each?" Then Varuṇa the Nāga king
replied, "My virtue is superior to that of you three," and when they
inquired why, he said, "This Supaṇṇa king is our enemy, whether before
or after we are born, yet even when I see him such a destructive enemy
of our race I never feel any anger; therefore my virtue is superior";
and he then uttered the first stanza of the Catuposatha jātaka <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_141.md):

<span class="small">"The good man who feels no anger towards one who
merits anger and who never lets anger arise within him, he who even when
angered does not allow it to be seen,—him they indeed call an
ascetic.</span>

\[258\] "These are my qualities; therefore my virtue is superior."

The Supaṇṇa king, hearing this, said, "This Nāga is my chief food; but
since, even though I see such food at hand, I endure my hunger and do
not commit evil for the sake of food, my virtue is superior," and he
uttered this stanza:

<span class="small">"He who bears hunger with a pinched belly, a
self-restrained hermit who eats and drinks by rule, and commits no evil
for the sake of food,—him they indeed call an ascetic."</span>

Then Sakka the king of the gods said, "I left behind various kinds of
heavenly glory, all immediate sources of happiness, and came to the
world of mankind in order to maintain my virtue,—therefore my virtue is
superior"; and he uttered this stanza:

<span class="small">"Having abandoned all sport and pleasure, he utters
no false word in the world, he is averse to all outward pomp and carnal
desire,—such a man they indeed call an ascetic."</span>

Thus did Sakka describe his own virtue.

Then King Dhanañjaya said, "I to-day have abandoned my court and my
seraglio with sixteen thousand dancing girls, and I practise an
ascetic's duties in a garden; therefore my virtue is superior"; and he
added this stanza:

<span class="small">\[259\] "Those who with full knowledge abandon all
that they call their own and all the workings of lust, he who is
self-restrained, resolute, unselfish, and free from desire,—him they
indeed call an ascetic."</span>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Thus they each declared their own virtue as superior, and then they
asked Dhanañjaya, "O king, is there any wise man in thy court who could
solve this doubt?" "Yes, O kings, I have Vidhura-paṇḍita, who fills a
post of unequalled responsibility and declares civil and ecclesiastical
law, he will solve our doubt, we will go to him." They at once
consented. So they all went out of the garden and proceeded to the hall
for religious assemblies, and, having ordered it to be adorned, they
seated the Bodhisatta on a high seat, and, having offered him a friendly
greeting, sat down on one side and said, "O wise sir! a doubt has risen
in our minds, do thou solve it for us:

<span class="small">"We ask thee the minister of lofty wisdom: a dispute
has arisen in our utterances,—do thou consider <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_142.md) and solve our perplexities to-day, let
us through thee to-day escape from our doubt."</span>

\[260\] The wise man, having heard their words, replied, "O kings, how
shall I know what you said well or ill concerning your virtue, as you
uttered the stanzas in your dispute?" and he added this stanza:

<span class="small">"Those wise men who know the real state of things
and who speak wisely at the proper time,— how shall they, however wise,
draw out the meaning of verses which have not been uttered to them? How
does the Nāga king speak, how Garuḷa, the son of Vinatā? Or what says
the king of the Gandhabbas? Or how speaks the most noble king of the
Kurus?"</span>

Then they uttered this stanza to him:

<span class="small">"The Nāga king preaches forbearance, Garuḷa the son
of Vinatā gentleness, the king of the Gandhabbas abstinence from carnal
lust, and the most noble king of the Kurus freedom from all hindrances
to religious perfection."</span>

Then the Great Being, having heard their words, uttered this stanza:

<span class="small">"All these sayings are well spoken,—there is nothing
here uttered amiss; and he in whom these are properly fitted \[261\]
like the spokes in the nave of a wheel,—he, who is endowed with these
four virtues, is called an ascetic indeed."</span>

Thus the Great Being declared the virtue of each of them to be one and
the same. Then the four, when they heard him, were well pleased, and
uttered this stanza in his praise:

<span class="small">"Thou art the best, thou art incomparable, thou art
wise, a guardian and knower of the law: having grasped the problem by
thy wisdom, thou cuttest the doubts in thy skill as the ivory-workman
the ivory with his saw."</span>

Thus all the four were pleased with his explanation of their question.
Then Sakka rewarded him with a robe of heavenly silk, Garuḷa with a
golden garland, Varuṇa the Nāga king with a jewel, and King Dhanañjaya
with a thousand cows, etc.; then Dhanañjaya addressed him in this
stanza:

<span class="small">"I give thee a thousand cows and a bull and an
elephant, and these ten chariots drawn with thoroughbred horses, and
sixteen excellent villages, being well pleased with thy solution of the
question <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_143.md)."</span>

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

\[262\] Then Sakka and the rest, having paid all honour to the Great
Being, departed to their own abodes. Here ends the section of the
fourfold fast.

### II.

Now the queen of the Nāga king was the lady Vimalā; and when she saw
that no jewelled ornament was on his neck, she asked him where it was.
He replied, "I was pleased at hearing the moral discourse of
Vidhura-paṇḍita the son of the Brahmin Canda, and I presented the jewel
to him, and not only I, but Sakka honoured him with a robe of heavenly
silk, the Supaṇṇa king gave him a golden garland, and King Dhanañjaya a
thousand oxen and many other things besides." "He is, I suppose,
eloquent in the law." "Lady, what are you talking about? It is as if a
Buddha had appeared in Jambudīpa! a hundred kings in all Jambudīpa,
being caught in his sweet words, do not return to their own kingdoms,
but remain like wild elephants fascinated by the sound of their
favourite lute,—this is the character of his eloquence!" When she heard
the account of his preeminence she longed to hear him discourse on the
law, and she thought in herself, "If I tell the king that I long to hear
him discourse on the law, and ask him to bring him here, he will not
bring him to me; what if I were to pretend to be ill and complained of a
sick woman's longing?" So she gave a sign to her attendants and took to
her bed. When the king did not see her when he paid his visit to her, he
asked the attendants where Vimalā was. They replied that she was sick,
and when he went to see her he sat on the side of her bed and rubbed her
body as he repeated a stanza:

<span class="small">"Pale and thin and weak,—your colour and form was
not like this before,—O Vimalā, answer my question, what is this pain of
the body which has come upon you?"</span>

She told him in the following:

\[263\] <span class="small">"There is an affection in women,—it is
called a longing, O king; O monarch of the Nāgas, I desire Vidhura's
heart brought here without guile."</span>

He replied to her:

<span class="small">"Thou longest for the moon or the sun or the wind;
the very sight of Vidhura is hard to get: who will be able to bring him
here?"</span>

When she heard his words, she exclaimed, "I shall die if I do not obtain
it," so she turned round in her bed and showed her back and covered her
face with the end of her robe. The Nāga king went to his own chamber and
sat on his bed and pondered how bent Vimalā was on obtaining Vidhura's
heart; "She will die if she does not obtain the flesh of his heart; how
can I get it for her?" Now his daughter Irandatī, a Nāga

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

princess, came in all her beauty and ornaments to pay her respects to
her father, and, having saluted him, she stood on one side. She saw that
his countenance was troubled, and she said to him, "You are greatly
distressed,—what is the reason?"

<span class="small">"O father, why are you full of care, why is your
face like a lotus plucked by the hand? \[264\] Why are you woe-begone, O
king? Do not grieve, O conqueror of enemies."</span>

Hearing his daughter's words, the Nāga king answered:

<span class="small">"Thy mother, O Irandatī, desires Vidhura's heart,
the very sight of Vidhura is hard to get,—who will be able to bring him
here?"</span>

Then he said to her, "Daughter, there is no one in my court who can
bring Vidhura here; do thou give life to thy mother, and seek out some
husband who can bring Vidhura."

So he dismissed her with a half-stanza, suggesting improper thoughts to
his daughter:

<span class="small">"Seek thou for a husband, who shall bring Vidhura
here."  
And when she heard her father's words, she went forth in the night and
gave free course to her passionate desire."</span>

\[265\] As she went she gathered all the flowers in the Himalaya which
had colour, scent, or taste, and, having adorned the entire mountain
like a precious jewel, she spread a couch of flowers upon it, and,
having executed a pleasant dance, she sang a sweet song:

<span class="small">"What gandhabba or demon, what Nāga, kimpurasa or
man, or what sage, able to grant all desires, will be my husband the
livelong night?"</span>

Now at that time the nephew of the great king Vessavana <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_144.md), named Puṇṇaka, the Yakkha general, as
he was riding on a magic Sindh horse, three leagues in length, and
hastening over the red arsenic surface of the Black Mountain to a
gathering of the Yakkhas, heard that song of hers, and the voice of the
woman which he had heard in his last previous life pierced his skin and
nerves and penetrated to his very bones; and, being fascinated by it, he
turned back, seated as he was on his Sindh horse, and thus addressed
her, comforting her, "O lady, I can bring you Vidhura's heart by my
knowledge, holiness, and calmness,—do not be anxious about it," and he
added this verse:

"Be comforted, I will be thy husband, I will be thy husband, O thou of
faultless eyes: verily my knowledge is such, be comforted, you shall be
my wife."

Then Irandatī answered, with her thoughts following the old experience
of a wooing in a former birth, \[266\] "Come, let us go to my father, he
will explain this matter to thee."

Adorned, clad in bright raiment, wearing garlands, and anointed with
sandal, she seized the Yakkha by the hand and went into her father's
presence.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

And Puṇṇaka, having taken her back, went to her father the Nāga king and
asked for her as his wife:

<span class="small">"O Nāga chief, hear my words, receive a fitting
present for thy daughter; I ask for Irandatī: give her to me as my
possession. A hundred elephants, a hundred horses, a hundred mules and
chariots, a hundred complete waggons <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_145.md) filled with all sorts of gems,—take thou
all these, O Nāga king, and give me thy daughter Irandatī."</span>

Then the Nāga king replied:

<span class="small">"Wait while I consult my kinsmen, my friends, and
acquaintances; a business done without consultation leads afterwards to
regret."</span>

\[267\] Then the Nāga king, having entered his palace, spoke these words
as he consulted his wife, "This Puṇṇaka the Yakkha asks me for Irandatī;
shall we give her to him in exchange for much wealth?"

Vimalā answered:

<span class="small">"Our Irandatī is not to be won by wealth or
treasure; if he obtains by his own worth and brings here the sage's
heart, the princess shall be won by that wealth,—we ask no further
treasure."</span>

Then the Nāga Varuṇa went out from his palace, and, consulting with
Puṇṇaka, thus addressed him:

<span class="small">"Our Irandatī is not to be won by wealth or
treasure; if thou obtainest by thine own worth and bringest here the
sage's heart, the princess shall be won by that wealth,—we ask no
further treasure."</span>

Puṇṇaka replied:

<span class="small">"Him whom some people call a sage, others will call
a fool; tell me, for they utter different opinions about the matter, who
is he whom thou callest a sage, O Nāga?"</span>

\[268\] The Nāga king answered:

<span class="small">"If thou hast heard of Vidhura the minister of the
Koravya king Dhanañjaya, bring that sage here, and let Irandatī be thy
lawful wife."</span>

Hearing these words of Varuṇa, the Yakkha sprang up greatly pleased;
just as he was, he said at once to his attendant, "Bring me here my
thoroughbred ready harnessed."

With ears of gold and hoofs of ruby, and mail-armour of molten gold. The
man brought the Sindh horse thus caparisoned; and Puṇṇaka, having
mounted him, went through the sky to Vessavana and told him of the
adventure, thus describing the Nāga world; this is described as follows:

"Puṇṇaka, having mounted his horse, a charger fit for bearing the gods,
himself richly adorned and with his beard and hair trimmed, went through
the sky.

Puṇṇaka, greedy with the passion of desire, longing to win the Nāga
maiden Irandatī, \[269\] having gone to the glorious king, thus
addressed Vessavana Kuvera:

"There is the palace Bhogavatī called the Golden Home, the capital of
the snake kingdom erected in its golden city.

Watch-towers which mimic lips and necks, with rubies and cat's eye
jewels, palaces built of marble and rich with gold, and covered with
jewels inlaid with gold.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

Mangoes, tilaka-trees and rose-apples, sattapaṇṇas, mucalindas and
ketakas, piyakas, uddālakas and sahas, and sinduvāritas with their
wealth of blossom above,

Champacs, Nāgamālikās, bhaginīmālās, and jujube trees,—all these
different trees bending with their boughs, lend their beauty to the Nāga
palace.

There is a huge date palm made of precious stones with golden blossoms
that fade not, and there dwells the Nāga king Varuṇa, endowed with
magical powers and born of supernatural birth.

There dwells his queen Vimalā with a body like a golden creeper, tall
like a young kālā plant, fair to see with her breasts like nimba fruits.

Fair-skinned and painted with lac dye, like a kaṇikāra tree blossoming
in a sheltered spot, like a nymph dwelling in the deva world, like
lightning flashing from a thick cloud.

\[270\] Bewildered and full of a strange longing, she desires Vidhura's
heart. I will give it to them, O king,—they will give me for it
Irandatī."

As he dared not go without Vessavana's permission, he repeated these
stanzas to inform him about it. But Vessavana did not listen to him, as
he was busy settling some dispute about a palace between two sons of the
gods. Puṇṇaka, knowing that his words were not listened to, \[271\]
remained near that one of the two disputants who proved victorious in
the contest. Vessavana, having decided the dispute, took no thought of
the defeated candidate, but said to the other, "Go thou and dwell in thy
palace." Directly the words were said "go thou," Puṇṇaka called some
sons of the gods as witnesses, saying, "Ye see that I am sent by my
uncle," and at once ordered his steed to be brought and mounted it and
set out.

The Teacher thus described what took place:

<span class="small">"Puṇṇaka, having bidden farewell to Vessavana Kuvera
the glorious lord of beings, thus gave his command to his servant
standing there, "Bring hither my thoroughbred harnessed." With ears of
gold, hoofs of ruby, and mail-armour of molten gold. Puṇṇaka, having
mounted the god-bearing steed, well-adorned and with his beard and hair
well-trimmed, went through space in the sky."</span>

As he went through the air he pondered, "Vidhura-paṇḍita has a great
retinue and he cannot be taken by force, but Dhanañjaya Koravya is
renowned for his skill in gambling. I will conquer him in play and so
seize Vidhura-paṇḍita. Now there are many jewels in his house: he will
not play for any poor sum; I shall have to bring a jewel of great value,
the king will not accept a common jewel. Now there is a precious jewel
of price belonging to the universal monarch, in the Vepulla Mountain
near the city Rājagaha; I will take that and entice the king to play and
so conquer him." He did so.

The Teacher declared the whole story:

<span class="small">"He went to pleasant Rājagaha, the far-off city of
Aṅga, rich in provisions and abounding with food and drink. Like
Masakkasāra, Indra's capital, \[272\] filled with the notes of peacocks
and herons, resonant, full of beautiful courts, and with every kind of
bird like the mountain Himavat covered with flowers. So Puṇṇaka climbed
Mount Vepulla, with its heaps of rocks inhabited by kimpurisas, seeking
for the glorious jewel, and at last he saw it in the middle of the
mountain.</span>

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

When he saw the glorious precious gem thus flashing light, gleaming so
splendidly with its beauty, shining like lightning in the sky,—he at
once seized the precious lapis lazuli, the jewel of priceless value, and
mounted on his peerless steed, himself of noble beauty, he rushed
through space in the sky.

He went to the city Indapatta, and he alighted in the court of the
Kurus; \[273\] the fearless Yakkha summoned the hundred warriors who
were gathered there.

"Who wishes to conquer from us the prize of kings? or whom shall we
conquer in the contest of worth? what peerless jewel shall we win? or
who shall win our best of treasures?"

Thus in four lines he praised Koravya. Then the king thought to himself,
"I have never before seen a hero like this who uttered such words; who
can it be?" and he asked him in this stanza:

<span class="small">"In what kingdom is thy birthplace? these are not
the words of a Koravya: thou surpassest us all in thy form and
appearance; tell me thy name and kindred."</span>

The other reflected, "This king asks my name: now it is the servant
Puṇṇaka; but if I tell him that I am Puṇṇaka, he will say, "He is a
servant, why does he speak to me so audaciously?" and he will despise
me; I will tell him my name in my last past birth." So he uttered a
stanza:

<span class="small">"I am a youth named Kaccāyana, O king; they call me
one of no mean name; \[274\] my kindred and friends are in Aṅga; I have
come here for the sake of play."</span>

Then the king asked him, "What wilt thou give if thou art conquered in
play? what hast thou got?" and he uttered this stanza:

<span class="small">"What jewels has the youth, which the gamester who
conquers him may win? A king has many jewels,—how canst thou, a poor
man, challenge them?"</span>

Then Puṇṇaka answered:

<span class="small">"This is a fascinating jewel of mine, it is a
glorious jewel which brings wealth; and the gamester who conquers me
shall win this peerless steed which plagues all enemies."</span>

When the king heard him, he replied

<span class="small">"What will one jewel do, O youth? and what will one
thoroughbred avail? Many precious jewels belong to a king, and many
peerless steeds swift like the wind <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_146.md)</span>

### III.

\[275\] When he heard the king's speech, he said, "O king, why dost thou
say this? there is one horse, and there are also a thousand and a
hundred thousand horses; there is one jewel, and there are also a
thousand jewels; but all the horses put together are not equal to this
one, see what its swiftness is." So saying, he mounted the horse and

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

galloped it along the top of a wall, and the city wall seven leagues in
length was as it were surrounded by horses striking neck against neck,
and then in course of time neither horse nor Yakkha could be
distinguished, and a single strip of red cloth tied on his belly seemed
to be spread out all round the wall. Then he alighted from the horse,
and, telling him that he had now seen the steed's swiftness, he bade him
next mark something new: and lo he made the horse gallop within the city
garden on the surface of the water, and he leapt without wetting his
hoofs; then he made him walk on the leaves of the lotus beds, and when
he clapped his hand and stretched out his arm the horse came and stood
upon the palm of his hand. Then he said, "This is indeed a jewel of a
horse, O king." "It is indeed, O youth." "Well, let the jewel of a horse
be put on one side for a while,—see now the power of the precious
jewel."

"O greatest of men, behold this peerless jewel of mine; in it are the
bodies of women and the bodies of men; the bodies of beasts are in it
and the bodies of birds, the Nāga kings and Supaṇṇas,—all are created in
this jewel.

"An elephant host, a chariot host, horses, foot-soldiers, and
banners,—behold this complete army created in the jewel;
elephant-riders, the king's body-guard, warriors fighting from chariots,
warriors fighting on foot, and troops in battle array,—behold all
created in this jewel.

\[276\] "Behold created in this jewel a city furnished with solid
foundations and with many gateways and walls, and with many pleasant
spots where four roads meet. Pillars and trenches, bars and bolts,
watch-towers and gates,—behold all created in the jewel.

"See <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_147.md) various troops of birds in
the roads under the gateways, geese, herons, peacocks, ruddy geese and
ospreys; cuckoos, spotted birds, peacocks, jīvajīvakas,—birds of every
sort behold gathered together and created in the jewel.

"See a marvellous city with grand walls, making the hair stand erect
with wonder, pleasant with banners upraised, and with its sands all of
gold,—see the hermitages divided regularly in blocks, and the different
houses and their yards, with streets and blind lanes between.

"Behold the drinking shops and taverns, the slaughter-houses and cooks'
shops, and the harlots and wantons, created in the jewel. The
garland-weavers, the washermen, the astrologers, the cloth merchants,
the gold workers, the jewellers—behold created in the jewel.

\[277\] "See drums and tabours, conchs, tambours and tambourines and all
kinds of cymbals, created in the jewel.

"Cymbals, and lutes, dance and song well executed, musical instruments
and gongs, behold created in the jewel.

"Jumpers and wrestlers too are here, and a sight of jugglers, and royal
bards and barbers, behold created in the jewel.

"Crowds are gathered here of men and women, see the seats tiers beyond
tiers created in the jewel.

"See the wrestlers in the crowd striking their doubled arms, see the
strikers and the stricken, created in the jewel.

"See on the slopes of the mountains troops of various deer, lions,
tigers, boars, bears, wolves, and hyenas; rhinoceroses, gayals,
buffaloes, red deer, rurus, antelopes, wild boars, niṁkas and hogs,
spotted kadalī-deer, cats, rabbits, all kinds of hosts of beasts,
created in the jewel.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

\[278\] "Rivers well-situated, paved with golden sand, clear with
flowing waters and filled with quantities of fishes; crocodiles,
sea-monsters are here and porpoises and tortoises, pāṭhīnas, pāvusas,
vālajas, and muñjarohitas.

"Behold created in the jewel all kinds of trees, filled with various
birds, and a forest with its branches made of lapis lazuli.

"See too lakes well-distributed in the four quarters, filled with
quantities of birds and abounding with fish with broad scales. See the
earth surrounded by the sea, abounding with water everywhere, and
diversified with trees,—all created in the jewel.

"See the Videhas in front, the Goyāniyas behind, the Kurus and Jambudīpa
all created in the jewel.

"See the sun and the moon, shining on the four sides, as they go round
Mount Sineru,—created in the jewel.

"See Sineru and Himavat and the miraculous sea and the four guardians of
the world,—created in the jewel.

"See parks and forests, crags and mountains, pleasant to look at and
full of strange monsters,—all created in the jewel.

"Indra's gardens Phārusaka, Cittalatā, Missaka, and Nandana, and his
palace Vejayanta,—behold all created in the jewel.

"Indra's palace Sudhamma, the heaven of the Thirty-three, the heavenly
tree Pāricchatta in full flower, and Indra's elephant Erāvaṇa,—behold
created in the jewel. See here the maidens of the gods risen like
lightning in the air, wandering about in the Nandana,—all created in the
jewel.

\[279\] "See the heavenly maidens bewitching the sons of heaven, and the
sons of heaven wandering about, all created in the jewel,

"Behold more than a thousand palaces covered with lapis lazuli, all
created with brilliant colours in the jewel. And the beings of the
Tāvatiṁsa heaven and the Yāma heaven and the Tusita heaven, and those of
the Paranimmita heaven all created in the jewel. See here pure lakes
with transparent water covered with heavenly coral trees and lotuses and
water-lilies.

"In this jewel are ten white lines and ten beautiful lines dark blue;
twenty-one brown, and fourteen yellow. Twenty golden lines, twenty
silver, and thirty appear of a red colour. Sixteen are black,
twenty-five are of the colour of madder,—these are mixed with bandhuka
flowers and variegated with blue lotuses.

"O king, best of men, look at this bright flame-like jewel, perfect in
all its parts,—this is the destined prize <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_148.md) for him who wins <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_149.md)."

### IV.

\[280\] Puṇṇaka, having thus spoken, went on to say, "O great king, if I
am overcome by thee in play I will give thee this precious jewel, but
what wilt thou give me?" "Except my body and white umbrella let all that
I have be the prize." "Then my lord, do not delay—I have come from a far
distance—let the gaming room be got ready." So the king gave orders to
his ministers and they quickly got the hall ready and prepared a carpet
of the finest fibre-cloth <span id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_150.md) for the
king and seats for the other kings, and having appointed a suitable seat
for Puṇṇaka, they told

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

the king that the time was come. Then Puṇṇaka addressed the king in a
verse:

<span class="small">"O king, proceed to the appointed goal,—thou hast
not such a jewel: let us conquer by fair dealing, and by the absence of
violence, and when thou art conquered pay down thy stake."</span>

Then the king replied, "O youth, do not be afraid of me as the king, our
several victory or defeat shall be by fair dealing and by the absence of
violence." Then Puṇṇaka uttered a verse as calling the other kings to
witness that the victory was to be gained by fair dealing only:

<span class="small">"O lofty Pañcāla and Surasena, O Macchas, and
Maddas, with the Kekakas, —let them all see that the contest is without
treachery, no one is to interfere in our assembly."</span>

\[281\] Then the king attended by a hundred kings took Puṇṇaka and went
into the gaming hall, and they all sat down on suitable seats, and
placed the golden dice on the silver board. Then Puṇṇaka said quickly,
"O king, there are twenty-four throws in playing with dice, they are
called *mālika, sāvaṭa, bahula, santi, bhadra* <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_151.md)*, &c.;* choose thou whichever pleases
thee." The king assented and chose the *bahula,* Puṇṇaka chose that
called *sāvaṭa.* Then the king said, "O youth, do thou play the dice
first." "O king, the first throw does not fall to me, do thou play." The
king consented. Now his mother in his last existence but one before this
was his guardian deity and by her power the king wins in play. She was
standing close by, and the king remembering the goddess sang the song of
play <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_152.md) and turned the dice in his
hand and threw them up into the air. By Puṇṇaka's power the dice fall so
as to conquer the king. The king by his skill in play recognised that
the dice were falling against him \[282\] and seizing them and mixing
them together in the air he threw them again in the air but he detected
that they were again falling against him and seized them as they were.
Then Puṇṇaka thought to himself, "This king, though he is playing with a
Yakkha like me, mixes the dice as they fall and so takes them up, what
can be the reason of this?" Then, having recognised the power of the
guardian goddess, he opened his eyes wide as if he were angry and looked
at her and she being frightened fled and took refuge trembling in the
top of the Cakkavāla mountain. The king, when he threw the dice a third
time, although he knew that they would fall against him could not put
out his hand and seize them in consequence of Puṇṇaka's power and they
fell against the king. Then Puṇṇaka threw the dice and they fell
favourable to him. Then knowing that he had won he clapped his hands
with a loud noise, saying three times, "I have won,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have won," and
that sound thrilled through all Jambudīpa. The Teacher described the
event as follows:

<span class="small">"The king of the Kurus and the Yakkha Puṇṇaka
entered wild with the intoxication of play; the king played the losing
throw and the Yakkha Puṇṇaka the winning throw. They two met there in
contest in the presence of the kings and amidst the witnesses,—the
Yakkha conquered the mightiest of men and loud was the tumult which
arose there."</span>

The king was displeased at being conquered, and Puṇṇaka repeated a verse
to comfort him:

\[283\] <span class="small">"Victory and defeat belong to one or another
of the contending parties, O king; O king, thou hast lost the great
prize; being worsted, pay down the price forthwith."</span>

Then he bade him take it in the following verse:

<span class="small">"Elephants, oxen, horses, jewels and earrings,
whatever gems I have in the earth, take the best of wealth, O
Kaccāna,—take it and go where thou wishest."</span>

Puṇṇaka answered:

<span class="small">"Elephants, oxen, horses, jewels and earrings,
whatever gems thou hast in the earth, Vidhura the minister is the best
of them all, he has been won by me, pay him down to me."</span>

The king said:

<span class="small">"He is my minister, my refuge and help, my shelter,
my fortress and my defence,—that minister of mine is not to be weighed
against wealth, that minister of mine is like my life."</span>

Puṇṇaka answered:

<span class="small">"There would be a long contest between thee and me,
let us go to him and ask him what he wishes, \[284\] let him decide this
matter between us, let then what he determines be the judgment of us
both."</span>

The king replied:

<span class="small">"Verily thou speakest truth; O youth, thou utterest
no injustice, let us go at once and ask him: in this way we shall both
be satisfied."</span>

So saying the king took the hundred kings and Puṇṇaka went gladly in
haste to the court of justice; and the sage rose from his seat and
saluted the king and sat on one side. Then Puṇṇaka addressed the Great
Being and said, "O wise man, thou art firm in justice, thou wilt not
utter a falsehood, even for the sake of life; such is the echo of thy
fame which has spread through the whole world. I shall know to-day
whether thou art really firm in justice," and so saying he uttered a
verse:

<span class="small">"Have the gods truly set thee among the Kurus as the
councillor Vidhura firm in justice? Art thou the slave or the kinsman of
the king? What is thy value in the world, Vidhura?"</span>

Then the Great Being thought to himself, "This man asks this question of
me; but I cannot tell him whether I am a kinsman of the king or whether
I am superior to the king or whether I am nothing to the king.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this world
there is no protection like the truth; \[285\] one must speak the
truth." So he uttered two verses to show that he was no kinsman to the
king nor his superior, but only one of his four slaves:

<span class="small">"Some are slaves from their mothers, others are
slaves bought for money, some come of their own will as slaves, others
are slaves driven by fear. These are the four sorts of slaves among men.
I verily am a slave from my birth: my weal and my woe come from the
king, I am the king's slave even if I go to another,—he may give me by
right to thee, O young man."</span>

Puṇṇaka, on hearing this, being excessively pleased, clapped his hands
and said:

<span class="small">"This is my second victory to-day, thy minister when
asked has answered thy question; verily the best of kings is unjust; it
has been well decided, but thou dost not give it to me."</span>

Hearing this the king was angry with the Great Being and said, "Not
regarding one who can confer honour like me thou regardest this young
man who catches thine eye"; then turning to Puṇṇaka, and saying, "If he
is a slave take him and go," he uttered the following stanza:

<span class="small">\[286\] "If he has thus answered our question,
saying, "I am a slave and not a kinsman," then take, O Kaccāna, this
best of treasures, take it and go whither thou wilt."</span>

But when the king had thus spoken, he reflected, "The young man will
take the sage and go where he pleases, and after he is once gone I shall
find it hard to get any sweet converse about holy things; what if I were
to set him in his proper place and ask him some question in reference to
a householder's life?" So he said to him, "O sage, after thou art gone I
shall find it hard to get any sweet converse about holy things; wilt
thou sit down in a well-decorated pulpit and taking thy proper position
expound to me a question relating to the householder's life?" He
assented, and having sat down in a well-decorated pulpit he expounded
the question which the king asked; and this was the question:

"O Vidhura, how shall there be a prosperous life to him who lives as a
householder in his own house? how shall there be for him kind favour
among his own people? how shall he be free from suffering? and how shall
the young man who speaks truth escape all sorrow when he reaches the
next world?" Then Vidhura, full of wisdom and insight, he who sees the
real aim and presses steadily onward, he who knows all doctrines,
uttered these words:

"Let him not have a wife in common with another; let him not eat a
dainty meal alone; let him not deal in vain conversation, for this
increases not wisdom. Virtuous, faithful to his duties, not careless,
quick to discern, humble-minded, not hard-hearted, compassionate,
affectionate, gentle, \[287\] skilled in winning friends, ready to
distribute, prudent in arranging in accordance with the season,—let him
continually satisfy the monks and Brahmins with food and drink. Let him
long for righteousness and be a pillar of the sacred text, ever ready to
ask questions and let him reverentially attend to the virtuous learned.
Thus shall there be a prosperous life to one who lives as a householder
in his own house, thus shall there be for him kind favour among his own
people; thus shall he be free from suffering; and thus the youth who
speaks truth shall escape all sorrow when he reaches the next world."

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

The Great Being, having thus expounded the question relating to the
householder's life, came down from his seat and made his salutation to
the king. The king also, having paid him great respect, went away to his
own abode, surrounded by the hundred kings <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_153.md).

\[288\] When the Great Being returned, Puṇṇaka said to him:

<span class="small">"Come, I will now depart,—you were given to me by
the king; attend only to this duty—this is the ancient law."</span>

The sage Vidhura replied:

<span class="small">"I know it, O youth; I was won by thee; I was given
by the king to thee; let me lodge thee for three days in my home while I
exhort my sons."</span>

When Puṇṇaka heard this, he thought within himself, "The sage has spoken
the truth; this will be a great benefit to me; if he had asked leave to
lodge me there for seven days or even for a fortnight, I ought at once
to have assented "; so he answered:

<span class="small">"Let that advantage be for me too, let us dwell
there three days; do, Sir, whatever needs to be done in thy home;
instruct to-day thy sons and thy wife, that they may be happy after thou
art gone."</span>

So saying, Puṇṇaka went with the Great Being to his home.

\[289\] The Teacher thus described the incident:

<span class="small">"Gladly assenting and eagerly longing, the Yakkha
went with Vidhura; and the best of the holy ones introduced him into his
home, attended by elephants and thoroughbred steeds."</span>

Now the Great Being had three palaces for the three seasons,—one of them
was called Koñca, another Mayūra, and the third Piyaketa; this verse was
uttered about them:

<span class="small">"He went there to Koñca, Mayūra, and Piyaketa, each
of most pleasant aspect, furnished with abundance of food and plenty to
eat and to drink, like Indra's own palace Masakkasāra."</span>

After his arrival, he had a sleeping-chamber, and a raised platform in
the seventh story of the decorated palace, and having had a royal couch
spread and every kind of dainty to eat and drink set out, he presented
to him five hundred women like daughters of the gods, saying, "Let these
be your attendants, stay here without a care," and then went to his own
abode. When he was gone, these women took their different musical
instruments end performed all kinds of dances as they attended on
Puṇṇaka.

The Teacher has thus described it:

"These women adorned like nymphs among the gods dance and sing and
address him, each better in her turn <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_154.md).

The guardian of the law, having given him food and drink and fair women,
\[290\] next, thinking only of his highest good, brought him into the
presence of his wife.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

Then he said to his wife, who was adorned with sandal and liquid
perfumes and stood like an ornament of purest gold, "Come, listen, lady;
call thy sons here, O fair one with eyes of the hue of copper."

Anujjā, hearing her husband's words, spoke to her daughter-in-law,
fair-eyed and with nails like copper, "O Cetā, who wearest thy bracelets
as an armour, and art like a blue water-lily, go, call my sons hither."

Having uttered her assent and traversed the whole length of the palace
she assembled all the friends as well as the sons and daughters, saying,
"Your father wishes to give you an exhortation, this will be your last
sight of him." When the young prince Dhammapāla-kumāra heard this he
began to weep, and went before his father surrounded by his younger
brothers. When the father saw them, unable to maintain his tranquillity,
he embraced them with eyes full of tears, and kissed their heads and
pressed his eldest son for a moment to his heart. Then, raising him up
from his bosom and going out of the royal chamber, he sat down in the
middle of the couch on the raised platform and delivered his address to
his thousand sons.

\[291\] The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"The guardian of the law, without trembling, kissed
his sons on their foreheads when they drew near, and having addressed
them uttered these words, "I have been given by the king to this young
man. I am subject to him, but to-day I was free to seek my own pleasure,
he will now take me and go whither he will, and I am come to admonish
you, for how could I go if I had not given you salvation? If Janasandha,
the king who dwells in Kurukhetta, should very earnestly ask you, "What
do you reckon as having been ancient even in ancient time? what, did
your father teach first and foremost?" and if he were then to say, "Ye
are all of an equal position with me,—which of you here is not more than
a king? <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) do you make a respectful
salutation and reply to him, "Say not so, O monarch, this is not the
law; how shall the baseborn jackal be of equal position with the royal
tiger?"</span>

\[292\] Having heard this discourse of his the sons and daughters and
all the kinsmen, friends, servants, and common folk were unable to
maintain their tranquillity and uttered a loud cry; and the Great Being
consoled them <span id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_156.md).

### V.

Then having come to all those kinsmen and seeing that they were silent,
he said, "Children, do not grieve, all material things are impermanent,
honour ends in misfortune; nevertheless I will tell you of a means of
obtaining honour, namely, a king's court; listen to it with your minds
earnestly intent." Then through the Buddha's magic power he made them
enter into a royal court.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

The Teacher thus described it:

"Then Vidhura thus addressed his friends and his enemies, his kindred,
and his intimates, with his mind and will detached from all things,
"Come, dear ones, sit down and listen to me as I tell of a royal
dwelling, how a man who enters a king's court may attain to honour. When
he enters a king's court he does not win honour while he is unknown, nor
does one ever win it who is a coward, nor the foolish man, nor the
thoughtless. When the king finds out his moral qualities, his wisdom and
his purity of heart, then he learns to trust him and hides not his
secrets from him.

When he is asked to carry out some business, like a well-fixed balance,
with a level beam, and evenly poised, he must not hesitate; if like the
balance, he is ready to undertake every burden, he may dwell in a king's
court.

\[293\] Whether by day or by night, the wiser man should riot hesitate
when set upon the king's business; such an one may dwell in a king's
court. The wise man who, when set upon the king's business, whether by
day or by night, undertakes every commission,—he is the one who may
dwell in a king's court.

He who sees a path made for the king and carefully put in order for him,
and refrains from entering himself therein, though advised to do so,—he
is the one who may dwell in a king's court. Let him on no account ever
enjoy the same pleasures as the king, let him follow behind in
everything,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Let him not put on
a garment like the king's nor garlands nor ointment like his; let him
not wear similar ornaments or practise a tone of voice like his; let him
always wear a different attire,—such an one may dwell in a king's court.
If the king sports with his ministers or surrounded by his wives, let
not the minister make any allusion to the royal ladies. He who is not
lifted up, nor fickle, who is prudent and keeps his senses under
control, he who is possessed of insight and resolution,—such an one may
dwell in a king's court.

\[294\] Let him not sport with the king's wives nor talk with them
privately; let him not take money from his treasury,—such an one may
dwell in a king's court. Let him not think too much of sleep, nor drink
strong drink to excess, nor kill the deer in the king's forest,—such an
one may dwell in a king's court. Let him not seat himself on the king's
chair or couch or seat or elephant or chariot; as thinking himself a
privileged person,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Let him
prudently keep not too far from the king nor yet too near to him, and
let him stand ready before him, telling something for his lord to hear.
The king does not count as a common person, the king must not be paired
with anyone else; kings are easily vexed, as the eye is hurt if touched
by a barley-awn. Let not the wise man, thinking himself to be held in
honour, ever venture to speak roughly to the suspicious king. If he gets
his opportunity, let him take it; but let him not trust in kings; let
him be on his guard as in the case of fire <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_157.md),—such an one may dwell in a king's
court. If the ruler favours his son or his brother with a gift of some
villages or towns or some people in his kingdom as clients, let him
quietly wait in silence, nor speak of him as prudent or faulty.

\[295\] If the king increases the pay of his elephant-driver or his
life-guardsman, his chariot-soldier or his foot-soldier, through hearing
some story of their exploits, let him not interfere to hinder it,—such
an one may dwell in a king's court. The wise man will keep his belly
small like the bow <span id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_158.md), but he will
bend easily like the bamboo; let him not go contrary to the king <span
id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_159.md), so he may dwell in a king's court. Let
him keep his belly small like the bow, and let him have no tongue like
the fish; let him be moderate in eating, brave and prudent; such an one
may dwell in a king's court.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

Let him not visit a woman too often, fearing the loss of his strength;
the foolish man is a victim to cough, asthma, bodily pain and
childishness. Let him not laugh too much, nor keep always silent; he
should utter, when the due season comes, a concise and measured speech.
Not given to anger, not ready to take offence, truthful, gentle, no
slanderer, let him not speak foolish words,—such an one may dwell in a
king's court.

\[296\] Trained, educated, self-controlled, experienced in
business <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_160.md), temperate, gentle,
careful, pure, skilful,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Humble
in behaviour towards the old, ready to obey, and full of respect,
compassionate, and pleasant to live with,—such an one may dwell in a
king's court. Let him keep at a distance from a spy sent by a foreign
king to intermeddle <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_161.md); let him look
to his own lord alone, and own no other king.

Let him pay respect to monks and Brahmins who are virtuous and learned;
let him carefully wait on them; such an one may dwell in a king's court.
Let him satisfy virtuous and learned monks and Brahmins with food and
drink,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Let him draw near and
devotedly attend on virtuous and learned monks and Brahmins,—desiring
thereby his own real good.

Let him not seek to deprive monks or Brahmins of any gift previously
bestowed on them, and let him in no way hinder mendicants at a time of
distributing alms. One who is righteous, endowed with wisdom, and
skilled in all business arrangements, and well-versed in times and
seasons,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. \[297\] One who is
energetic in business, careful and skilful, and able to conduct his
affairs successfully,—such an one may dwell in a king's court.

Visiting repeatedly the threshingfloor, the house, the cattle and the
field, he should have the corn carefully measured and stored in his
granaries, and he should have it carefully measured for cooking in his
home. (Let him not employ or promote <span
id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_162).md) a son or a brother who is not stedfast
in virtue; such children are no true members of one's own body, they are
to be counted as if they were dead; let him cause clothing and food for
sustenance to be given to them and let them sit while they take it. Let
him employ in offices of authority servants and agents who are
established in virtue and are skilful in business and can rise to an
emergency.

One who is virtuous and free from greed and devoted to his king, never
absent from him <span id="fr_164"></span>[4](#fn_163.md) and seeking his
interest,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Let him know the
king's wish, and hold fast to his thoughts, and let his action be never
contrary to him,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. \[298\] He
will rub him with perfumes and bathe him, he will bend his head low when
washing his feet; when smitten he will not be angry; such an one may
dwell in a king's court.

He will make his salutation to a jar full of water, or offer his
reverential greeting to a crow, yea, he will give to all petitioners and
be ever prudent and preeminent,—he will give away his bed, his garment,
his carriage, his house, his home, and shower down blessings like a
cloud on all beings. This, Sirs, is the way to dwell in a king's court,
this is how a man is to behave himself and so to conciliate the king's
favour, and to obtain honour from his rulers <span
id="fr_165"></span>[5](#fn_164.md)."

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

### VI.

Three days went by as he thus discoursed to his sons, wives, friends and
others. Then, knowing that the time was accomplished, early in the
morning, after having eaten his meal of various dainties, he said, "I
will take my leave of the king and depart with the young man"; so he
went to the king's palace surrounded by a company of kinsmen and saluted
the king and stood on one side, and uttered his words of wise practical
counsel.

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"Having thus counselled the company of his kindred,
the wise one, surrounded by his friends, went up to the king. \[299\]
Having saluted his feet with his head and made a reverential homage,
Vidhura with his hands clasped thus addressed the king, "This youth,
wishing to employ me according to his will, is leading me away; I will
speak for the sake of my kindred,—hear what I say, O enemy-conqueror.
Wilt thou be pleased to look to my sons and whatever property I may have
besides in my house, so that when I am gone my company of kinsmen may
not hereafter perish? As when the earth trembles that which is upon it
likewise trembles, and as when the earth is firm it all remains
firm <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_165.md), so I see that my kindred
fall in my fall; this I perceive was my error."</span>

When the king heard this, he said, "O sage, thy going pleases me not; do
not go; I will send for the young man on some pretext, then we will kill
him and hush it up"; and in illustration of this he repeated a stanza:

<span class="small">"Thou canst not go, this is my resolve; having
smitten and slain this Kātiya <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_166.md)
fellow, do thou dwell here,—this is what seems best to me; do not go
hence, O thou possessed of such vast wisdom."</span>

When the Great Being heard this he exclaimed, "Such an intention is not
worthy of thee," and then he added,

"Do not set thy mind on unrighteousness, be thou devoted to temporal and
spiritual good <span id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_167.md); shame on an action
which is ignoble and sinful, which when a man has done, he goes
afterwards to hell.

\[300\] This is not righteousness, this is not what ought to be done; a
king, O lord of men, is the supreme authority of a poor slave, which
sets him to kill or to burn or kills by its own act; I have no wrath
against him and I depart."

So saying the Great Being respectfully saluted the king and exhorted the
king's wives and his officers; and then went out from the palace while
they, unable to retain their fortitude, burst out into a bitter cry; and
all the inhabitants of the city exclaimed, "The sage is going with the
young man, come, we will see him as he goes," and they gazed upon him in
the king's court. Then they too said to one another, "Sorrow not for it,
all material things are transitory, be zealous in almsgiving and other
good works," and then they returned and went each to his own house.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"Having embraced his eldest son and controlled the
anguish in his heart, with eyes filled with tears he entered the
palace."</span>

Now in the palace there were a thousand sons, a thousand daughters, a
thousand wives, and seven hundred courtezans, and with these and the
other servants and attendants and relations and friends lying prostrate
everywhere the palace appeared like a sāl grove with its trees strewed
about by the fury of the great wind which heralds the end of the world.

The Teacher has thus described it:

"The sons and wives of Vidhura lie prostrate in the palace like
sāl-trees shaken and shattered by the wind.

\[301\] A thousand wives, and seven hundred female slaves wailed
stretching out their arms, in the palace of Vidhura. The ladies of the
harem and the princes, the Vesiyas and Brahmins wailed stretching out
their arms in the palace of Vidhura. Elephant-drivers, the soldiers of
the body-guard, chariot-riders and foot-soldiers wailed stretching out
their arms in the palace of Vidhura. The people of the country and the
towns collected together wailed stretching out their arms in the palace
of Vidhura."

The Great Being, having comforted the vast assembly and performed all
that remained to be done and exhorted the ladies of the harem and
pointed out all that needed to be told, went to Puṇṇaka and announced to
him that he had done everything that was to be done.

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"Having done all that was to be done within the
house and having instructed all the people, his friends and counsellors
and companions, his wives, sons and relations, and having arranged the
outside work which demanded attention and informed them of the stores in
the house, the treasure and the debts that were to be paid, he thus
spoke to Puṇṇaka, Thou hast dwelt three days in my house, I have done
all that needed to be done in my home, I have instructed my sons and my
wives, let us now act according to thy will, O Kaccāna <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_168.md)."</span>

\[302\] Puṇṇaka replied:

<span class="small">"If, O thou who attest of thine own will <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_169.md), thou hast instructed thy sons, thy
wives, and thy dependents, then alas! thou standest here as one about to
cross: this is a long journey before thee. Take hold, without fear, of
the tail of thy noble steed, this is thy last sight of the world of the
living."</span>

Then the Great Being said to him:

<span class="small">"Of whom shall I be afraid, when I have done no evil
to him by body, speech or thought, whereby I could come to
misfortune?"</span>

So the Great Being, uttering a loud shout, fearless like an undismayed
lion, said, "This is my robe—put it not off without my permission"; and
then, guided by his own perfect resolution, and having girt his robes
tightly, he disentangled the horse's tail and seizing it firmly with
both hands, he pressed the horse's thighs with his two feet and said to
him,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "I have seized the
tail, proceed, O youth, as thou wilt." At that moment Puṇṇaka gave a
signal to the horse who was endowed with reason, and he forthwith
bounded into the sky, carrying the seer.

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"The prince of horses bearing Vidhura went up into
the sky and soon reached the Black Mountain <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_170.md) without coming in contact with the
boughs of trees or the rocks."</span>

\[303\] While Puṇṇaka thus went off carrying the Great Being with him,
the seer's sons and the other spectators went to Puṇṇaka's dwelling; but
when they found not the Great Being, they lamented with loud and
repeated cries, falling down as if their feet had been cut off <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_171.md).

When they thus had seen and heard the Great Being, as he went up without
any cause into the sky, and had thus uttered their lamentations, they
all went wailing to the king's gate, accompanied by all the citizens.
The king, hearing the loud sound of lamentation, opened his window and
asked why they lamented. They replied, "O sire, that was no Brahmin
youth, but a Yakkha who has come in the guise of a Brahmin and carried
off the seer; \[304\] without him there is no life for us; if he does
not return on the seventh day from this, we will collect timber in
hundreds, yea, thousands of carts and will all enter the fire <span
id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_171.md)."

When the king heard their words, he replied, "The sage with his honied
speech will soon beguile the youth by his religious discourse and will
make him fall down at his feet, and will ere long come back and bring
smiles to your tearful faces,—sorrow not"; and he repeated a stanza:

<span class="small">"The seer is wise, and learned, and skilful; he will
soon set himself free; fear not, he will come back."</span>

Meantime Puṇṇaka, after he had set the Great Being on the top of the
Black Mountain, thought to himself, "As long as this man lives there is
no chance of prosperity for me; I will kill him, and take his heart's
flesh and I will then go to the Nāga world and give it to Vimalā <span
id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_172.md), and having thus obtained his daughter
Irandatī I shall rise to the world of the gods."

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"When he had gone there he thought to himself,
"Rational beings exist in various gradations; I have no possible use for
his life,—I will kill him and take his heart."</span>

\[305\] Then again he thought, "What if without killing him by my own
hand I were to cause him to perish by shewing him some frightful

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

shape?" So having assumed the form of a frightful demon, he went up to
him and threw him down, and seizing him in his mouth made as if he were
about to devour him; but not a hair of the Great being stood on end.
Then he came up in the shape of a lion and of a furious elephant, he
threatened to attack him with teeth and tusks; and when the other still
shewed no fear, he assumed the appearance of a great serpent as big as a
great trough-shaped canoe, and coming up to him hissing and coiling his
body round him it covered his head with its hood, but the other shewed
no signs of alarm. Then he said, "As he stands on the top of a mountain
and falls down, I will shatter him into fragments by the fall,"—so he
raised up a mighty wind; but it stirred not the end of one of his hairs.
Then he set him on the top of a mountain and himself standing in the
form of an elephant, he made it shake to and fro like a wild date palm
tree, but even then he could not stir one hair of his head from its
place. Then he said, "I will make his heart burst by terror at some
frightful sound"; so he entered the inside of the mountain, and uttering
a tremendous roar filled heaven and earth with one mighty sound; but
still the Great Being shewed no alarm; for he knew that he who had thus
come in the form of a Yakkha and a lion and an elephant and a Nāga, and
had shaken the mountain with the wind and rain, and had entered into the
mountain and uttered the great roar, was still only a man and nothing
else. Then the Yakkha thought to himself, "I shall not be able to kill
him by external attacks, I shall only destroy him by my own hand." So he
set the Great Being on the top of a mountain and himself going to the
mountain's foot rose up from the centre of the mountain as though he
were inserting a white thread into a perforated gem, and with a roar he
seized the Great Being violently and whirled him round, and flung him
head downwards into the sky where there was nothing that he could lay
hold of. It has thus been described:

\[306\] <span class="small">"Having gone thither and entered within the
mountain Kātiyāna of evil mind held him with his head downwards in the
open expanse of the world <span id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_173.md). While
he hung there as on the precipice of hell frightful to see and most
difficult to traverse, he the best of all the Kurus in action thus
addressed Puṇṇaka undismayed: "Thou art base in thy nature, though thou
assumest for a time a noble form, utterly licentious though wearing the
guise of one restrained, thou art doing a cruel and monstrous
deed,—there is nothing good in thy nature. What is thy reason for
killing me, when thou wishest to see me thrown down this precipice? Thy
appearance bespeaks thee as something superhuman, tell me what kind of a
god thou art."</span>

\[307\] Puṇṇaka answered:

<span class="small">"Thou hast heard perchance of the Yakkha Puṇṇaka,—he
is the minister of King Kuvera. There is an earth-ruling Nāga called
Varuṇa, mighty, pure, and endowed with beauty and strength; I desire his
younger sister, the Nāga maiden named Irandatī; for the love of that
fair damsel I have set my mind on killing thee, O sage."</span>

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

The Great Being reflected, "This world is ruined by a thing being
misunderstood, why should a wooer of a Nāga maiden want my death? I will
learn the whole truth of the matter," so he uttered a stanza:

"Be not deceived, O Yakkha; many people are destroyed by a thing being
misunderstood; what has thy love for that fair maiden to do with my
death? Come, let us hear the whole."

Then Puṇṇaka said to him, "In my love for the daughter of that mighty
Nāga I consulted her kinsfolk, and when I sought her hand my
father-in-law told me that they knew that I was moved by an honourable
passion. "We will give thee the damsel endowed with beautiful body and
eyes, fair-smiling and with her limbs perfumed with sandal wood, if thou
bringest to me the sage's heart won in fair fight; \[308\] the maiden is
to be won by this prize, we ask no other gift besides. Thus I am not
deceived,—listen, O thou doer of right actions; there is nothing
misunderstood by me; the Nāgas will give me the Nāga maiden Irandatī for
thy heart won in fair fight. It is for this that I am set on killing
thee, it is in this way that I have need of thy death. If I threw thee
hence down into hell I would kill thee and take thy heart."

When the Great Being heard this he reflected, "Vimalā <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_174.md) has no need of my heart. Varuṇa, after
he had heard the discourse on the law and honoured me with his jewel
must have gone home and described my power in discoursing concerning the
law, and Vimalā must have felt a great longing to hear my words. Puṇṇaka
must have been ordered by Varuṇa through a misconception, and he
influenced by this his own misconception has brought about all this
calamity. Now my character as a sage consists in my power to bring to
light and to discover absolute truths. If Puṇṇaka kills me, what good
will it do? Come, I will say to him, Young man, I know the law as
followed by good men; before I die, set me on the top of the mountain
and hear the law of good men from me; and afterwards do what thou wilt";
and after having declared to him the law of good men I will let him take
my life." So he uttered this stanza as he hung with his head downwards:

<span class="small">"Hold me up forthwith, O Kātiyāna, if thou needest
my heart; \[309\] I will declare to thee this day all the laws of the
good man."</span>

Then Puṇṇaka reflected, "This law will never have been declared before
to gods or men; I will forthwith hold him up and hear the law of good
men"; so he lifted the Great Being up and set him on the summit of the
mountain.

The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"Puṇṇaka, having quickly placed the best of the
performers of good actions among the Kurus upon the mountain's summit,
asked the Teacher of lofty wisdom, as he sat looking at a pipul tree, "I
have brought thee up from the precipice, I have need of thy heart this
day,—tell me then to-day all the laws of the good man."</span>

The Great Being said:

<span class="small">"I am saved by thee from the precipice; if thou
needest my heart, I will declare to thee this day all the laws of the
good man."</span>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Then the Great Being said, "My body is dirty, I will bathe." The Yakkha
consented, so he brought some water, and when he was bathing, he gave
the Great Being some heavenly cloth and perfumes, &c., and after he was
adorned and drest he gave him some heavenly food. When he had eaten, the
Great Being caused the top of the Black Mountain to be covered with
adornment, and prepared a richly decorated seat, and being seated
thereon uttered a stanza, describing in it the duty of the good man with
a Buddha's triumphant mastery:

<span class="small">"O youth, follow thou the path already traversed;
put away from thee the soiled hand <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_175.md)
\[310\] be not ever treacherous to thy friends, nor fall into the power
of unchaste women."</span>

The Yakkha, being unable to comprehend these four rules expressed so
concisely, asked in detail:

<span class="small">"How does one follow the path already traversed? How
does one burn the wet hand? Who is the unchaste woman? Who is
treacherous to his friend? Tell me the meaning at my request."</span>

The Great Being replied:

"Let a man follow *his* actions, who invites him even to a seat, when he
comes as a stranger and never seen before; him the wise call one who
follows in the path already traversed.

In whosesoever house a man dwells even for one night, and receives there
food and drink, let him not conceive an evil thought against him in his
mind; he who is treacherous to his friend burns the innocent hand <span
id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_176.md). Let not a man break a bough of that
tree under whose shadow he sits or lies,—the wretch is treacherous to
his friend. Let a man give this earth filled with riches to the woman
whom he has chosen, yet she will despise him if she gets the
opportunity; let him not fall into the power of unchaste women. Thus
does a man follow the path already traversed; thus does he burn the wet
hand; this is the unchaste woman; this is one that is treacherous to his
friend; such a man is righteous, abandon thou unrighteousness."

\[311\] Thus did the Great Being declare to the Yakkha with a Buddha's
triumphant mastery the four duties of a good man, and when he heard them
Puṇṇaka reflected, "In these four propositions the sage is only asking
his own life; for he verily welcomed me though I was before unknown; I
dwelt in his house three days, receiving great honour from him; I, doing
him this wrong, do it for a woman's sake; I am moreover in every way
treacherous to my friends; if I shall do injury to the sage, I shall not
follow the duty of a good man; what need have I of the Nāga maiden? I
will carry him forthwith to Indapatta and gladden the weeping faces of
its inhabitants and I will seat him in the convocation hall there." Then
he spoke aloud:

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span class="small">"I dwelt three days in thy house, I was served with
food and drink, thou wast my friend, I will let thee go, O seer of
excellent wisdom, thou shalt depart at thy will to thine own home.
\[312\] Yea, let all that concerns the Nāga race perish, I have had
enough of the Nāga maiden; by thine own well-spoken words thou art set
free, O seer, from my threatened blow to-day."</span>

The Great Being replied, "O youth, send me not away to my own home but
carry me to the Nāga dwelling," and he uttered this stanza:

<span class="small">"Come, Yakkha, carry me to thy father-in-law, and
act as is best towards me; I will shew to him a royal Nāga palace which
he has never seen before.</span>

Puṇṇaka said:

<span class="small">"The wise man should not look on that which is not
for a man's wellbeing; why then, O seer of excellent wisdom, dost thou
wish to go amongst thy enemies?"</span>

The Great Being answered:

"Verily I know it all; the wise man ought not to look upon it; but I
have never at any time committed evil, and therefore I fear not the
coming of death."

\[313\] "Moreover by my discourse concerning the law such a cruel being
as thyself was won over and softened, and now thou sayest, "I have had
enough of the Nāga maiden, go thou to thine own home"; it is now my task
to soften the Nāga king, carry me thither forthwith." When he heard
this, Puṇṇaka consented, saying:

"Come, thou shalt see with me that world of unequalled glory where the
Nāga king dwells amidst dance and song like King Vessavana <span
id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_177.md) in Nalinī. Filled with troops of Nāga
maidens, gladdened constantly with their sports day and night, abounding
with garlands and covered with flowers, it shines like the lightning in
the sky. Filled with food and with drink, with dance and song and
instruments of music; filled with maidens richly attired, it shines with
dresses and ornaments."

Then Puṇṇaka placed him, the best doer of good actions among the Kurus,
on a seat behind him and carried the illustrious sage to the palace of
the Nāga king. When he reached that place of unrivalled glory, the sage
stood behind Puṇṇaka; and the Nāga king, beholding the concord between
them, thus addressed his son-in-law as he had done before.

\[314\] "Thou didst go before to the world of men, seeking for the
sage's heart; hast thou returned here with success, bringing the sage of
unequalled wisdom?"

Puṇṇaka replied:

<span class="small">"He whom thou desirest is come, he is my guardian in
duty, won by righteous means; behold him as he speaks before
thee,—intercourse with the good brings happiness."</span>

The Nāga king uttered a stanza as he saw the Great Being:

<span class="small">"This mortal, beholding me whom he had never seen
before and pierced with the fear of death, does not speak to me in his
terror; this is not like a wise man."</span>

The Great Being thus addressed the Nāga king while he conceived this
idea, even though he had not directly said that he would not pay him

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

respect,—as the Great Being knew by his omniscience how best to deal
with all creatures:

<span class="small">\[315\] "I am not terrified, O Nāga, nor am I
pierced with the fear of death; the victim should not address his
executioner, nor should the latter ask his victim to address him <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_178.md)."</span>

Then the Nāga king uttered a stanza in the Great Being's praise:

<span class="small">"It is as thou sayest, O sage,—thou speakest the
truth; the victim should not address his executioner nor should the
latter ask his victim to address him <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_178.md)."</span>

Then the Great Being spoke kindly to the Nāga king:

<span class="small">"This splendour and glory and this might and Nāga
birth of thine, are subject to death and not immortal; I ask thee this
question, O Nāga king, how didst thou obtain this palace? Was it gained
without a cause or as the development of a previous condition? was it
made by thyself or given by the gods? Explain to me this matter, O Nāga
king, how thou didst win this palace <span
id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_179.md)."</span>

\[316\] The Nāga king replied:

<span class="small">"It was not gained without a cause, nor was it the
development of a previous condition; it was not made by myself nor given
by the gods; this palace of mine was gained by my own virtuous
deeds <span id="fr_183"></span>[3](#fn_180.md)."</span>

The Great Being answered:

<span class="small">"What holy vow was it, what practice of sanctity? Of
what good action was this the fruit,—this splendour and glory and might
and Nāga birth of thine and this great palace, O Nāga <span
id="fr_184"></span>[4](#fn_181.md)?"</span>

The Nāga king replied':

<span class="small">"I and my wife in the world of men were both full of
faith and bountiful; my house was made into a drinking-hall, and priests
and Brahmins were cheered there. Garlands and perfumes and ointments,
lamps and couches and resting-places, raiment and beds and food and
drink, I virtuously gave away there as free gifts. That was my vow and
practice of sanctity, this is the fruit of that good conduct, this
splendour and glory and Nāga birth and this great palace, O
seer."</span>

\[317\] The Great Being said:

<span class="small">"If thou hast thus gained this palace, thou knowest
about the fruit of holy actions and rebirth; therefore practise virtue
with all diligence that thou mayest live again in a palace."</span>

The Nāga king replied:

<span class="small">"There are no priests or Brahmins here to whom we
may give food and drink, O holy one; tell me this thing I pray, how may
I again live in a palace?"</span>

The Great Being said:

<span class="small">"There are snakes who have been born here, sons and
wives and dependents; commit no sin towards them in word or deed at any
time. Thus follow thou, O Nāga, innocence in word and deed,—so shalt
thou dwell here all thy life in a palace and then depart hence to the
world of the gods."</span>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

\[318\] The Nāga king, having heard the religious discourse of the Great
Being, thought to himself, "The sage cannot stay long away from his
home; I will shew him to Vimalā and let her hear his good words, and so
calm her longing desire, and I will gratify King Dhanañjaya and then it
will be right to send the sage home"; so he said:

<span class="small">"Verily that best of kings is mourning in thy
absence, whose intimate minister thou art; having once regained thee,
though now distressed and sick, a man will regain happiness."</span>

The Great Being praised the Nāga:

<span class="small">"Thou dost indeed utter the holy words of the good,
a peerless piece of right doctrine; in such crises of life as these the
character of men like me is made known."</span>

Then the Nāga king still more delighted uttered a stanza:

<span class="small">"Say, wast thou taken for nothing? Say, did he
conquer thee in the game? He says that he won thee fairly—how didst thou
come into his power?"</span>

The Great Being replied:

Puṇṇaka conquered in the game with dice him who was my lord and king;
\[319\] he being conquered gave me to the other; so I was won fairly and
not by wrong."

The great Nāga, delighted and overjoyed, when he heard these noble words
of the sage, seized the lord of lofty wisdom by the hand and thus went
into the presence of his wife, "He for whom, O Vimalā, you grew pale and
food lost its savour in your eyes, this sun, for the sake of whose heart
this trouble came upon you,—listen well to his words, you will never see
him again."

Vimalā, when she saw the lord of great wisdom, folded the ten fingers of
her hands in reverence, and thus addressed the best of the Kurus with
her whole soul full of delight:

"This mortal, beholding me whom he had never seen before and pierced
with the fear of death, does not speak to me in his terror; this is not
like a wise man."

"I am not terrified, O Nāgī, nor am I pierced with the fear of death;
the victim should not address his executioner, nor should the latter ask
his victim to address him <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_182.md)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[322\] Thus the Nāga maiden asked the sage the same question which the
Nāga Varuṇa had asked him before; and the sage by his answer satisfied
her as he had before satisfied Varuṇa.

The sage, seeing that the Nāga king and the Nāga maiden were both
pleased with his answers, undaunted in soul and with not one hair erect
with fear, thus addressed Varuṇa: "Fear not, O Nāga, here I am; whatever
use this body may be to thee, whatever it can do by its heart and its
flesh, I myself will carry out according to thy will."

The Nāga king replied:

<span class="small">"The heart of sages is their wisdom,—we are
delighted to-day with thy wisdom; let him whose name implies
perfection <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_183.md) take his bride to-day
and let him put thee in possession to-day of the Kurus."</span>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

\[323\] Having thus spoken, Varuṇa gave Irandatī to Puṇṇaka and he in
his joy poured out his heart to the Great Being.

The Great Being has thus described the matter:

<span class="small">"Puṇṇaka, delighted and overjoyed, having won the
Nāga maiden Irandatī, with his whole soul full of joy, thus addressed
him who was the best of the Kurus in action: "Thou hast made me
possessed of a wife, I will do what is due to thee, O Vidhura; I give
this pearl of jewels and I will put thee to-day in possession of the
Kurus."</span>

Then the Great Being praised him in another stanza:

"May thy friendship with thy loved wife be indissoluble, and do thou in
thy joy with a happy heart give me the jewel and carry me to Indapatta."
Then Puṇṇaka placed the best of the Kurus in action on a seat before him
and carried him, the lord of supreme wisdom, to the city Indapatta.
Swift as the mind of man may travel, his speed was even swifter still;
and Puṇṇaka bore the best of the Kurus to the city Indapatta.

\[324\] Then he said to him: "Behold before thee the city Indapatta and
its pleasant mango groves and districts; I am possessed of a wife, and
thou hast obtained thine own home."

Now on that very day at morning-tide the king saw a dream, and this was
what he saw. At the door of the king's palace there stood a great tree
whose trunk was wisdom, and whose branches and boughs were like the
virtues, and its fruits the five sacred products of the cow <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_184.md), and it was covered with elephants and
horses richly caparisoned; and a great multitude with folded hands were
worshipping it with all reverence. Then a black man, clothed with red
cloth, and wearing earrings of red flowers, and bearing weapons in his
hand, came up and cut the tree down by the roots in spite of the
expostulations of the multitude, and dragged it off and went away, and
then came back and planted it again in its old place and departed. Then
the king as he comprehended the dream said to himself, "The sage Vidhura
and no one else is like the great tree; that youth and no other, who
carried off the sage, is like the man who cut the tree down by the roots
in spite of the expostulations of the multitude; and verily he will come
back and set him at the door of the Hall of Truth and depart. We shall
behold the seer again to-day." So he joyfully ordered the whole city to
be decorated and the Hall of Truth to be got ready and a pulpit in a
pavilion adorned with jewels; and himself surrounded by a hundred kings,
with their counsellors, and a multitude of citizens and country people,
he consoled them all by saying, "Fear not, you will see the sage again
to-day "; and he seated himself in the Hall of Truth, looking for the
sage's return. Then Puṇṇaka brought the sage down and seated him in the
middle of the assembly at the door of the Hall of Truth, and then
departed with Irandatī to his own celestial city.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

\[325\] The Teacher has thus described it:

<span class="small">"Puṇṇaka of noble race, having set down him, the
best of the Kurus in action, in the middle of the religious assembly,
mounted his own noble steed and sped in the sky through the air. When
the king beheld him, he, filled with delight, sprang up and embraced him
with his arms, and without a moment's fear seated him on a throne before
him in the midst of the congregation."</span>

Then after exchanging friendly greeting with him he welcomed him
affectionately and uttered a stanza:

<span class="small">"Thou guidest us like a ready-furnished chariot, the
Kurus rejoice at seeing thee; answer me and tell me this,—how was it
that that young man let thee go?"</span>

The Great Being replied:

<span class="small">"He whom thou callest a young man, O great king, is
no common man, O best of heroes; if thou hast ever heard of the Yakkha
Puṇṇaka, it was he, the minister of King Kuvera. There is a Nāga king
named Varuṇa, mighty, endowed with strength and a noble presence,—now
Puṇṇaka loves his younger daughter, the Nāga maiden Irandatī. \[326\] He
laid his plan for my death for the sake of that fair maiden whom he
loved,—he thus obtained his wife, and I was allowed to depart and the
jewel was won.</span>

"The Nāga king, being pleased with my solution of his question as to the
four ends of men, paid me the honour of giving me a jewel; and when he
returned to the Nāga world, his queen Vimalā asked him where the jewel
was. He described my skill in discoursing concerning the law, and she,
being desirous of hearing such a discourse, feigned a longing for my
heart. The Nāga king, not understanding her real wish, said to his
daughter Irandatī, "Thy mother has a longing for Vidhura's heart, find
out a noble who is able to bring it for her." As she was seeking one,
she saw the Yakkha Puṇṇaka who was the son of Vessavana's <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_185.md) sister, and, as she knew that he was in
love with her, she sent him to her father, who said to him, "If thou art
able to bring me Vidhura's heart thou shalt obtain her." So he, having
brought from the mountain Vepulla the gem which might well belong to a
universal monarch, played dice with me and having won me by his play he
remained three days in my house. Then he made me lay hold of his horse's
tail, and dashed me against the trees and mountains in Himavat, but he
could not kill me. Then he rushed forward on a whirlwind in the seventh
sphere of the winds and he set me on the top of the Black Mountain sixty
leagues high; there he assailed me as a lion and in other shapes, but he
could not kill me. Then at last at his request I told him how I could be
killed. Then I proceeded to tell him the duties of the good man, and
when he heard them he was highly pleased and wished to bring me hither.
Then I took him and went to the Nāga world and I told the law to the
king and to Vimalā, and all the court was highly pleased; and after I
had stayed

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

there six days the king \[327\] gave Irandatī to Puṇṇaka. He was
delighted when he gained her, and honoured me with many jewels as his
present. Then at the king's command he mounted me on a magic horse
created by his will, and seating himself in the middle seat and Irandatī
behind, he brought me here and put me down in the middle of the court,
and then went away with Irandatī to his own city. Thus, O king, for the
sake of that fair maiden whom he loved he laid his plan for my death and
thus through me he obtained his wife. When the king had heard my
discourse on the law, he was pleased and let me depart and I received
from Puṇṇaka this jewel which grants all desires and which is worthy of
a universal emperor; accept it, O monarch," and so saying he gave the
jewel to the king. Then the king, in the morning, being desirous to tell
the citizens the dream which he had seen, related to them the history as
follows:

"There grew a tree before my gates, its trunk was wisdom and its boughs
the moral virtues; it ripened into all that was natural and developed,
its fruits were the five products of the cow, and it was covered with
elephants and cattle. But while it resounded with dance, song, and
musical instruments a man came and cut it up from the roots and carried
it away; it then came to this palace of ours,—pay your homage to this
tree.

Let all who are joyful by my means shew it to-day by their actions;
bring your presents in abundance, and pay your homage to this tree.

Whatever captives there may be in my realm, let them set them all loose
from their captivity; as this tree has been delivered from its
captivity, so let them release others from bondage.

\[328\] Let them spend this month in holiday, hanging up their ploughs;
let them feast the Brahmins with flesh and rice; let them drink in
private, and still seem total abstainers, with their full cups flowing
over. Let them invite their friends on the highway, and keep a strict
watch in the kingdom so that none may injure his neighbour,—pay your
homage to this tree."

When he had thus spoken,

"The queens, the princes, the Vesiyas, and the Brahmins brought to the
sage much food and drink.

"Riders on elephants, body-guards, riders in chariots, foot-soldiers,
brought to the sage much food and drink. \[329\] The people of the
country and the city gathered together in crowds brought to the sage
much food and drink. The vast assembly were filled with joy, beholding
the seer after he had come: when the sage had come a triumphant waving
of cloths took place."

After a month the festival came to an end: the Great Being, as
fulfilling a Buddha's duties, taught the great assembly the law,
counselled the king and so fulfilled his span of life and so became
destined for heaven. Abiding in his teaching, and following their king
all the inhabitants of the Kura kingdom gave gifts and performed good
works and at the end of their lives went to swell the hosts of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

The Master, having brought his lesson to an end, said, "Not now only but
formerly also did the Buddha, having obtained complete wisdom, shew
himself skilful in adapting means to ends. Then he identified the Birth:
"At that time the sage's father and mother were the royal family, the
eldest queen was Rāhula's mother, the eldest son was Rāhula, Varuṇa the
Nāga king was Sāriputta, the garuḷa king was Moggallāna, Sakka was
Anuruddha, the king Dhanañjaya was Ānanda, and the wise Vidhura was
myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[126:1](j6010.htm#fr_140.md) Sc. himself at that
time.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[127:1](j6011.htm#fr_141.md) Cf. Kathāsaritsāgara
(Tawney's transl., Vol. I. p. 67).

<span id="fn_141"></span>[128:1](j6011.htm#fr_142.md) Sc. the jātaka
concerning the four vows for keeping the fast; cf. Vol. IV. *Jāt.* No.
441. The Birth is not there given, but only a reference to the Puṇṇaka
Birth which has not been identified.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[129:1](j6011.htm#fr_143.md) Prof. Cowell takes
*kaṁkhaṁ* in line 26 as a participle—the verb occurs on p.
229<sup>8</sup>: but the schol. takes it as a noun with asyndeton. So
261<sup>14</sup>.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[129:2](j6011.htm#fr_144.md) "*Catuposatha-khaṇḍaṁ
nitthitaṁ.*"

<span id="fn_144"></span>[131:1](j6011.htm#fr_145.md) *Kuvera.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[132:1](j6011.htm#fr_146.md) *Vaḷabhi* may mean a
tent or shed.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[134:1](j6011.htm#fr_147.md) *"Dohaḷa-khaṇḍaṁ."*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[135:1](j6011.htm#fr_148.md) Cf. Vol. V. p.
406<sup>2</sup>, trans., p. 215.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[136:1](j6011.htm#fr_149.md) *odhisuṁkaṁ?*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[136:2](j6011.htm#fr_150.md) *"Maṇi-khaṇḍaṁ."*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[136:3](j6011.htm#fr_151.md)
*varapothakattharaṇam?*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[137:1](j6011.htm#fr_152.md) These terms are
obscure. Cf. the scene of Darduraka in "The Toycart," Act II., and the
*Comm. on the Chāndogya-upanishad,* IV.1. 4.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[137:2](j6011.htm#fr_153.md) B *d* here adds six
corrupt stanzas.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[140:1](j6011.htm#fr_154.md) *"Gharāvāsa-pañhaṁ."*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[140:2](j6011.htm#fr_155.md) *varāvaram?*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[141:1](j6011.htm#fr_156.md) I read the line as
*ko na idha rañño abbhadhiko;* the scholiast explains it as *Ko nu.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[141:2](j6011.htm#fr_157.md) "*Lakkha- khaṇḍaṁ.*"

<span id="fn_157"></span>[142:1](j6011.htm#fr_158.md) This line is obscure.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[142:2](j6011.htm#fr_159.md) The bow must not be
kept bent into too great a curve.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[142:3](j6011.htm#fr_160.md) Or "let him not go
contrary to other people."

<span id="fn_160"></span>[143:1](j6011.htm#fr_161.md) katatto = kataṭṭo
*(kṛtārtha?)*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[143:2](j6011.htm#fr_162.md) So the scholiast
seems to explain it.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[143:3](j6011.htm#fr_163.md) Some line to this
effect seems to have dropped from the text.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[143:4](j6011.htm#fr_164.md) I would read
*aviraho.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[143:5](j6011.htm#fr_165.md)
*"Rājavasati-khaṇḍaṁ."*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[144:1](j6011.htm#fr_166.md) This line is very
obscure.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[144:2](j6011.htm#fr_167.md) Cf. *kaccāna, supra.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[144:3](j6011.htm#fr_168.md) Or "the sacred text
and its inner meaning."

<span id="fn_168"></span>[145:1](j6011.htm#fr_169.md) Elsewhere *Kātiyāna.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[145:2](j6011.htm#fr_170.md) Is *katte* a vocative
for *katta?*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[146:1](j6011.htm#fr_171.md) Is this *Kālagiri*
the same as the *Kālapabbata,* a peak of the Himālaya?

<span id="fn_171"></span>[146:2](j6011.htm#fr_173.md) Here a verse
paraphrase of the above has been omitted.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[146:3](j6011.htm#fr_174.md) This Nāga is called
Varuṇa afterwards.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[147:1](j6011.htm#fr_175.md) So, the sky.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[148:1](j6011.htm#fr_176.md) The wife of Kuvera.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[149:1](j6011.htm#fr_177.md) This line seems
corrupt and does not agree with the comm., which explains it "do not
burn the wet hand." In the verses *addo* is translated here both
"soiled" and "wet"; *adubbha* is the word used for "innocent."

<span id="fn_176"></span>[149:2](j6011.htm#fr_178.md) Ie. the hand which
had given him food?

<span id="fn_177"></span>[150:1](j6011.htm#fr_179.md) Kuvera.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[151:1](j6011.htm#fr_181.md) The same thought is
repeated in different words after this passage.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[151:2](j6011.htm#fr_182.md) See V.
171<sup>9</sup>—trans., p. 79.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[151:3](j6011.htm#fr_183.md) See V.
171<sup>22</sup> = trans., p. 79.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[151:4](j6011.htm#fr_184.md)  See V. 171 foll. =
trans., p. 79, *Sumaṅg.-Vil.* I. 177.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[152:1](j6011.htm#fr_185.md) The same dialogue is
here repeated, with the gender altered to suit Vimalā.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[152:2](j6011.htm#fr_186.md) *anūnanāmo?* in
allusion to his name Puṇṇaka from pupa "full."

<span id="fn_184"></span>[153:1](j6011.htm#fr_187.md) Milk, ghee, curds,
buttermilk, and butter.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[154:1](j6011.htm#fr_188.md) Kuvera.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 546.: The Mahā-Ummagga-Jātaka.](j6012.md)

</div>
