[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf04)  [Next](pf06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE RESULTS OF THEOLOGIANS.

*Some have placed it in the third heaven, some in the fourth, in the
heaven of the moon, in the moon itself, on a mountain near the lunar
heaven, in the middle region of the air, out of the earth, upon the
earth, beneath the earth, in a place that is hidden and separated from
man. It has been placed under the northern pole, in Tartary, or in the
place now occupied by the Caspian Sea. Others placed it in the extreme
south, in the land of fire; others in the Levant, or on the shores of
the Ganges, or in the island of Ceylon. It has been placed in China, or
in an inaccessible region beyond the Black Sea; by others in America, in
Africa, etc.*—<span class="smallcaps">Bishop Huet</span>.

*An ein Resultat, das auch nur einigermassen befriedigte, ist nicht zu
denken*.—<span class="smallcaps">Wetzer und Welte</span>,
Kirchen-Lexicon.

<span class="smallcaps">Theologians</span>, Christian and Jewish, have
in all ages differed, and irreconcilably differed, as to the location of
the cradle of the human race. The evidences of this are so well known,
or so easily accessible to every intelligent reader, that they need not
be adduced in this place. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)

The fathers and theologians of the Early Church and of the Middle Ages
held many curious and conflicting opinions upon the subject. Some,
following the allegorizing method of Philo, interpreted the whole
narrative in Genesis as a parable setting forth spiritual things. Eden
was not a place, but a state of spiritual blessedness. The four rivers
were not rivers, but the four cardinal virtues, etc. The majority,
however, held to the historic character of the narrative, and to the
strictly geographical reality

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

of Eden. To the question of its location, numberless were the answers.
Often it was in the far East, beyond all lands inhabited by men.
Sometimes it was thought of as perhaps within, or under, the earth, in
the regions of the dead. Sometimes it was neither on nor below the
earth, but high above it, in the third heaven, or some way associated
with the lunar orbit. Again, it would be stated that there are two
paradises, a celestial and a terrestrial one,—the one in heaven, the
other on the earth. Tertullian, conceiving of the torrid zone as the
flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of
life (Gen. iii. 24), placed Eden beyond it, in the southern hemisphere.
Now it was at the bottom of the sea; <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)
or again it held a position midway between earth and heaven. Anon, it
was on the summit of a miraculous mountain, which rose to the height of
the moon. Of this mountain only the base was washed, when by the waters
of the Deluge all other mountains were covered. It was conceived of as
rising in three gigantic stages to its stupendous height. All kinds of
marvelous plants and precious metals and gems adorned it, but its
supreme adornment was a divine river, which, starting from the throne of
God in the highest heaven, descended to the holy garden on the
mountain's head, and thence parting into four, after watering and
beautifying the whole mountain in its descent, gradually lost more and
more of its celestial taste and vivifying virtues, and became the water
system of the habitable globe. Sometimes the location of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

this mountain was described as in some distant portion of the earth,
"where the sea, or earth, and the sky meet."

Impatient of such contradictions, Luther, in his own brusque way,
rejected all attempts to locate the primeval garden, declaring that the
Deluge had so changed the face of the earth and the course of its
original rivers that all search was fruitless.

Calvin, on the contrary, confidently affirmed that the writer of the
Genesis narrative must be understood as locating the Garden of Eden near
the mouths of the Euphrates. Soon this original diversity of Protestant
teaching upon the subject became aggravated by new theories, some of
them suggested by orthodox ingenuity, some introduced by rationalistic
conceptions of the semi-mythical character of the Bible, until at the
present time the state of theological teaching respecting Eden is, if
possible, a worse Babel than in any preceding age.

For a partial illustration of the confusion one has only to turn to the
most recent and authoritative biblical, theological, and religious
encyclopædias. In McClintock and Strong's, the writer on Eden inclines
to locate it in Armenia. In Smith's "Bible Dictionary" the problem is
abandoned as probably insoluble. In the great German encyclopædia of
Herzog it is declared necessary to deny to the story of Eden a strictly
historical character; it is "a bit of mythical geography." In the
supplement, however, Pressel makes an elaborate argument of many pages
in favor of the location at the junction of the Tigris and Euphrates.
Dilimann, in Schenkel's "Bibel-Lexicon," places it in the Himalayas,
north of India. In the chief Roman Catholic cyclopædia, Wetzel

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and Welte's "Kirchen-Lexicon," the writer vacillates between Eastern
Asia, taken in a vague and undefined sense, and an equally undefined
North. In Lichtenberg's just completed "Encyclopédie des Sciences
Religieuses" the whole story in Genesis ii. is declared a "philosophic
myth." Professor Brown, of New York, in the new work edited by Dr.
Schaff, on the basis of Herzog, enumerates a variety of opinions
advocated by others, but refrains from expressing any opinion of his
own. Such is all the light which contemporary theology seems able to
throw upon our problem.

But here some plain reader of the Bible opens at the second chapter of
Genesis, and reads, "And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden;
and there he put the man whom he had formed." And the plain reader asks
how a believer in the Bible can doubt that this passage fixes the
location of the garden somewhere to the East of Palestine. But, looking
a little more critically, our inquirer himself quickly sees that the
verse does not necessarily affirm anything as to the direction of the
garden from the writer. It may naturally mean that the garden was
planted in the eastern part of the land of Eden, wherever that was; and
turning to the most careful and orthodox commentators, he finds that not
a few take this view of it. Moreover, *Miqqedem*, here translated
"eastward," may be otherwise translated, as it is in King James's
Version, in the passages Ps. lxxiv. 12, lxxvii. 6, and elsewhere. In
fact, in the Vulgate it is here translated, *a principio*, "in or from
the beginning." Among the early Greek translators, Symmachus,
Theodotion, and Aquila understand the term in the same way.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence, nearly two
hundred years ago, the learned Thomas Burnet wrote as follows: "Some
have thought that the word *Miqqedem*, Gen. ii. 8, was to be rendered in
the East, or Eastward, as we read it, and therefore determined the site
of Paradise; but ’tis only the Septuagint translate it so; all the other
Greek versions, and St. Jerome, the Vulgate, the Chaldee Paraphrase, and
the Syriak, render it *from the beginning*, or *in the beginning*, or to
that effect. And we that do not believe the Septuagint to have been
infallible or inspired have no reason to prefer their single authority
above all the rest." <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

The same writer says again, "We may safely say that none of the
Christian Fathers, Latin or Greek, ever placed Paradise in Mesopotamia;
that is a conceit and innovation of some modern authors, which hath been
much encouraged of late, because it gave more ease and rest as to
further inquiries in an argument they could not well manage." <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20)

As to the new source of evidence opened up by the decipherment of the
Cuneiform inscriptions, Lenormant says, that in none of these, so far as
yet deciphered, has anything been found indicating that the
Chaldæo-Babylonians believed that their country was the cradle of the
human race. <span id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21)

"But the four rivers," says our inquirer, and he reads verses 10-14:
"And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it
was parted and became into four heads. The name of the first is Pison. .
. . And the name of the second river is Gihon. . . . And the name of the
third river

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

is Hiddekel, . . . and the fourth river is Euphrates." "Surely here in
the fourth river we have *one* undeniable landmark. However impossible
it may be satisfactorily to identify all four of the primitive rivers of
Eden, the mention of the Euphrates at least restricts the location of
the garden to some part of the region drained by that river."

Consulting the theologians, however, our investigator finds a great
variety of serious objections urged against this short and easy method
of settling the controversy.

First, he is told that some Biblical critics have expressed doubt as to
the genuineness of the verses, and that as earnest a defender of the
Bible as Mr. Granville Penn considered the whole passage an
interpolation.

Secondly, he learns that Perath or Phrath, the Hebrew name of the river,
is from the older form Buratti or Purattu, a word believed to signify
"the broad," or "the deep." <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) Of
course such a descriptive term may well have been the name of more than
one ancient river, just as "Broad Brook" is the name of many an American
stream. Indeed, in his learned work, "*Le Berceau de l’Espèce Humaine*,"
Obry shows that in ancient times Phrat, or Euphrates, was the name of
one, or possibly two, of the rivers of Persia. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) One of these in Pliny's time still bore
the name in the hardly changed form Ophradus. Lenormant says he does not
hesitate to consider the Phrath of the Khorda-Avesta identical with the
Persian

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

river Helmend. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) Africa also had its
sacred Euphrates. <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) If therefore the
passage in Genesis is genuine, and Moses wrote of the Phrath, it is not
absolutely certain what "broad" or "abounding" river he had in mind.
Moreover, in any case, the Euphrates of Mesopotamia is not one of four
equal offshoots into which the one "river" proceeding "out of Eden"
divided itself according to the statement of the text. Its source is not
from another river at all, but from ordinary mountain springs.

Thirdly, it must not be forgotten, our friend is told, that all peoples
coming into a new country love to name their new rivers and towns after
the loved and sacred ones they have left in the elder home. The Thames
of New England perpetuates the memory of the Thames of Old England. "It
is very seldom indeed," says a late writer, "that a river has no
namesakes." <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26) Very possibly,
therefore, the Phrath of Mesopotamia may have been named for some elder
river of the antediluvian world, wherever that may have been. That it
was so is the firm belief of various learned writers. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27)

Fourthly, continue the theologians, the language of Ezekiel xxviii.
13-19, and of Proverbs iii. 18; xi. 30, etc., shows that poetic and
symbolical applications of the name and images of Eden were common.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And if the Hebrews
named one of the water-courses at Jerusalem Gihon, in commemoration of
one of the four Paradise rivers, <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) it
is not irrational to suppose that the inhabitants of Mesopotamia may
have called their-chief stream in honor of another of the four.
Lenormant, Grill, Obry, and others support this view. They might have
rendered the probability still stronger by calling attention to the fact
that the oldest name of Babylon, Tin-tir-ki, was of the same
commemorative or symbolical character, and signified "the place of the
Tree of Life." <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29)

Finally, pursuing these curious investigations further, our plain reader
finds mention in Pausanias, ii. 5, of a strange belief of the ancients,
according to which the Euphrates, after disappearing in a marsh and
flowing a long distance underground, rises again beyond Ethiopia, and
flows through Egypt as the Nile. This reminds him of the language of
Josephus, according to which the Ganges, the Tigris, the Euphrates, and
the Nile are all but parts of "one river which ran round about the whole
earth,"—the Okeanos-river of the Greeks. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30) And he wonders whether the old Shemitic
term from which the modern Euphrates is derived was not originally a
name of the general water system of the world,—a name of that
Ocean-river which Aristotle describes as rising in the upper heavens,
descending in rain upon the earth, feeding, as Homer tells us, all
fountains and rivers and every sea, flowing through all these
water-courses

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

down into the great and "broad" equatorial ocean-current which girdles
the world in its embrace, thence branching out from the further shore
into the rivers of the Underworld, to be at last fire-purged and
sublimated, and returned in purity to the upper heavens to recommence
its round. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) And just as he is
wondering over the question, he finds that some of the Assyriologists,
in their investigation of pre-Babylonian Akkadian mythology, have found
reason to believe this surmise correct, and to say that in that
mythology the term Euphrates was applied to "the rope of the world,"
"the encircling river of the snake god of the tree of life," "the
heavenly river which surrounds the earth." <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) Furthermore, as he turns back to the pages
of Hyginus, and Manilius, and Lucius Ampelius, and reads of the fall of
the "world-egg" at the beginning "into the river Euphrates," he
perceives that he is in a mythologic, and not a historic region. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) And when he lights upon a mutilated
fragment of an ancient Assyrian inscription, in which descriptions of
the visible and invisible world are mixed up together, and in which the
river "of the life of the world" is designated by the name
"Euphrates," <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34) he quickly concludes
that it will not do to take the term Phrath, or Eu-frata, as always and
everywhere referring to the historic river of Mesopotamia.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Hitherto, then, the "results" of the theologians as to the location of
Eden are purely negative and mutually destructive. "It would be
difficult," says one of their number, "to find any subject in the whole
history of opinion which has so invited and at the same time so
completely baffled conjecture as this. Theory after theory has been
advanced, but none has been found which satisfies the required
conditions. The site of Eden will ever rank, with the quadrature of the
circle and the interpretation of unfulfilled prophecy, among those
unsolved and perhaps insoluble problems which possess so strange a
fascination." <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[23:1](pf05.htm#fr_17) See McClintock and
Strong, *Cyclopædia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical
Literature*, Arts. "Eden" and "Paradise."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[24:1](pf05.htm#fr_18) "In some legends Eden was
submerged by the earliest deluge that covered the Mount. The happy
garden was believed to be lying at the bottom of Lake Van, in
Armenia."—Gerald Massey, *The Natural Genesis*, vol. ii., p. 231.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[27:1](pf05.htm#fr_19) *Sacred Theory of the
Earth*. London, 2d ed., 1691: p. 252.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[27:2](pf05.htm#fr_20) Ibid., p. 253.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[27:3](pf05.htm#fr_21) *Les Origins de
l’Histoire*. Paris, 1882: tom. ii. I, p. 120.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[28:1](pf05.htm#fr_22) Delitzsch, *Wo lag das
Paradies?* p. 169. Grill, *Die Erzväter der Menschheit*, Bd. i., p. 230.
In Old Persian it is *Ufratu*, "the fair flowing." F. Finzi, *Antichità
Assira*, Turin, 1872: p. 112.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[28:2](pf05.htm#fr_23) See pp. 95, 136, 140.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[29:1](pf05.htm#fr_24) *Origins de l’Histoire*,
tom. ii. 1, p. 99.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[29:2](pf05.htm#fr_25) "Also there is a very
sacred river in Hwida called the Euphrates or Eufrates."—Gerald Massey,
*The Natural Genesis*. London, 1883: vol. ii., p. 165.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[29:3](pf05.htm#fr_26) "There is no
improbability in supposing that there may have been in Britain two
rivers named Trisanton. On the contrary, it is very seldom indeed that a
river has no namesakes."—Henry Bradley, in *The Academy*, April 28,
1883, p. 296.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[29:4](pf05.htm#fr_27) See Grill, *Die Erzväter
der Menschheit*, Bd. i., pp. 239, 242.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[30:1](pf05.htm#fr_28) Ewald, *Geschichte des
Volkes Israel*, 2d ed., Bd. iii., pp. 321-328.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30:2](pf05.htm#fr_29) Lenormant, *Origines de
l’Histoire*, vol. i., p. 76. English version, p. 85. See also Rev. O. D.
Miller, "The Symbolical Geography of the Ancients," in the *American
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal*, Chicago, July, 1881.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30:3](pf05.htm#fr_30) Compare Rev. ix. 14.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31:1](pf05.htm#fr_31) See below Part V.,
chapter 5: "The Quadrifurcate River."

<span id="fn_32"></span>[31:2](pf05.htm#fr_32) The Rev. A. H. Sayce in
*The Academy*. London, Oct. 7, 1882: p. 263. "Professor Sayce, after
recently observing that 'in early Akkadian mythology the mouth of the
Euphrates was identified with the River of Death,' adds, 'The Okeanos of
Homer had, I believe, its origin in this Akkadian river which coiled
itself around the world.'"—Robert Brown, Jun., F. R. S., *The Myth of
Kirké*. London. 1883: p. 33.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[31:3](pf05.htm#fr_33) Bryant, *Analysis of
Ancient Myths*, vol. iii., pp. 160-162.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[31:4](pf05.htm#fr_34) *Records of the Past*,
x., p. 149.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[32:1](pf05.htm#fr_35) William A. Wright, of
Trinity College, Cambridge, in Smith's *Dictionary of the Bible*, Art.
"Eden."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Results of Non-Theological Scholars](pf06)
