[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf05)  [Next](pf07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### THE RESULTS OF NON-THEOLOGICAL SCHOLARS: NATURALISTS, ETHNOLOGISTS, ETC.

<span class="small">*It is useless to speculate on this subject*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Charles Darwin</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> location of the cradle of the human
race is as much a problem for the ethnologist and anthropologist as it
is for the theologian. The archæologist, the zoölogist, and even the
biologist, if at all broad and philosophical in their inquiries, cannot
ignore the high interest of the questions, Was there for the human race
one primitive centre of distribution? and, if so, Where was it located?

Thirty years ago the pretentious American work by Nott and Gliddon,
entitled "The Types of Mankind," <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)—a
work written in opposition to the doctrine of the unity of the human
race,—attracted unusual attention to the former of these questions. The
teaching therein put forth was that there are very many types or
varieties of men without genealogical connection with each other, and
that therefore a great number of primitive centres of distribution must
be assumed. The avowed prejudices of the projectors of the work against
certain races, particularly the African, would have rendered the
influence of the work upon the scientific world extremely slight, had
not contributions of some value from Dr. S. G. Morton, and Professor
Louis Agassiz

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

been incorporated with it. As it was, it gave European ethnologists
occasion to form and express very uncomplimentary conceptions of
American representatives of ethnological research. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) Fortunately these crude beginners of the
science have had no influential successors of their own sort in this
country, and but obscure or half-hearted disciples in any other. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) The polygeny of the race has at present no
respectable support. Even the author of the latest and perhaps ablest of
the works on the Preadamite Hypothesis remarks, "The plural origin of
mankind is a doctrine now almost entirely superseded. All schools admit
the probable descent of all races from a common stock." <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39) To the second question, therefore, the
attention of the scientific and archæological world is steadily
gravitating. Given one primeval point of departure for the race, where
shall that point of departure be sought?

The answers which recent biologists, naturalists, and ethnologists have
given to this problem are hardly less numerous or less conflicting than
are the solutions proposed by theologians. Of these

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

answers Professor Zoeckler, in a late work, enumerates *ten*, each
having the support of eminent scientific names. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) In latitude they range from Greenland to
Central Africa, and in longitude from America to Central Asia. Of the
whole number, the two which seem to command the widest and weightiest
support are, first, the hypothesis that "Lemuria"—a wholly imaginary,
now submerged prehistoric continent under the northern portion of the
Indian Ocean—was the "mother-region" of the race; and, secondly, that it
was in the heart of Central Asia.

The former of these sites is the one supported by Haeckel, Caspari,
Peschel, and many others. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) Though
less positive, Darwin and Lyell seem favorable to the same location or
to one in the adjoining portion of Africa. Most of the recent maps of
the progressive dispersion of the race over the globe have been
constructed in accordance with this theory. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42) Perhaps the best popular summary of the
arguments in its favor is that found in Oscar Peschel's "Races of
Men." <span id="fr_43"></span>[4](#fn_43)

But while biological speculation, especially in the hands of Darwinists,
has strongly inclined toward the chief habitat of the ape tribes in its
attempts to find man's primitive point of departure, comparative
philologists, mythologists, and archæological

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

ethnographers have of late very strongly tended to place the cradle of
mankind on the lofty plateau of Pamir in Central Asia. For these the
eminent French anthropologist, Quatrefages, is well entitled to speak.

 

We know \[says this savant\] that in Asia there is a vast region bounded
on the south and south-west by the Himalayas, on the west by the Bolor
mountains, on the north-west by the Alla-Tau, on the north by the Altai
range and its off-shoots, on the east by the Kingkhan, on the south and
south-east by the Felina and Kwen-lun. Judging of it by what exists at
the present day, this great central region might be regarded as having
included the cradle of the human race.

In fact, the three fundamental types of all the races of mankind are
represented in the populations grouped around this region. The negro
races are the furthest removed from it, but have nevertheless marine
stations, in which they are found pure or mixed, from the Kiussiu to the
Andaman Islands. On the continent they have mingled their blood with
nearly all the inferior castes and classes of the two Gangetic
peninsulas; they are still found pure in each of them; they ascend as
far as Nepal, and, according to Elphinstone, spread to the west as far
as the Persian Gulf and Lake Zareh. The yellow race, pure, or mixed here
and there with white elements, seems alone to occupy the area in
question. The circumference of this region is peopled by it to the
north, the east, the south-east, and the west. In the south it is more
mixed, but it none the less forms an important element of the
population. The white race, by its allophylian representatives, seems to
have disputed the possession of even the central area itself with the
yellow race. In early times we find the Yu-Tchi, the U-Suns, to the
north of Hoang-Ho; and at the present day in Little Thibet, in Eastern
Thibet, small islands of white populations have

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

been pointed out. The Miao-Tsé occupy the mountainous regions of China;
the Siaputhes are proof against all attacks in the gorges of Bolor. On
the confines of this area we find to the east the Aïnos and the Japanese
of high caste, the Tinguians of the Philippine Islands; to the south the
Hindus. To the south-west and west, the white element, pure or mixed, is
completely predominant. No other region on the face of the globe
presents similar reunion of the extreme types of the human race
distributed around a common centre. This fact of itself might suggest to
the naturalist the conjecture which I have expressed above; but we may
appeal to other considerations.

One of the weightiest of these is drawn from philology. The three
fundamental forms of human language are found in the same regions and in
analogous connections. In the centre and the south-east of our area the
monosyllabic languages are represented by the Chinese, the Annamite, the
Siamese, and the Thibetan. As agglutinative languages, we find, from the
north-east to the north-west, the group of the Ugro-Japanese; in the
south that of the Dravidians and the Malays; and in the west the Turkish
languages. Lastly, Sanscrit with its derivatives, and the Iranian
languages, represent, in the south and south-west, the inflectional
languages. With the linguistic types accumulated around this central
region of Asia all human languages are connected, either by their
vocabulary or their grammar. Some of these Asiatic languages resemble
very closely languages spoken in regions far removed, or separated from
the area in question by very different languages.

Lastly, it is from Asia, again, that our earliest-tamed domestic animals
have come. Isidore Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire is entirely agreed on this
point with Dureau de la Malle.

Thus, taking into account only the present epoch,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

everything leads us back to this central plateau, or rather this vast
inclosure. Here, we are inclined to say to ourselves, the first human
beings appeared, and multiplied down to the moment when the populations
overflowed like a bowl which is too full, and poured themselves out in
human waves in all directions. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)

 

This view of the location of the first centre of the race is very widely
accepted. It has the support of many great names. To its establishment
contributions have been made by scholars in a great variety of fields.
Among them may be mentioned Lassen, Burnouf, Ewald, Renan, Obry,
D’Eckstein,. Höfer, Senart, Maspéro, Lenormant, etc. Perhaps the most
important single treatise representing the view is Obry's "Cradle of the
Human Species,"—a work of singular interest to every scholar. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45)

But the latest writers on the question are by no means confined to the
two locations just mentioned. The difficulty of accounting for the first
advent of human beings in America, without supposing in early times a
closer land-connection between the eastern and western hemispheres in
the intertropical regions than now exists, has led not a few
ethnologists to postulate a lost Atlantis, including perhaps the Canary
and Madeira Islands, or the Azores,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

or located to the North or South of them, and to place in it the
fountain head of the streams of population which colonized both the Old
and the New World. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)

Another location lately advanced with great confidence and supported
with remarkable acuteness and learning is that advocated by Dr.
Friedrich Delitzsch in his valuable work entitled "*Wo lag das
Paradies?*" <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) This site is on the
Euphrates between Bagdad and Babylon. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48) In the author's construction the "four
rivers" are the great canal west of the Euphrates, called by the Greeks
the Pallacopas,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the Shat-en-Nil, and the lower Tigris and Euphrates. But despite the
conceded ability of the plea, there seems at present little prospect
that it will secure acceptance among scholars. The distinguished Theodor
Noeldeke, in a recent review, while cordially praising the learning and
ingenuity of the work, professes himself unmoved by its arguments. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) Similarly a critic in this country writes:
"Unfortunately for the theory so powerfully advanced, almost all the
linguistic evidences by which it is supported are still of doubtful
value, the etymology of the Babylonian names in most cases, and the
reading in some, being disputed by high authorities in this obscure
field of inquiry. Were the linguistic points proved, it would be hard to
resist the power of the argument, in spite of various difficulties
arising from the scanty text of Genesis itself. As it is, although all
other solutions of the knotty Biblical problem may be subject to still
graver objections, the following questions militate too strongly against
Professor Delitzsch's solution: Why, if the stream of Eden be the middle
Euphrates, is it left unnamed in the narrative, though it is certain
that the Hebrews were perfectly familiar both with the middle and the
upper course of that river? Why, if the Pison and Gihon designate the
canals Pallacopas and Shat-en-Nil, are they said to *compass* lands
which the canals only traverse? If the *lower* Tigris be meant by the
Hiddekel, why is this river described as flowing in front of Assyria,
which lay *above* the central Mesopotamian

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

lowland asserted to be Eden? How should a writer familiar with the whole
course of the Tigris deem its lower part a branch of the Euphrates? Why
should Cush, a name which commonly designated Ethiopia, have been used
by the narrator in a sense in which it nowhere else occurs in the
Scriptures, without the least further definition? Why, on the other
hand, is Havilah, if the Arabian borderland so well known to the Hebrews
be meant, so fully described by its products? Who tells us that the
gold, the bdellium, and the shoham of Babylonia were also characteristic
of the adjoining Havilah? But whether these objections, in the present
stage of Assyriological studies, be fatal to the theory of Professor
Delitzsch or not, we have no hesitation in saying that his dissertation,
amplified as it is by supplementary treatises on the ancient geography
and ethnology of the Mesopotamian and neighboring countries, of Canaan,
Egypt, and Elam, is a perfect treasury of knowledge,—made most
accessible by excellent indexes,—and probably the most brilliant
production in all Biblico-Assyriological literature." <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

At the present writing, the latest monograph upon the subject is the one
just published in the "*Revue de l’Histoire des Religions*," from the
pen of M. Beauvois. <span id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) This locates the
Eden of ethnic traditions in America, and ascribes to the Keltic race

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

no small influence upon the Greco-Roman mythology in the development of
such ideas as those pertaining to the Gardens of the Hesperides, the
Isles of the Blessed, etc. The site advocated is not new, though the
line of argument is fresh and scholarly. The hypothesis that the cradle
of the race is to be sought in America has before found advocacy at the
hands of J. Klaproth, Gobineau, and others.

That this, however, is not to be the last and only word on the subject
is evident from the fact that, in a huge work just from the press, an
English writer says: "If there be an earthly original for the heavenly
Eden, it will be found in equatorial Africa, the land of seething,
swarming, multitudinous, and colossal life, where the mother nature grew
great with her latest race; the lair in which the lusty breeder brought
forth her black, barbarian brood, and put forth for them such a warm,
welling bosom as cannot be paralleled elsewhere on earth. This was the
world of wet and heaven of heat; the land of equal day and dark; that
supplied the Two Truths of *Uarti* (Egyptian); the top of the world; the
very nipple (*Kepa*) of the breast of earth, which is there one vast
streaming fount of moisture quick with life. So surely as a
topographical Meru is found in Habesh, so surely is the Earthly
Paradise, the original of the mythical which was carried forth over the
world by the migrations from Kam, to be found there, if at all." <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

In fine, so resultless seem all discussions and investigations in this
field that in his work on "The Patriarchs of Humanity" Dr. Julius Grill,
like Noeldeke, prefers to locate lost Paradise "in Utopia," and to deny
to it all historic reality. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)
Evidently the naturalists and the ethnologists, the comparative
mythologists, and *Kulturgeschichtschreiber*, have not yet solved the
problem. Their "mother-region" of the human race is as elusive and
Protean as are any of the terrestrial Edens of theology, or of legend,
or of poetry.

Thus far, then, all search has been fruitless. Paradise is indeed lost.
The explorer cannot find it; the theologian, the naturalist, and the
archæologist have all sought it in vain. Representative voices out of
every camp are heard confessing utter ignorance as to the region where
human history began. "The problem," says Professor Ebers, "remains
unanswered."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[33:1](pf06.htm#fr_36) Philadelphia and London,
1354.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[34:1](pf06.htm#fr_37) Such references as the
following are not uncommon: "Unerlässlich bleibt die Behauptung eines
einzigen Ausgangsortes sämmtlicher Menschenrassen, *im Gegensatze zur
Anthropologenschule unter den Amerikanern, die vielleicht um ihr
Gewissen über die vormalige Negersklaverei und den Rassenmord der
Indianer zu beruhigen, in neuster Zeit über hundert Menschenarten, nicht
Menschenrassen, überhaupt so viele geschaffen hat als Völkertypen sich
aufstellen lassen*," etc.—O. Peschel, in *Ausland*, 1869, p. 1110. Cited
in Caspari, *Die Urgeschichte der Menschheit*. 2d ed., Leipsic, 1877,
vol. i., p. 241.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[34:2](pf06.htm#fr_38) See Simonin, *L’Homme
Américain*. Paris, 1870: p. 12. A. Réville, *Les Religions des Peuples
non-civilisés*. Paris, 1883: vol. i., p. 196.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[34:3](pf06.htm#fr_39) Alexander Winchell,
*Preadamites; or a Demonstration of the Existence of Men before Adam*.
Chicago, 1880: p. 297. One of the latest and most authoritative
criticisms and refutations of Agassiz's polygenism is found in
Quatrefages, *The Human Race*. N. Y., 1879: chap. xiv.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[35:1](pf06.htm#fr_40) *The Cross of Christ*.
Translated by Evans. London, 1877. Appendix iii., p. 389.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[35:2](pf06.htm#fr_41) Ernst Haeckel, *The
Pedigree of Man, and other Essays*. London, 1883: pp. 73-80. Otto
Kuntze, *Phytogeogenesis*. Leipsic, 1884: P. 52, note.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[35:3](pf06.htm#fr_42) See Caspari's in *Die
Urgeschichte der Menschheit*, at the close of vol. i.; Kracher's
*Ethnographische Weltkarte* in Novara Expedition, Vienna, 1875;
Winchell's in his *Preadamites*, p. I.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[35:4](pf06.htm#fr_43) New York, Appletons, pp.
26-34.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[38:1](pf06.htm#fr_44) *The Human Species*, pp.
175-177.—Quatrefages’ noteworthy suggestion as to the possibility of a
modification of the above conclusion in consequence of the revelations
of recent paleontological researches will be noticed in Part III.,
chapter 7.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[38:2](pf06.htm#fr_45) *Le Berceau de l’Espèce
Humaine selon les Indiens, les Perses et les Hébreux*. Amiens, 1858. See
also Lenormant, *Origines de l’Histoire*. Paris, 1882: tom. ii. 1, pp.
41, 144, 145. (Translated in part in *The Contemporary Review*, Sept.
1881.) *Fragments cosmogoniques de Berose*, pp. 300-333. Renan,
*Histoire générale des Langues Semitiques*, pp. 475-484. Wilford,
*Asiatic Researches*, vol. vi., pp. 455-536, and the following volumes.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[39:1](pf06.htm#fr_46) Unger, *Die versunkene
Insel Atlantis*. Vienna, 1860. An American work in advocacy of this
theory is Ignatius Donnelly's *Atlantis: The Antediluvian World*. New
York, 1882. In Europe the hypothesis has been represented as largely
abandoned. See Engler, *Die Entwickelungsgeschichte der Pflanzenwelt*.
Leipsic, 1879: vol. i., p. 82. But a new modification has since appeared
in the work of M. Berlioux of Lyons: *Les Atlantes. Histoire de
l’Atlantis et de l’Atlas primitif, ou Introduction a l’histoire de
l’Europe*. Paris, 1883.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[39:2](pf06.htm#fr_47) *Wo lag das Paradies?
Eine biblisch-assyriologische Studie. Mit zahlreichen assyriologischen
Beiträgen zur biblischen Länder- [und](errata.htm#0) Völkerkunde und
einer Karte Babyloniens*. Von Dr. Friedrich Delitzsch, Professor der
Assyriologie an der Universität Leipzig. Leipsic, 1881. The author is a
son of the well-known Biblical scholar Professor Franz Delitzsch, and is
himself eminent as an Assyriologist.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[39:3](pf06.htm#fr_48) Compare the language of
his fellow-student in Assyriology, Professor Felice Finzi: "Mentre a
cercare la culla degli Ariani dobbiamo volgerci ad Oriente, agli
Uttara-Kuru degli Indiani, al mitico paradiso degli nomini del monte
Meru, all’ Airyanem Vaêdjô degli Irani, al regno di Udyana presso al
Caschmir; mentre in qualche gruppo del sistema uralo-altaico dee forse
indicarsi il centro di formazione della famiglia turanica, e la
orografia del Caucaso potrà forse sola determinare il sito più opportuno
per lo sviluppo delle tribù che se ne attestano autottone; i Semiti ci
si mostrano figli di quella terra ove si sono svolte le pagine più belle
della loro storia. È là forse in un angolo di questo paese ricco un
tempo dello splendore di una natura lussureggiante che la tribù semita
si formò."—*Ricerche per lo Studio dell’ Antichità Assira*. Torino,
1872: p. 433.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[40:1](pf06.htm#fr_49) "Seine Ansicht zu
begründen wendet er sehr viel Gelehrsamkeit und noch mehr Scharfsinn
auf, aber ich fürchte umsonst. Nach sorgfältiger Prüfung muss ich
festhalten an einer Lage des Paradieses in 'Utopien,' wie er etwas
spöttisch sagt."—*Zeitsthrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft*, 1882, p. 174.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[41:1](pf06.htm#fr_50) *The Nation*. New York,
Mar. 15, 1883. See Lenormant's criticisms in Les *Origines de
l’Histoire*, tom. ii.; and Halévy's in the *Revue Critique*, Paris,
1881, pp. 457-463, 477-485.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[41:2](pf06.htm#fr_51) "L’Elysée Transatlantique
et l’Eden Occidental," par E. Beauvois. Revue, Paris, 1883, pp. 273 ss.
See also "L’Elysée des Mexicains comparé a celui des Celtes," by the
same author, in same Review, 1884.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[42:1](pf06.htm#fr_52) *The Natural Genesis,
containing an attempt to recover and reconstitute the lost Origins of
the Myths and Mysteries, Types and Symbols, Religion and Language, with
Egypt for the mouthpiece, and Africa as the birthplace*. By Gerald
Massey. London, 1883: vol. ii., p. 162. It is impossible to understand
how Mr. Massey reconciles the foregoing language with that used on p. 28
of the same volume, where <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> he speaks of
the crooked sword *Khepsh*, "that turned every way, and by its
revolution formed the circle of Eden, or, as it was represented, kept
the way of the Tree of Life, the <span class="smallcaps">Pole</span>,
where the happy garden was planted as the primary creation, which was
the home of the primeval pair." But in the language of *The Nation*
(June 26, 1884) the work is "an enormous conglomeration of facts set
down with entire indifference to scientific principles of comparison, .
. . and, as far as the author's aim is concerned, absolutely worthless."

<span id="fn_53"></span>[43:1](pf06.htm#fr_53) "Der Ort, wohin die
althebräische Ueberlieferung die Wiege des Menschengeschlechtes verlegt
. . . ist also nicht auf der Erde gelegen, and gehört dem Bereich der
Wirklichkeit nicht an."—Grill, *Die Erzväter der Menschheit*. Leipzig,
1875: Abth. I., p. 242.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Hypothesis](pf07)
