[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf07)  [Next](pf09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### IMPORTANT NEW FEATURES AT ONCE INTRODUCED INTO THE PROBLEM OF THE SITE OF EDEN. SIGNIFICANCE OF THESE FOR A VALID SOLUTION.

<span class="small">*It appears, then, to be a condition of a genuinely
scientific hypothesis that it be not destined always to remain an
hypothesis, but be certain to be either proved or disproved by that
comparison with observed facts which is termed verification. . . .
Verification is proof; if the supposition accords with the phenomena
there needs no other evidence of it*.—<span class="smallcaps">John
Stuart Mill</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is evident, on a moment's thought,
that our hypothesis immediately and materially modifies the whole
problem of the location of Paradise.

Given a prehistoric circumpolar continent at the North Pole as the
cradle of the race, what must have been marked and memorable features of
that primitive abode?

1\. To the first men there would have been but one day and one night in
a year.

2\. The stars, instead of seeming to rise and set, would have had an
apparently horizontal motion round and round the observer from left to
right.

3\. The Pole, the unmoving centre-point of the heavens directly
overhead, would naturally have seemed to be the top of the world, the
true heaven, the changeless seat of the supreme, all-ruling God. And if,
accordingly, through all the long lifetime of the ante-diluvian world,
the *circumpolar* sky was to human thought the true abode of God, the
oldest post-diluvian peoples, though scattered down the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

sides of the globe half or two thirds the distance to the equator, could
not easily have forgotten that at the centre and true top of the
rotating sky was the throne of its great Creator, and that there, in the
far North, was "the sacred quarter" of the world.

4\. Standing at the Pole of the earth, an observer would be not only
directly under the centre of the celestial hemisphere, but also directly
on the centre of the surface of the terrestrial hemisphere. There, and
there alone, the heavenly bodies would move, in horizontal planes, round
and round him everywhere at an apparently equal distance, and he would
seem to himself to stand on the one precise centre-point of the entire
earth. Every departure of a few miles in any direction from this polar
position would at once confirm this first impression. If, therefore,
primeval Eden was at the Pole, the descendants of the first man, going
away from such an original country, could hardly have failed to remember
it as the centre of all lands, the *omphalos* of the whole earth.

5\. Supposing the first man to have been located in the central and most
elevated portion of the hypothetical Eden-land, the streams there
originating and flowing seaward would have flowed, not in one but in
various opposite directions toward all the cardinal points of the
horizon. Moreover, all of these streams being obviously fed, not by each
other, but by the rain from heaven, it would not have required a very
powerful imagination to conceive of them as parts of a finer and more
celestial stream whose head-springs were in the sky. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) If, finally, the streams

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

flowing in the opposite directions grew at length into four
opposite-flowing rivers,—*flumina principalia*, as many old theologians
have called them,—dividing the circumpolar land into four nearly equal
quarters, it would have constituted a never-to-be-forgotten feature of
that first home of men.

6\. In another chapter we shall expose the baselessness of the popular
impression that at the Pole six months of every twelve are spent in
darkness, and shall show that, on the contrary, less than one fifth of
the year is so spent, while more than four fifths are spent in light.
This being true, a primitive abode in that part of the world would have
been remembered by the descendants of the first man as preëminently a
land of beauty,—preëminently the home of the sun. Moreover, Arctic
explorers find it impossible to describe the nocturnal splendors of the
Aurora Borealis in those regions,—the whole top of the globe ofttimes
seeming veiled in and over-canopied with quivering curtains and banners
and streamers of living, leaping flame;—it is therefore easy to believe
that, once exiled from such a home, mankind would ever have looked back
to it as to an abode of unearthly and preternatural effulgence,—a home
fit for the occupancy of gods and holy immortals.

7\. Finally, assuming the prevalence of an equable tropical temperature,
we find the biological conditions of the region—such as the
extraordinary prevalence of daylight, the intenser terrestrial
magnetism,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and the unparalleled electric forces which feed the Northern Lights—all
combining to raise a high probability that if ever such a land as we
have supposed existed, it must have presented forms of life surpassing
those with which we are familiar; a flora and fauna of almost unimagined
vigor and luxuriance of development. Under such conditions men
themselves may well have had a stature and strength and longevity never
attained since the Deluge, which destroyed "the world that then was,"
and immediately or ultimately occasioned the translocation of the seed
of our new post-diluvian humanity into the cold and barren and desolate
regions of the Northern Temperate zone. And if the first men were of the
stature and strength and longevity supposed, how certainly would
traditions of the fact linger in the memory of mankind long after its
exile from its earlier and happier home!

Glancing back now over these various points, one instantly sees that
they present conditions of human existence totally unlike the conditions
of life as we know it, or as it has ever been known in what are called
historic ages. They necessarily modify in the profoundest manner the
whole problem of the site of Eden. No solution ever heretofore presented
exposed itself to refutation at so many points. None ever before
postulated so extraordinary an adjustment of both heavens and earth.
None ever before required, in order to its establishment, so incredibly
wide a concurrency of testimony. Against no other has it ever been
possible for the very stars in their courses to fight. If false, it
demands of human tradition shadowy recollections of world-conditions
which have never existed in human experience. An

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

hypothesis so peculiarly difficult must surely break down, if it be not
true. Promising the reader, therefore, not a new *ignis-fatuus* chase,
but at least the satisfaction of a definite result as respects one
hypothesis, we cordially invite his critical and patient attention to
the facts to be presented in the following chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[51:1](pf08.htm#fr_55.md) Compare the poetic
representation of "the river of God," in Ps. lxv. 9, 10. Also the
following: "Aristotle, I remember, in his *Meteors*, <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> speaking of the course of the Vapours, saith,
there is a River in the Air, constantly flowing betwixt the Heavens and
the Earth, made by the ascending and descending Vapours."—Burnet,
*Sacred Theory of the Earth*, p. 226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Testimony of Geogony](pf09.md)
