[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf09)  [Next](pf11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE TESTIMONY OF ASTRONOMICAL GEOGRAPHY.

<span class="small">*The nights are never so dark at the Pole as in
other regions, for the moon and stars seem to possess twice as much
light and effulgence. In addition, there is a continuous light in the
North, the varied shades and play of which are amongst the strangest
phenomena of nature*.—<span class="smallcaps">Rambosson's</span>
Astronomy.</span>

<span class="small">*The fact which gives the phenomenon of the polar
aurora its greatest importance is that the earth becomes self-luminous;
that, besides the light which as a planet it receives from the central
body, it shows a capability of sustaining a luminous process proper to
itself*.—<span class="smallcaps">Humboldt</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> are apt to think of an unbroken night
of six months at the Pole. Eminent scientific authorities speak as if
this conception were correct. Thus Professor Geikie, in his admirable
new manual of Geology, writing of the Arctic flora of the Miocene age,
says, "When we remember that this vegetation grew luxuriantly within 8°
15´ of the North Pole, *in a region which is in darkness for half of the
year*, . . . we can realize the difficulty of the problem in the
distribution of climate which these facts present to the
geologist." <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

In like manner Sir Charles Lyell, discussing the question of the
possibility of whales reaching the supposed open sea at the Pole, says,
"They could pass under considerable barriers of ice, provided there were
openings here and there; and so they may, perhaps, reach a more open sea
near the Pole,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

and find sustenance there during a day of more than *five months’*
duration." <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59)

From such representations as these the reader naturally carries away the
impression that daylight lasts at the Pole somewhat over five months,
while all the rest of the year the region is shrouded in darkness. Were
this true, it would certainly be an unpromising region in which to
search for the terrestrial Paradise.

Fortunately for our hypothesis, this conception of the duration of the
polar night is very far from true. The half-yearly reign of darkness
exists only in the uninstructed imagination. Astronomical geography
teaches that, as respects daylight, the polar regions are and always
have been the most favored portions of the globe. As early a popularizer
of natural science as the Rev. Thomas Dick set forth the real facts as
follows: "Under the Poles, where the darkness of night would continue
six months without intermission if there were no refraction, total
darkness does not prevail one half of this period. When the sun sets at
the North Pole, about the 23d of September, the inhabitants (if any)
enjoy a perpetual aurora till he has descended eighteen degrees below
the horizon. In his course through the ecliptic, the sun is two months
before he can reach this point, during which time there is a perpetual
twilight. In two months more he arrives again at the same point, namely,
eighteen degrees below the horizon, when a new twilight commences, which
is continually increasing in brilliancy for other two months, at the end
of which the body of this luminary is seen rising in all its glory. So
that in this

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

region the light of day is enjoyed in a greater or less degree for ten
months, without interruption by the effects of atmospheric refraction;
and during the two months when the influence of the solar light is
entirely withdrawn, the moon is shining above the horizon for two half
months without intermission; and thus it happens that no more than two
separate fortnights are passed in total darkness, and this darkness is
alleviated by the light of the stars and the frequent coruscations of
the Aurora Borealis. Hence it appears that there are no portions of our
globe which enjoy throughout the year so large a portion of the solar
light as these northern regions." <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)

Striking as is this account of the polar day, it is noteworthy that
experience has repeatedly shown that the actual duration of light in
high latitudes exceeds even the calculations of the astronomers. Thus,
in the spring of 1893, the officers of the Austrian expedition, under
Lieutenants Weyprecht and Payer, were surprised to behold the sun three
days before the date on which he was expected to rise. A late writer
thus states the case: "In the latitude (79° 15´ N.) in which the
Tegethoff was lying, the sun ought to reappear above the horizon on the
19th of February; but, owing to an effect of refraction, due to the low
temperature prevailing, -30° R., the explorers were able to salute its
rays three days earlier." <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61)

Lieutenant Payer's own account is as follows: "Though the sun did not
return to our latitude (78°

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 15´ N., 71° 38´ E.
long.) till the 19th of February, we were able to greet his beams three
days previous to that date, owing to the strong refraction of 1° 40´
which accompanied a temperature of -30° R." <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62)

Still more remarkable was the experience of Barentz's Arctic expedition,
almost three hundred years ago. Dr. Dick alludes to it as follows: "The
refractive power of the atmosphere has been found to be much greater, in
certain cases, than what has now been stated. In the year 1595
\[1596-97\] a company of Dutch sailors having been wrecked on the shores
of Novaia Zemlia, and having been obliged to remain in that desolate
region during a night of more than three months \[it was a little less
than three months\], beheld the sun make his appearance in the horizon
*about sixteen days before the time in which he should have risen
according to calculation*, and when his body was actually more than four
degrees below the horizon." The only explanation of this astonishing
phenomenon which the same writer offers is found in this appended
clause,—"which circumstance has been attributed to the great refractive
power of the atmosphere in those intensely cold regions." This is so
unsatisfactory that not a few prefer to believe, what seems entirely
incredible, namely, that Barentz and his men in the short space of less
than three months made a blunder of sixteen days in their time record.

Professor Nordenskjöld has recently referred to the case as follows: "On
the 14 / 4th November the sun disappeared and was again visible on the
3d Feb. / 24th Jan. These dates have caused scientific men much
perplexity, because, in latitude 76° North, the upper

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

edge of the sun ought to have ceased to be visible when the sun's south
declination in autumn became greater than 13°, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) and to have become visible again when the
declination again became less than that figure; that is to say, the sun
ought to have been seen for the last time at Barentz's Ice Haven on the
7th / 11th October, and it ought to have appeared again there on the
14th / 4th Feb. It has been supposed that the deviation arose from a
considerable error in counting the days, but this was unanimously denied
by the crew who wintered." <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64) In a
foot-note he gives proofs which seem convincing that no such error can
have been committed.

But while these experiences of Barentz and the Austrians point to a
duration of darkness at the Pole of less than sixty days out of the
three hundred and sixty-five, some apparently good authorities extend
the period to seventy-six or seventy-seven days. Thus Captain Bedford
Pim, of the Royal Navy of Great Britain, makes the following statement:
"On the 16th of March the sun rises, preceded by a long dawn of
forty-seven days, namely, from the 29th of January, when the first
glimmer of light appears. On the 25th of September the sun sets, and
after a twilight of forty-eight days, namely, on the 13th of November,
darkness reigns supreme, so far as the sun is concerned, for seventy-six
days, followed by one long period of light, the sun remaining above the
horizon one hundred and ninety-four days. The year, therefore, is thus
divided at the Pole: 194 days sun; 76 darkness; 47 days dawn; 48
twilight." <span id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_65)

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Even according to this account we should have at the Pole only 76 days
of darkness to 289 days of light in the year. In other words, instead of
being in darkness little short of half of the time, as at the equator,
one would be in darkness but about one fourth of the time. As far as
light is concerned, therefore, even on this calculation the polar region
is twice as favorable to life as any equatorial region that can be
named.

But whence this discrepancy among the astronomers? Why should some of
them make the polar night sixteen days longer than others?

The simple answer is that they proceed upon different assumptions as to
atmospheric refraction in the region of the Pole. In our latitude
twilight is usually reckoned to begin when the centre of the rising sun
is yet 18° below the horizon. Starting with this as the limit, and
counting sunrise and sunset to be the moments when the sun's upper limb
is on the horizon, we arrive at the division of the polar year given by
Captain Pim. But astronomers say that in England twilight has been
observed when the sun was 21° below the horizon. To be entirely safe
some have therefore taken 20° as the limit of solar depression, and
reckoning with this datum, instead of the 18° before mentioned, have
found that at the Pole the morning twilight would begin January 20th,
and the evening twilight would cease November 21st. This would make the
period of darkness but 60 days, and the period of light 305. Thus a
difference of only two degrees in the assumed limit of solar depression
at the beginning and end of the twilights makes the difference of
sixteen days in the supposed duration of darkness. "Which of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the two calculations," writes an eminent American mathematician, "is the
more correct is known, I imagine, by no one." <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)

To us in the present discussion the discrepancy is of very little
moment. It is only a question as to whether at the Pole there is
daylight three fourths or five sixths of the year. Both suppositions may
be and probably are wrong. For if "in tropical climates 16° or 17° is
said to be a sufficient allowance for the extreme solar depression,
while, on the other hand, it is said in England to vary from 17° to
21°," it certainly looks as though in yet higher latitudes the light of
the sun might be discernible when its body is as much as 21° or 22°
below the horizon; and this would reduce the annual polar darkness to
less than fifty days. This supposition is rendered the more probable by
the fact that, while the expeditions already alluded to found much more
of daylight than their astronomical calculations had led them to expect,
we have no offsetting accounts where the sun was awaited in vain. The
final and authoritative settlement of the question can be reached only
by actual observation. Among the fascinating problems whose solution
awaits the progress of Arctic exploration, we must therefore place the
scientific determination of the unknown duration of the polar day.

In view of the foregoing we are certainly safe in conceiving of the
polar night as lasting not over four fortnights. During two of these, as
Dick reminds us, the moon would be walking in beauty

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

through the heavens, and exhibiting all her changing phases of
loveliness in unbroken successions. The other two would be passed
beneath the starry arch of heaven, all of whose sparkling constellations
would be moving round and round the observer in exactly horizontal
orbits.

In such a perfect and regular stellar system kept in view so long and so
continuously, the irregular movements of the "planets," or wandering
stars, could not possibly escape observation. All their curious
accelerations, retardations, conjunctions, declinations, would be
perfectly marked and measured on the revolving but changeless dial-plate
of the remoter sky. Dwelling in such a natural observatory, any people
would of necessity become astronomers. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) And how magnificent and orderly would the
on-goings of the universe appear when viewed from underneath a firmament
whose centre of revolution was fixed in the observer's zenith! After
long months of unbroken daylight; how would one's soul yearn for a new
vision of those stellar glories of the night! Nor would the moon and
silent stars be the only attractions of the brief period during which
the light of the sun was withdrawn. The mystic play of the Northern
Light would transform the familiar daylight world into a veritable
fairy-land.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

In our latitude the Aurora Borealis is a comparatively rare and tame
phenomenon. In the highest Arctic regions it almost nightly kindles its
unearthly glories. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) In itself it is
lightning diluted and sublimated to the point of harmlessness. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) Sometimes these electric discharges not
only fill the whole heaven with palpitating draperies, but also tip the
hills with lambent flame, and cause the very soil on which one stands to
prickle with a kind of life. <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70)

But after all the glories of the night begin the greater glories of the
polar day. Who with any approach to adequacy has ever described a dawn?
What poet has not attempted it, and what poet has not failed? But if it
be impossible to picture one

<span id="img_06800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![NIGHT SKIES OF
EDEN.&lt;br&gt; An actual Aurora Borealis.](tn/06800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06800.jpg)  
NIGHT SKIES OF EDEN.  
An actual Aurora Borealis.  
</span>

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of our brief and evanescent day-dawns, who shall attempt a description
of that surpassing spectacle in which all the splendors and loveliness
of sixty of our dawns are combined in one. No words can ever portray it.
No poet's imagination, even, has ever given us such unearthly scenery.

First of all appears low in the horizon of the night-sky a scarcely
visible flush of light. At first it only makes a few stars’ light seem a
trifle fainter, but after a little it is seen to be increasing, and to
be moving laterally along the yet dark horizon. Twenty-four hours later
it has made a complete circuit around the observer, and is causing a
larger number of stars to pale. Soon the widening light glows with the
lustre of "Orient pearl." Onward it moves in its stately rounds, until
the pearly whiteness burns into ruddy rose-light, fringed with purple
and gold. Day after day, as we measure days, this splendid panorama
circles on, and, according as atmospheric conditions and clouds present
more or less favorable conditions of reflection, kindles and fades,
kindles and fades,—fades only to kindle next time yet more brightly, as
the still hidden sun comes nearer and nearer his point of emergence. At
length, when for two long months such prophetic displays have been
filling the whole heavens with these increscent and revolving splendors,
the sun begins to emerge from his long retirement, and to display
himself once more to human vision. After one or two circuits, during
which his dazzling upper limb grows to a full-orbed disk, he clears all
hill-tops of the distant horizon, and for six full months circles around
and around the world's great axis in full view, suffering no night to
fall upon his favored home-land at the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pole. Even when at
last he sinks again from view he covers his retreat with a repetition of
the deepening and fading splendors which filled his long dawning, as if
in these pulses of more and more distant light he were signaling back to
the forsaken world the promises and prophecies of an early return.

In these prosaic sentences we aim at no description of the
indescribable; we only remind ourselves of the bald facts and conditions
which govern the unpicturable transformations of each year-long polar
night and day.

Enough, however, has been said for our purpose. Whoever seeks as a
probable location for Paradise the heavenliest spot on earth with
respect to light and darkness, and with respect to celestial scenery,
must be content to seek it at the Arctic Pole. Here is the true City of
the Sun. Here is the one and only spot on earth respecting which it
would seem as if the Creator had said, as of His own heavenly residence,
"There shall be no night there."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[60:1](pf10.htm#fr_58) *Text-book of Geology*.
By Archibald Geikie, LL. D., F. R. S London, 1882: p. 869.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[61:1](pf10.htm#fr_59) *Principles of Geology*,
New York ed., vol. i., p. 246.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[62:1](pf10.htm#fr_60) *Works of Thomas Dick*,
LL. D., *The Practical Astronomer*, ch. ii. Hartford, vol. ii., second
half, p. 30.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62:2](pf10.htm#fr_61) *Recent Expeditions in
Eastern Polar Seas*. London, 1882: p. 83.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63:1](pf10.htm#fr_62) *New Lands within the
Arctic Circle*. Lond. 1876: vol. i., p. 237.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64:1](pf10.htm#fr_63) On the assumption of a
horizontal refraction of about 45´.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[64:2](pf10.htm#fr_64) *The Voyage of the Vega*.
London, 1882: p. 192.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[64:3](pf10.htm#fr_65) Pim's *Marine Pocket
Case:* quoted in Kinn's *Harmony of [the](errata.htm#1) Bible with
Science*. London, 1882: 2d ed., p. 474.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[66:1](pf10.htm#fr_66) Professor J. M. Van
Vleck, LL. D., of Wesleyan University, in a letter to the author under
date of October 11, 1883. Professor Van Vleck was for many years a
*collaborateur* upon the *American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac*. He
is the authority for the next quoted statement.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67:1](pf10.htm#fr_67) Even an equatorial
position would probably have been less favorable. "The Peruvians had
also their recurrent religious festivals; . . . but the geographic
position of Peru, with Quito, its holy city, lying immediately under the
equator, greatly simplified the process by which they regulated their
religious festivals by the solstices and equinoxes; and the facilities
which their equatorial position afforded for determining the few
indispensable periods in their calendar *removed all stimulus to further
progress*."—Dr. Daniel Wilson on "Pre-Aryan American Man," in
*Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada*. Montreal,
1883: vol. i., sect. ii., p. 60.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[68:1](pf10.htm#fr_68) A lately published
report, speaking of the last winter at one of these circumpolar stations
of the far North, says: "Auroræ have been seen here during the winter
almost every night, and during all weathers. . . . The auroral forms or
types which have appeared have been those generally known, from the
grand corona to the modest, pulsating, little luminous cloud; but as a
characteristic feature attending them all, I must mention the absence of
stability in the types. Thus only on a few occasions has there been an
opportunity to watch the stationary arc, but in general the auroræ have
represented wafting draperies and shining streamers with ever-changing
position and intensity."—A. S. Steen, "The Norwegian Circumpolar
Station," in *Nature*, October 11, 1883, p. 568.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[68:2](pf10.htm#fr_69) "The electric discharges
which take place in the polar regions between the positive electricity
of the atmosphere and the negative electricity of the earth are the
essential and unique cause of the formation of the polar light."—M. de
la Rive in *The Arctic Manual*, p. 742.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[68:3](pf10.htm#fr_70) "Mr. Lemström concluded
that an electric discharge which could only be seen by means of the
spectroscope was taking place on the surface of the ground all round
him, and that from a distance it would appear as a faint display of
Aurora,"—a display like "the phenomena of pale and flaming light which
is sometimes seen on the top of the Spitzbergen mountains."—*The Arctic
Manual*, p. 939. Compare Elias Loomis, Aurora Borealis, Smithsonian
Report, i865. H. Fritz, *Das Polarlicht*. Leipsic, 1881.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Testimony of Physiographical Geology](pf11)
