[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf10)  [Next](pf12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### THE TESTIMONY OF PHYSIOGRAPHICAL GEOLOGY.

*Die arctische Geologie birgt die Schlüssel zu Lösung vieler
Räthsel*.—<span class="smallcaps">Professor Heer</span>.

*An extensive continent occupied this portion of the globe when these
strata were deposited*.—<span class="smallcaps">Baron
Nordenskjöld</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Our</span> hypothesis calls for an antediluvian
continent at the Arctic Pole. It is interesting to find that a writer
upon the Deluge writing more than forty years ago advanced the same
postulate. <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) Is the supposition that
there existed such a continent scientifically admissible?

Until very recently too little was known of the geology of the high
latitudes to warrant or even to occasion the discussion of such a
question. Even now, with all the contemporary interest in Arctic
exploration, it is difficult to find any author who has distinctly
propounded to himself and discussed the question as to the geologic age
of the Arctic Ocean. It will not be strange, therefore, if we have here
to content ourselves with showing, first, that geologists

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and paleontologists do not think the present distribution of Arctic sea
and land to be the primeval one; and secondly, that in their opinion,
incidentally expressed, a "continent" once existed within the Arctic
Circle of which at present only vestiges remain.

We will begin with the distinguished Alfred Russel Wallace, who in
speaking of the Miocene period presents us with a very different
Northern hemisphere from ours of to-day. For instance, in his view
Scandinavia was at that time a vast island. He says: "The distribution
of the Eocene and Miocene formations shows that during a considerable
portion of the Tertiary period an inland sea, more or less occupied by
an archipelago of islands, extended across Central Europe between the
Baltic and the Black and Caspian seas, and thence by narrower channels
southeastward to the valley of the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf, thus
opening a communication between the North Atlantic and the Indian Ocean.
From the Caspian also a wide arm of the sea extended, during some part
of the Tertiary epoch, northwards to the Arctic Ocean, and there is
nothing to show that this sea may not have been in existence during the
whole Tertiary period. Another channel probably existed over Egypt into
the eastern basin of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea; while it is
probable that there was a communication between the Baltic and the White
Sea, leaving Scandinavia as an extensive island. Turning to India, we
find that an arm of the sea, of great width and depth, extended from the
Bay of Bengal to the mouths of the Indus; while the enormous depression
indicated by the presence of marine fossils of Eocene

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

age at a height of 16,500 feet in Western Tibet renders it not
improbable that a more direct channel across Afghanistan may have opened
a communication between the West Asiatic and Polar seas." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72)

Later, in the same book, Mr. Wallace incidentally shows that the facts
of Arctic paleontology call for the supposition of a primitive Eocene
continent in the highest latitudes,—a continent which no longer exists.
His language is, "The rich and varied fauna which inhabited Europe at
the dawn of the Tertiary period—as shown by the abundant remains of
mammalia wherever suitable deposits of Eocene age have been
discovered—proves that an extensive Palearctic continent then
existed." <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73)

Another most eminent authority in Arctic paleontology, the late
Professor Heer, of Zürich, fully fifteen years ago arrived at and
published the conclusion that the facts presented in the Arctic fossils
plainly point to the existence in Miocene time of a no longer existing
polar continent. Fuller reference to his views will be made in our next
chapter. <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74)

On another and more lithological line of evidence Baron Nordenskjöld,
the eminent Arctic explorer, has arrived at the same conclusion.
Speaking of certain rock strata north of the 69th degree of north
latitude, he says, "An extensive continent occupied this portion of the
globe when these strata were deposited." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[4](#fn_75) Elsewhere he speaks of this "ancient polar
continent" as something already accepted and universally understood
among scientific men. He

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

also alludes to the conspiring evidences of its former existence found
in different departments of research. "These basalt beds," he remarks,
"probably originated from a volcanic chain, active during the Tertiary
period, which perhaps limits the ancient polar continent, in the same
manner as is now the case with the eastern coast of Asia and the western
of America; this confirming the division of land and water in the
Tertiary period, which upon totally different grounds has been supposed
to have existed." <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

Another authority in this field, writing of the theory that continuous
land once connected Europe and North America at the North, remarks, "In
further support of this theory we have the fact that no trace of sea
deposit of Eocene age has ever been found in the polar area, all the
vestiges of strata remaining showing that these latitudes were then
occupied by dry land." <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77)

Finally, as our assumption of the early existence of a circumpolar
Arctic continent is thus supported by most competent geological
authority, so is also our hypothesis that its disappearance was due to a
submergence beneath the waters of the Arctic Ocean. On this point what
could be more explicit and satisfactory than the following, from one of
the greatest of living geologists: "We know very well that . . . within
a comparatively recent geological period . . . a wide stretch of Arctic
land, of which Novaia Zemlia and Spitzbergen formed a part, has been
submerged." <span id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

As to the natural conditions and forces which may be conceived as having
brought about this continental catastrophe, geologists are not so well
agreed. The French *savant*, Alfonse-Joseph Adhémar, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) has advanced a theory that this
North-polar deluge was only one of an alternating series, which in
age-long periods recur first at the North and then at the South Pole.
Flammarion, writing of it, says: "This theory depends on the fact of the
unequal length of the seasons in the two hemispheres. Our autumn and
winter last 179 days. In the southern hemisphere they last 186 days.
This seven days, or 168 hours of difference, increase each year the
coldness of the pole. During 10,500 years the ice accumulates at one
pole and melts at the other, thereby displacing the earth's centre of
gravity. Now a time will arrive when, after the maximum of elevation of
temperature on one side, a catastrophe will happen which will bring back
the centre of gravity to the centre of the figure, and cause an immense
deluge. The deluge of the North Pole was 4,200 years ago; therefore the
next will be 6,300 hence." <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80)

Another recent theory teaches that the poles are periodically deluged,
but simultaneously, not in alternation. The alternative movement is at
the equator. The crust of the earth at the equator is all the time
rising or sinking in a kind of æonian rhythm.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whenever it sinks
beyond the equilibrium figure, due to its actual rate of rotation, lands
emerge at the poles; whenever it rises beyond the equilibrium figure,
the polar lands sink and are submerged beneath the waters of the ocean.
Professor Alexander Winchell thus expounds the view: "It has been shown
that one of the actions of tides upon a planetary body tends to diminish
its rate of rotation. Correspondingly, its equatorial protuberance will
tend to diminish. In the case of a planet still retaining its liquid
condition, the equatorial subsidence will keep nearly even pace with the
retardation. To whatever extent viscosity exists, the subsidence will
*follow* the retardation. There will exist an excess of protuberance
beyond the equilibrium figure due to the actual rotation, and this will
act as an additional retardative cause. In the case of an incrusted and
somewhat rigid planet, the excess of ellipticity would attain its
greatest value. It would continue to augment until the strain upon the
mass should become sufficient to lower the excessive protuberance to the
equilibrium figure. The recovery of this figure might take place
convulsively. The equatorial regions would then subside, and the polar
would rise. In the case of an incrusted planet extensively covered, like
the earth, by a film of water, retarded rotation would be attended by a
prompt subsidence of the equatorial waters and rise of the polar waters
to about twice the same extent. In other words, the equatorial lands
would emerge, and the polar lands would become submerged. The amount of
emergence would diminish with increase of distance from the equator, and
the amount of submergence would diminish with increase of distance

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

from the pole. In about the latitude of 30° the two tendencies would
meet and neutralize each other. Under these conditions, an incrusted and
ocean-covered planet, since it must be undergoing a process of rotary
retardation, must possess the deepest oceans about the poles and the
shallowest about the equator. The first emergences of land, accordingly,
will take place within the equatorial zone; and the highest elevations
and greatest land areas will exist within that zone. The elevation of
equatorial land-masses would interpose new obstructions to the
equatorial ocean current. This would divert it in new directions, and
thus modify all climates within reach of oceanic influences. Changes of
currents would necessitate the migration of marine faunas, and changes
of climate would modify the faunas and floras of the land.

"But the protrusion of the equatorial land-mass could not increase
indefinitely. The same central force which retains the ocean continually
at the equilibrium figure strains the solid mass in the same direction.
The strain must at length become greater than the rigidity of the mass
can withstand. The equatorial land protuberance will subside toward the
level of the ocean. Some parts of the ocean's bottom must
correspondingly rise. Naturally, the parts about the poles will rise
most. Thus some equatorial lands will become submerged, and some
northern and southern areas may become newly emergent.

"But these vertical movements would not be arrested precisely at the
point of recovery of the equilibrium figure. As suggested by Prof. J. E.
Todd, and less explicitly by Sir Wm. Thomson, the movement

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

would pass the equilibrium figure to an extent proportional to the
cumulation of strain. The equatorial region would become too much
depressed, and the polar regions too much elevated. The effect of this
would be to accelerate the rotation sufficiently to neutralize the
ceaseless tidal retardation. The day would be shortened. The ocean would
rise still higher along the shores of equatorial lands, and subside
along the shores of polar lands. An extension of polar lands would
immediately modify the climates of the higher latitudes. They would
become subject to greater extremes. A considerable elevation of polar
lands would diminish the mean temperature, and the region of perpetual
snow would be enlarged. These effects would visit the northern and
southern hemispheres simultaneously.

"Such effects would follow from an excessive subsidence of equatorial
lands. But the constant retardative action of the tides would cause the
equatorial lands again to emerge, and protrude beyond the limits of the
equilibrium figure attained in a later age. Thus the former condition
would return, and the former events would be repeated. In the nature of
force and matter these oscillations should be repeated many times.
Professor Todd suggests that the present terrestrial age is one of
equatorial land subsidence and of high latitude emergence. Immediately
preceding the present, the Champlain epoch was one of northern and
probably of south polar subsidence; while further back, in the Glacial
epoch, we have evidence of northern, and perhaps also south latitude
elevation." <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Leibnitz, Deluc, and others, have presented a still different view of
the etiology of all deluges, according to which they are the result of a
steady shrinkage of the earth in consequence of its secular cooling.
According to this theory, after once a solid earth-crust had been
formed, the cooling nucleus within it withdrew the support on which the
crust had rested, in proportion as it shrank away from beneath it,
until, as often as the subterranean voids thus created became too great
for the strength of the crust, this of necessity fell in with the force
of incomputable tons, carrying the ruined surface to such a depth as to
cause it immediately to be overflowed and submerged by the adjacent
waters of the ocean. The geologic history of the earth is divided into
its strongly marked periods by these successive "collapsions" of the
rocky strata which constituted the primitive crust. "Each succeeding
cataclysm," says a recent advocate of the view, "considered as a
universal catastrophe, must leave the globe a wreck, like the ruin of
some immense cathedral whose dome and arches have fallen in. Cornice and
frieze, pillar and entablature, broken and dislocated, lie at all angles
of inclination and in the utmost confusion. So it is with the ancient
rocks and more modern strata. Only to this mighty wreck have been added
the outgushings of molten matter into fissures, creating dikes, and the
unsparing movements of oceans sweeping loose materials and perishing
forms of all sorts from one place to another, partially covering up and
disguising the desolation."

Again, the same writer says: "The present sun face of the earth is
comparatively recent. The last great cataclysm is, geologically
speaking, not very

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

ancient. Accumulating evidence compels us to believe that one of those
destructive events has occurred since the human race was created. The
facts

I have presented plainly indicate that another is in the course of
preparation. Each of these vast periodical voids between the nucleus and
the crust is filled by collapsion of the surface. . . . Thus, if we
assume that the globe was one hundred or three hundred miles greater in
all its diameters when its crust became hard and was bathed with the
earliest seas, and when marine plants and trilobites and mollusca began
to appear, the lithological characteristics of the paleozoic ages will
be more acceptably deciphered. So successively with the carboniferous
periods, whose vast areas have been folded up and overflowed, and whose
fields for reproduction have been so numerous and extensive as to
convince us that Arctic America, during those remote ages, presented
tropical positions to the sun." <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)

Although starting with no such purpose, the author, in expounding this
general Leibnitzian theory of all deluges, incidentally explains the
submersion of the primeval Arctic continent. In accordance with his
theory, he asserts that "the diameter of the earth at the poles must
have been at some more ancient epoch very much greater than now. It must
have been more than twenty-seven miles greater to permit such equatorial
or tropical exposures to the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

sun as we know to be necessary for the production of those vegetable
forms which abound in the coal measures of Arctic latitudes. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) If it was fifty or a hundred miles greater
during any portion of the carboniferous age, it might have been two
hundred during the 'Taconic' period, and perhaps three hundred or more
when the life-force began to fashion its primordial and rudimentary
organisms upon its waiting surface." He furthermore distinctly asserts
that Sir Isaac Newton's supposed demonstration that the oblateness of
the earth's figure is due to the centrifugal force generated by its
rotation "is an error unworthy of further consideration among
geologists." The true explanation, as he regards it, is stated as
follows: "The shorter axes of the globe—what at present are our
poles—are not the result of flattening by rotation, but by a sudden
falling in of surface." <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84)

Here, of course, is just that down-sinking of wide *polar* regions, in
"comparatively recent" geologic time, demanded by the facts of Arctic
geology. It must have been greater than any of those which have occurred
in other portions of the globe, for it has permanently modified the
originally and naturally spherical figure of the earth. The author is
"compelled to believe" that it, or one like it, "occurred since the
human race was created." Moreover, this belief is in no wise built upon
the Biblical record of the Deluge, for he speaks almost bitterly of "the
retarding influence of Jewish legends upon the free expansion of the
human intellect," and

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

makes Moses one of the two men whose "declarations and authority, more
than the statements of all others, have retarded the advancement of
general knowledge." Happily for Moses, the second in this portentous
duumvirate is no worse a man than Sir Isaac Newton!

It is by no means necessary to commit ourselves to any one of these
theories of deluges, or to seek still other explanations of the
recognized subsidence of the basin now occupied by the Arctic Ocean.
Enough for the present that upon the authority of eminent physiographic
geologists we have shown:—

1\. That the present distribution of land and water within the Arctic
Circle is, geologically speaking, of very recent origin.

2\. That the paleozoic data of the highest explored latitudes demand for
their explanation the hypothesis of an extensive circumpolar continent
in Miocene time.

3\. That lithological authorities affirm that such a continent existed.

4\. That physical geography has reached the conclusion that the known
islands of the Arctic Ocean, such as Novaia Zemlia and the Spitzbergen,
are simply mountain tops still remaining above the surface of the sea
which has come in and covered up the primeval continent to which they
belonged.

5\. And finally, that the problem of the process by which this grand
catastrophe was brought about is now sporadically engaging the thoughts
of terrestrial physicists and geologists. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71:1](pf11.htm#fr_71) "On peut supposer, et je
tâcherai de developper cette idée plus tard, qu’il a existé une periode
géologique plus recoulée, . . . et qu’à cette époque l’Europe, l’Asie,
et l’Amérique septentrionale se joignaient au pole nord de manière à
former un continent d’une étendue prodigeuse, se prolongueant vers le
pôle sud en trois presqu’iles, savoir: l’Amérique méridionale,
l’Afrique, et l’Océanie. C’est des débris de cet ancien continent que
des révolutions violentes ont formé les terres actuelles." Frédérik
Klee, *Le Déluge*, French ed. Paris, 1847: p. 83. (Danish original,
1842.)

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73:1](pf11.htm#fr_72) *Island Life*. London,
1880: pp. 184, 185.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[73:2](pf11.htm#fr_73) Ibid., p. 362.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[73:3](pf11.htm#fr_74) Professor Heer, deceased
Sept. 27, 1883. On the preëminence of his authority in this field, see
*Nature*, Oct. 25, page 612.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[73:4](pf11.htm#fr_75) *Expedition to
Greenland*. *Arctic Manual*, London, 1875: p. 423.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[74:1](pf11.htm#fr_76) *Arctic Manual*, p. 420.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[74:2](pf11.htm#fr_77) J. Starkie Gardner in
*Nature*, London, Dec. 12, 1878: p. 127.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[74:3](pf11.htm#fr_78) James Geikie, LL. D., F.
R. S., *Prehistoric Europe. A Geological Sketch*. London, 1881: p. 41.
Compare Louis Faliés, *Études* <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>
*historiques et philosophiques sur les Civilisations Européenne,
Romaine, Greque, etc*. Paris, 1874: vol. i., pp. 348-352.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[75:1](pf11.htm#fr_79) In his *Révolutions de la
Mer*. 2 ed., 1860.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[75:2](pf11.htm#fr_80) Flammarion naturally
adds, "It is very obvious to ask on this, *Why* should there be a
*catastrophe*, and why should not the centre of gravity return
*gradually*, as it was gradually displaced?" *Astronomical Myths*, p.
426. But a gradual displacement would produce a deluge, only a gradual
one.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[78:1](pf11.htm#fr_81) *World-Life; or
Comparative Geology*. Chicago, 1883: pp. 278-280.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[80:1](pf11.htm#fr_82) C. F. Winslow, M. D.,
*The Cooling Globe, or the Mechanics of Geology*. Boston, 1865: pp. 50,
51. For the latest presentations and criticisms of this general theory,
see Winchell's *World-Life*, 1883, pp. 302-308, and the literature there
given. Among the older treatises constructed upon it, none is perhaps of
so great interest to the general reader as the work on *The Deluge*, by
Frédérik Klee (Danish 1842, German 1843, French 1847).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[81:1](pf11.htm#fr_83) Dr. Winslow seems here to
forget that the primeval polar continent was of necessity the sunniest
of all lands.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[81:2](pf11.htm#fr_84) Ibid., p. 49.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[82:1](pf11.htm#fr_85) See the very interesting
paper "On Ice-Age Theories," in *Transactions of the British
Association*, 1884, by E. Hill, M.A., F.G.S. Also in the same volume W.
F. Stanley's criticism of the theory of Croll.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Testimony of Prehistoric Climatology](pf12)
