[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf11)  [Next](pf13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE TESTIMONY OF PREHISTORIC CLIMATOLOGY.

<span class="small">*Ver Iliad erat, ver magnus agebat Orbis*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Vergil</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*One of the most startling and important of the
scientific discoveries of the last twenty years has been that of the
relics of a luxuriant Miocene flora in various parts of the Arctic
regions. It is a discovery which was totally unexpected, and is even now
considered by many men of science to be completely unintelligible, but
it is so thoroughly established, and it has such an important bearing on
the subjects we are discussing in the present volume, that it is
necessary to lay a tolerably complete outline of the facts before our
readers*.—<span class="smallcaps">A. R. Wallace</span> 1880).</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Thus</span> far, then, we have found theoretical
geogony demanding a location at the Pole for the first country
presenting conditions of Eden life; we have found the requisite
astronomical conditions to give it an abundance of light; we have found
the geologists attesting the former existence of such a country; we must
now interrogate Prehistoric Climatology, and ascertain whether this lost
land ever enjoyed a temperature which admits of the supposition that
here was the primitive abode of man. The answer to our question comes,
not from one, but from several sources. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

First, geogony gives us an almost irresistible antecedent probability.
For if the earth from its earliest consolidation has been steadily
cooling, it is hardly possible to conceive of a method by which any
region once too hot for human residence can have become at length too
cold except by passing through all the intermediate stages of
temperature, some of which must have been precisely adapted to human
comfort.

Again, paleontological botany shows that in Europe in Tertiary times
this hypothetical cooling of the earth was going on, and going on in the
steady and regular way postulated by theoretic geogony. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) But if a telluric process as essentially
universal as this was going on in Europe, there is no reason why it
should not have been going on in all countries, whether to the north, or
to the south, or to the east, or to the west of Europe.

But we are not left to inferences of this sort. It is now admitted by
all scientific authorities that at one time the regions within the
Arctic Circle enjoyed a tropical or nearly tropical climate. Professor

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nicholson uses the
following language: "In the early Tertiary period the climate of the
northern hemisphere, as shown by the Eocene animals and plants, was very
much hotter than it is at present; partaking, indeed, of a sub-tropical
character. In the Middle Tertiary or Miocene period the temperature,
though not high, was still much warmer than that now enjoyed by the
northern hemisphere; and we know that the plants of the temperate
regions at that time flourished within the Arctic Circle." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88)

Mr. Grant Allen says, "One thing at least is certain, that till a very
recent period, geologically speaking, our earth enjoyed a warm and
genial climate up to the actual poles themselves, and that all its
vegetation was everywhere evergreen, of much the same type as that which
now prevails in the modern tropics." <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89)

Alluding to those distant ages, M. le Marquis de Nadaillac remarks:
"Under these conditions, life spread freely even to the Pole." <span
id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90) Similar is the language of Croll: "The
Arctic regions, probably up to the North Pole, were not only free from
ice, but were covered with a rich and luxuriant vegetation." <span
id="fr_91"></span>[4](#fn_91) Keerl holds that at the very Pole it was
then warmer than now at the equator. <span id="fr_92"></span>[5](#fn_92)
Professor Oswald Heer's calculations would possibly modify Keerl's
estimate to a slight degree, but only enough to make the circumpolar
climate of that far-off age a

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

little more Edenic than is that of the hottest portions of our present
earth. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

Sir Charles Lyell, who in the discussion of this subject is
characteristically cautious and "uniformitarian," does not hesitate to
say, "The result, then, of our examination, in this and in the preceding
chapter, of the organic and inorganic evidence as to the state of the
climate of former geological periods is in favor of the opinion that the
heat was generally in excess of what it now is. In the greater part of
the Miocene and preceding Eocene epochs the fauna and flora of Central
Europe were sub-tropical, and a vegetation resembling that now seen in
Northern Europe extended into the Arctic regions as far as they have yet
been explored, and probably reached the Pole itself. In the Mesozoic
ages the predominance of reptile life and the general character of the
fossil types of that great class of vertebrata indicate a warm climate
and an absence of frost between the 40th parallel of latitude and the
Pole, a large ichthyosaurus having been found in lat. 77° 16´ N." <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94)

Averaging the above views and estimates of scientific authorities, we
have at the Pole, in the age of the first appearance of the human race,
a temperature the most equable and delightful possible; and with this we
may well be content.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[83:1](pf12.htm#fr_86) We have no use here for
mere fancy sketches, like the following, which appeared on the 10th of
May, 1884, in *The Norwood Review* and *Crystal Palace Reporter* (Eng.),
and which looks very much like an unacknowledged loan from Captain Hall,
of Arctic fame: "We do not admit that there is ice up to the Pole. No
one has been nearer that point than 464 miles. Once inside the great
ice-barrier, a new world breaks upon the explorer; a climate first mild
like that of England, and afterwards balmy as that of the Greek Isles,
awaits the hardy adventurer who first beholds those wonderful shores.
Wonderful, indeed; for he will be greeted by a branch of the human race
<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> cut off from the rest of humanity by
that change of climate which came over Northern Europe about 2,000 years
ago, but surrounded by a profusion of life bewildering in the extreme."

Speculations or fancies of this sort have ever clustered about this
mysterious region of the Pole. As we shall hereafter see, they abounded
in remote antiquity. Even the singular fancy known to the public as
"Symmes’ Hole" antedates Symmes, and may be found in much more
attractive form in Klopstock's *Messiah*. (K.'s *Sämmtliche Werke*.
Leipsic, 1854: vol. i., pp. 24, 25.)

<span id="fn_87"></span>[84:1](pf12.htm#fr_87) "L’étude des flores nous
démontre que le climat de l’Europe, pendant les temps tertiaires, est
toujours allé *en se refroidissant d’une manière continue et
regulière*."—*Le Préhistorique. Antiquité de l’Homme*. Par Gabriel de
Mortillet, Professeur d’anthropologie préhistorique à l’École
d’Anthropologie de Paris. Paris, 1883: p 113.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[85:1](pf12.htm#fr_88) *The Life-History of the
Globe*, p. 335.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[85:2](pf12.htm#fr_89) *Knowledge*. London, Nov.
30, 1883: p. 327.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[85:3](pf12.htm#fr_90) *Les Premiers Hommes et
les Temps Préhistoriques*. Paris, 1881: tom. ii., p. 391.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[85:4](pf12.htm#fr_91) *Climate and Time*. Am.
ed., 1875: p. 7.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[85:5](pf12.htm#fr_92) *Die Schöpfungsgeschichte
und Lehre vom Paradies*. Basel, 1861: Abth. I., p. 634.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[86:1](pf12.htm#fr_93) *Flora Fossilis Arctica*.
Zurich, 1868: Bd. i., pp. 60-77. See also Alfred Russel Wallace, *Island
Life*. London, 1880: ch. ix., pp. 163-202. Well, therefore, sings a
rollicking rhymster of the age,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"When the sea rolled its fathomless billows  
   Across the broad plains of Nebraska;  
 When around the North Pole grew bananas and willows,  
 And mastodons fought with the great armadillos  
   For the pine-apples grown in Alaska."

</div>

<span id="fn_94"></span>[86:2](pf12.htm#fr_94) *Principles of Geology*,
eleventh ed., vol. i., p. 231.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Testimony of Paleontological Botany](pf13)
