[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf14)  [Next](pf16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

#### THE TESTIMONY OF PALEONTOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY.

<span class="small">*Quittons donc pour un instant les jardins d’Armide,
et, nouveaux Argonautes, parcourons les régions hyperborées;
cherchons-y, armés de patience et surtout de scepticism, l’origine de la
plupart des nations et des langues modernes, celle même des habitans de
l’Attique, et des autres peuples de la Grèce, objets de notre savante
idolatrie*.—<span class="smallcaps">Charles Pougens</span> (A.D.
1799).</span>

<span class="small">*Telle est la théorie qui l’accord le mieux avec la
marche présumée des races humaines*.—<span class="smallcaps">Count
Saporta</span> (A.D. 1883).</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Man</span> is the one traveler who has certainly
been in the cradle of the human race. He has come from the land we are
seeking. Could we but follow back the trail of his journeyings it would
assuredly take us to the garden of pleasantness from which we are
exiled. Unfortunately the traveler has lost whole volumes of his
itinerary, and what remains is in many of its passages not easy of
decipherment.

What says anthropologic and ethnic Paleontology—or what some French
writers are beginning to call *Paléoethnique* Science—respecting the
hypothesis of a Polar Eden?

At the time when the present writer began his university lectures on
this subject the teachings of professed anthropologists were in the
chaotic and contradictory condition indicated in Part First. One of the
strongest proofs he could then find that a new light was about to dawn
on this field was in the there cited work of Quatrefages, entitled "The

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Human
Species." <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) Accordingly, in
discussing the probable verdict of this science upon the admissibility
of the new theory of human distribution, the lecturer presented the
following paragraph, and there rested the case:—

"Anthropology as represented by Quatrefages seems to be actually feeling
its way to the same hypothesis. This writer first argues that in the
present state of knowledge we should be led to place the cradle of the
race in the great region 'bounded on the south and southwest by the
Himalayas, on the west by the Bolor mountains, on the northwest by the
Ala-Tau, on the north by the Altai range and its offshoots, and on the
east by the Kingkhan, on the south and southeast by the Felina and
Kwen-lun.' Later on, however, he says that paleontological studies have
very recently led to results which are 'capable of modifying these
primary conclusions.' And after briefly stating these results, he starts
the question whether or no the first centre of human appearance may not
have been 'considerably to the north of the region' just mentioned, even
'*in polar Asia*.' Without deciding, he adds, 'Perhaps prehistoric
archeology or paleontology will some day confirm or confute this
conjecture.'"

The cautious anticipation here expressed was quickly fulfilled. At the
concluding lecture of the same first course it was possible to present
the following as the ripe conclusion of a fellow countryman of
Quatrefages, one of the foremost savants of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Europe, Count
Saporta: <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) "We are inclined to
remove to the circumpolar regions of the North the probable cradle of
primitive humanity. From there only could it have radiated as from a
centre to spread into the several continents at once, and to give rise
to successive emigrations toward the South. This theory best agrees with
the presumed march of the human races." <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107.md)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

In the foregoing we have more than a demonstration of the bare
admissibility of our hypothesis. We have in it the latest word of
anthropological science respecting the birth-place of the human race. To
make it a complete confirmation of our theory, so far as this field of
knowledge is concerned, but one thing is lacking, and that is a clearer
recognition of the great natural revolution or catastrophe which
destroyed man's primitive home and occasioned the world-wide
post-diluvian dispersion. This lack, however, is abundantly supplied by
the foremost German ethnographers, and even by such as represent the
most radical Darwinian views. Thus Professor Friedrich Müller, of
Vienna, and Dr. Moritz Wagner, both of whom place the probable cradle of
the race *in some high latitude* in Europe or Asia, lay the utmost
stress upon the mighty climatic revolution which came in with the
glacial age, ascribing to it the most stupendous and transforming
influences that have ever affected mankind. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md) In our view the deterioration of natural
environment reduced the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

vigor and longevity of the race; in theirs it changed one of the tribes
of the animal world into men! Which of these views is the more rational
may safely be left to the reader's judgment. Few will be disposed to
accept the doctrine that man is simply a judiciously-iced pithecoid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[98:1](pf15.htm#fr_105.md) New York edition, pp.
175, 177, 178. See M. Zaborowski's support of Quatrefages’ conjecture in
the *Revue Scientifique*, Paris, 1883, p. 496.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[99:1](pf15.htm#fr_106.md) The following note
appeared in the *Boston Daily Advertiser* of May 25, 1883:

THE CRADLE OF THE RACE.

A few years ago, about the time of the appearance of the first edition
of Dr. Winchell's *Preadamites*, in a letter addressed to its learned
author, I expressed my belief that the Garden of Eden, the first abode
of man, was to be sought in a now submerged country, situate at the
North Pole. More than a year ago, in a printed essay on *Ancient
Cosmology*, I made the statement that "all ethnic traditions point us
thither for the cradle of the race." Early last January I began a course
of lectures in the post-graduate department of the university, setting
forth my view and the astonishing mass of cosmological, historic,
mythologic, paleontologic, paleoethnic, and other evidences which
conspire to its support. Last Monday afternoon, about twenty minutes
before I was to give the concluding lecture of the course, I opened the
fresh-cut leaves of the *Revue des Deux Mondes*, the number for the
first of this month. In it my eye quickly fell upon *Un Essai de
Synthèse Paléoethnique*, in which M. le Marquis G. de Saporta sums up
and sets forth the latest results of paleontological research, so far as
they bear upon ethnology. Judge of my gratification to find some twenty
pages devoted to the question of the cradle of the human race in the
light of the latest science, and to read as the conclusion of this
learned savant that this cradle must have been "within the Arctic
Circle."

As Count Saporta has lately shown a little anxiety that American
scholarship should not receive too exclusive credit for first proposing
a closely related doctrine which he holds in common with our Professor
Gray, and with Switzerland's Professor Heer (see *American Journal of
Science*, May, 1883, p. 396, footnote), he will doubtless pardon the
public statement of this, to me, most interesting coincidence.

<span class="smallcaps">William F. Warren</span>.

Boston, May 24, 1883.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[99:2](pf15.htm#fr_107.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>, Sect. II.: "How the Earth was
Peopled."

<span id="fn_108"></span>[100:1](pf15.htm#fr_108.md) "Es muss dort, wo der
Mensch aus dem Zustand, den er mit den Thieren gemeinsam hat, sich
entwickelte, ein gewaltiger Wechsel der Naturkräfte und seiner Umgebung
stattgefunden haben. Nichts ist natürlicher als an die Eiszeit des Endes
der Pleiocänen und der Diluvial-Periode, welche durch eine Reihe
schlagender geologischer Thatsachen für das nördliche Europa, Asien und
America bestätigt wird, zu denken. Damals, wo das Paradies des in der
Befriedigung leiblicher Bedürfnisse einzig und allein dahinlebenden,
unschuldigen, Gutes und Böses noch nicht unterscheidenden Menschen mit
eisiger Hand zertrümmert wurde, damals fing der Mensch den eigentlichen
Kampf ums Dasein an, und stieg durch Anspannung aller seiner Kräfte zum
Herrn der Natur empor." As the tree no more bore fruit the "climber" was
forced to "become a runner;" this differentiated the foot from the hand,
modified the leg, and in time changed the pithecoid ancestors of
humanity into men. Friedrich Müller, *Allgemeine Ethnographie*. Wien,
1893: p. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Conclusion of Part Third](pf16.md)
