[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf15)  [Next](pf17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### CONCLUSION OF PART THIRD.

<span class="small">*We must now be prepared to admit that God can plant
an Eden even in Spitzbergen; that the present state of the world is by
no means the best possible in relation to climate and vegetation; that
there have been and might be again conditions which could convert the
ice-clad Arctic regions into blooming Paradises*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Principal J. W. Dawson</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> are at the end of the first series of
tests, and with what results?

1\. Scientific Cosmology, searching for the place where the physical
conditions of Eden-life first appeared on our globe, is brought to the
very spot where we have located the cradle of our race.

2\. Contrary to all ordinary impressions, we have found this same spot
the most favored on the globe, not only as respects the glories of
night, but also in respect to prevalence of daylight.

3\. In its geology we have found scientific evidence of the vast
cataclysm which destroyed the antediluvian world and permanently
transferred to lower latitudes the habitat of humanity.

4\. We have found scientifically accepted evidence that at the time of
the advent of man the climate at the Arctic Pole was all that the most
poetic legends of Eden could demand.

5\. From Paleontological Botany we have learned that this locality was
the cradle of the floral life-forms of the whole known earth.

6\. By Paleontological Zoölogy we have been assured

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

that here too originated, and from this centre eradiated, the fauna of
the prehistoric world.

7\. And lastly, we have found the latest ethnographers and
anthropologists slowly but surely gravitating toward the same Arctic
Eden as the only centre from which the migrations of the human race can
be intelligibly interpreted.

We asked of these sciences simply, "Is our hypothesis admissible?" Their
answer is more than an affirmative; it is an unanticipated and
pronounced confirmation.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Some months after the foregoing chapters had been written and delivered
in lectures before classes of students in the University, a very
interesting reinforcement of the views therein advanced appeared in a
little work by Mr. G. Hilton Scribner, of New York, entitled "Where did
Life Begin?" <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) As Mr. Scribner was
conducted to a belief in the north polar origin of all races of living
creatures by considerations quite independent of those mythological and
historical ones which first led the present writer to the same opinion,
the reader of these pages will find in the following extracts a special
incentive to procure and read the entire treatise from which they are
taken. That two minds starting with such entirely different data should
have reached so nearly simultaneously one and the same conclusion
touching so difficult and many-sided a problem is surely not without
significance.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Our first extract is from pp. 21-23, where the following summary of
previous reasonings and conclusions is given: “We may therefore safely
conclude, if the code of natural laws has been uniformly in force,—

“First,—That life commenced on those parts of the earth which were first
prepared to maintain it; at any rate, that it never could have commenced
elsewhere.

“Second,—As the whole earth was at one time too hot to maintain life, so
those parts were probably first prepared to maintain it which cooled
first.

“Third,—That those parts which received the least heat from the sun, and
which radiated heat most rapidly into space, in proportion to mass, and
had the thinnest mass to cool, cooled first.

“Fourth,—That those parts of the earth's surface, and those only,
answering to these conditions are the Arctic and Antarctic zones.

“Fifth,—That as these zones were at one time too hot, and certain parts
thereof are now too cold, for such life as inhabits the warmer parts of
the earth, these now colder parts, in passing from the extreme of heat
to the extreme of cold, must have passed slowly through temperatures
exactly suited to all plants and all animals in severalty which now live
or ever lived on the earth.

“Sixth,—If the concurrent conditions which have usually followed
lowering temperature followed the climatic changes in this case, life
did commence on the earth within one or both of certain zones
surrounding the poles, and sufficiently removed therefrom to receive the
least amount of sunlight necessary for vegetal and animal life.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

“It seems almost superfluous to say that those parts of the earth which
first became cool enough to maintain life had a climate warmer at that
time than that which we now call torrid. It was for an epoch, and
probably a very long one, as hot as it could be and maintain life.

“It is also quite obvious, in the light of the foregoing considerations,
that as the temperate zones have always received more heat from the sun,
and have had more mass per square foot to cool, in proportion to
radiating surface, than the polar zones, so, on the other hand, they
have always received less heat from the sun and have had less mass to
cool, in proportion to radiating surface, than the torrid zone; and so
when the arctic zones cooled from a tropical to what we now call a
temperate climate, the temperate zones had cooled down to that
temperature which we now call a torrid climate, while the equatorial
belt was still too hot for any form of life. Thus the lowering of
temperature, climatic change, and that life which made its advent in
these zones surrounding the poles have crept thence slowly along, *pari
passu*, from these polar regions to the equator.”

Farther on (pp. 26, 27) he claims that the progressive cooling of the
region at the Pole is all-sufficient, as a natural cause, to account for
that dispersion of life, vegetable and animal, which proceeded from the
Arctic centre southward: “As might be readily supposed, these Arctic
regions which first became cool enough to maintain life would from the
same causes be the first to become too cold for the same purpose. And
this cold would occur first as a temperate climate near and around the
pole; at any rate,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

in the centre of a zone just sufficiently removed from the pole to
combine the influence of the sun with its own cooling temperature, so as
to become the first fit habitation of life.

“This central cold creating a temperate climate would thus have become
the first and all-sufficient cause of a dispersion and distribution of
both the tropical plants and animals over another zone next south, next
further removed from the pole, and next sufficiently cool to maintain
such life. Moreover, this cooler climate occurring in the centre would
have driven out and dispersed such life equally, in all possible
directions. So, if the first habitable zone included the northernmost
land of all the great continents which converge around the North Pole,
this dispersion from an increasing cold to the north of each of them
would have sent southward plants and animals from a common origin and
ancestry, to people and to plant all the continents of the earth, with
the possible exception of Australia, whose flora and fauna are certainly
anomalous and possibly indigenous.”

In section fourth (pp. 28-34) the author briefly touches upon some of
the surface features of the globe peculiarly favorable to the southward
migration of plants and animals: “Let us now see how admirably the earth
is adapted, by its surface formation and topography, for a southern
migration from a zone surrounding the North Pole. In the first place,
nearly the whole of the earth's surface (and all the northern
hemisphere) is corrugated north and south with alternate continents and
deep sea channels almost from pole to pole. Both the eastern and western
continents extend with unbroken land connections

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

from the Arctic zone through the northern temperate, the torrid, and
through the southern temperate, almost to the Antarctic zone. Between
these great continents lie the deep oceans, whose channels run north and
south through as many degrees of latitude. The great air and ocean
currents run north or south; all the mountain ranges of the western
continent and many of the eastern continents run mainly north and south.
Nearly all the great rivers of the northern hemisphere run north or
south. To a southern migration—in other words, a migration from the
Arctic region toward the equator—these peculiarities of topography,
these great corrugations and mountain ranges, these channels and
currents, are roads and vehicles, guides and helps; while to an east and
west migration the same features are not only obstacles and hindrances,
but in the main barriers insuperable.

“The impassability of mountain ranges for most plants is shown by the
fact that strongly marked varieties in great numbers and many distinct
species occur upon the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains, the Sierra
Nevadas, the Alleghanies, and even lower ranges, which are not found at
all upon their western sides, and *vice versa*. Such a condition of
things, incompatible as it is with an eastern and western migration, is
quite consistent, however, with a north and south movement. For all the
climatic conditions, especially that of rainfall, are so different on
the opposite sides of all long mountain ranges that the same variety,
split and separated by the northern extremities of these ranges, would,
in moving southward along their eastern and western sides, and
encountering such diverse conditions,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

have become in the course of time, under the laws of adaptation,
distinct varieties, and probably different species.

“It may be well now to examine some of the conditions assisting this
movement. Hot air being lighter than cold, the heated air of the
northern equatorial belt has always risen and passed mainly toward the
North Pole in an upper current, while the cooler and heavier currents
from the north have swept southward, hugging the surface of the
continents, laded with pollen, minute germs and spores, and all the
winged seeds of plants, bending grass and shrubs and trees constantly to
the southward, and so, by small yearly increments, moving the whole
vegetal kingdom through valleys and along the sides of mountain ranges,
down the great continents, always moving with, and never across, these
great surface corrugations. It is unnecessary to add that all insects
and herbivorous animals would follow the plants, or that the birds and
carnivorous animals would follow the herbivorous animals and the
insects. So, too, the currents of the ocean have been established in
obedience to similar laws: as hot water is lighter than cold, great
surface currents have been formed in both the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans, flowing from the equator to the Arctic regions; while the cooler
and heavier currents from the Arctic have swept the floor of both oceans
from shore to shore to the southward, carrying all kinds of marine life
from the pole toward the equator with them.

“It may be well in this connection to allude to another fact seriously
affecting the bottom currents from the pole toward the equator of both
air and

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

ocean. By reason of the revolution of the earth upon its axis, a given
point upon its surface 1,000 miles south of the North Pole moves to the
eastward at the rate of about 260 miles an hour, while another point in
the same meridian at the equator would be moving to the eastward a
little more than I,000 miles an hour; so every cubic yard of air and
water which starts in a bottom current from the polar regions for the
equator must, before reaching the equator, acquire an eastward motion of
about 750 miles an hour. The tendency, therefore, of all bottom currents
of air and ocean moving to the south is to press to the westward every
obstacle met with in its course, and the result, both as to the currents
and all movable things they come in contact with, would be to give them
a southwestern course and movement.

“Now it is a strange coincidence, if nothing more, that the eastern
coasts of all the continents have a southwestern trend, are full of
bays, inlets, and shoal water, as though the floor of the ocean was
being constantly swept up against them; while the western coasts are
more abrupt, straight, and touch deeper water, as though the sweepings
from the land were being constantly rolled into the sea along their
entire lines.

“Notwithstanding all these indications of a southern or southwestern
movement, ever since the migration of plants and animals first attracted
attention, students of natural science, careful and conscientious
observers, able and discriminating investigators, have, almost with one
accord, been looking east and west across these great north and south
corrugations and natural barriers for the paths of

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

their journeyings; searching along every parallel of latitude, across
lofty mountain ranges, broad continents, deep and wide oceans, and ocean
currents, to and fro; and if perchance they looked north or south it was
only in search of some ferry or ford south of the ice-fields by which to
pass the flora and fauna from one continent to another, and thus account
for what is very evident, namely, that many widely distributed species
and varieties have come from the same locality and had a common ancestry
and origin. Is it not evident that the very plants and animals (in a
tribal sense) whose migrations they have been engaged in unraveling were
as much older than ice and snow on the earth as it would require in time
to lower the average temperature over a vast area from a tropical to a
frigid climate?”

The portion of the little treatise least satisfactory, even to its
author, is the part which relates to man (pp. 52-54). By making the
human race the descendants (or, as on Darwinist principles we ought
rather to say, the *ascendants*) of one or more pairs of lower animals,
and assuming that our animal ancestry had already been driven from the
polar region before they were blessed with this unanticipated progeny,
the author suggests a possible manner in which "the absence on the earth
of our immediate predecessor," the missing link, might be accounted for.
He says, "If it is true that, in common with many existing plants and
animals, the ancestry of man—some animal with a thumb, and so having the
possibility of all things—shared this northern home, this common and
immensely remote origin, earlier by long epochs than the glacial period,
it

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

would afford a possible ground for the claim of the unity of the origin
of man, and also a reason for the absence on earth of his immediate
predecessor. His arboreal progenitor in the pioneer ranks of this great
southern movement, ages before the Quaternary (during all of which
period man has probably inhabited the earth), was possibly driven naked
by the ever-following, merciless cold, thus keeping him within the
southward-moving tropical climate, down the eastern and western
continents alike, until it and he, arriving in the lapse of ages at the
equatorial belt, and being always at the head and still rising in the
scale of being by this movement, discipline, and process, became
sufficiently advanced by slow degrees to build fires, clothe himself,
make implements, and, possibly, domesticate animals,—at least the first
and most useful to primitive man, the dog,—and so prepared for conflict
and for all climates, turned backward to the verge of everlasting ice,
subduing, slaying, and exterminating, first his own ancestry, his
nearest but now weak rival, which by lingering behind and struggling for
life in a climate of increasing cold, would have become extremely
degenerated and so easily disposed of, if not actually exterminated by
the climate itself; thus leaving as the nearest in resemblance to man,
and yet the remotest in actual relationship both to him and to his
ancestry, the later tribes of anthropoid apes since developed, nearer to
the equator, from the next lower animals which accompanied him in his
southward march."

In this speculation, it will be observed, the place of the origin of the
human race is entirely indeterminate. When its far-off arboreal ancestor
left the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pole his only
prophetic endowment was "a thumb." But possessing this, he "had the
possibility of all things." In his successors, ages afterward, the real
transition from the plane of animal to that of human life seems to be
represented as having taken place "at the equatorial belt."
Unfortunately, however, for the theory, the claim of the new men to the
virtue and name of humanity was now poorer than before the change, for
their first act was to turn fiercely upon those who brought them into
being, "subduing, slaying, and exterminating their own ancestry" in a
frenzy worse than brutal. The shock to the feelings of the near but
younger relatives of the massacred victims—the mild-mannered apes—must
have been violent in the extreme. In fact, among all the tens of
thousands of their descendants not one, from that day to this, has ever
been seen to smile.

But in justice to our author it should be stated that he attaches
little, if any, weight to this Darwinistic episode. He frankly says,
"This last proposition, however, is but a vague and very deductive
supposition, for which nothing is claimed beyond a possibility or bare
probability." It is possible that he is only slyly indulging in a bit of
quiet pleasantry at the expense of the new-school anthropogonists.
Whether so or not, he hastens without further words to return from it to
the impregnable positions of his main argument, and to reinforce them by
a fresh study of the power and function of heat in the cosmic unfoldment
and distribution of life.

The next two divisions of the present work will show us that the
birth-memories of mankind conduct us, not to "the equatorial belt," but
to the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

polar world, and that in Mr. Scribner's answer to the question, "Where
did Life begin?" human as well as floral and faunal life should be
included. After examining these fresh lines of evidence it is believed
that the reader will find more impressive than ever the words with which
our author concludes his charming tractate:—

"Thus the Arctic zone, which was earliest in cooling down to the first
and highest heat degree in the great life-gamut, was also first to
become fertile, first to bear life, and first to send forth her progeny
over the earth. So, too, in obedience to the universal order of things,
she was first to reach maturity, first to pass all the subdivisions of
life-bearing climate and finally the lowest heat degree in the great
life-range, and so the first to reach sterility, old age, degeneration,
and death. And now, cold and lifeless, wrapped in her snowy winding
sheet, the once fair mother of us all rests in the frozen embrace of an
ice-bound and everlasting sepulchre."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[103:1](pf16.htm#fr_109) Published by Charles
Scribner's Sons, New York. 12mo, pp. 64. Ex-Chancellor Winchell
(anonymously) reviews the work with much respect in *Science*, March 7,
1884, p. 292. For courteous permission to quote from the treatise
without restriction I publicly return the author my thanks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Ancient Cosmology and Mythical Geography](pf17)
