[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf18)  [Next](pf20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### THE CRADLE OF THE RACE IN CHINESE THOUGHT.

<span class="small">*The rationalistic genius of the matter-of-fact
Chinese is apparent even in the way in which they conceived their
primitive history; and in this respect, as in many others, it brings
them into nearer relations with the best modern science than belong to
the other Oriental races*.—<span class="smallcaps">Samuel Johnson</span>
(of Salem).</span>

<span class="small">*It is through this wonderfully pure seer*
\[*Lao-tse*\], *as it appears to me, that we ascend to the primitive
revelation of truth given to this ancient people*.—<span
class="smallcaps">William Henry Channing</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Approaching</span> this theme, a reviewer of the
*Shin Seën Tung Keën*—a "General Account of the Gods and Genii," in
twenty-two volumes—offers the following observations: "All nations have
some tradition of a Paradise, a place of primeval happiness, a state of
innocence and delight. The Tauists <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163.md)
are by no means behind in referring to an abode of lasting bliss, which,
however, still exists on earth. It is called Kwen-lun." <span
id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164.md)

In another article, by a student of Chinese sources, it is stated, "This
locality, being the abode of the gods, is Paradise; it is round in form,
and like Eden it is 'the mount of assembly.'" <span
id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_165.md)

Like the Gan-Eden of Genesis it is described as a

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

garden, with a marvelous tree in the midst; also with a fountain of
immortality, from which proceed four rivers, which flow in opposite
directions toward the four quarters of the earth. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166.md)

In the language of the writer first quoted in this chapter, "Sparkling
fountains and purling streams contain the far-famed ambrosia. One may
there rest on flowery carpeted swards, listening to the melodious
warbling of birds, or feasting upon the delicious fruits, at once
fragrant and luscious, which hang from the branches of the luxuriant
groves. Whatever there is beautiful in landscape or grand in nature may
also be found there in the highest state of perfection. All is charming,
all enchanting, and whilst Nature smiles the company of genii delights
the ravished visitor." <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_167.md)

Where, now, is this Paradise mountain located? At the North Pole.

The sentence before those last quoted reads as follows: "Here is the
great pillar that sustains the world, no less than 300,000 miles high."

This world-pillar, or axis of the earth, is sometimes conceived of as
slender enough for the use of a climber. Thus we read, "One of the
Chinese kings, anxious to become acquainted with the delightful spot,
set out in search of it. After much wandering he perceived the immense
column spoken of, but, trying to ascend it, he found it so slippery that
he had to abandon all hopes of gaining his end, and to endeavor by some
mountain road which was rugged in the extreme to find his way to
Paradise. When almost fainting with fatigue, some friendly

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

nymphs, who had all the time from an eminence compassionated the weary
wanderer, lent him an assisting hand. He arrived there, and immediately
began to examine the famous spot." <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168.md)

Such a pillar connecting the earth with an upper Paradise, and affording
a means of access thereto, necessarily recalls to mind the analogous
conception set forth in the Talmud: "There is an upper and a lower
Paradise. And between them, upright, is fixed a pillar; and by this they
are joined together; and ’tis called 'The Strength of the Hill of Sion.'
And by this Pillar on every Sabbath and Festival the righteous climb up
and feed themselves with a glance of the Divine majesty till the end of
the Sabbath or Festival, when they slide down and return into the lower
Paradise." <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169.md)

In this conception we have a twofold Paradise, one celestial and one
terrestrial. Among the Chinese

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

we find the same. The upper is situated in the centre or pole of heaven,
the lower directly under it, at the centre or pole of the northern
terrestrial hemisphere. The Pillar connecting them is of course the axis
of the heavenly vault.

We quote: "Within the seas, in the valleys of Kwen-lun, at the northwest
is Shang-te's *Lower* Recreation Palace. It is eight hundred *le*
square, and eighty thousand feet high. In front there are nine walls,
inclosed by a fence of precious stones. At the sides there are nine
doors, through which the light streams, and it is guarded by beasts.
Shang-te's wife also dwells in this region, immediately over which is
Shang-te's Heavenly Palace, which is situated in the centre of the
heavens \[the celestial pole\], as his earthly one is in the centre of
the earth \[the terrestrial pole\]." <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170.md)

There can be no mistaking this use of the term "centre" for pole, for
the Chinese astronomers expressly state, "The Polar star is the centre
of heaven." <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171.md)

Elsewhere, instead of Kwen-lun being a World-pillar in the "valleys," or
"plain," or "mound" of the terrestrial Paradise, we find it described as
a stupendous heaven-sustaining mountain, marking the centre or pole of
the earth: "The four quarters of the earth incline downwards. . . . On
this vast plain or mount, surrounded on all ides by the four seas, arise
the mountains of Kwen-lun, the highest in the world according to the
Chinese geographers: 'Kwen-lun

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

is the name of a mountain; it is situated at the northwest, fifty
thousand *le* from the Sung-Kaou mountains, and is *the centre of the
earth*. It is eleven thousand *le* in height' (Kang-he)." <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md)

The significance of the foregoing as respects the location of Paradise
cannot be doubtful. But compare further the sixth head under chapter
third of Part fifth; also chapter fourth of the same Part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[143:1](pf19.htm#fr_163.md) "Die Secte der Tao-sse
hat die Sagen and religiösen Gebräuche des alten China's noch am Meisten
aufbewahrt." Lüken, *Traditionen des Menschengeschlechtes*, p. 77.
"Lao-tse abounds in sentences out of some ancient lore, of which we have
no knowledge but from him." Samuel Johnson, *Oriental Religions—China*.
Boston, 1877: p. 861.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[143:2](pf19.htm#fr_164.md) *The Chinese
Repository*, vol. vii., p. 519.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[143:3](pf19.htm#fr_165.md) *The Chinese Recorder
and Missionary Journal*, vol. iv., p. 94. Compare Isaiah xiv. 13, 14.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[144:1](pf19.htm#fr_166.md) Lüken, *Traditionen
des Menschengeschlechtes*, p. 72.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[144:2](pf19.htm#fr_167.md) *The Chinese
Repository*, vol. vii., p. 519.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[145:1](pf19.htm#fr_168.md) *The Chinese
Repository*, vol. vii., p. 520.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[145:2](pf19.htm#fr_169.md) Eisenmenger,
*Entdecktes Judenthum*, Bd. ii., p. 318. (English translation, vol. ii.,
p. 25.) Compare Schulthess, *Das Paradies*, p. 354. Also the story of
Er, the Pamphylian, in which we have the same "*column, brighter than
the rainbow, extending right through the whole heaven and through the
earth;*" here also the spirits visiting the earth are allowed seven days
before ascending. Plato, *Republic*, 616. Also the Chaldæo-Assyrian
conception of "the celestial and terrestrial Paradises, supposed to be
united by means of the Paradisaic Mount itself." *The Oriental and
Biblical Journal*. Chicago, 1880: p. 293. Also the Greek idea: "Sehr
merkwürdig ist, was Pindar (Olymp., ii., 56 f.) von den Seligen sagt.
Wenn sie nämlich auf der Insel der Seligen sich befinden, steigen sie
zum *Thurme des Chronos* empor. Dieser Höhentendenz entspricht nun die
alte Vorstellung vom Naturcentrum am Nordpol und so führen uns denn auch
die griechischen Dichter auf einem langen Umwege doch zuletzt nach Nysa,
wo uns die griechischen Künstler alle Wonnen des dionysischen Himmels
aufthun." Menzel, *Die vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*, ii., p.
10. Finally, the Japanese idea in Griffis, *The Mikado's Empire*, p. 44.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[146:1](pf19.htm#fr_170.md) *The Chinese
Recorder*, vol. iv., p. 95.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[146:2](pf19.htm#fr_171.md) *The Chinese
Repository*, vol. iv., p. 194. Compare Menzel: "Der Polarstern heisst
Palast der Mitte." *Unsterblichkeitslehre*, Bd. 1, p. 44.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[147:1](pf19.htm#fr_172.md) *The Chinese
Recorder*, vol. iv., p. 94.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Cradle of the Race in East Aryan or Hindu
Thought](pf20.md)
