[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf28)  [Next](pf30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### CHAPTER V.

#### THE QUADRIFURCATE RIVER.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span class="small"><em>Als ich erfunden han,<br />
Us dem paradise ran<br />
Zu fühten baum und gras,<br />
Und alles das darynne was,<br />
Zu guter moss ein wasser gross,<br />
Das in vier teil darnachefloss</em>.<br />
                                LUTWIN.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">*Wir haben hier ein merkwürdiges
Stromsystem*.—GRILL.</span>

"<span class="smallcaps">And</span> a river went out of Eden to water
the garden, and from thence it was parted and became into four heads."

In chapter second of Part Second we presented the simple and natural
interpretation suggested by the hypothesis of a primitive circumpolar
continent. If the reader will kindly turn back to the statement there
made ([p. 51](pf08.htm#page_51)), he will see in how natural a manner
the water system of that lost "land of delights" might have become, in
after tradition, the one disparted river which waters the whole earth.

The insuperable difficulties of all hitherto attempted identifications
of the four rivers are too numerous to present here in detail. <span
id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_388) In our interpretation

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

the original river is from the sky; the division takes place on the
heights at the Pole, and the four resulting rivers are the chief streams
of the circumpolar continent as they descend in different directions to
the surrounding sea. Does such a view find any support in the traditions
of the ancient world?

That it does will be clear to any one who has carefully read thus far.
Let us take the rivers of the Persian cradle of the race. Where do they
rise? If the investigator of this question have made no previous studies
in Comparative Sacred Hydrography, he will be surprised to find that in
Persian thought, not only the Paradise rivers, but also all the rivers
of the whole earth, *have but one headspring and but one place of
discharge*.

This head-spring is the Ardvî-Sûra, situated in heaven,—the heaven of
the Pole. "This heavenly fountain," says Haug, summarizing the contents
of the Abân Yasht,—"this heavenly fountain has a thousand springs and a
thousand canals, each of them forty days’ journey long. Thence a channel
goes through all the seven *keshvares*, or regions of the earth,
conveying everywhere pure celestial waters." <span
id="fr_389"></span>[1](#fn_389)

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

The following is an ancient invocation to Anâhita, the spirit of these
heavenly waters: "Come before me, Ardvî-Sûra Anâhita!—come down from
yonder stars on to the earth created by Ahura-Mazda! Thee shall worship
the handy lords, the rulers of countries, sons of the rulers of
countries." <span id="fr_390"></span>[1](#fn_390)

From its elevation the heavenly height is called Hûgar, *i.e.*, "the
lofty:" "Hûgar, the lofty, is the mount from which the water of
Ardvî-Sûra leaps down the height of a thousand men." <span
id="fr_391"></span>[2](#fn_391) Again it is written, "Hagar, the lofty,
on which the water of Ardvî-Sûra flows and leaps, is the chief of
summits, since it is that above which is the revolution of Satavês, the
chief of reservoirs." <span id="fr_392"></span>[3](#fn_392)

As all the rivers of the earth's seven regions, so all lakes and seas
and the ocean itself, are from this one celestial fountain. "Through the
warmth and clearness of the water, purifying more than other

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

waters, everything continually flows from the source Ardvî-Sara." <span
id="fr_393"></span>[1](#fn_393) However named, all waters are simply
portions of the same heaven-descending stream. "The other innumerable
waters and rivers, springs and channels, are one in origin with those,
so in various districts and various places they call them by various
names." <span id="fr_394"></span>[2](#fn_394) Even plant-sap, and blood,
and milk, and all the seventeen kinds of liquid enumerated in the
Yashts, are parts of the one cosmic current. "All these, through growth,
or the body which is formed, mingle again with the rivers, for the body
which is formed and the growth are both one." <span
id="fr_395"></span>[3](#fn_395)

Everything of a liquid nature, therefore, in the whole world is
conceived of as proceeding from one source high in the north-polar sky.
Whither is it tending? What becomes of it all in the end? Where do its
myriad rills and rivers at last discharge? As according to the
cosmological conception so often illustrated in these pages, all start
from the zenith, we should naturally expect all to reunite at last in
the nadir. This is found to be the fact. But in this nether gathering
place the waters, now polluted from their contact with all the filth and
vileness of the world, are not allowed to rest and

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

accumulate. <span id="fr_396"></span>[1](#fn_396) This cesspool of the
universe has a *pervious* bottom. By the various processes of straining,
vaporizing, aeration, etc., the polluted waters are by Tishtar brought
back distilled and purified, and are re-discharged into the
zenith-reservoir which perpetually supplies the gushing streams of
Ardvî-Sûra. <span id="fr_397"></span>[2](#fn_397) Into such a
marvelously complete cosmical circulatory water system did the Iranic
imagination develop the primitive head-stream of Eden. But never, even
in the most extravagant mythological adornments of the idea, was it for
a moment forgotten that the original undivided stream originates in the
north polar sky; and that its division into earthly streams and rivers
is on the holy mount which stands in the centre of Kvanîras, the central
and circumpolar *keshvare* of the whole habitable earth. <span
id="fr_398"></span>[3](#fn_398)

The various fragmentary allusions of the oldest Greek poets to Okeanos
and the rivers would seem to imply the early existence, and perhaps
early loss, of a similar Hellenic conception of the water circulation of
the entire earth. Thus, according to Homer's familiar couplet, it is
from Okeanos, in

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

some application of the term, that "all rivers and every sea and all
fountains flow."  <span id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_399) Euripides
presents the same idea. <span id="fr_400"></span>[2](#fn_400) There is,
therefore, *one fountain* of all the world's waters. The same conception
is expressed by Hesiod in his Theogony, where all rivers, as sons, and
all fountains and brooks, as daughters, are traced back to Okeanos. Then
we have a constant descending movement of all waters until they reach
the world-surrounding Ocean-river at the equator, beyond which is the
Underworld. From this equatorial ocean, parting off from the southern or
under shore, new branches diverge and form the river system of the
Hadean kingdom. Other Underworld rivers were perhaps conceived of as
percolating through the earth and emerging to the surface in the lower
hemisphere. There is at least some evidence that the Greeks, like the
Persians, had this idea of interterranean water-courses, and even
rivers, resembling the circulation of the blood in the human body. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[3](#fn_401) Sometimes these Underworld rivers are
represented as four in number, thus making the circumpolar water system
of the Underworld a perfect counterpart of the Eden rivers at the summit
of the upper hemisphere. <span id="fr_402"></span>[4](#fn_402) All,
moreover, like those of the Persian Underworld, seem to be plunging
forward and ever downward, until in the last glimpse which the
imagination can catch they are seen streaming from the roof of the grot
of the goddess Styx, and, as Preller expresses it,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "falling thence,
beneath the Earth, downward into the deep, deep Night." <span
id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_403)

Here, then, we have a unitary water system, embracing the whole earth,
and the remarkable Homeric and Hesiodic term ἀψόῤῥοος, "refluent," may
well imply that the Underworld προχοὴ, or "outflow," <span
id="fr_404"></span>[2](#fn_404) *returns* in nature's perfect order to
feed its original fountain, thus conforming the whole, in every part, to
the sacred hydrography of the Persians. <span
id="fr_405"></span>[3](#fn_405)

Granting this, one should locate the Okeanos-fountain, not where Preller
and Welcker and Völcker and the other mythographers have hitherto placed
it, but in the farthest North, and in the sky. That this location was
the original one is plain from all the local implications of the
mythological accounts of the proper home of Okeanos and Têthys, and is
further confirmed by many incidental evidences connected with such myths
as those of the Eridanus, <span id="fr_406"></span>[4](#fn_406) the
Acheloös, the birth of Zeus, and particularly those of Atlas and his
children. <span id="fr_407"></span>[5](#fn_407)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

In the most ancient Akkadian, Assyrian, and Babylonian literature there
are expressions which seem clearly to indicate the presence among these
peoples of a precisely similar conception with respect to the waters of
the world. <span id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_408) The same is true of
Egyptian literature, but in both these cases the data are as yet too
meagre to make them entirely conclusive in argument. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[2](#fn_409) We therefore pass them by, and close
with a glance at the Eden river of the ancient Aryans of India.

This, as already seen, is the heaven-born Gangâ. The Vedas call it "the
river of the three worlds," for the reason that it flows through Heaven
and Earth and the Underworld. In Vedic times "the original source and
home of the waters was thought to be the highest heaven (*paramam
vyoman*), the region peculiarly sacred to Varuna." <span
id="fr_410"></span>[3](#fn_410) This is clearly

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

illustrated in scores of passages: for example, in the beautiful prayer
for immortality, where the fourfold <span
id="fr_411"></span>[1](#fn_411) head-spring of all waters is located in
the sacred Centre of Heaven. <span id="fr_412"></span>[2](#fn_412)
Sometimes the heaven-sprung stream is called the Sindhu, <span
id="fr_413"></span>[3](#fn_413) sometimes the Sarasvatî. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[4](#fn_414) In the later Mahâbhârata its head-spring
is placed in the heaven of Vishnu, high above the lofty Pole-star
(Druva). On their descent the ethereal waters wash the Pole-star, and
the Seven Rishis (the Great Bear), and the polar pivot of "the lunar
orb," <span id="fr_415"></span>[5](#fn_415) thence falling upon the top
of beautiful

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Meru. "On the
summit of Meru," says the Vishnu Purana, "is the vast city of Brahma, .
. . inclosed by the river Gangâ, which, issuing from the foot of Vishnu
and washing the lunar orb, falls here \[on the top of Meru\] from the
skies, and, after encircling the city, <span
id="fr_416"></span>[1](#fn_416) divides into four mighty rivers, flowing
in opposite directions. These rivers are Sítá, the Alakanandá, the
Chakshu, and the Bhadrá. The first, falling on the tops of the inferior
mountains on the east side of Meru, flows over their crests, and passes
through the country of Bhadráswa to the ocean. The Alakanandá flows
south to the country of Bhárata, and, dividing into seven rivers on the
way, falls into the sea. The Chakshu falls into the sea after traversing
all the western mountains and passing through Ketumála. And the Bhadrá
washes the country of the Uttarakurus and empties itself into the
northern ocean." <span id="fr_417"></span>[2](#fn_417)

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

Here, again, as our interpretation of Genesis requires, the four rivers
traced back to their origin bring us to the summit of the earth at the
Pole,—to the one river which descends from the north polar sky. Curious
confirmations of this primitive conception come even from the most
distant continents. <span id="fr_418"></span>[1](#fn_418) Late Christian
legend shows evident traces of it, for in Maundeville's description of
the Paradise-fountain he says, "All the sweet waters of the world *above
and beneath* take their beginning from that well of Paradise;" and
again, "Out of that well all waters *come and go*,"—giving thus clear
expression to the idea of a unitary cosmic water

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

circulation. <span id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_419) So, again, in the
apocryphal "Revelation of the Holy Apostle Paul," the angel who was
showing the apostle the wonders of the heavenly city brought him to just
such a World-river, whose spring was in heaven, but whose main body
surrounded the earth.

"And he set me upon the river whose source springs up in the circle of
heaven, and it is this river which encircleth the whole earth. And he
says unto me: This river is Ocean." <span
id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_420)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_388"></span>[250:1](pf29.htm#fr_388) "We entirely agree
with Delitzsch \[the elder\] that 'Paradise is lost,' and the four
streams are on this account a riddle which cries, 'Where is Paradise?'
the question remaining without an answer." Ebers, *Ægypten and die
Bücher Mose*, p. 30. See McClintock and Strong's *Cyclopædia*, Arts.
"Gihon," "Pison," "Eden," etc. "Wherever there is a river-head that can
be made to run on all-fours, even by assuming the existence of
water-channels no longer extant, <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> the
Biblical Eden has been discovered,—whether in Asia, Africa, Europe, or
America." Gerald Massey, *The Natural Genesis*, vol. ii., p. 162. We may
add that Mr. Samuel Johnson's suggestion (*Oriental Religions; Persia*.
Boston, 1885: p. 253), to the effect that the "four rivers" of the
Hebrew story consisted of two real rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates,
*plus* two imaginary "words, that simply mean 'flowing waters,' and that
were used as generic terms for the purpose of making up the number
*four*, the conventional sign of completeness in all Eastern
mythologies," is a characteristic specimen of the unscholarly and
dogmatic caprice of pantheistic exegesis in the field of ancient
religious ideas and their history.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[251:1](pf29.htm#fr_389) *Essays*, 2d ed., p.
198. See Darmesteter's translation: "From this river of mine alone flow
all the waters that spread all over the <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> seven keshvares; this river of mine alone goes on bringing
waters both in summer and in winter." The *Zend-Avesta*, Pt. ii., pp.
52-84.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[252:1](pf29.htm#fr_390) Haug, Ibid., p. 198.
Darmesteter, Ibid., p. 73.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[252:2](pf29.htm#fr_391) *Bundahish* (West),
xii. 5. *The Zend-Avesta* (Darmesteter), ii. p. 54.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[252:3](pf29.htm#fr_392) *Bundahish*, xxiv. 17.
When West (*Pahlavi Texts*, Pt. i., p. 35, note 6) uses the last clause
of this quotation to show that the location of Hûgar is "probably" in
the western quarter, his argument rests upon two mistakes, both of which
seem to be shared by all modern Avestan students. The first mistake is
to suppose Satavês a different star from Tishtar (Ti*s*trya); and the
second is the notion that Tishtar was the star now called Sirius. The
fact is that originally Satavaêsa and Ti*s*trya were simply two
designations for one and the same object, and that object was not our
Sirius, but the Pole star. I say *our* Sirius, because there is evidence
that this name also once belonged to a very different heavenly body, and
to one situated in "*die Mitte des Himmels*," *i.e.*, at the Pole.
(Ideler, *Sternennamen*, p. 216.) Hûgar (Hukairya) is the heavenly
height of the polar sky, high above Harâ-berezaiti, whenever this term
is applied, as originally, to the terrestrial polar mount. *Âbân Yasht*,
88. See Windischmann, *Zoroastrische Studien*, p. 171.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[253:1](pf29.htm#fr_393) *Bundahish*, ch.
xiii., 3. The chapter on Seas.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[253:2](pf29.htm#fr_394) Ibid., xx. 33. Raṅha,
the original Avestan name of the world-river, became corrupted into
*Araṅhâm*—*Arang*—*Aring*—and finally into *Arg*. Windischmann,
*Zoroastrische Studien*, pp. 187, 189.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[253:3](pf29.htm#fr_395) Ibid., xxi. 2. Henry
Bowman, in his *Eighteen Hundred and Eighty-one; or the End of the Æon*
(St. Louis, Mo., 1884, p. 36), gives the following remarkable
interpretation to the heaven-descending river: "The throne of God is the
apex, culmination, directly over the pole's axis, and so in the centre
of the city,—corresponding to the tree of life, which in the old
creation was situated in the centre of the garden,—from which proceeds
the <span class="smallcaps">electrical current</span>, the 'pure river
of the water of life, clear as crystal.'"

<span id="fn_396"></span>[254:1](pf29.htm#fr_396) This underworld is the
long-misunderstood "cave," in which, in the Vedic myth, the demons try
to imprison the stolen rain-cows, so that the earth may be cursed with
drought.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[254:2](pf29.htm#fr_397) Ibid., xx. 4.
*Vendîdâd*, v. 16-19. More fully and graphically described in
*Dâdistân-î Dînîk*, ch. xciii. The ancient idea seems yet to survive in
modern folk-lore: "In der Geschichte von Ikirma und Chuseima (in den
Erzählungen der 1001 Nächte) sitzen zwei Engel der eine in Gestalt eines
Löwen, der andere in der eines Stieres vor einer Pforte, Wache haltend
und Gott preisend. Die Pforte, welche nur der Engel Gabriel öffnen kann,
führt zu einem von Rubingebirgen umflossenen Meere, der Quelle aller
Wasser auf Erden; aus ihm schöpfen Engel die Gewässer der Welt bis zum
Auferstehungstage." Justi, *Geschichte des alten Persiens*, 1879, p. 80.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[254:3](pf29.htm#fr_398) Compare Spiegel,
*Erânische Alterthumskunde*. Leipsic, 1871: vol. i., pp. 198-202.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[255:1](pf29.htm#fr_399) *Iliad*, xxi. 195.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[255:2](pf29.htm#fr_400) Hippolytus, 119.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[255:3](pf29.htm#fr_401) *Bundahish*, viii. 4.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[255:4](pf29.htm#fr_402) "In der Unterwelt gab
es ausser dem Styx noch drei Flüsse. Die Vierzahl entspricht derjenigen
der vier Paradiesflüsse."—Wolfgang Menzel, *Die vorchristliche
Unsterblichkeitslehre*, vol. ii., p. 6.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[256:1](pf29.htm#fr_403) Preller, *Griechische
Mythologie*, i. 29. Plato, in his cosmical sketch in Phædo, makes the
Hadean rivers pour into Tartaros.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[256:2](pf29.htm#fr_404) *Odyssey*, xx. 65.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[256:3](pf29.htm#fr_405) "Fountful Ida"
corresponds almost perfectly to the Iranian Hagar, down whose sides leap
and flow the waters of Ardvî-Sûra. Moreover, in its very name Lenormant
and others see a root connecting it with Ilâvrita, the circumpolar
paradisaic *varsha* of Puranic geography. It should be added that to
Ilâvrita corresponds significantly the Norse Idavöllr, or "plain of
Ida," which is "*in the middle* of the divine abode." Mallet, *Northern
Antiquities*, p. 409.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[256:4](pf29.htm#fr_406) "Der Eridanus ist
*ursprünglich* ein mythischer Fluss." Ideler, *Ursprung der
Sternennamen*, p. 229. See especially Robert Brown, Jr., *Eridanus*.
London, 1883.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[256:5](pf29.htm#fr_407) Compare the like
conclusion of Grill, *Die Erzväter der Menschheit*. Leipsic, 1875: i.,
pp. 222, 223. Grill also claims that the ancient Germans had a similar
world-river, p. 223. I cannot help thinking that in the descending
Ukko's stream and in the ascending Ämmä's stream of Finnish mythology we
have traces of a like cosmic <span id="page_257">p. 257</span> water
circulation. See Castrèn, *Mythologie*, p. 45. After reading the long
note in Buxtorfii, *Lexicon Chaldaicum, Talmudicum et Rabbinicum*,
Lipsiae, 1865, pp. 341, 342, one could also readily believe that we have
here the true origin of the two movements or paths set forth in the
omnifluent philosophy of Heraclitus: τὴν ὁδὸν κάτω, and τὴν ὁδὸν ἄνω.
Again, "In the Edda all rivers derive their origin from that called
*Ilver gelmer*." *Asiatic Researches*, vol. viii., p. 321.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[257:1](pf29.htm#fr_408) Attention is only
called to the ancient Akkadian hymn given by George Smith, *Assyrian
Discoveries*, pp. 392, 393; to the exceedingly interesting article by
Professor Sayce on "The Encircling River of the Snake-God of the Tree of
Life," in *The Academy*, London, Oct. 7, 1882, p. 263; and finally to
the instructive account of the Akkadian "mother of rivers" given in
Lenormant's *Origines*, ii. I, p. 133, a citation from which has already
been made on [p. 171](pf22.htm#page_171). See also Robert Brown, *The
Myth of Kirkè*, p. 110.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[257:2](pf29.htm#fr_409) "Die Ægypter wussten
schon frühe von einem die Erde umfliessenden Strom."—Grill, *Die
Erzväter der Menschheit*, i., p. 277.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[257:3](pf29.htm#fr_410) E. D. Perry, *Journal
of the American Oriental Society*, 1882, p. 134. He adds in a foot-note,
"In the Veda, 'water' and all corresponding terms, such as stream,
river, torrent, ocean, etc., are used indiscriminately of the water upon
the earth and of the aqueous vapor in the sky or of the rain in the
air." Compare M. Bergaigne: "L’eau <span id="page_258">p. 258</span> des
rivières terrestres est reconnue identique par sa nature et son origine
à celle des rivières célestes," etc., etc. *La Religion Védique*, tom.
i., p. 256. See pp. 251-261.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[258:1](pf29.htm#fr_411) Rig Veda, ix. 74, 6.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[258:2](pf29.htm#fr_412) Rig Veda, ix. 113, 8.
Grassmann translates it:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Wo König ist Vivasvats Sohn,  
 Und wo des Himmels Heiligthum  
 Wo ewig strömt des Wassers Born,  
 Da mache du unsterblich mich."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> See the "Hymns to
the Waters" generally, and particularly that addressed to *Apām Napāt*,
the "Navel of the Waters," *R.V.*, ii. 35, comparing therewith the
invocations to the "Navel of the Waters" in the Yashts. Darmesteter,
*Zend-Avesta*, ii. 6 n., 12, 14, 20, 36, 38, 39, 71, 94, 102, 202.
Windischmann, *Zoroastrische Studien*, pp. 177-186.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[258:3](pf29.htm#fr_413) "Der vedische Inder
redet von dem Sindhu κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν, dem Einen himmlischen Strom oder
Weltstrom, in dem er die Gesammtheit der atmosphärischen Dünste und
Wasser als in Bewegung begriffener und die Erde rings umfliessender sich
zur Anschauung bringt."—Grill, *Die Erzväter der Menschheit*, Th. i., p.
197.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[258:4](pf29.htm#fr_414) See the Vedic passages
in Bergaigne, *La Religion Védique*, tom. i., pp. 325-328.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[258:5](pf29.htm#fr_415) Wilkins, Hindu
Mythology. London, 1882: p. 102. In Indian cosmology the lunar sphere is
concentric with and includes the earth-sphere; hence water falling
perpendicularly from the celestial to the terrestrial pole can yet on
its way "wash the lunar sphere." So too a mountain at the North Pole, if
only high enough, will reach to the "lunar sphere." Such, in fact, was
the case with the Paradise mountain of Indian cosmology, and traces of
the idea live on in the Talmud <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> and in
Patristic theology too plain for even Massey to render valueless: "Meru
is shown to be the mount which reached to the moon and became a figure
of the four lunar quarters. . . . Hence the tradition that Paradise was
preserved during, or was exempt from, the Deluge because it was on the
summit of a mountain that reached to the moon (Bereshith Rabba,
xxxiii.); which shows the continuation of the typical mount of the seven
stars into the lunar phase of timekeeping, where the mount of the four
quarters carried Eden with it." *The Natural Genesis*, vol. ii., p. 244.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[259:1](pf29.htm#fr_416) Here is probably the
origin of the curious notion of the Sabæans touching the Euphrates. Or
was the borrowing on the other side? "Les Soubbas ont la certitude que
l’Euphrate, qui, d’après eux, prend sa source sous le trône d’Avather
(personnage qui préside au jugement des âmes et dont le trône est placé
sous *l’étoile polaire*), passait autrefois à Jérusalem." M. N. Siouffi,
*La Religion des Soubbas ou Sabéens*. Paris, 1880: p. 7, note. Jehovah's
city here takes the place of Brahma's.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[259:2](pf29.htm#fr_417) *The Vishnu Purana*,
Wilson's version, vol. vii., p. 120. Compare herewith the notions of the
Chinese Buddhists: "With reference to this land of Jambu-dwîpa \[the
earth\], the Buddhists say that in the <span id="page_260">p. 260</span>
midst of it is a centre (heart), called the lake A-nieou-to
(Anavataptu); it lies to the south of the Fragrant Mountains, and to the
north of the great Snowy Mountains (Himavat). It is 800 li in circuit.
In the midst of this lake is the abode of a Naga, who is in fact the
transformed appearance of Dasabhumi Bodhisatwa (or of the Bodhisatwas of
the ten earths). From his abode proceed four refreshing rivers, which
compass Jambu-dwîpa. At the east side of the lake, from the mouth of a
silver ox, flows out the Ganges River. After compassing the lake once it
enters the sea towards the southeast. From the south side of the lake,
from the mouth of a golden elephant, flows the Sindhu \[Indus\] River.
After compassing the lake once it enters the sea on the southwest. On
the west side of the lake, flowing from the mouth of a horse of
lapis-lazuli, flows the river Foh-tzu (Vakshu, *i.e.*, Oxus), which,
after compassing the lake once, enters the sea on the northwest. On the
north side of the lake, flowing from a crystal lion, flows the river
Sida \[Hoang-ho\], which after making one circuit flows into the sea on
the northeast." Beal, *Buddhist Literature in China*. 1882: p. 149.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[260:1](pf29.htm#fr_418) Thus in Africa, among
the Damaras, "the highest deity is Omakuru, the Rain-giver, who dwells
in the far North." E. B. Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, Am. ed., vol. ii.,
p. 259. So also in America: "Die alten Mexikaner glaubten, das Paradies
liege auf dem höchsten Berge, wo die Wolken sich versammeln, von wo sie
Regen bringen, and von wo auch die Flüsse herabkommen." Lüken,
*Traditionen*, i., p. 115. And this Paradise-mountain was in the
farthest North. See the pathetic prayer to Tlaloc in Bancroft, *Native
Races*, vol. iii., pp. 325-330.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[261:1](pf29.htm#fr_419) Compare verses 482-487
of the Old German legend of Brandan in Carl Schroeder, *Sanct Brandan*.
Erlangen, 1871: p. 61:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“Vor dem sale stûnt ein brunne,  
“ûz dem vlôz milch and wîn,  
“waz mohte wunderlîcher sîn.  
“ouch olei and honicseim darûz vlôz  
“daz *an vier enden* sich ergôz.”

</div>

The editor (p. 105) connects this last line with the quadripartite river
of Paradise, and the lines immediately following give it an
unequivocally cosmical significance:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“Von dem selben brunnen  
“haben die wurze saf gewunnen  
“die got liez gewerden ie.”

</div>

<span id="fn_420"></span>[261:2](pf29.htm#fr_420) *The Apocryphal
Gospels, Acts and Revelations*. *Ante-Nicene Christian Library*, vol.
xvi., p. 483.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Central Tree](pf30)
