[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf32)  [Next](pf34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

# PART SIXTH.

## THE SIGNIFICANCE OF OUR RESULTS.

<div align="center">

|                                  |                                                              |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">CHAP.</span> |                                                              |
| I.                               | FOR THE STUDY OF BIOLOGY AND TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS.            |
| II\.                             | FOR THE STUDY OF ANCIENT LITERATURE.                         |
| III\.                            | FOR THE PROBLEM OF THE ORIGIN AND EARLIEST FORM OF RELIGION. |
| IV\.                             | FOR THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY AND THEORY OF CIVILIZATION.    |

</div>

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<span class="small">But as when one lights a candle to look for one or
two things which they want, the light will not confine itself to those
two objects, so methinks, in seeking after these two, the Universal
Deluge and Paradise, and in retrieving the notion and doctrine of the
Primeval Earth upon which they depended, we have cast a light upon all
Antiquity.—<span class="smallcaps">Thomas Burnet</span>.</span>

<span class="small">I have laid it down as an invariable maxim
constantly to follow historical tradition, and to hold fast by that clue
even when many things appear strange and almost inexplicable, or at
least enigmatical; for in the investigation of ancient history, the
moment we let slip that thread of Ariadne, we can find no outlet from
the labyrinth of fanciful theories and the chaos of clashing
opinions.—<span class="smallcaps">F. von Schlegel</span>, *Philosophy of
History*.</span>

<span class="small">Le mythe du jardin d’Éden n’est point une fiction;
il nous donne, sous une forme d’enfantine poésie, la première page de
l’histoire morale de humanité, de cette histoire qui a pour documents
non plus simplement quelques silex plus ou moins taillés, mais toute
cette survivance d’une vie divine dans l’âme humaine, manifestée par ses
aspirations et ses douleurs, et par cet universal sentiment de la
déchéance, qui palpite dans toutes les mythologies et est l’inspiration
dominente de toutes les religions.—<span class="smallcaps">E. de
Pressensé</span>.</span>

<span class="small">Der Tempel des Heidenthums ist ein uralter Bau, aber
ein Bau der nicht aus dem Heidenthum stammt und nicht von den Heiden
selbst errichtet ist. Die Mythen-Inschriften und heiligen Legenden
dieses Tempels enthalten ursprünglich die Urgeschichte der Welt und des
Menschengeschlechtes, und die Verheissungen welche demselben im Anfange
geworden sind.—<span class="smallcaps">Lüken</span>.</span>

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

### CHAPTER I.

#### THE BEARING OF OUR RESULTS ON THE STUDY OF BIOLOGY AND TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span class="small">How seemed this globe of ours when thou didst scan it?<br />
  When in thy lusty youth there sprang to birth<br />
All that hath life, unnurtured, and the planet<br />
  Was Paradise, the true Saturnian Earth!<br />
Far toward the Poles was stretched the Happy Garden,<br />
  Earth kept it fair by warmth from her own breast;<br />
Toil had not come to dwarf her sons and harden;<br />
  No crime (there was no want!) perturbed their rest.<br />
                   EDMUND C. STEDMAN, The Skull in the Gold Drift.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">*The solution of the problem of Life may come from
an unexpected quarter*.—<span class="smallcaps">John
Fiske</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> the alleged facts and the conclusions
of the foregoing chapters shall be accepted as correct, it is plain that
in finding the true answer to one of the longest standing and most
baffling of the problems of Biblical theology we have at the same time
found one of those central key-truths, acquaintance with which affects a
great many other kinds of knowledge. Indeed, it is not too much to say
that the acceptance of this alleged truth upon its appropriate
evidences, must affect men's estimate of the *sources* of knowledge. For
if the sacred traditions of mankind, when once rightly interpreted, are
discovered to be in astonishing harmony with each other, and to yield
results which our most advanced sciences, working in the most varied
fields of research, singularly conspire to verify, this discovery cannot
fail to give new significance to history in all

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

its departments and in all its teachings. But apart from this general
effect of a verification of ancient testimony, our precise conclusion as
to the location of the cradle of the human race has a most evident and
important connection with all physical, paleontological, archæological,
philological, mythological, ethnological, and "culture-historical"
speculation,—in a word, a most evident and important connection with
about every problem which in a marked degree attracts and occupies our
modern thought. <span id="fr_515"></span>[1](#fn_515.md) In the present
Part it is proposed to notice the relation of our facts and conclusions
to a few of these fields of study, and first of all, in the present
chapter, their bearing upon the study of biology and terrestrial
physics.

In Part Third and in the seventh chapter of Part Fifth and elsewhere, we
have already had various illustrations of the fascinating and
authenticating light which the biological sciences can throw upon the
study of prehistoric traditions. Possibly the reader, if devoted to this
kind of study, has wondered why a field of illustration so rich has not
oftener been utilized by writers upon antiquity. But however important
this bearing of biological upon prehistoric studies may be, it should
not be forgotten that the counterpart bearing of the study

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

of the earliest traceable thoughts and beliefs of mankind upon biology
and upon the most fruitful study of biology is not a whit less
important. This is a point of utmost moment to the fields of knowledge
concerned and also to the general theory of personal and organized
culture; yet it is a point most infrequently brought under the
consideration of thoughtful readers.

It is an unfortunate and ominous fact that the average biologist of the
present day sees nothing worthy of his professional attention back of
the present century. The intellectual history of the human race has not
the slightest interest for him or value for his work. Ages on ages of
human observation and thought and speculation touching the problems of
life are to him as if they had never been. If he acquaints himself with
them in the slightest degree, it is usually only for the sake of amusing
his hearers with what he considers the grotesque and absurd ideas of
former times, and impressing them with the contrast which latter-day
"science" presents. For all that his race has done until just before his
own immediate teachers began, he has little more than pity and contempt.

Now, in any department of human learning, such an attitude of mind is
certainly to be deplored. Its effects are detrimental in every aspect.
In proportion as it prevails among any class of intellectual workers, in
just that proportion does that class become isolated from the one
collective and historic intellectual life of humanity. In this way the
collective intellectual life suffers, and yet more do the isolated
workers suffer. Humanity, conscious of an intellectual history,
naturally comes to pay little

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

attention to these men who deny it, or take no interest in it. On the
other hand, any class of men who ignore the history of the human mind
and begin all true history and all true science with their own
achievements, by this very procedure place themselves outside that
spiritual fellowship in which all forms and fragments of knowledge find
unity and mutual supplementing. The circle of their intellectual
sympathies and tastes is narrowed. With the loss of broad sympathies and
tastes they are in danger of losing even the capacity to discern and
appreciate any kind of truth outside the limited range of their own
specialized field of professional research. So far has this perilous
tendency already gone that it is a difficult thing in any country to
find a celebrated biologist whose publicly advocated theory of education
for his own field of labor does not quietly ignore, or actively
antagonize, the broadening historical and humanistic studies which alone
can qualify a man for intelligent sympathy with all good learning.
Unless the tendency can in some way be checked, there is positive danger
lest the special cultivators of biology and the natural sciences become
as narrow and isolated and influenceless a guild of experts as are the
antiquarian-catalogue makers of modern Europe. <span
id="fr_516"></span>[1](#fn_516.md)

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

In studies like the one which has thus far engaged us lies the best
possible corrective for this one-sidedness. In this field are found
stimulation for the student's curiosity, facts for his understanding,
arguments for his reason, play for his imagination. And all the time his
study of Nature and his study of Man are mutually helpful to each other.
He now has Nature and her life before him in *two* forms: first, as she
has entombed herself in the great cemetery of the rocks; and secondly,
as she has pictured herself in historic and even prehistoric human
thought. If the former gives her with greater tangibility, it is only
the tangibility of the mouldering skeleton. It is the latter which shows
her alive and filled with all life's meanings. Each is important in its
place, both being reciprocally corrective and mutually complementary.

As yet the biologist has not profited by ancient conceptions of Nature
as he should have done. How long and slow has been the progress of the
botanist up to this latest conception that all the life-forms of the
vegetable kingdom proceeded originally from one centre, and that at the
Pole! The ancient Iranian myth of "the tree of all seeds," from which
proceeded "the germs of all species of plants" that ever grew, and
which, moreover, was located at the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> North Pole, ought
long ago to have suggested to him the truth as to the genetic unity of
the vegetable kingdom and also as to its pristine centre of
distribution. The same may be said of the zoölogist and the
suggestiveness of the myths of the same people respecting "the primeval
ox" and the *Gosh*, "the personification of the animal kingdom." <span
id="fr_517"></span>[1](#fn_517.md) In these survivals of ancient culture we
have the forms in which prehistoric zoölogy expressed the unity, the
monogenesis, and the north polar origin of the entire fauna of the
earth.

It is now, perhaps, too late for the biologist to gain from these
particular myths the instruction which generations ago they could have
given him. By slower and more painful methods this beautiful polocentric
conception of the vegetable, animal, and human worlds has at last been
reached. The problems of earliest floral and faunal and ethnic
distribution have shut men up to its acceptance. But if the discovery of
the accordant significance of these ancient myths has been equally
delayed, we may at least indulge the hope that the unexpected agreement
of the prehistoric conception with that of latest science will inspire
in candid students of Nature a new and higher respect for the primeval
teachings and beliefs of mankind. Meantime let it not be forgotten that
there are other myths, of equal antiquity and possibly of wider
prevalence, the significance of which for the progress of biology may
to-day be as great as ever was that of the tree of all seeds.

Notice, for example, this curious fact: that while in ancient East Aryan
thought the gods on Mount

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Meru are of
prodigious stature the proper tenants of the adjacent regions are
somewhat less, though still gigantic; and they seem to dwindle regularly
in size from Varsha to Varsha, until we reach Bhârata, the Varsha which
borders upon the equatorial ocean and is peopled with ordinary men. And
as if the inhabitants of Hades, being still farther to the South, must
be by some law of nature still smaller than men, Prince Satyavân's soul,
when led away to Yama's abode, is described in the Mahâbhârata as only
"a thumb in height." A striking gradation, every one will say. Beginning
with beings sometimes represented as miles in height, it ends on the
borders of the Land of Death with disembodied spirits whose stature is
only a thumb's length. But this conception of the range of the kingdom
of generated and mutable life was not limited to the ancestors of the
Hindus. In the most ancient Greek thought the proper habitat of the
Pygmies was near the equatorial Ocean-river; farther northward was the
abode of men; still farther proceeding, one came into the region of
giants; while in polar Olympos the gods were so colossal that in his
fall prostrate Arês "covered seven acres." <span
id="fr_518"></span>[1](#fn_518.md) Traces of the same remarkable adjustment
are found in other mythologies. <span id="fr_519"></span>[2](#fn_519.md)
Possibly this far-off prehistoric conception has some significance, some
lesson for the biology of to-day.

What should this lesson be if not that in all our

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

researches into the origin and sustaining conditions of life the
phenomena of the highest North should be taken into account? Too long
have those who busy themselves with these investigations been turning
their attention to the ice-cold abysses of the "deep sea," hoping in
some "bathybius" clot of the sunless ocean-bottom to find the
protoplasmic power which has transmuted inorganic matter into microcosms
of organic life. In no such region of cold and darkness should this
search be made. <span id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_520.md) Let life's
beginnings and life's feeding forces be looked for where its supreme
vigor and exuberance have been seen,—at the pristine centre whence the
types and forms of life have spread victoriously through the world; let
them be studied at the Pole. <span id="fr_521"></span>[2](#fn_521.md)

On this subject as conservative an authority as

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Principal Dawson
recently remarked: "It is not impossible that in the plans of the
Creator *the continuous summer sun of the Arctic regions* may have been
made the means for the introduction, or at least for the rapid growth
and multiplication, of new and more varied types of plants." <span
id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_522.md)

In this true centre what new and interesting aspects the problems of
life immediately take on! <span id="fr_523"></span>[2](#fn_523.md) Here we
have a regnancy of sunlight such as we never dreamed of in our lower
zones. Here we have

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

a tension and a direction of terrestrial magnetism with whose biological
significance we are utterly unacquainted. Here we have electric forces
which pour their currents through every grass-blade, and tip the very
hills with lambent flame. <span id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_524.md) Shall
not such absolutely exceptional biological conditions and energies be
found to yield some exceptional biological result? Is not this a more
hopeful field for the study of the origin of life than the dark and
almost congealed recesses of the deep sea? The old theologians were
accustomed to call Adam and Eve

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

the "*Protoplasts;*" in their ancient polar home it is possible that
science may yet discover the divine secret of all "*protoplasm*."

Again, our new interest in one of the terrestrial polar regions gives
fresh significance to the contrasts between the two. <span
id="fr_525"></span>[1](#fn_525.md) Within ten years our most eminent
American geologist has said, "I find no explanation in the present state
of science, wherefore most of the dry land of the globe should have been
located about the North Pole, and of the water about the South.
Physicists say that it indicates greater attraction and therefore a
greater density in the solid material beneath the southern ocean. But
why the mineral ingredients should have been so gathered about the South
Pole as to give the crust there greater density is the unanswered query.
It may be that magnetite is much more abundantly diffused through the
Antarctic crust than the Arctic. This is only one of many possibilities,
and it is at present without a satisfactory fact to stand upon beyond
the general truth that iron was universally present." <span
id="fr_526"></span>[2](#fn_526.md)

But the diversity of the two Poles is as great and as perplexing to the
biologist as to the physical geographer. "The researches made show that
the two polar regions differ greatly. The seas of the

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arctic teem with
animal life. Land animals, such as the bear, wolf, reindeer, musk-ox,
and Arctic fox, are scattered over the frozen surface of the land where
they find the means of sustenance. The air is peopled with innumerable
flocks of birds; a hardy vegetation extends close up to the Arctic
Circle, and beyond it, in mosses, lichens, scurvy-grass, sorrel, small
stunted shrubs, dwarfed trees, and in summer beautiful flowers. In the
Antarctic, on the contrary, vegetation ceases at a certain limit, trees
terminating at about 56° S. latitude. Animal life abounds in the seas,
but though birds exist in great numbers and in varieties unknown in the
Arctic, no quadrupeds are found upon the land." <span
id="fr_527"></span>[1](#fn_527.md)

With this we may compare the already cited language of Sir Joseph
Hooker: "Geographically speaking, there is no Antarctic flora except a
few lichens and seaweeds." <span id="fr_528"></span>[2](#fn_528.md)

Would it not seem as if the South Pole must have been covered by "the
barren sea" at the period when floral and faunal life, starting at its
Arctic centre, began its conquering marches over all the Earth? Or is
there rather some marked difference in the biological value of the poles
themselves? <span id="fr_529"></span>[3](#fn_529.md)

But polar biological research involves antecedent Polar Exploration and
a wider and more systematic

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

study of Terrestrial Physics. <span id="fr_530"></span>[1](#fn_530.md)
Herein lies a fresh and novel impulse to reinvest on every side the
still uncaptured citadel of the Arctic Pole. Long ago could Maury write,
"As science has advanced, men have looked with deeper and deeper
longings toward the mystic circles of the Polar regions. There icebergs
are framed and glaciers launched; there the tides have their cradle, the
whales their nursery; there the winds complete their circuits, and the
currents of the sea their round; there the aurora is lighted up, and the
trembling needle brought to rest; there, too, in the mazes of that
mystic circle, terrestrial forces of occult power and of vast influence
upon the well-being of man are continually at play. Within the Arctic
Circle is the pole of the winds and the poles of cold, the pole of the
earth and of the magnet. It is a circle of mysteries; and the desire to
enter it, to explore its untrodden wastes and secret chambers, and to
study its physical aspects has grown into a longing. Noble daring has
made Arctic ice and snow-clad seas classic ground. It is no feverish
excitement nor vain ambition that leads men there. It is a higher
feeling, a holier motive: a desire to look into the works of creation,
to comprehend the economy of our planet, and to grow wiser and better by
the knowledge." If such a passion for discovery could be kindled in the
presence of the older and more abstract problems, what ought to be the
result when to these are added the possibility of solving at least some
of the mysteries of Nature's Life, and the certainty of standing where
Human Life began!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_515"></span>[314:1](pf33.htm#fr_515.md) Even psychological
research may be found to have a profound interest in our result: "Here
the question arises how far it \[the juggler's mind-power over matter\]
may be affected by, or dependent upon, electrical and magnetic phenomena
and surroundings and climatic influences, since it flourishes at its
best, both in the Old World and in the New, as one approaches the
regions of the Arctic Circle, and enters the lands of the aurora and
midnight sun." G. Archie Stockwell, M. D., "Indian Jugglery and
Psychology," in *The Independent*, New York, Sept. 27, 1883, p. 1221.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[316:1](pf33.htm#fr_516.md) A few years ago Mr.
John Stuart Mill, in an address before a Scotch university, put forth a
defense of the claims of classical studies to a place in the regular
university curriculum. For this one crime he was recently editorially
assailed and vilified through several columns of an American organ of
natural science, and despite the fact that he was notoriously a
disbeliever in Revelation, and was a professed admirer of Comte's
atheistic evolutional sociology, the dreadful charge is brought forward:
"He was in the Golden-Age, Paradise-Lost dispensation of thought, in
which the notions of the early perfection of mankind and the superiority
of the ancients were <span id="page_317">p. 317</span> contrasted with
the degeneracy of the moderns; and so completely was his intellect
possessed and perverted by this view that he was disabled from
appreciating the immense and epoch-making influence of the modern
doctrine of evolution." "The Dead-Language Superstition," *Popular
Science Monthly*, New York, 1883, p. 703. Such naturalists are too
unlettered to know their own party leaders, or to be aware of the fact
that it is precisely to biology that Mill pays the splendid tribute of
declaring that among all departments of human knowledge it "affords as
yet the only example of the true principles of rational classification."

<span id="fn_517"></span>[318:1](pf33.htm#fr_517.md) Darmesteter, *The
Zend-Avesta*, Part ii., p. 110.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[319:1](pf33.htm#fr_518.md) *Iliad*, xxi. 407. In
keeping herewith the more than gigantic Poseidon passes with four
strides from Thracian Samos to Ægæ. *Il*., xiii. 20.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[319:2](pf33.htm#fr_519.md) "The idea of the soul
as a sort of 'thumbling' is familiar to the Hindus and to German
folk-lore."—E. B. Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, i. 450 n.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[320:1](pf33.htm#fr_520.md) "As we descend from
the shore into deep water, the temperature becomes lower and lower the
deeper we go, until we come to a stratum or zone of water about 32°-36°
Fahrenheit, where circumpolar or Arctic life alone abounds. . . . The
water of the ocean all over the globe below a depth of one thousand
fathoms is of an Arctic temperature."—Packard, *Zoölogy*, p. 665.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[320:2](pf33.htm#fr_521.md) Since the above was
written, a distinguished specialist in deep-sea dredging has borne the
following striking testimony: "With regard to the constitution of the
deep-sea fauna, one of the most remarkable features is the general
absence from it of Paleozoic forms, excepting so far as representatives
of the Mollusca and Brachiopoda are concerned; and it is remarkable that
amongst the deep-sea Mollusca no representatives of the *Nautilidæ* and
*Ammonitidæ*, so excessively abundant in ancient periods, occur, and
that *Lingula*, the most ancient Brachiopod, should occur in shallow
water only." Professor H. N. Moseley, F. R. S., Biological Address
before British Association in 1884. Nature, August 28, 1884, p. 428. The
same high authority adds, "With regard to the origin of the deep-sea
fauna there can be little doubt that it has been derived almost entirely
from the littoral fauna,"—agreeing herein with Professor Sven Loven in
his "splendid monograph," *Pourtalesia*, Stockholm, 1883. The funeral
sermon of the *bathybius* theory of the origin of life has already been
preached, and the text of the sermon was Job xxviii. 24.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[321:1](pf33.htm#fr_522.md) "The Genesis and
Migration of Plants," in *The Princeton Review*, 1879, p. 292.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[321:2](pf33.htm#fr_523.md) The following, from a
recent newspaper, suggests some of the new lines of desirable
investigation:—

"The Norwegian plant-geographer, Schubeler, a short time ago called
attention to some striking and surprising peculiarities manifested by
vegetation in high latitudes, which he ascribed to the intensive
light-effects of the long days. Most plants in these regions produce
much larger and heavier seeds than in lower latitudes. Grain is heavier
in the North than in the more Southern latitudes; the increase of weight
being due to the assimilation of non-nitrogenous substances, while the
protein products have no part in it. The leaves of most plants grow
larger in the higher latitudes, and at the same time take on a deeper,
darker color. This fact has been observed not only in most of the wild
trees and shrubs, but also in fruit trees and even in kitchen-garden
plants. It has further been observed that the flowers of most plants are
larger and more deeply colored, and that many flowers which are white in
the South become in the far North violet."

So potent and irrepressible are the powers of life in highest Arctic
latitudes that neither darkness nor the indescribable cold avail against
them. The algic flora well illustrates this statement. According to a
writer in Nature, Oct. 30, 1884, nearly all Arctic algæ live several
years, and, in order that they may be able to effect the work of
propagation and nourishment, their organs are in operation during the
dark as well as the light season. Whilst wintering at the northernmost
part of Spitzbergen in 1872-73, Professor Kjellman observed, in the
middle of the winter—viz., at a time when the sun was lowest, and the
darkness, therefore, most intense—that a considerable development and
growth of the organs of nourishment took place, while, as regards the
organs of propagation, he found that <span id="page_322">p. 322</span>
it was just at this season that they were most developed. Spores of all
kinds were produced and became mature, and they developed into splendid
plants. The Arctic algæ, therefore, present the remarkable spectacle of
plants which develop their organs of nourishment, and particularly their
*organs of propagation*, all the year round, even during the long Polar
night, growing regularly at a temperature of between -1° and -2° C., and
even attaining a great size at a temperature which never rises above
freezing-point. As to "mother-region," the result at which Professor
Kjellman arrived was that the algæ flora of the Arctic Ocean is not an
immigrant flora, but that its origin lay in the Polar Sea itself. This
theory is, he believes, proved by the fact that the Arctic algæ flora is
rich in endemic species. There are many species found both in the
Northern Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans, a large percentage of which
reaches very far north in the Arctic Sea, and which have attained a high
degree of development there, being characteristic algæ of the Arctic
Ocean; and that these species have been originated there, and gradually
spread to the other two oceans is, as he believes, more than probable.
How little our zonal diversities of climate affect the question of the
possibility of a universal distribution of a north polar flora, or even
fauna, is well illustrated in the following: "A remarkable fact
associated with the ocean temperature is that forms of animal life
belonging to the Arctic seas have been dredged up from the Antarctic
Ocean at depths of two thousand fathoms, and may have passed from pole
to pole through the tropics \[in deep-sea currents\] *without having
been subjected to a greater variation of temperature than some five
degrees or so*." Gen. R. McCormick, *Voyages of Discovery in the Arctic
and Antarctic Seas*. London, 1884: vol. i., p. 354.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[322:1](pf33.htm#fr_524.md) *The Arctic Manual*,
p. 739.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[323:1](pf33.htm#fr_525.md) "The higher mean
temperature of the Northern compared to the Southern hemisphere is
clearly proved and universally acknowledged." Professor Hennessy on
"Terrestrial Climate" in *Philosophical Magazine and Journal of
Science*. London and Edinburgh, 1859: p. 189. On the Northern
hemisphere's greater length of spring and summer see Malte-Brun, *System
of Universal Geography*. Boston, 1834: vol. i., p. 14. Also Mansfield
Merriman, *The Figure of the Earth*. New York, 1881: p. 76. The
disparity of mean temperature is now believed to be less than was
formerly supposed.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[323:2](pf33.htm#fr_526.md) Professor Dana, in
*American Journal of Science*, 1875, vol. xxi.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[324:1](pf33.htm#fr_527.md) C. P. Daly in
*Johnson's Cyclopædia*, Art. "Polar Research."

<span id="fn_528"></span>[324:2](pf33.htm#fr_528.md) *Nature*, London,
1881, p. 447.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[324:3](pf33.htm#fr_529.md) The latter explanation
would seem to be favored by the experiments of Dr. Ferdinand Cohn, who
found that a positive electrode would hinder the development of
micrococcus "*in bei weitem höherem Grade als die negative*." *Beiträge
zur Biologie der Pflanzen*. Breslau, 1879: p. 159. It is also known that
eggs may be hatched quicker at one pole of a magnet than at the other.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[325:1](pf33.htm#fr_530.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>, Sect. VII.: "Latest Polar Research."
Also Andree, *Der Kampf um den Nordpol*. 4 Aufl., Bielefeld, 1882.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Bearing of Our Results on the Study of Ancient
Literature](pf34.md)
