[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf34)  [Next](pf36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### THE BEARING OF OUR RESULTS ON THE PROBLEM OF THE ORIGIN AND EARLIEST FORM OF RELIGION.

<span class="small">*The more I search into the ancient history of the
world, the more I am convinced that the cultivated nations commenced
with a purer worship of the Supreme Being; that the magic influence of
Nature upon the imaginations of the human race afterward produced
polytheism, and at length entirely obscured spiritual conceptions of
religion in the belief of the people*.—<span class="smallcaps">A. W. von
Schlegel</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*La prétendue évolution de la vie sauvage, telle que
la décrit l’école naturaliste en la considérant comme le premier degré
du développement de l’humanité, a deux grands défauts: elle part de trop
bas, et elle s’élhve trop haut; car il lui est impossible d’expliquer
les progrès qu’elle constate dans l’humanité, une fois qu’elle la fait
débuter par la bestialité complète*.—<span class="smallcaps">E. de
Pressensé</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> is another class of investigations
of remarkable present interest,—investigations lying partly in the
anthropological and partly in the theological field of research,—on
which the discussions and results of the present treatise have a most
important bearing. They are the questions which relate to the Origin,
the Primordial Form, and the true History of Religion.

Such light is greatly needed at the present time. As we have seen, all
the most ancient traditions of the race represent mankind as having
commenced existence in a divine fellowship, and as having lost this holy
and blessed estate only through sin. This view of the Origin of Religion
has prevailed from the beginning of traceable history among all nations
of the earth, varying only to such slight extent as would permit
polytheistic peoples to conceive of the

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

primeval divine fellowship polytheistically, and the monotheistic
peoples monotheistically. To a monotheist it is significant that several
of the ancient nations, representing widely differing races, as for
example the Egyptians, the Persians, and the Chinese, seem to have been
more monotheistic in their earliest traceable conceptions of religion
than in their later and latest creed and practice. But without dwelling
upon this, it may be stated as a broad and impressive fact that, with
the exception of a few speculative authors, nearly all of whom have
lived since the middle of the last century, the solid traditional belief
of the whole human family in every age of the world has been that man
began his existence pure and sinless, and in conscious and intelligent
divine communion. <span id="fr_618"></span>[1](#fn_618) *This is the
pan-ethnic no less than the Biblical doctrine of the Origin and First
Form of Religion among men*.

It was remarked a moment ago that at the present time new light is
greatly needed on this question. The need is special for the reason that
for about a hundred years past certain speculative minds, oblivious of
the early history of mankind, ignoring the sacred books of all nations,
despising the consentaneous convictions of all peoples, and more or less
ridiculing the very idea on which religion itself is based,—namely, the
idea of the existence and action of extra-human and super-human
personalities,—have undertaken to set aside the view which we have above
described as the pan-ethnic doctrine of the Origin of Religion, and to
substitute

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

for it some other explanation, so framed as to make it appear that
religion originated from man himself, apart from any divine
manifestation, or teaching, or impulse whatsoever. The result has been a
succession of crude speculations, inadequate in their premises and
contradictory in their respective conclusions. Professing unusual
philosophic candor, aided by the interest which always attends novel
attempts to set aside the beliefs of ages; adapting themselves to every
class of readers, and especially to all the successively ruling fashions
in non-religious and irreligious current speculation, these writers have
at last not only wrought a perfect confusion in this portion of the
Philosophy of Religion, but have furthermore so degraded and bestialized
their readers’ conception of primitive humanity, and so outraged all
probability in their descriptions of primitive savagery, that even from
biological and sociological sides a strong reaction has already set in.

It will be instructive briefly to review the history of these
speculations, and to note .the successive stages of ever-deepening error
and the mutual contradiction of their much-admired results.

The first of them of any note was David Hume, the English deist and
champion of philosophic doubt. In his "Natural History of Religion"
(published in 1755), he lays down this as his first and fundamental
proposition: "Polytheism was the primary religion of mankind."

His first argument in support of this thesis is an appeal to the
evidence of post-christian history. He puts it thus:

"It is a matter of fact, incontestable, that about 1700 years ago all
mankind were polytheists. The

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

doubtful and skeptical principles of a few philosophers, or the
theism—and that not entirely too pure—of one or two nations, form no
objection worth regarding. Behold, then, the clear testimony of history.
The farther we mount into antiquity the more do we find mankind plunged
into polytheism. No marks, no symptoms, of any more perfect religion.
The most ancient records of the human race still present us with that
system as the popular and established creed. The North, the South, the
East, the West, give their unanimous testimony to the same fact. What
can be opposed to so full an evidence?"

The force of this passage consists almost exclusively in its cool
positiveness of dogmatic assertion. Plainly, the condition of the
majority of mankind 1700 years ago affords no just criterion by which to
judge of the condition of the race thousands of years before that.
Indeed, to any believer in historic evolution of any sort, it would seem
antecedently certain that the condition of men several thousand years
after the commencement of their existence must be very different indeed
from their primitive condition. But, furthermore, he grants that 1700
years ago the prevalence of polytheism was, after all, not universal;
there were "one or two nations" of theists, and even philosophers in
other nations, who doubted the truth of polytheism. It was absurd,
therefore, to talk of "the unanimous testimony" of North and South, East
and West.

The second point urged by Hume is the improbability of the supposition
that "a barbarous, necessitous animal, such as man is, on the first
origin of society," a being "pressed by such numerous wants and
passions," should have had either the

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

disposition, or the capacity, or the leisure, so to study "the order and
frame of the universe" as immediately to be led "into the pure
principles of theism." He grants that a careful and philosophic
consideration of the unity and order of the natural world is sufficient
to conduct one to an assured belief in the being of one Supreme and
Almighty Creator, but he says, "I can never think that this
consideration could have an influence on mankind when they formed their
first rude notions of religion." Assuming that the first men must
necessarily have been "an ignorant multitude," he says,—

"It seems certain that, according to the natural progress of human
thought, the ignorant multitude must first entertain some groveling and
familiar notion of superior powers before they stretch their conception
to that perfect Being who bestowed order on the whole frame of nature."

The force of this argument it is difficult to see. It all rests upon two
assumptions: first, the assumption that the first men were the lowest
barbarians,—to use his own words, "barbarous, necessitous animals;" and,
secondly, the assumption that there was, apart from the philosophic
study of nature, no other way in which they could have obtained a belief
in the existence of the Creator. As no religionist of any age has ever
admitted these assumptions, and as Hume adduces no particle of proof for
either of them, this part of his argument is surely quite unworthy of a
professed philosopher.

His next and last point is the impossibility of the loss of the
monotheistic faith if it had once been reached by the earliest men. He
says,—

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

"If men were at first led into the belief of one superior Being by
reasoning from the frame of nature, they could never possibly leave
\[have left\] that belief in order to embrace polytheism; but the same
principles of reason which at first produced and diffused over mankind
so magnificent an opinion must be \[have been\] able, with greater
facility, to preserve it. The first invention and proof of any doctrine
is much more difficult than the supporting and retaining of it."

Here our author appears to even poorer advantage than in either of his
former arguments. In the first place, as before, he ignores the
possibility of supposing a knowledge of God by means of a divine
self-manifestation, thus covertly misrepresenting or evading the only
point in debate. In the second place, the assertion that if the first
men had attained to a pure theism they never could have left it and
become polytheists should be compared with his own later assertions in
Section viii. of the same treatise, where he describes what he himself
calls the "Flux and Reflux of Polytheism and Theism." This section opens
thus:—

"It is remarkable that the principles of religion have a kind of flux
and reflux in the human mind, and that men have a natural tendency to
rise from idolatry to theism, and to sink again from theism into
idolatry."

The author then states his well-known theory of the origin of polytheism
as the first form of religion, and his theory of the rise of monotheism
out of polytheism. But when a people have thus reached a belief in a God
possessed of "the attributes of unity and affinity, simplicity and
spirituality," there

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

comes—so he declares—a natural relapse into polytheism. The explanation
of this is given in these words:—

"Such refined ideas \[as those of pure monotheism\], being somewhat
disproportioned to vulgar comprehension, remain not long in their
original purity, but require to be supported by the notion of inferior
mediators or subordinate agents, which interpose between mankind and
their supreme deity. These demi-gods, or middle beings, partaking more
of human nature, and being more familiar to us, become the chief objects
of devotion. . . . But as these idolatrous religions fall every day into
grosser and more vulgar corruptions, they at last destroy themselves,
and by the vile representations which they form of their duties make the
tide turn again toward them."

Thus monotheism and polytheism are, to Hume, two opposites, between
which the human mind forever oscillates. This being so, it is plain that
this oscillation is grounded in reason, or it is not. If it is grounded
in reason, then primitive men may have reasoned their way into
monotheism as their first religious faith, and still have relapsed into
polytheism as the natural and rational reaction. On the other hand, if
the oscillation is not grounded in reason, then, as by his own account
all later religious states of mankind have been unreasonable, the
*first* may have been altogether different from what Hume would have
considered rational; that is, may have been a state of pure monotheism.

Such was Hume's attempted demonstration of the primitiveness of
polytheism, and the whole of it.

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

Five years later, in 1760, De Brosses, one of Voltaire's correspondents,
published his crude but noteworthy book on "The Worship of Fetiches; or,
Parallel of the Ancient Religion of Egypt with the Present Religion of
Nigritia." This was the writer who first gave currency to the word
"fetichism," and who first postulated it as the invariable antecedent of
polytheism. De Brosses, however, was a professed believer in primeval
divine revelation, and he made the Hebrews an exception to his general
claim that all ancient nations began with fetichism, rose thence to
polytheism, and tended thence toward monotheism. In the early part of
the present century, however, Auguste Comte, ignoring any primeval
revelation, elevated De Brosses’ generalization into an absolute law of
historic development. He gave the greater plausibility and influence to
it by representing this law of theological progress as only part of a
yet broader social law, according to which humanity, having traversed
this "theological stage" in the manner indicated, passes next through a
"metaphysical" one, and finally attains the "scientific" stage of
atheistic positivism.

In Germany, in 1995, Hume's opinion found an able representative in G.
L. Bauer, of Altdorf, and ten years later we see Meiners, in his
"Universal History of Religion," repeating and enforcing the notion of
the absolute primitiveness of fetichism. The rationalistic and
pantheistic tendencies of German speculation about this time were, of
course, favorable to any new theory which discredited the Biblical one,
and thus it came to pass that before the middle of the present century
the De Brosses theory, in its completer Comtean form, became almost

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

universally adopted. Speaking of its prevalence, Professor Max Müller
says:—

"All of us have been brought up on it. I myself certainly held it for a
long time, and never doubted it till I became more and more startled by
the fact that, while in the earliest accessible documents of religious
thought we look in vain for any very clear traces of fetichism, they
become more and more frequent everywhere in the latter stages of
religious development, and are certainly more visible in the later
corruptions of the Indian religion, beginning with the Atharvana, than
in the earliest hymns of the Rig Veda." <span
id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_619)

For many years our works on primeval history have been saturated with
this idea. Even professedly Christian writers upon the History of
Religions, and upon Comparative Theology, have largely fallen in with
the prevailing notion. As one has well said, "The very theory has become
a kind of scientific fetich, though like most fetiches it seems to owe
its existence to ignorance and superstition."

For some time past, however, this long dominant dogma of naturalism has
been losing credit with all careful students of the world's religions,
and indeed with the more thorough professional ethnologists. In his
recent work, "The Hibbert Lectures on the Origin and Growth of
Religion," <span id="fr_620"></span>[2](#fn_620) Max Müller, himself for
a long time, as we have seen, a believer in the theory, publicly
challenges its correctness. In Lecture second, after rapidly sketching
the rise and remarkable prevalence of the theory, he exposes,

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

with much acuteness and with his usual wealth of illustrative facts, the
indiscriminateness with which the term fetichism has been currently
used, and the worthlessness of evidence upon which Comte and others have
relied. He sets forth, respectfully but strongly, the inadequacy of
their psychological explanation of the origin of fetichism, and shows
that even the West African fetich-worshipers hold at the same time other
views properly polytheistic, or, in some cases, even monotheistic.
Summing up his own conclusions, he says,—

“The results at which we have arrived after examining the numerous works
on fetichism from the days of De Brosses to our own time may be summed
up under four heads:—

“First. The meaning of the word fetich has remained undefined from its
first introduction, and has by most writers been so much extended that
it may include almost every symbolical or imitative representation of
religious objects.

“Second. Among people who have a history we find that everything which
falls under the category of fetich points to historical and
psychological antecedents. We are therefore not justified in supposing
that it has been otherwise among people whose religious development
happens to be unknown or inaccessible to us.

“Third. There is no religion which has kept itself entirely free from
fetichism.

“Fourth. There is no religion which consists entirely of
fetichism.” <span id="fr_621"></span>[1](#fn_621)

So able an *exposé* of the shortcomings of the fetichistic philosophy of
the origin of religion, coming

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

from the pen of a scholar so widely and deservedly revered, cannot fail
to produce in the world of general readers and second-hand writers a
profound and wholesome impression. Probably the work will fail of
becoming "epoch-making" solely in consequence of something for which the
author is not responsible, namely, the fact that in discussing to-day
this dogma of primitive fetichism one is really dealing with an issue
which in advanced circles is already dead. Even Mr. Andrew Lang, perhaps
the most antagonistic of all Professor Müller's reviewers, is not
himself willing to make fetichism the "first 'moment' in the development
of religion." <span id="fr_622"></span>[1](#fn_622) Ten or fifteen years
earlier the polemic would have done many times the good it can now.
During this period a decided change has taken place. There remained a
decade or two ago a further step, and but one further step, for the
advocates of the naturalistic view of the origin of religion to take.
Hume had made polytheism the primitive faith; Comte thought to go back
of this, and to postulate a still more rudimentary form as antedating
polytheism. It remained to go back of fetichism, and predicate of the
first men *absolute atheism*. This various recent authors have done,
prominent among whom, in England, is Sir John Lubbock. In chapter iv. of
his work, miscalled "The Origin of Civilization, and the Primitive
Condition of Man," <span id="fr_623"></span>[2](#fn_623) he classifies
"the first great stages of religious thought" as follows:

First. *Atheism;* "understanding by this term not

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

a denial of the existence of a deity, but an absence of any definite
ideas on the subject."

Second. *Fetichism*. In the state of primeval atheism men were "not
without a belief in invisible beings." They especially believed in human
shadows, ghosts, and the people seen in dreams, etc., though these
spirits were not conceived of as immortal, or as possessing any
supernatural powers. They were feared only because they were supposed to
have power and disposition to inflict disease, or otherwise to injure
men yet in the flesh. Now, inasmuch as it was believed that by means of
the fetich these evil spirits could be controlled and coerced to the
will of the worshiper, fetichism, viewed in its relation to religious
development, is pronounced by Lubbock "a decided step in advance."
Viewed in itself, "it is mere witchcraft."

Third. *Totemism*, or Nature-worship. This our author nowhere clearly
distinguishes from fetichism. In this stage of religious progress, "the
savage does not abandon his belief in fetichism, from which, indeed, no
race of men has yet entirely freed itself, but he superinduces on it a
belief in beings of a higher and less material nature. In this stage
everything may be worshiped,—trees, stones, rivers, mountains, the
heavenly bodies, plants, and animals."

Fourth. *Shamanism*. "As totemism overlies fetichism, so does Shamanism
overlie totemism." Here the gods are conceived of as far more "powerful
than men," as "of a different nature," as residing far away, and as
"accessible only to the Shamans," who are "occasionally honored by the
presence of the deities, or are allowed to visit the heavenly

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

regions." This in its turn is pronounced "a considerable advance" over
the preceding stage of religious thought.

Fifth. *Idolatry*, or Anthropomorphism. Here "the gods take still more
completely the nature of men, being, however, more powerful. They are
still amenable to persuasion; they are a part of Nature, and not
creators. They are represented by images or idols."

Sixth. To the sixth stage no name is given; but it is described as one
in which "the deity is regarded as the author, not merely a part, of
Nature. He becomes for the first time a really supernatural being."

Seventh. In this last and highest stage, which he also leaves
unchristened, morality becomes "for the first time associated with
religion." <span id="fr_624"></span>[1](#fn_624)

We will not stop to criticise in detail this extremely confused and
ill-named classification, or the assumptions on which it rests. Its most
characteristic feature is its postulation of universal primitive atheism
as antedating every form of religious development in our race. So far as
he rested this dogma either upon the affirmed absence of all religious
beliefs and usages among the lowest savages of to-day, or upon the
principle that the religious conceptions of a people are always in exact
proportion to its degree of civilization, his refutation quickly began.
The next year after the publication of his work, in a learned treatise
on "Primitive Culture," E. B. Tylor challenged several of Lubbock's
authorities for the statement that non-religious tribes have been found,
while in his new work on "The Human Species,"

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1879, the learned
and able Professor of Anthropology in the Paris Museum of Natural
History, Quatrefages, went yet further, not only maintaining with Tylor
that no atheistic tribe of savages has yet been discovered, but also
expressly denying the proposition that elevation of religious
conceptions invariably corresponds to the elevation of a people in the
scale of general civilization or knowledge of the arts. The fact that
these objections to the hypothesis of primitive atheism came, not from
theologians, but from scientific men,—from fellow-students in the fields
of anthropology and ethnology,—gave them, with many, all the greater
weight. <span id="fr_625"></span>[1](#fn_625) The careful reader,
however, cannot fail to see that the only difference between Lubbock and
some of his critics is merely one of name, and not of thing; that the
alleged primitive state which he calls atheistic exactly answers to what
Tylor and Darwin would describe as the earliest form of animistic
religion, and to what Herbert Spencer would call the first rudimentary
beginnings of ghost and ancestor worship. Nor can we fail to see that
the consistent Darwinian evolutionist *must* place the beginnings of
human history so near the plane of the brute-life as to make it almost
certain that its first stage was truly non-theistic, if not, indeed,
altogether non-religious.

Precisely at this point notice should be taken of the elaborate work of
Otto Caspari, of Heidelberg, entitled "*Die Urgeschichte der
Menschheit*, mit

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rücksicht auf die
natürliche Entwickelung des frühesten Geisteslebens" ("The Primitive
History of Mankind, with Respect to the Natural Evolution of the
Earliest Spiritual Life)." This two-volumed treatise was issued at
Leipsic in 1872, and reached a second edition in 1877. A very large
portion of it is devoted to the exposition of the author's view of the
origin and natural evolution of religion in the early history of the
race. This view is characterized by an originality and elaborated with
an ingenuity which render the book as fascinating to the student as the
most absorbing romance. The author is a pure and professed evolutionist,
but instead of attempting to solve his problem with Lyell and Broca from
the data of Paleontology, or with Darwin and Häckel from the data of
Zoölogy, or with Huxley and Bastian from the data of Biology, or with
Müller and Noiré from the data of Philology, or with Prichard and
Peschel from the data of Ethnology, or with Tylor and Lubbock from the
data of Culture-History, or with Waitz and Topinard from the data of
General Anthropology, he approaches it and grapples with it as a problem
for that higher and broader science to which all of the above are
tributary,—the science to which its German originators have given the
name *Völker-Psychologie* (Ethnic or Anthropic Psychology). He cannot
consider the problem solved until, beginning with the psychological
facts of brute-life, we are able to represent to ourselves the
successive steps and stages by which the originally animal mind slowly
evolved all the spiritual and religious conceptions, emotions, habits,
and ideals of the historic and actual human race. His own attempt to do
this is not free from arbitrary

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

assumptions or inconsistencies, but, as a whole, it is a marvel of
subtile analysis and constructive ability. In contrast with it the
expositions of Hume and Lubbock appear as clumsy and grotesque as the
early theories of geology, described in Goldsmith's "Book of Nature,"
now look to the modern student.

One of the oldest of the anti-supernaturalist explanations of the origin
of religion is that which ascribes it to the ignorant and superstitious
fears of earliest men.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Primus in orbe deos fecit timor,"</span>

</div>

wrote Petronius, and Lucretius’ fuller exposition of the same notion is
familiar. No such explanation satisfies Caspari. He cannot conceive how
fear could ever become that compound of reverence and love which is of
the essence of religion. Fear simply prompts the brute to shun, as far
as may be, the object feared. Equally unsatisfactory is the notion that
the heavenly bodies and the sublimer phenomena of nature inspired the
awe and curious questionings out of which religion could have grown. The
primitive man, like the anthropoid brute, took no notice of the remote
and lofty. Nothing had interest for him save that which was perceived to
be vitally related to him in the struggle for existence. The range of
his conceptions and of his sympathies was limited to the objects which
were his allies or his enemies in this perpetual battle. Religion,
therefore, is not to be traced to any inworking of nature, or of natural
objects upon the human mind. It had a deeper and yet more obvious
genesis in natural human relationships. The first and root form of all
piety was filial piety. The first object of truly religious regard was
*the parent*. This reverential and affectionate

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

regard of the consciously ignorant, weak, and dependent child for the
indefinitely wise, strong, and helpful father or mother is essentially
religious. At an extremely early date it must have become extended from
the parent to the all-defending and all-regulating tribal chieftain, and
to the aged and experienced counselors of the rude primeval communities.
The natural tendency of uncivilized men to gesture-language must have
produced habitual forms of rendering homage,—the germ of which we may
observe in the homage paid by the bees to their queen,—and thus parents,
chieftains, and sages were the first objects of religious reverence and
homage among men. As yet men had no conceptions of nature as a whole, no
intellectual interest in stars, or trees, or animals, no mental
provocation to worship anything else than "*the ethically exalted*," as
it appeared in the narrow circle of the family and tribal life. There
was no thought of an unseen world, no idea of souls, no proper
conception even of death. The dead man was supposed to be simply asleep,
or in a long swoon. Being self-evidently helpless for the present, like
a sick member of the family, he called out natural pity and care. Food
and drink were placed in readiness against his awakening. If he had to
be left behind, he was put in a cave to protect him against wild beasts,
and his weapons were left for his use.

On the basis of this naïve conception of things the rise of animal
worship first becomes conceivable. The beast which has devoured a man,
living or dead, is now as much man as beast. The man has not ceased to
be; he has simply blended his life in that of the beast, and become a
"man-beast." The ferocity

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

of the new compound. is easily mistaken for an angry wish on the part of
the late man to take vengeance on his relatives or associates for not
having more effectually protected him from the devouring animal. But if
the "man-beast" is human enough to remember and avenge such real or
supposed neglects on the part of his late friends, he must be human
enough to recognize and appreciate any well-meant attempts to appease
his anger and propitiate his favor. Hence a natural basis, not for
universal animal worship, but for the worship of the more common
carnivora, and these Caspari endeavors to show were the first that
attained such distinction.

Here, also, is found the origin of cannibalism. A man has killed his
foe. If he leaves him merely dead he will some time come to life again
as bad as ever. If haply before this some wild beast devour him, he will
then become a ferocious and malevolent "man-beast,"—a worse enemy than
before. There is no way of making the victory final and secure, except
by eating him up one's self. Then the life and valor of the slain become
life and valor to the slayer. Even the eating of others than foes is in
this way made intelligible. As the Fan Negroes are said to eat—"with a
certain tenderness"—the bodies of their wives and children, so the
primitive man, seeking the safest possible place for the body of his
dead friend, may have thought it a far friendlier act to eat him up than
to leave him to take his chances at the hand of worms underground, or
beasts of prey above it. Between the two motives, the desire to
appropriate the vital forces of the foe and the wish to do the best
possible thing for the unwakable friend, our author thinks that

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

anthropophagy became in the first age of the world almost universal. The
very piety of the surviving toward the dead contributed to the
dissemination of the revolting custom.

Our limits will not permit an equally full account of the remaining
stages by which religion grew to be what it has been and is in the
world. Suffice to say that possible millenniums from the beginning of
human history "toward the end of the Stone Age," there occurred the
greatest revolution in human thought and belief and life which the race
has yet witnessed. This was brought about by the rise and adoption of
the belief that trees and men and beasts—in fine, all natural
objects—are possessed of invisible, impalpable, vital principles, souls.
That which produced and supported this strange, new notion was a
discovery which, estimated by the breadth and profoundness of its
influence, must be placed at the head of all others,—the discovery,
namely, of the art of kindling fire. This mysterious and novel power of
evoking what seemed a bright and living being from the realm of the
invisible, by means of the "fire-drill," half bewildered even the
priestly caste, in whose hands the awful secret lay. Their attempts to
use it led to Shamanism and a sincere magic. By means of the observed
vital heat of living things and the coldness of the dead the new element
was quickly identified with the inner essence of life itself, and the
new art the more commended to universal attention by means of its
beneficent applications in the hands of the Flamens, or Fire-priests, to
the purposes of healing. The same identification of heat and life soon
associated phallus and fire-drill, and introduced the strange and

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

apparently monstrous aberration of phallic worship. Under these new
ideas it was only natural that sun and star and lightning flash should
come to have a new significance for man, and make their impress on
religion. Animal worship was profoundly modified in ways ingeniously set
forth. The simple oblations of the earlier period give place to
sacrifices to fire, and to the heavenly bodies. So strong is the desire
to become transformed into white, flaming spirits, and to be joined to
the supernal fellowship of such, that men bring themselves as offerings,
and seek transfiguration in the holy altar flames. Hence human
sacrifices; hence also incremation of the dead. In time, the idea of the
soul takes on greater and greater definiteness; so also the idea of the
immaterial supersensual gods. The long-continued stimulation of the
imagination renders myth-constructions possible. Some of the great
priesthoods of history invent hieroglyphic and alphabetic writing, and
in time there naturally follow sacred books, cosmogonies, codes of
religious laws, etc., etc. The magic wand of the first fire-bringer has
at last created a spiritual and unseen counterpart to the world which is
seen. In this enchanted world we live to-day; the lowest of us showing
our faith by superstitious fetichism, the highest of us by attempts at a
purely spiritual worship. That highest Christian conception, "God is
light, and in Him is no darkness at all," is simply the culmination of a
mode of thinking which started ages ago with the spark which some savage
prehistoric flint-chipper struck out of the flinty stone. <span
id="fr_626"></span>[1](#fn_626)

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

The brevity of this sketch of Caspari's theory renders it impossible to
do full justice to the skill and plausibility with which he has
elaborated it. Still less have we space for that detailed review which
would be needed were we to undertake a refutation of the scheme in part
or whole.

In striking opposition to the theory of Caspari stands that of Jules
Baissac, elaborated in his "Origines de la Religion." <span
id="fr_627"></span>[1](#fn_627) He, too, begins with primitive
animality, and proposes to trace the rise and natural evolution of
religion from that far-off starting-point of the human race. But,
instead of magnifying the initial influence of a pure domestic life in
Caspari's truly German method, Baissac—in a manner characteristically
French, shall we say?—starts with a deification of mere maternity,
conceived of as self-originating and self-sufficing. This form of
religion prevailed during the remote period anterior to the time when it
was discovered that males had any participation in the procreation of
the species. The religious symbols of that far-off age were "les
élévations et tumescences terrestres, naturelles ou artificielles, et
les cavités souterraines; les tumescences comme image du sein maternel
en état de pregnation et les profondeurs et cavités comme ventre sacré
de la divine mère. De là le culte des ballons ou montagnes à croupe
arrondie; de là le symbolisme des tumuli, des pyramides, des grottes,
des puits, des labyrinthes, des dolmens." In this period all motherhood
is divine, and all life and change in nature are mentally represented as
a spontaneous, and exclusively female, conceiving and bringing forth.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

In the second period, which is still anterior to the idea of marriage
and to the establishment of the idea of personal property or individual
rights, the function of the male principle has been discovered; and now
Nature, the divine mother, is conceived of as analogous to a woman of
the period,—a mother fecundated only by male energy, but by male energy
from any quarter. To use Baissac's own terms, she is a "prostituée
divine, ayant son symbole dans la terre ouverte à tous les
germes." <span id="fr_628"></span>[1](#fn_628)

In the third period the two principles are brought into a relation of
equality, and now the divine becomes hermaphrodite.

In the fourth the male principle is given priority, the religious
symbols of maternity give place to the phallic symbols, the institutions
of marriage and property arise, the power of atmospheric and celestial
divinities begins to supersede that of earth-spirits. The fifth stage is
marked by the entire predominance of these celestial divinities and the
definite rejection of the ancient chthonian and subterranean powers. In
the sixth comes the final separation of the Heaven and the Earth, the
idea of creation, and the idea of an almighty and transcendent Creator
of all things.

The manner in which the author elaborates this remarkable interpretation
of the history and symbolism of religion, through two octavo volumes of
300 pages each, is as ingenious as it is disgusting.

Behold the savory outcome of these successive philosophic and scientific
rebellions against history! And whom of all these wise men of the West
shall we follow? The first form of religion, says one of

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

them, was an animal hallucination of the early anthropoids respecting
sexual generation. No, says another, it was a genuine worship of
invisible gods and goddesses, like the beautiful Olympian divinities of
Greece,—a religion whose fruits in character and conduct compare most
favorably with those of Christian monotheism. <span
id="fr_629"></span>[1](#fn_629) Absurd! exclaims a third. "Polytheism"
is a very high type of religion; men never could have reached that until
after the invention of the fire-drill, nobody knows how many ages from
the beginning. Fools all! rejoin the more thorough-going. Know ye not
that primitive men were far lower than our lowest modern savages,—as
incapable of any religious ideas as they were of using the integral
calculus?

At the beginning of the exposition of these speculations it was
intimated that their contradictory and incredible outcome had already
provoked a degree of reaction even from biological and sociological
writers. This reaction is too instructive to leave unnoticed. <span
id="fr_630"></span>[2](#fn_630) It comes from men who, religiously or
theologically speaking, seem in full sympathy with the rejecters of the
old Biblical and pan-ethnic faith; but they find they cannot go along
with these rejecters without surrendering more than any biologist or
sociologist can afford to surrender if he would maintain a credible
philosophy of the history of man and of human society. To a simple
disciple of history the spectacle of their embarrassment and of their
attempts at extrication is in an eminent degree entertaining. Indeed,
the best refutation of whatever is wrong in all these new conceptions of

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

primordial religion will be found, not in a blind and indiscriminate
polemic against them *en masse*, but in showing how every departure from
the traditional conception involves the careful thinker in perplexing if
not insoluble problems, and how easily all the real facts on which these
proposed departures are based can be arrayed in support of the
traditional conception. To this task we turn.

First, then, according to Genesis, the earliest representatives of the
human race began their existence in Paradise unclad, unhoused, and
possessed of none of the outward and visible signs of what is called
civilization. Had Mr. Lubbock been permitted at the time to visit the
spot, he would have seen—so far as Moses suggests—no printing-press, no
power-loom, perhaps not even a "fire-drill" or flint "arrow-head." He
would have seen no god, no Miltonic guard of angels, no Eden gates, *no
temple or altar*. He would have noticed in the luxuriant tropical
landscape simply a wealth of graceful animal forms, rising in manifold
gradations, and culminating in two fair human figures. He would
doubtless have gone his way, and reported at the next meeting of the
Anthropological Society the discovery of a new Otaheite, whose naked and
artless inhabitants were evidently at the bottom of the scale as
respects "culture," and in the sub-fetichistic "atheistic stage" as
respects religion. So doing, he would have committed no greater blunder
than many of his favorite reporters have made in describing such people
as the Andaman Islanders. <span id="fr_631"></span>[1](#fn_631)

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

According to the old conception, no less than according to the new, the
arts were only gradually developed. Men were destitute of the art of
metalworking and of all to which that was essential until the days of
Tubal Cain. Musical instruments there were none until invented by Jubal.
Everything in sacred Scripture indicates the kind of social and
industrial progress for which, in connection with the beginnings of
human society, one would naturally look.

So far, then, the believer in Sacred History has no occasion whatever to
disagree with the believer in Natural History. Häckel and Peschel and
Caspari hold, with Moses, to the monogenesis of the race, and even place
their imaginary "Lemuria" just under the northern portion of the Indian
Ocean, hard by one of the traditional seats of Eden. Their account of
man's migrations from that centre, and of his primeval destitution of
the arts, conflict with no fact recorded in Holy Scripture. Neither
party can tell precisely how long the period antecedent to the rise of
the first great historic civilizations of Asia, Egypt, and Greece
lasted, and neither can tell how long ago it terminated, so that even in
their confessed ignorances both are in accord.

But, secondly, the believer in Sacred History, Hebrew or Ethnic, cannot
accept the eagerly advocated notion that the intellectual condition of
the earliest men was not higher than that of the lowest savages of
to-day. Ignorant of many things those earliest generations must have
been, but it is equally certain

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

that they must have been above the line which separates stationary or
retrograding peoples from progressive ones. They were men capable of
investigating the powers and laws of nature, of originating arts
absolutely new in the history of the world, and of making successive
inventions which revolutionized the social state.

With this representation we should expect the Darwinian, on sober second
thought, to agree. For it is a well-known fact that our lowest savages
are dying out, while the men who peopled the world in accordance with
the law of the survival of the fittest, at a period in the earth's
history when, in important respects, according to Darwin, the
environment was less favorable to the human struggle for existence than
now, must have been superior to these degenerating and vanishing tribes.
And as all evolutionists, in enumerating the qualities which win in the
struggle for existence, lay great stress upon superior intellectual
endowments, it is only a natural inference that the native intelligence
of the earliest men was at least superior to that of the lowest modern
savage. Turning to the writers in question we find our antecedent
expectations confirmed. Thus Mr. Herbert Spencer, in one of his maturest
works, expresses himself as follows: "There are sundry reasons for
suspecting that existing men of the lowest types, forming social groups
of the simplest kinds, do not exemplify men as they originally were.
Probably most of them, if not all of them, had ancestors in higher
states, and among their beliefs remain some which were evolved during
those higher states. . . . There is inadequate warrant for the notion
that the lowest savagery has

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

always been as low as it is now. . . . That supplanting of race by race,
and thrusting into corners such inferior races as are not exterminated,
which is now going on so actively, and which has been going on from the
earliest recorded times, must have been ever going on. And the
implication is that remnants of inferior races, taking refuge in
inclement, barren, and otherwise unfit regions, have retrograded." <span
id="fr_632"></span>[1](#fn_632)

In like manner Darwin himself conceives of the first men as capable of
rising in thought above the knowledge furnished by the senses, *as able
to represent to themselves the unseen and spiritual*. And he expressly
calls their mental faculties "high," saying, "The same high mental
faculties which first led men to believe in unseen spiritual agencies,
then in fetichism, polytheism, and ultimately in monotheism, would
infallibly lead him, so long as his reasoning powers remained poorly
developed, to various strange superstitions and customs." <span
id="fr_633"></span>[2](#fn_633) Thus Darwin justly considers the
character of the very aberrations of the human intellect in its
infantile stage a striking proof of the loftiness of its powers.

Lubbock ascribes to the earliest men a like ability to conceive of the
supersensual and to govern themselves largely by ideals. Though
sometimes describing the primitive generations as in a state of "utter
barbarism," or as having been "no more advanced than the lowest savages
of to-day," this seems to occur only by inadvertence; for in the later
editions of his already quoted work, "The Origin of Civilization," page
483, he expressly admits and asserts that he does not regard cannibals
as representatives

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

of the first men. <span id="fr_634"></span>[1](#fn_634) On the same page
he says, "It may be as well to state emphatically that all brutal
customs are not, in my opinion, primeval. Human sacrifices, for
instance, were, I think, certainly not so."

Caspari no less emphatically affirms that the social state of the North
American Indians and of the Australians is not primitive, but a result
of degeneration. He says, "We know a succession of such tribes, of
which, in fact, only *ausgeartete verkommene Banden und staatliche
Splitter* remain in existence, who, wild and savage, wander about in the
primitive forests, miserably to perish." <span
id="fr_635"></span>[2](#fn_635)

Tylor takes the same general ground, maintaining that the best
representatives of primitive men are not the lowest but "the higher" of
the uncivilized races. Thus he says, "In a study of the nature-myths of
the world it is hardly practicable to start from the conceptions of the
very lowest human tribes, and to work upward from thence to fictions of
higher growth; partly because our information is meagre as to the
beliefs of these shy and seldom quite intelligible folk, and partly
because the legends they possess have not reached the artistic and
systematic shape which they attain to among races next higher in the
scale. It therefore answers better

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

to take as a foundation the mythology of the North American Indians, the
South Sea Islanders, and other high savage tribes *who best represent in
modern times the early mythological period of human history*." <span
id="fr_636"></span>[1](#fn_636)

In chapter ii. of the same work he presents the evidence that many of
the very lowest tribes of the modern world have become what they are by
degeneration.

But, thirdly, if the best representatives of the first men must be
sought, not among the lowest, but rather among the higher, of the
uncivilized peoples, then surely we are justified in rejecting the
notion of all those writers who, since the time of De Brosses and Comte,
have maintained that primitive men personified and vitalized and
fetichized all natural objects about them.

On this point the author of the "Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy" is less
clear-sighted than his master, Herbert Spencer. Boldly and ably as he
criticises Comte in some other particulars, in this Mr. Fiske surrenders
to him wholly. He says, "We may safely assert, with Comte, that the
earliest attitude assumed by the mind in interpreting nature was a
fetichistic attitude." <span id="fr_637"></span>[2](#fn_637) Spencer,
however, recognizing the fact that the lower mammals, birds, and even
insects are able to distinguish animate from inanimate objects, and that
to deny this capacity to the first men would be to make them less and
lower than animals, commits himself unreservedly to the view in harmony
with that of the Biblical record. Quoting the stock examples of savages
who, on

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

first seeing a watch or a compass, imagined that it was alive, he shows
the naturalness of the mistake, and very properly says: "We must exclude
these mistakes made in classing things which advanced arts have made to
simulate living things, since such things mislead the primitive man in
ways unlike those in which he can be misled by the natural objects about
him. Limiting ourselves to his conceptions of these natural objects, we
cannot but conclude that his classification of them into animate and
inanimate is substantially correct. Concluding this, we are obliged to
diverge at the outset from certain interpretations currently given of
his superstitions. The assumption, tacit or avowed, that the primitive
man tends to ascribe life to things which are not living is clearly an
untenable assumption. Consciousness of the difference between the two,
growing ever more definite as intelligence evolves, must be in him more
definite than in all lower creatures. To suppose that without cause he
begins to confound them is to suppose the process of evolution
inverted." <span id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_638)

This writer, therefore, whom Darwin in one passage calls "our great
philosopher," explicitly rejects the dogma of the primitiveness and
universality of animism and fetichism among the earliest men. According
to him, animistic and fetichistic beliefs were not "primary beliefs;"
they were errors into which "the primitive man was betrayed during his
early attempts to understand the surrounding world." "The primitive man
no more tends to confound animate with inanimate than inferior creatures
do" (p. 146).

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

Caspari, too, as we have seen, denies to fetichism a primitive
character. <span id="fr_639"></span>[1](#fn_639) Ascribing its rise to
the new ideas which the discovery of the art of fire-kindling produced,
he makes the worship of "the morally exalted" (*des sittlich
Erhabenen*), represented by the personal father, the tribal chieftain,
and the deceased ancestor, far older, possibly thousands of years older,
than any worship of fetiches. With Lubbock there is no moral element in
religion until it reaches its last and highest stage. With Caspari, on
the contrary, religion is essentially moral in its first emergence, and
has from the first moment of its existence an actual and relatively
worthy personal object. This is a prodigious scientific advance from the
positions of Hume, Comte, Lubbock, and all their followers, and by
postulating a high moral nature and moral life at the very beginnings of
human history it renders the Biblical conception of those beginnings not
only conceivable, but even antecedently probable.

Fourthly. The Bible and the sacred traditions of nearly all peoples
present monogamy as the first form of marriage, ascribing all deviations
from it to the ungoverned selfish passions of men. This view, Lubbock
and the writers whom he has followed, McLennan and Morgan, emphatically
reject. These theorists claim that among the first men the late

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Oneida Community
system of "complex marriage," or, as Lubbock calls it, "communal
marriage," universally obtained. The appropriateness of the term
*marriage* is very far from clear. The first communities were mere
herds, in which all the women were "wives" to all the men. In McLennan's
opinion "the next stage was that form of polyandry in which brothers had
their wives in common; afterward came that of the *levirate*, *i.e.*,
the system under which, when an elder brother died, his second brother
married the widow, and so on with the others in succession." Thence he
considered that some tribes branched off into endogamy, others into
exogamy; that is to say, some forbade marriage out of, others within,
the tribe. If either of these two systems was older than the other, he
held that exogamy must have been the more ancient. Exogamy was based on
infanticide, and led to the practice of marriage by capture. Lubbock, on
the contrary, believes that the communal marriage, which he assumes to
have been the primitive form, "was gradually superseded by individual
marriage founded on capture," and that this led, first, to exogamy, and
then to female infanticide, thus reversing Mr. McLennan's order of
sequence. "Endogamy and regulated polyandry, though frequent," he says,
"I regard as exceptional and as not entering into the normal progress of
development." <span id="fr_640"></span>[1](#fn_640) Still different is
the theory of Bachofen, set forth in his work entitled "Das
Mutterrecht." Assuming sexual promiscuity as the primordial state, he
considers that under this system the women, instead of being rendered
more and

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

more debauched and corrupted by the practice, as we might suppose,
became on the contrary, in process of time, so refined, that after a
season they felt shocked and scandalized by the beastly state of things,
revolted against it, and established a system of marriage with female
supremacy, the husband being subject to the wife, property and descent
being required to follow the female line, and women enjoying the
principal share of political power.

Gradually, however, the more spiritual ideas associated with fatherhood
prevailed over the more material ideas associated with motherhood. The
father came to be considered the real author of life to the offspring,
the mother a mere nurse; property and descent were traced in the male
line, sun-worship superseded moon-worship, men absorbed all political
power,—in a word, as primitive "Hetairismus" was followed by the
"Mother-Law" system, so this now gave way to the modern social state.

The chief evolutionist authorities disagreeing so widely on this point,
it is surely proper to look further. So doing, we find a number of at
least equally respectable, scientific and speculative representatives of
the evolutional school, who expressly question, if they do not openly
reject, the dogma of universal sexual promiscuity as the primeval social
state. Thus Herbert Spencer argues through many pages of his "Principles
of Sociology" against McLennan, claiming that monogamy must be conceived
of as going back to the beginning. However unsettled social and sexual
relations then were, "promiscuity," he affirms, "was checked by the
establishment of individual connections prompted by men's likings, and
maintained against other men by force" (p. 665).

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again he says,
"The impulses which lead primitive men to monopolize other objects of
value must lead them to monopolize women" (p. 664). And again, "Monogamy
dates back as far as any other marital relation" (p. 698). Darwin takes
substantially the same view, positively discrediting the alleged sexual
promiscuity of the earliest communities. <span
id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_641)

In like manner another of the latest of English writers on this subject,
James A. Farrer, in his book entitled "Primitive Manners and
Customs," <span id="fr_642"></span>[2](#fn_642) emphatically rejects the
notion that a brutal and forcible bride-capturing was ever universal,
and denies that the customs relied upon by McLennan and others to prove
its prevalence are to be viewed as a survival of such a custom. As to
the absolutely first form of marriage he does not express an opinion,
but the theory of primitive monogamy would better agree with his general
representation than any other. The same may be said of Caspari, who,
though he does not expressly postulate the priority of monogamy, yet
ascribes to filial piety a rôle in the first origination of religion
which seems to necessitate such a postulate. <span
id="fr_643"></span>[3](#fn_643) So Mr. John Fiske's suggestion that the
transition from the anthropoid animals to truly human beings was
probably effected by the prolongation of infancy and of parental care
incident to the slower evolution of a highly complex organism, and by
the family life thus necessitated and brought about, is more harmonious
with the doctrine of primitive monogamy than with any other. It would
not be surprising, therefore, if this class of

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

considerations, which we meet again in Noiré's theory of the origin of
language, should gradually lead to such a reconstruction of Darwinistic
sociology as will postulate monogamy as the one and only form of sexual
relation by virtue of which man could have arisen out of the lower and
preceding animal orders. Mr. Spencer calls Mr. Fiske's suggestion "an
important" one, and he explains it in a note appended to a significant
declaration respecting the biological and sociological value of monogamy
(p. 630). Elsewhere, after stating that "irregular relations of the
sexes are at variance with the welfare of the society, of the young and
of the adults," and after ascribing the gradual dying out of the
Andamanese to their promiscuity of sexual relation, <span
id="fr_644"></span>[1](#fn_644)he says, "We may infer that the progeny
of such unions (as had a degree of exclusiveness and durability) were
more likely to be reared and more likely to be vigorous" (p. 669).
Again, a page or two later, he uses this language: "As under ordinary
conditions the rearing of more numerous and stronger offspring must have
been favored by more regular sexual relations, there must on the average
have been a tendency for those societies most characterized by
promiscuity to disappear before those less characterized by it" (p.
671). But Spencer himself must grant that in the earliest ages, upon the
whole, the race multiplied and spread from generation to generation, so
that we must at least conclude from his own declaration, that the
approximately monogamous societies and

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

unions were more numerous than the approximately promiscuous ones. Well,
therefore, may Mr. Lang, our latest advocate of McLennan's theory,
concede the possibility that "man *originally* lived in the patriarchal
or monogamous family," and seek to content his fellow sociologists with
the assurance that "*if there occurred a fall from the primitive
family*, and if that fall was *extremely general*, affecting even the
Aryan race, Mr. McLennan's adherents will be amply satisfied." <span
id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_645)

Fifthly. The Bible represents the earliest men as capable of
entertaining the conception of a supreme Divine Being, the Maker of the
heavens and earth, the Creator and rightful Lord of men. It represents
them as capable of realizing the moral obligation of obedience to the
Creator, and as possessed of freedom to obey or to disobey. It gives us
to understand that, as a matter of fact, a few then as now were faithful
to their light and to their convictions of duty, while the greater part
lived in conscious violation of the promptings of their own consciences.
As a natural consequence immoralities multiplied: these demoralized and
brutalized those who practiced them. Then demoralized and brutalized
parents were followed by children less well instructed and less well
endowed than they themselves had been, and so, despite exceptional men
and exceptional families who were more faithful to conscience, the
general demoralization went on. The song of Lamech, Gen. iv. 23, 24, is
the song of a true savage, though of one who has known the law of right
and duty. One can hardly read it without imagining it first sung in a
kind of domestic war-dance in the hut of

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

its polygamous author. He glories in his homicides, and evidently
belongs to those who with savage lust and brutality "took them wives of
all which they chose." He was a representative of his Cainite kindred.
By the mass of these and those who intermarried with them the Father and
Lord of all creatures was ignored and gradually misconceived, and at
last superseded by creations of man's own disordered mind and heart,
until the pure primitive religion of the righteous patriarchs became a
false worship as irrational and immoral as the mass of those who gave
themselves to its loathsome and cruel practices. With some populations
this abnormal and immoral evolution proceeded to thoroughly unnatural
and self-destructive results, such as religious prostitution, sodomy,
human sacrifices, cannibalism, etc. On the other hand, then as now,
fidelity to truth and goodness led its possessor to larger knowledge and
to higher spiritual experiences. Then as ever the principle held good,
"To him that hath shall be given." Hence alongside and within and above
the historic evolution of a large portion of the race from evil to evil
there was another evolution of a smaller but more vital portion from
good to good. If Satan's kingdom steadily unfolded, so did also the
kingdom of God. And while the one was in the direction of spiritual and
physical degeneration and death, the other was in the direction of life
and ultimate spiritual ascendency. Both of these partial or special
evolutions were within and part of the universal evolution of the race
under its preëstablished nature and conditions, one of which fundamental
conditions is its immanency in the Divine. Such is the picture presented
us by all the monotheistic religions

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

of the world, and it is substantially confirmed by most of the ancient
traditions of the human race.

Now in all this there is nothing inconsistent with any well-established
facts or principles of science. Some authorities which Lubbock himself
quotes prove not only that uncivilized tribes are capable of
entertaining the theistic conception of the world, but also that not a
few of them when first found actually possessed remarkably high and pure
conceptions of the Supreme Spirit and of man's relation to him. Thus he
cites Livingstone as saying that "the uncontaminated African believes
that the Great Spirit lives above the stars." In trying to prove the
absence of prayer among certain savages, he admits witnesses who show
that the Esquimos, the North American Indians, and the Caribs believed
in the existence of a Supreme Spirit, the "Master of Life." He even
quotes the following objection to prayer made by Tomochichi, the chief
of the Yamacraws, to General Oglethorpe, to wit: "That the asking of any
particular blessing looked to him like directing God; and if so, that it
must be a very wicked thing. That for his part he thought everything
that happened in the world was as it should be; that God of himself
would do for every one what was consistent with the good of the whole;
and that our duty to him was to be content with whatever happened in
general, and thankful for all the good that happened in particular."
What civilized religionist, what purest monotheist, ever apprehended or
expressed this theological problem more clearly than did this Indian
chief? Lubbock quotes another author as saying that the Caribs
considered the Great Spirit as endowed with so great goodness

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

that he does not take revenge even on his enemies. <span
id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_646)

So Mr. Tylor allows not only that most barbarians are able to conceive
of a Creator, but also that they actually believe in one. He says:—

"Races of North and South America, of Africa, of Polynesia, recognizing
a number of great deities, are usually and reasonably considered
polytheists, yet their acknowledgment of a Supreme Creator would entitle
them at the same time to the name of monotheists," if belief in a
Supreme Deity, held to be the Creator of the world and chief of the
spiritual hierarchy, were the sufficient criterion of monotheism. "High
above the doctrine of souls, of divine manes, of local nature-spirits,
of the great deities of class and element, there are to be discerned in
savage theology shadowings, quaint or majestic, of the conception of a
Supreme Deity." <span id="fr_647"></span>[2](#fn_647)

He illustrates the prevalence of this conception by facts related of
barbarous peoples in almost every quarter of the globe. Speaking of the
remarkable clearness of this idea and belief among the New Zealanders,
the Hawaiians, the Tongans, Samoans, and other representatives of the
Polynesian race, he says:

"Students of the science of religion who hold polytheism to be but the
misdevelopment of a primal idea of divine unity, which in spite of
corruption continues to pervade it, might well choose this South Sea
Island divinity as their aptest illustration from the savage
world." <span id="fr_648"></span>[3](#fn_648)

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

He quotes Moerenhout as saying:—

"Taaroa is their supreme, or rather only, God; for all the others, as in
other known polytheisms, seem scarcely more than sensible figures and
images of the infinite attributes united in his divine person."

He adds the following sublime native description of this Supreme God:—

"He was; Taaroa was his name; he abode in the void. No earth, no sky, no
men. Taaroa calls, but naught answers; and alone existing he became the
universe" (p. 345).

Though an outspoken opponent of the theory that polytheism arose from
moral and spiritual degeneration, his own facts are so strong that for
the explanation of some of them he is constrained to resort to it.
Speaking of the "conceptions of the Supreme Deity in the savage and
barbaric world," he says, "The degeneration theory may claim such
beliefs as mutilated and perverted remnants of higher religions, in some
instances no doubt with justice."

That a religion originally good and pure may degenerate and become
corrupt is conceded even by Lubbock. At the close of his sketch of "the
lowest intellectual stages through which religion has passed," he uses
this significant language:

"I have stopped short sooner, perhaps, than I should otherwise have
done, because the worship of personified principles, such as Fear, Love,
Hope, etc., could not have been treated apart from that of the
*Phallus*, or *Lingam*, with which it was so intimately associated in
Greece, India, Mexico, and elsewhere; and which, though at first modest
and pure,—as all religions are in their origin,—led to such

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

abominable practices that it is one of the most painful chapters in
human history." <span id="fr_649"></span>[1](#fn_649)

Reading this, the disciple of history simply asks, If men could so
corrupt the originally modest and pure worship of Aphrodite, why not
also the originally pure worship of El?

Sixthly. The disclosure of the Arctic Eden solves all further
difficulties in the Hebrew conception of the religious development of
mankind.

This doctrine as to the cradle of the race concedes to the devotee of
prehistoric archæology all his claims as to the lowly beginnings of
every *historic* civilization developed in our postdiluvian seats of
humanity. It welcomes every revelation which fossil bone, or chipped
flint, or lacustrine pile, or sepulchral mound has ever made, finding in
it precious illustration of those "times of ignorance" through which our
expatriated race has made its passage (Acts xvii. 30; Rom. i. 18-32). It
is equally ready for every conclusion of the scientific anthropologist.
By his own doctrine of the power of environment, and by his own picture
of Mammalian life in Tertiary and Quaternary times, it constrains him to
admit that if the Eden of Genesis was at the Pole, the Biblical picture
of Antediluvian Man, with his extraordinary vigor and stature and
longevity, with his extraordinary defiance of the authority of God, and
with his extraordinary persistence in the indulgence of self-centred
passions and appetites and ambitions, is credible in the highest degree.
And that nothing may be lacking to its perfect confirmation, the
comparative mythologist discovers that in this new Eden he is given the
master-key to his

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

own science, and that every great system of ancient mythology and of
mythological geography must now be freshly and intelligently interpreted
in the light of it. The old, old stories of a Golden Age, of the
Hesperidian Gardens, of the Tree of Golden Fruit, of the Hyperborean
Macrobii, of the insurrection of the Titans, of the destruction of
mankind by a Flood, are history once more. Their authenticity as history
is attested by new and unchangeable evidences,—by witnesses as
unbribable as the axis of the earth and the pole of the heavens. No more
can the investigator of the history and philosophy of religion rule out
the ancient myths of humanity as senseless, or seek to interpret them as
results of an inevitable "disease of language." No more can they be
palmed off upon us as capricious variations of that myth of dawn, or of
the sun, or of the storm, which we are told that the fancy of
"primitive" men is ever weaving. They are simply blurred chapters from
the neglected and abused and almost lost Bible of the Gentiles,
confirming and establishing the opening chapters of our own.

Summing up, then, we see: 1. That in rejecting the historical conception
of the primeval religious belief of mankind Hume took up a position
which none of his own successors consider as at all tenable.

2\. The further these successors have carried their revolt against
history, the more have they become involved in contradiction with each
other.

3\. The more consistently and radically the dogma of primitive savagery
has been carried out, the more inevitably has it landed its advocates in
the doctrine of primitive bestiality.

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

4\. In their eagerness to destroy the possibility or credibility of
primeval monotheism, these more consistent and radical theorists have
inadvertently gone so far as to render a self-consistent evolutional
biology or sociology impossible.

5\. In consequence hereof the more clear-sighted of the representatives
of Darwinism are just now deftly re-approaching the long-scouted
historic conception, by representing the first men as superior to the
modern savage in intellectual endowment, by calling their powers high,
by considering their judgments of natural objects substantially correct,
by admitting their knowledge of the true and normal form of the family,
by conceding to them a truly human appreciation of ethical excellences
and obligations, by allowing to them a capacity to conceive of an
almighty Supreme Spirit, the Author and rightful Governor of the world,
and by recognizing that nearly all religions present clear traces of
corruption. So far as principles are concerned these representations
surrender their whole case. With these data Adamic Revelation becomes
quite as possible and quite as credible as Abrahamic, or Mosaic, or
Christian Revelation.

6\. The *Anlage* for religion is no product of age-long advances in
civilization and in the arts. The unclad Adam of the garden was no more
incapacitated for the knowledge of his Father than was that naked second
Adam, for whose advent Mary provided the swaddling-clothes. If the
former seems too undeveloped to be an organ of divine revelation, the
latter, the highest of all these organs, the absolute Revelator, began
quite as low. If nomad Arabs of to-day can see in storm and stars
sublime manifestations

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

of one almighty personal Power, why could not the nomadic Abel as well?
If the Gospel messenger of to-day can cause the rudest Fijian to know
God and to experience a sense of divine forgiveness and favor, why may
not God's earliest preachers of righteousness have produced a like
effect on sincere souls before the discovery of the art of
metal-working? Once let the anthropological and sociological postulates
demanded even by Herbert Spencer be granted, and the ancient historic
conception of Primitive Monotheism becomes both possible and eminently
reasonable. As an escape from the conflicting and mutually destructive
theories of the naturalistic school in its different departments, it
presents, on merely speculative grounds, a positive attractiveness. Its
full array of evidences, however, is simply co-extensive and identical
with the evidences for the reality of Historic Revelation as a whole.
Everything which goes to show that God has intelligibly revealed himself
to men at all bears more or less directly upon the credibility of a
Revelation "*in the beginning*."

7\. Lastly, the Arctic Eden completes the reconciliation of Biblical and
secular learning in their relations to the problem of the primitive
religion of men. As we have seen, both science and theology now find in
this primeval *Bildungsherd* at the Pole the one prolific centre whence
all the floral and faunal and human life-forms of the whole earth have
proceeded. In an "environment" of such creatively potent,
world-overflowing nature-forces as were there, any culmination of life's
manifestations short of a "Golden Race" of men, kingly in stature,
*Rishis* in intelligence, measuring their *Deva*-like

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

lives by centuries, would have been an incongruity. That a loving
Creator—creating because loving—should have put himself into instant
personal communion with these highest of his creatures, moral natures
fashioned in his own image and after his likeness, children of his love,
is to a theist, even an ethnic theist, the only credible representation.
That such a lusty race should have been open to temptation on the line
of apparently innocent aspiration after still higher perfections, that
they should have desired to "be as gods," that they should have coveted
experimental and personal knowledge of evil as well as of good,—these
are suppositions which no serious anthropologist will pronounce
inadmissible. That the actual revolt of such an order of moral agents
from the true law and basis of its life should have carried into its
subsequent historic developments consequences of profoundest import is
as much a necessary implication of the law of heredity and of the
established constitution of nature as it is an instinctive inference
from the preconceived character of a perfect Moral Governor. Given such
antediluvian men, one must pronounce the history of antediluvian
religion, as reported in the oldest memories and in the most sacred
scriptures of humanity, a self-attesting chronicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_618"></span>[363:1](pf35.htm#fr_618) Compare Lenormant,
*Beginnings of History*, ch. ii. The Duke of Argyll's *Unity of Nature*.
London, 1884: chapters xi., xii., and xiii.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[370:1](pf35.htm#fr_619) *Origin and Growth of
Religions*. London and New York, 1899: p. 58.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[370:2](pf35.htm#fr_620) Reviewed by C. P.
Tiele, in *Theol. Tijdschrift*, for May, 1899.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[371:1](pf35.htm#fr_621) *Origin and Growth of
Religions*, p. 115.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[372:1](pf35.htm#fr_622) *Custom and Myth*.
London, 1884: pp. 212-242.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[372:2](pf35.htm#fr_623) The first edition was
published in 1870. Later echoes are heard in Mortillet, *Le
Préhistorique*. See the *Revue de l’Histoire des Religions*. Paris,
1883: p. 117.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[374:1](pf35.htm#fr_624) Chaps. iv.-vi.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[375:1](pf35.htm#fr_625) Professor Roskoff has
done Mr. Lubbock the honor to take up every tribe and people, in the
extended list which the latter had claimed as non-religious, and to
exhibit in every case evidence of their religious character. See his
work, *Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvölker*. Leipsic, 1880.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[381:1](pf35.htm#fr_626) Very similar to
Caspari's view is that set forth by Professor J. Frohschammer in his
late work, *Die Genesis der Menschheit*. München, 1883: pp. 68-381.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[382:1](pf35.htm#fr_627) Paris, 2 tomes, 1877.
Compare Baring-Gould, *Religious Belief*. New York, 1870: Part I., pp.
411-414.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[383:1](pf35.htm#fr_628) *Origines*, p. 131.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[384:1](pf35.htm#fr_629) Hume's above-cited
*Essay*, closing sections.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[384:2](pf35.htm#fr_630) Compare *Revue des
Deux Mondes*, April, 1880, pp. 660-665.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[385:1](pf35.htm#fr_631) For the complete
vindication of this statement see Sir Henry Sumner Maine, *Early Law and
Custom*, London, 1883, pp. 229-231; Quatrefages, *The Human Species*,
New York, 1879, chap. xxxv.; and <span id="page_386">p. 386</span>
especially Roskoff, *Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvölker*,
Leipsic, 1880, and Réville, *Les Religions des Peuples non-civilisés*,
Paris, 1883, tom. i., ch. i.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[388:1](pf35.htm#fr_632) *Principles of
Sociology*, pp. 106-109.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[388:2](pf35.htm#fr_633) *Descent of Man*, vol.
i., p. 66.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[389:1](pf35.htm#fr_634) Let us hope that it is
by a like inadvertence, merely, that Professor Sayce speaks of "the
savage tribes of the modern world, and *the still more savage* tribes
among whom the languages of the earth took their start." *Introduction
to the Science of Language*, vol. ii., p. 31. Compare p. 269, where,
speaking of the mythopœic man, whom he considers a considerable advance
on the primitive savage, the professor says, "He had not yet learned to
distinguish between the lifeless and the living;" "he had not yet
realized that aught existed which his senses could not perceive."

<span id="fn_635"></span>[389:2](pf35.htm#fr_635) Vol. i., p. 113.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[390:1](pf35.htm#fr_636) *Primitive Culture*,
vol. i., p. 321.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[390:2](pf35.htm#fr_637) Vol. i., p. 178, *et
passim*.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[391:1](pf35.htm#fr_638) *Principles of
Sociology*, pp. 143, 144.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[392:1](pf35.htm#fr_639) Compare the like
utterance of Frohshammer: "Mit Fetischismus hat das Gottesbewusstsein
und religiöse Cultus nicht begonnen." *Die Genesis der Menschheit*.
München, 1883: p. 71. Also, the recent declaration of a learned
Professor of Roman Law: "Die religiöse Anschauung aller Völker ist,
denke ich, ausgegangen von dem Glauben an Einen göttlichen Willen,
welcher über Allen and zu Oberst waltet." J. E. Kuntze, *Prolegomena zur
Geschichte Roms.* Leipsic, 1882: p. 23.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[393:1](pf35.htm#fr_640) *Origin of
Civilization*, pp. 94, 95. Compare D. McLennan, *The Patriarchal
Theory*. London, 1884: p. 355.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[395:1](pf35.htm#fr_641) *Descent of Man*, vol.
ii., pp. 362-367.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[395:2](pf35.htm#fr_642) London, 1879.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[395:3](pf35.htm#fr_643) See vol. i., pp. 322,
358, 367.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[396:1](pf35.htm#fr_644) Mr. E. H. Man's recent
paper on the Andaman Islanders (*The Journal of the Anthropological
Institute*, vol. xii., i. 69, and ii. 13) denies the alleged sexual
promiscuity, and illustrates the worthlessness of much of the evidence
on which popular ethnographers rely.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[397:1](pf35.htm#fr_645) *Custom and Myth*.
London, 1884: pp. 246-248.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[400:1](pf35.htm#fr_646) *Origin of
Civilization*, pp. 374, 375.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[400:2](pf35.htm#fr_647) *Primitive Culture*,
vol. ii., p. 332.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[400:3](pf35.htm#fr_648) Compare Quatrefages,
pp. 486-495.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[402:1](pf35.htm#fr_649) *Origin of
Civilization*, p. 350.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Bearing of Our Results on the Philosophy of
History and the Theory of the Development of Civilization](pf36)
