[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf35)  [Next](pf37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE BEARING OF OUR RESULTS ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY AND THE THEORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIZATION.

<span class="small">*It would be a valuable contribution to the Study of
Civilization to have the action of Decline and Fall investigated on a
wider and more exact basis of evidence than has yet been
attempted*.—<span class="smallcaps">E. B. Tylor</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*L’or fut certainement le premier métal que l’on
connut. . . . Les trois ages des poètes, l’age d’or, l’age d’airain, et
l’age de fer sont une réalité, et non une fiction*. <span
id="fr_650"></span>[1](#fn_650.md)—<span class="smallcaps">A. de
Rochas</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Besides</span> their philosophies of religion,
the apostles of universal primeval savagery have also their Philosophy
of Human History and of Social Progress. First of all, they would have
us believe that man has existed upon the Earth hundreds of thousands of
years, <span id="fr_651"></span>[2](#fn_651.md) and that for at least the
first hundred thousand years, possibly for twice or thrice this period,

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

he lived like a wild beast in thickets and dens and caverns of the
earth. <span id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_652.md) His one occupation was the
struggle for existence. The very cave in which his wretched young were
sheltered from the storm was continually exposed to invasion by the
cave-hyena and the cave-bear, fiercer and more powerful than the modern
type. His multitudinous enemies were all provided with offensive and
defensive armor,—with tusk and fang, with claw and beak, with lances
steeped in never-failing deadliest poisons. To every foe they could
oppose an almost impenetrable hide, a mail of horny scales, a solid
shell. He, by strangest anomaly, was destitute of all. He was a naked
and defenseless babe in the Indian jungle of Earth's fierce and venomous
carnivora. He had not a weapon, not an implement with which to shape
one. Even had he had implements ever so good, he would not have known
enough to fashion himself the rudest club from the branch of a tree. He
had not yet "learned to look up" to where the tree branches grew. "Habit
as

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

well as nature kept his eyes fixed upon the ground." As we saw in the
preceding chapter, he supposed that "the branches of the trees extended
quite to heaven, hiding themselves in infinitely remote ethereal
regions." Indeed, according to some of these advocates, this precious
"primitive man" could not distinguish a tree when he saw it. He was not
at all certain that its outspreading roots and branches were not the
legs and arms of a fellow-man who happened to grow in that particular
way. So says a "generally-understandable-scientific lecturer" of
Germany, Dr. Wilhelm Mannhardt. Let us note his exact statement:
"However inconceivable it may be to us moderns, there truly was a time
when people were *unable to make any conceivable distinction between a
plant and a man*." <span id="fr_653"></span>[1](#fn_653.md)

It is somewhat to be feared lest writers of this sort have been a little
precipitate in rejecting so determinedly the traditional idea of
extraordinary antediluvian longevity. For if the earliest generations of
mankind were in truth such idiotic specimens as here represented, the
great problems as to the possibility of their defending themselves
against the bloodthirsty and powerful carnivora by which they were

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

surrounded, and as to the possibility of their learning sufficiently
early how to wring a subsistence from the unfriendly soil, must give
place to the still more perplexing and more fundamental problem as to
the possibility and credibility of primitive procreation itself. To say
nothing of the question as to the whence of the very first of these
feeble and down-looking intelligences, it is plain that if ever they did
have successors to take up and carry forward and upward their type of
life, in some way and *at some time within the natural life of the first
individuals*,—incredible as it may be "to us moderns,"—it must (happily
for us) have dawned upon some man's mind, or on whatever then occupied
the place of his mind, that between Daphne (or whoever was practically
the first woman) and a tree some distinction was discernible. And as the
friends who give us such witless ancestors are prodigal to a fault in
their allowance of ages of time whenever any ordinary geological or
zoölogical result is to be reached without troubling a Higher Power, it
seems to a calm on-looker a very penurious and illogical, not to say
cruel, procedure to require these embryotic representatives of incipient
humanity to create, or rather to evolve and bring to *practicable*
perfection, the high arts and sciences of intelligent perception, of
human as distinguished from dendrological physiology, of gynecology and
obstetrics,—all within the few swift years of a modern human lifetime.
With "two hundred and thirty thousand to two hundred and forty thousand
years" at his command, or even "many hundred thousand," we really hope
Dr. Mannhardt will see his way to reconsider this point, and to deal
with the *protistoi* of the human

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

world in a more liberal and truly evolutionistic spirit. <span
id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_654.md)

Happily, the apostles of what De Maistre calls the *banale* hypothesis
of primeval savagery have done their worst, and doing this have
shattered their own party into an indefinite number of mutually
antagonistic factions, each protesting against all who happen to be more
thorough-going and radical than themselves. Thus Spencer is in array
against McLennan, Caspari protests against Mannhardt, Vogt endeavors to
outdo Darwin, and so on to the end of the chapter. The modern Babel is
worse than the ancient. To one surveying at the present time the
different departments of science which relate to Man, it would seem as
though in each the breakdown of the theory of primitive human
brutishness and imbecility were complete, though not yet publicly
proclaimed and acknowledged. A review of the situation, with authentic
citations of the dissentient

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

and often contradictory utterances of representative leaders, would be
most timely, but the task must be left to other and more competent
hands. Here, foregoing all exposures of such a kind, we will simply
suggest to the reader a few obviously important memoranda:

1\. Considered in the light of antecedent probabilities, there is no
discoverable reason, or apology for a reason, why the first *Homines*
should have been but half-witted, any more than those perfect *Nautili*
which, ages earlier, with astounding skill navigated the old Silurian
seas. <span id="fr_655"></span>[1](#fn_655.md)

2\. Given Human beings, normally endowed at the beginning, and we see
experience everywhere showing how all the savagery of past and present
history could easily and naturally have originated simply from disregard
of natural and moral law.

3\. Given at the beginning nothing but Animal powers, and we find
nothing in the whole range of experience, from the first dawn of history
until now, paralleling or in any wise rendering intelligible the
hypothetical biological legerdemain of Nature by which these zoölogic
powers were once, *and once only*, transmuted into Human. <span
id="fr_656"></span>[2](#fn_656.md)

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

4\. If Paleontology presents to us certain types of life which indicate
in their successions a certain progress, it must not be forgotten that
the same science presents us other types, whose successions with equal
clearness reveal a progressive degeneracy and an ultimate disappearance.
The movement may be forward, but it *may* also be backward. "As to the
class Reptilia," says Sir Charles Lyell, "some of the orders which
prevailed when the Secondary rocks were formed are confessedly much
higher in their organization than any of the same class now living. If
the less perfect Ophidians, or snakes, which now abound on earth had
taken the lead in those ancient days among the land reptiles, and the
Deinosaurians had been contemporary with Man, there can be no doubt that
the progressionist would have seized upon this fact with unfeigned
satisfaction as confirmatory of his views. Now that the order of
succession is precisely reversed, and that

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

the age of the Iguanodon was long anterior to that of the Eocene
palæophis and the living boa, while the crocodile is in our own times
the highest representative of its class, a retrograde movement in this
important division of the vertebrata must be admitted." <span
id="fr_657"></span>[1](#fn_657.md) With this agrees the emphatic
declaration of Andrew Wilson: "A study of the facts of animal
development is well calculated to show that life is not all progress,
and that it includes retrogression as well as advance. Physiological
history can readily be proved to tend in many cases towards backsliding
instead of reaching forwards and upwards to higher levels. *This
tendency, beginning now to be better recognized in biology than in late
years*, can readily be shown to exercise no unimportant influence on the
fortunes of animals and plants." <span id="fr_658"></span>[2](#fn_658.md)
In view of these facts of retrogression, the latest writers on the
history of life on our planet, even when professing, with the
last-quoted author, to accept of Darwin's philosophy as true, are at the
same time very generally saying, "It cannot be the whole truth." <span
id="fr_659"></span>[3](#fn_659.md)

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

5\. Again, by the same testimony of the rocks, life need not, of
necessity, either advance or retreat; it may stand as first originated
from age to age. Says Professor Nicholson, "There are various groups,
some of them highly organized, which make their appearance at an
extremely ancient date, but which continue throughout geological time
almost unchanged, *and certainly unprogressive*. Many of these
'Persistent Types' are known, and they indicate that under given
conditions, at present unknown to us, it is possible for a life-form to
subsist for an almost indefinite period without any important
modification of its structure." <span id="fr_660"></span>[1](#fn_660.md)

6\. All arguments for the alleged self-evolution of the Human Race out
of preceding animal races, based upon an alleged universal and uniformly
progressive self-evolution of life-forms in the animal kingdom, are, in
view of the above facts, arguments originating in ignorance or in fraud.

7\. According to the teachers of the current agnostic anthropology and
atheistic history, modern Man is the supreme product, the crowning
glory, of the cosmic life-process, at least so far as our planet is
concerned. Yet, by their own concessions, through all the unmeasured
æons during which this being has been maturing and perfecting, the Earth
has steadily been losing its life-giving warmth, its once delightful and
almost equable climate has slowly

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

given place to Sahara heat and Arctic cold, its once luxuriant flora has
yielded to types of marked inferiority, and its degenerating fauna
ceased to come up to the measure of the stature of preceding
forms. <span id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_661.md) This is saying that one and
the same secular Deterioration of Environment has devitalized and
degraded all forms of life *save one*, but that, unaided and alone, it
has elevated that one to the physical, intellectual, and spiritual
kingship of the world. <span id="fr_662"></span>[2](#fn_662.md)

8\. In proportion as the discussions and conclusions of this treatise
have vindicated and illustrated the trustworthiness of the most ancient
Traditions with reference to the location of the first abode of the
race, in precisely the same degree have they authenticated and verified
those same Traditions as trustworthy sources of information with respect
to Man's primitive state, his intellectual powers, and his knowledge of
the Divine.

Finally, the varying Power of Man over Nature, dwindling whensoever by
vice he descends beast-ward, increasing whensoever by virtue he ascends

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Godward, is to a
truly scientific and philosophic eye full of significance. The slightest
study of the manifestations of this power in history inwardly convicts
us of unfaithfulness, as a race, to the true law of our being. We cannot
help feeling that we ought to be lords of Nature. Our actual relation to
the cosmic forces is not, and in historic time never has been, the ideal
and true relation. It was no narrow-minded "bibliolater" who penned the
following expression of this feeling; it was Ralph Waldo Emerson: "As we
degenerate, the contrast between us and our house is more evident. We
are as much strangers in Nature as we are aliens from God. We do not
understand the notes of birds. The fox and the deer run away from us;
the bear and the tiger rend us. . . . Man is a god in ruins. When men
are innocent, life shall be longer, and shall pass into the immortal as
gently as we awake from dreams. Man is the dwarf of himself. Once he was
permeated and dissolved by spirit. At present he applies to Nature but
half his force. . . . Meantime, in the thick darkness, there are not
wanting gleams of a better light,—occasional examples of the action of
man upon Nature with his entire force. Such examples are the traditions
of <span class="smallcaps">miracles</span> in the antiquity of all
nations, the <span class="smallcaps">history of Jesus Christ</span>, the
achievements of a principle in political revolutions, the miracles of
enthusiasm, the wisdom of children. . . . *The problem of restoring to
the world original and eternal beauty is solved by the redemption of the
soul*."

The above is an utterance as true and deep as it is beautiful and
poetic. And here in this ancient and Biblical conception of Man's
relation to Nature

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

is given the sun-clear solution of the whole controversy between the
advocates of universal racial and technological degeneration, on the one
hand, and the advocates of universal racial and technological
progression, on the other. Both parties are right and both are wrong.
The one has vindicated and emphasized one vital class of facts; the
other, another class equally vital. Christian thought interprets and
harmonizes them both. It shows us through all human history racial and
social and technological decadence wherever men have rejected or ignored
God. It shows us, on the other hand, racial and social and technological
progress wherever men have acknowledged and lovingly served that Divine
One in whom we live and move and have our being. Here, then, is the law
of true human progress. As Emerson in his more Christian moods would put
it, The restoration of the lost harmony between Man and his House must
begin with the *Redemption of his Soul*.

As to the primeval condition of our race, a truly scientific mind will
wish to base its conception not on the air-hung speculations of mere
theorists, but on an immovable foundation of fact, attested and
confirmed by the widest, oldest, and most incontestable of all
concurrences of divine and human testimony. According hereto, as in its
beginning light was light, and water water, and the Spirit spirit, so in
his beginning *Man was Man*. It says that the first men could not have
been *men* without a human consciousness, and that they could not have
had a human consciousness without rationality and freedom. It says that
they could not have possessed conscious rationality and freedom without
the perception of ethical qualities and the personal taste of

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

moral experiences. It boldly asserts that, according to every principle
of just analogy, the notion that it took the earliest men one hundred
thousand years to get an idea of the conditions of normal intellectual,
and ethical, and social living is as incredible as that it took the
first-born mammal one hundred thousand years to find its mother's milk.
It calls attention to the fact that all the oldest historic peoples of
every continent unite in the testimony that the first men had knowledge
of superhuman personalities, good and evil. It dwells upon the equally
universal tradition that primeval human life, while progressive in
everything which accumulating human experience would of necessity
improve, was yet from the first the life of decidedly super-bestial,
almost god-like intelligences, as daring ultimately in evil as potent
originally for good. It holds on the same authority that after centuries
and possibly millenniums of such history as great natures undisciplined
by virtue are ever reproducing, the social organism was incurably
corrupted and the moral world-order itself defied. As Plato's Egyptian
priests told Solon, "the divine portion in human nature faded out; "the
purely human" gained the upper hand," and, spoiled by the very
excellence of their fortune, "men became unseemly. To him who had an eye
to see they *appeared* base, and had lost the fairest of their precious
gifts. They still appeared glorious and blessed, at the very time when
they were filled with unrighteous avarice and violence. Then the <span
class="smallcaps">God of gods</span>, who rules with law, and is able to
see into such things, perceiving that an honorable race was in a most
wretched state, and wanting to inflict punishment upon them that they
might

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

be chastened and improved," made fresh announcements of divine penalty
and promise, to the end that haply He might recall them to that earlier
and better life, when they had "despised everything but virtue, neither
were intoxicated by luxury;" when, being "possessed of true and great
spirits, they practiced gentleness and wisdom in their intercourse with
one another;" when they "were obedient to the laws and well affectioned
toward the gods." <span id="fr_663"></span>[1](#fn_663.md) These gracious
endeavors of Divine compassion proving fruitless, the integrity of the
world's rational purpose and significance could be conserved only by
penalty, and by a new moral and physical conditioning of the race. No
change of moral administration could suffice, since every wise appliance
of *merely moral* influence and instruction had been exhausted. A new
physical environment and conditioning was essential to the new moral
methods which, in this critical juncture, Humanity was needing. The
inbringing of such a new physical environment would of itself carry to
human consciences, individual and social, the profoundest and most
effectual of moral meanings. Both the physical and the moral change came
in that world-convulsion which Plato calls "the Great Deluge of all." In
it perished what Hesiod and Ovid and so many others called the "Golden
Race" of men,—the first, the fairest, the strongest, the longest-lived
of all that ever bore the human form divine. Under its waters were
engulfed precious accumulations of science, the primordial creations of
art, the *incunabula* of all literature. So sore was this loss of man's
costliest possessions that either myth or truthful history has

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

filled the early Shemitic world with the pathetic story that the God of
gods, while arranging for the righteous judgment upon the ungodly,
Himself still so compassionated the successors and heirs of its unhappy
victims as to command the patriarchal minister of His will to make an
indestructible monumental record of all that the progenitors of a new
Humanity would need to know. <span id="fr_664"></span>[1](#fn_664.md)

The new physical conditions under which the race was placed were the
conditions brought in by the Diluvian cataclysm. They involved (1)
expatriation, the great Glacial Age compelling an entire abandonment of
the mother-region of the human family; (2) dispersion, the frozen and
sterilized condition of even what is now the North Temperate zone
rendering the struggle for the means of subsistence a most arduous and
difficult one; (3) deterioration of physical constitution corresponding
to the biological conditions of the new and deteriorated environment;
and (4), as a natural consequence of the whole, an abbreviation of the
normal longevity previously enjoyed. Being at the same time reduced to
the lowest social unit in the way of organization,—the Family,—and
being, in consequence of the poverty of Nature's provision, compelled to
spread in proportion as it multiplied, the new Humanity of "the world
which now is" was signally guarded against the repetition of those
insolent and God-defying forms of sin in consequence of which a nemesis
of cosmical proportions had overtaken the antediluvian world. <span
id="fr_665"></span>[2](#fn_665.md)

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

Such is the conception of primeval human history which the oldest
traditions of the oldest nations set over against this late-born dream
of "primitive savagery." It is the conception of the whole Christian
world—of the whole Jewish world—of the Mohammedan world—of the ancient
Greek and Roman world—of the world of the eldest Asiatic and Egyptian
antiquity. It is the irrefutable *Selbstzeugniss* of the Human Race
respecting facts of which it has the knowledge of a living and most
interested participating witness. <span id="fr_666"></span>[1](#fn_666.md)

According to the results of this treatise the primitive seat of the
world's first civilization was outside the boundaries of all lands known
to recorded history. This being so, Mr. Tylor's confident challenge has
for the present quite lost its force. "Where," he exclaims,—"where now
is the district of the Earth that can be pointed to as the primeval home
of Man which does not show by rude stone implements buried in its soil
the savage condition of its former inhabitants?" <span
id="fr_667"></span>[2](#fn_667.md) The "cave-men" of Europe can as little
illustrate man's antediluvian condition as Robinson Crusoe's cave could
illustrate Westminster Cathedral. *Postdiluvian* civilization, or
barbarism, whichever one may choose to call it,

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

may be studied in "Stone Age" implements and products wherever we may
find them, but never should it be forgotten that, back of all dawnings
of new knowledge and new arts here revealed, lay the fuller knowledge
and the more perfect arts of a favored antediluvian world. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[1](#fn_668.md)

Let no one say that the profession of such an opinion betrays the
prejudice of a Christian education; that it is ignoring the fruits of a
century's study; that it is simply repristinating the doctrine

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

of a forgotten Goguet, and seeking to resurrect the long dead Banier. If
any reader is tempted to such utterances, it is possible that an
imaginary conversation may help him to juster conclusions.

Let us fancy ourselves at Cnossus, upon the shores of Crete, hundreds of
years before the Christian era. A traveler has just landed,—a Greek from
Athens, intent upon visiting the celebrated temple and cave of Zeus. As
he is walking to the temple he falls in with two companions, the one an
intelligent Cretan, the other a traveler from Lacedæmon. After due
salutations they naturally discourse of the laws and institutions of the
country, of their origin, and of the origin of all states and laws and
civilizations. And this we may imagine is a part of their conversation:—

*The Athenian:* Do you believe that there is any truth in ancient
traditions?

*The Cretan:* What traditions?

*Ath*. The traditions about the many destructions of mankind which have
been occasioned by deluges and diseases, and in many other ways, and of
the preservation of a remnant.

*Cr*. Every one is disposed to believe them.

*Ath*. Let us imagine one of them: I will take the famous one which was
caused by a Deluge.

*Cr*. What is to be remarked thereon?

*Ath*. I should say that those who then escaped would only be hill
shepherds,—small sparks of the human race preserved on the tops of
mountains. Such survivors would necessarily be unacquainted with the
arts of those who live in cities, and with the various devices which are
suggested to them by interest or ambition, and all the wrongs which they
contrive against one another.

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

*Cr*. Very true.

*Ath*. Let us suppose, then, that the cities in the plains and on the
sea-coast were utterly destroyed at that time. Would not all implements
perish and every other excellent invention of political or any other
sort of wisdom utterly fail at that time?

*Cr*. Why, yes; and if things had always continued as they are at
present ordered, how could any discovery have ever been made even in the
least particular? For it is evident that the arts were unknown during
thousands and thousands of years. And no more than a thousand or two
thousand years have elapsed since the discoveries of Dædalus, Orpheus
and Palamedes,—since Marsyas and Olympus invented music, and Amphion the
lyre,—not to speak of numberless other inventions which are but of
yesterday.

*Ath*. Have you forgotten the name of a friend who is really of
yesterday?

*Cr*. I suppose that you mean Epimenides.

*Ath*. The same, my friend; for his ingenuity does indeed far overleap
the heads of all your great men; what Hesiod had preached of old, he
carried out in practice, as you declare.

*Cr*. Yes, according to our tradition.

*Ath*. After the great destruction, may we not suppose that the state of
man was something of this sort. In the beginning of things there was a
fearful illimitable desert and a vast expanse of land; a herd or two of
oxen would be the only survivors of the animal world; and there might be
a few goats, hardly enough to support the life of those who tended them.

*Cr*. True.

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

*Ath*. And of cities or governments or legislation, about which we are
now talking, do you suppose that they could have any recollection at
all?

*Cr*. They could not.

*Ath*. And out of this state of things has there not sprung all that we
now are and have: cities and governments, and arts and laws, and a great
deal of vice and a great deal of virtue?

*Cr*. What do you mean?

*Ath*. Why, my good friend, how can we possibly suppose that those who
knew nothing of all the good and evil of cities could have attained
their full development, whether of virtue or of vice?

*Cr*. I understand your meaning, and you are quite right.

*Ath*. But, as time advanced and the race multiplied, the world came to
be what the world is.

*Cr*. Very true.

*Ath*. Doubtless the change was not made all in a moment, but little by
little, during a very long period of time.

*Cr*. That is to be supposed.

*Ath*. At first they would have a natural fear ringing in their ears
which would prevent their descending from the heights into the plain.

*Cr*. Of course.

*Ath*. The fewness of the survivors would make them desirous of
intercourse with one another; but then the means of traveling either by
land or by sea would have been almost entirely lost with the loss of the
arts, and there would be great difficulty in getting at one another; for
iron and brass and all metals would have become confused, and would have
disappeared; nor would there be any possibility of extracting

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

them; and they would have no means of felling timber. Even if you
suppose that some implements might have been preserved in the mountains,
they would quickly have worn out and disappeared, and there would be no
more of them until the art of metallurgy had again revived.

*Cr*. There could not have been.

*Ath*. In how many generations would this be attained?

*Cr*. Clearly not for many generations.

*Ath*. During this period, and for some time afterwards, all the arts
which require iron and brass and the like would disappear.

*Cr*. Certainly.

*Ath*. Faction and war would also have died out in those days and for
many reasons.

*Cr*. How would that be?

*Ath*. In the first place, the desolation of these primitive men would
create in them a feeling of affection and friendship towards one
another; and, in the second place, they would have no occasion to fight
for their subsistence, for they would have pasture in abundance, except
just at first, and in some particular cases; on this pasture-land they
would mostly support life in a primitive age, having plenty of milk and
flesh, and procuring other food by the chase, not to be despised either
in quantity or quality. They would also have abundance of clothing, and
bedding, and dwellings, and utensils either capable of standing on the
fire or not; for the plastic and weaving arts do not require any use of
iron: God has given these two arts to man in order to provide him with
necessaries, that, when reduced to their last extremity, the human race
may

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

still grow and increase. Hence in those days mankind were not very poor;
nor was poverty a cause of difference among them; and rich they could
not be, if they had no gold or silver, and such at that time was their
condition. And the community which has neither poverty nor riches will
always have the noblest principles, there is no insolence or injustice;
nor, again, are there any contentions or envyings among them. And
therefore they were good, and also because they were what is called
simple-minded; and when they were told about good and evil, they in
their simplicity believed what they heard to be very truth and practiced
it. No one had the wit to suspect, another of a falsehood, as men do
now; but what they heard about gods and men they believed to be true and
lived accordingly; and therefore they were in all respects such as we
have described them.

*Cr*. That quite accords with my views, and with those of my friend
here.

*Ath*. Would not many generations living on in a simple manner, although
ruder, perhaps, and more ignorant of the arts generally, and in
particular of those of land or naval warfare, and likewise of other
arts, termed in cities legal practices and party conflicts, and
including all conceivable ways of hurting one another in word and deed;
although inferior to those who lived before the Deluge, or to the men of
our day in these respects, would they not, I say, be simpler and more
manly, and also more temperate, and in general more just? The reason has
been already explained.

*Cr*. Very true.

*Ath*. I should wish you to understand that what

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

has preceded and what is about to follow has been, and will be, said
with the intention of explaining what need the men of that time had of
laws, and who was their lawgiver.

*Cr*. And thus far what you have said has been very well said.

*Ath*. They could hardly have wanted lawgivers as yet; nothing of that
sort was likely to have existed in their days, for they had no letters
at this early stage; they lived by habit and the customs of their
forefathers, as they are called.

*Cr*. Probably.

*Ath*. But there was already existing a form of government which, if I
am not mistaken, is generally termed a lordship, and this still remains
in many places, both among Hellenes and barbarians, and is the
government which is declared by Homer to have prevailed among the
Cyclopes:—

"They have neither councils nor judgments, but they dwell in hollow
rocks on the tops of high mountains, and every one is the judge of his
wife and children, and they do not trouble themselves about one
another."

*Cr*. That must be a charming poet of yours; I have read some other
verses of his, which are very clever; but I do not know much of him, for
foreign poets are little read among the Cretans.

*The Lacedæmonian*. But they are in Lacedæmon, and he appears to be the
prince of them all; the manner of life, however, which he describes is
not Spartan, but rather Ionian, and he seems quite to confirm what you
are saying, tracing up the ancient state of mankind by the help of
tradition to barbarism.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

*Ath*. Yes; and we may accept his witness to the fact that there was a
time when primitive societies had this form.

*Cr*. Very true.

*Ath*. And did not such states spring out of single habitations and
families who were scattered and thinned in the devastations; and the
eldest of them was their ruler, because with them government originated
in the authority of a father and a mother, whom, like a flock of birds,
they followed, forming one troop under the patriarchal rule and
sovereignty of their parents, which of all sovereignties is the most
just?

*Cr*. Very true.

*Ath*. After this they came together in greater numbers, and increased
the size of their cities, and betook themselves to husbandry, first of
all at the foot of the mountains, and made inclosures of loose walls and
works of defense, in order to keep off wild beasts; thus creating a
single large and common habitation.

*Cr*. Yes; at least we may suppose it.

*Ath*. There is another thing which would probably happen.

*Cr*. What?

*Ath*. When these larger habitations grew up out of the lesser original
ones, each of the lesser ones would survive in the larger; every family
would be under the rule of the eldest, and, owing to their separation
from one another, would have peculiar customs in things divine and
human, which they would have received from their several parents who had
educated them, and these customs would incline them to order, when the
parents had the element of

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

order in them; and to courage, when they had the element of courage in
them. And they would naturally stamp upon their children, and upon their
children's children, their own institutions; and, as we are saying, they
would find their way into the larger society, having already their own
peculiar laws.

*Cr*. Certainly.

*Ath*. And every man surely likes his own laws best, and the laws of
others not so well.

*Cr*. True.

*Ath*. Then how we seem to have stumbled upon the beginnings of
legislation!

*Cr*. Exactly.

*Ath*. The next step will be that these persons who meet together must
choose some arbiters, who will inspect the laws of all of them, and will
publicly present such of them as they approve to the chiefs who lead the
tribes, and are in a manner their kings, and will give them the choice
of them. These will themselves be called legislators, and will appoint
the magistrates, framing some sort of aristocracy, or perhaps monarchy,
out of the dynasties or lordships, and in this altered state of the
government they will live.

*Cr*. Yes, they would be appointed in the order which you mention. . . .

But we will not pursue the conversation farther. Is the reader indignant
that he has been made to listen so long to Abbé Banier, clumsily
disguised in the robes of a pretended Athenian philosopher and
discoursing, all out of character, on matters which betray "the
prejudices of a Christian education"? It may well be. To a reader of
Lubbock and Tylor and Vogt, the sentiments of the Athenian traveler do
seem singularly in accord with Holy Scripture.

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But let not the
innocent suffer for the guilty. It happens that our imaginary
conversation is not of our imagining. It was written more than two
thousand years before the birth of Abbé Banier, and by as good a pagan
as the famed Athenian Plato.

On the whole, we are of the opinion that the great consentaneous
Traditions of the Human Race will yet outlive a considerable number of
Bachofens and Büchners and Buckles, and that if ever the burial-place of
Moses shall be discovered, it will not be found to be in any of the
ignominious graveyards periodically prepared for him by on-coming
Professors of Hebrew eager for a stunning inaugural. Despite the
ingenious "higher" criticism of to-day's ephemeral "authorities," the
Biblical scholarship of the future is more likely to carry the age of
the composition of the Eden story backward than forward. The documents
embedded in the opening chapters of Genesis may yet prove to be, what
reverent and orthodox scholars have already affirmed—fragments of the
Sacred Scriptures of the Antediluvian Patriarchal Church. <span
id="fr_669"></span>[1](#fn_669.md) Whether so or no, one ancient word shall
evermore be verified: "The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the
word of our God shall stand forever."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Our treatise opened with a pathetic picture,—it must close with another.
Long-lost Eden is found; but its gates are barred against us. Now, as at
the beginning of our exile, a sword turns every way to keep the Way of
the Tree of Life.

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

Sadder yet, it is Eden no longer. Even could some new Columbus penetrate
to the secret centre of this Wonderland of the Ages, he could but
hurriedly kneel amid a frozen desolation and, dumb with a nameless awe,
let fall a few hot tears above the buried and desolated hearthstone of
Humanity's earliest and loveliest home.

Happily for us, O Menschengeschlecht, a trusty hand has added to the
third of Genesis the closing chapters of the Patmos Apocalypse. The
thought of the old forever evanished Eden is henceforth bearable, for
from afar we have caught the vision of a Sinless Paradise, the frostless
Gardens, the Tree, and the River of the Heavenly City of God.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Ja, wenn des Nordwinds rauhes Tosen  
Der Erde Gärten zugeschneit,  
Dann blühen erst des Himmels Rosen  
In unverwelkter Herrlichkeit.  
Ja, sind wir Gäste hier zu Landen  
Auf dieser kalten Winterflur,  
So ist noch eine Ruh vorhanden  
Dem Seufzen aller Kreatur*.  
                                 <span class="smallcaps">Karl
Gerok</span>.</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_650"></span>[407:1](pf36.htm#fr_650.md) *Revue Scientifique*,
Paris, September 22, 1883.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[407:2](pf36.htm#fr_651.md) With an impressive
attempt at accuracy Professor Mortillet says, "at least 230,000 to
240,000 years." *Le Préhistorique*, p. 627. Haeckel says, "in any case
more than 20,000 years," "probably more than 100,000 years," "perhaps
many hundred thousand years." *Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte*, p. 595.
Mr. John Fiske, building upon Croll, thinks that "the human race has
covered both the eastern and the western hemispheres for thousands of
centuries," and that the period during which man has possessed
sufficient intelligence to leave a traditional record of himself is
"only an infinitesimal fraction" of the time. In one passage he fixes on
the period of "eight hundred thousand years," and at one time Lyell and
others favored the same duration. *Cosmic Philosophy*, ii. 320, 295.
Compare on the other side Southall, *The Recent Origin of Man*, Phila.,
1875, and *The Epoch of the Mammoth and the Apparition of Man upon the
Earth*, Phila., 1878.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[408:1](pf36.htm#fr_652.md) "In the dim mist of
bygone ages our ancestors lived the life of wild beasts in forests and
caves." Élisée Reclus, *Ocean, Atmosphere, and Life*, vol. ii., p. 190.
"We must assign to him the position of a savage, but of a savage as far
below the buffalo-hunting Pawnee as the latter is removed from the
cultivated representative of the Caucasian race." Rau, *Early Man in
Europe*. N. Y., 1876: p. 162. "On such a view" as that "of the modern
naturalist, *savage life itself is a far advanced condition*." Tylor,
*Primitive Culture*, vol. i., p. 37. "All our recent investigations in
Europe into the state of the arts in the earlier Stone Age lead clearly
to the opinion that at a period many thousands of years anterior to the
historical, man was in a state of great barbarism and ignorance,
*exceeding that of the most savage tribes of modern times*." Lyell,
*Principles of Geology*, vol. ii., P. 485. For a contrary view see the
Duke of Argyll's chapter "On the Degradation of Man" in his *Unity of
Nature*. London, 1884: pp. 374-447.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[409:1](pf36.htm#fr_653.md) "Alle lebenden Wesen,
vom Menschen bis zur Pflanze, haben Geborenwerden, Wachsthum und Tod
miteinander gemein, und diese Gemeinschaft des Schicksals mag in einer
fernen Kindheitsperiode unsers Geschlechts so überwältigend auf die noch
ungeübte Beobachtung unserer Vorältern eingedrungen sein, dass sie
darüber die Unterschiede übersahen, welche jene Schöpfungsstufen
voneinander trennen. So unbegreiflich es uns Modernen klingen mag, hat
es in Wahrheit eine Zeit gegeben, in der man keinen begreiflichen
Unterschied zwischen einer Pflanze und einem Menschen zu machen wusste."
*Sammlung gemeinverständlicher wissenschaftlicher Vorträge,
herausgegeben von Rudolf Virchow und Frans von Holtzendorff*. Nro. 239.
Berlin, 1876.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[411:1](pf36.htm#fr_654.md) There is some evidence
that the geologists are becoming increasingly skeptical as to the
time-pieces relied upon by the ruling school of paleontological
anthropologists. For example: "The present rates of the retrocession of
Niagara, or of the deposit of Nile mud, or of stalagmite in caverns, or
of the accumulations of the rocks themselves, or of the movement of
glaciers, have been vainly used as natural chronometers, on the
assumption that they have been going on at the same rate through all the
past, and have been warranted never to stop, or to want winding up, or
to go faster or slower than at the moment the observer was looking at
them. Such attempts are so obviously futile that it is not a little
strange to find them seriously made by men like Wallace and Mortillet."
W. Boyd Dawkins, "Early Man in America." *North American Review*, Oct.,
1883, p. 338. See also "The Niagara Gorge as a Chronometer," by G.
Frederick Wright, in the *Bibliotheca Sacra*, and in the *Am. Journal of
Science* for 1884. Still more significant is the alarmingly
revolutionary "Opening Address" delivered last summer in Montreal before
the Geological Section of the British Association by President W. T.
Blanford, F. R. S., and printed in *Nature*, Sept. 4, 1884, pp. 440 ff.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[412:1](pf36.htm#fr_655.md) Since these pages were
placed in the printer's hands the following has appeared in the
scientific journals: "A discovery by Dr. Lindström in the Silurian rocks
of Gotland is worthy of special notice. In beds which are said to be the
equivalent of our Niagara group he has discovered a remarkably
well-preserved scorpion. Dr. Thorell, one of the foremost students of
Arachnida in the world, and Dr. Lindström are preparing a paper upon it,
and have given it the name of *Paleophoneus nuncius*. No scorpions, nor
indeed any Arachnida, have before been found fossil in beds lower than
the carboniferous deposits, in which some twenty-five species have been
found in this country and Europe; *yet this Silurian example is more
perfect than any specimen of a fossil scorpion from any formation*."

<span id="fn_656"></span>[412:2](pf36.htm#fr_656.md) "That man, equally
with the monad and the Conferva, owes his <span id="page_413">p.
413</span> origin to a protoplasmic germ, in which are contained all the
possibilities of his after development, is no piece of scientific
romance, but demonstrable truth. . . . All forms of protoplasm, however
alike in appearance and composition science may and does declare them to
be, are not identical in their potentialities. They do not, in other
words, all possess similar powers of becoming similar organisms. The
speck which remains an Amœba has no power of evolving from its substance
a higher form of life. The protoplasmic spore of a seaweed is a seaweed
still, despite its similarity to other or higher forms of plant germs.
The germ of the sponge, again, remains possessed of the powers which can
convert it into a sponge alone. And the differences between such
protoplasmic specks and the germ which is destined to evolve the human
frame can only be declared as of immense extent, and as equaling in
their nature the wide structural and functional distinctions which we
draw betwixt the sponge and the man. Of such differences in the inherent
nature of protoplasm under different conditions we are as yet in
complete ignorance."—Andrew Wilson, Ph. D., F. L. S., *Chapters on
Evolution*. London, 1883: pp. 74, 75.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[414:1](pf36.htm#fr_657.md) *The Antiquity of
Man*, Philadelphia ed., p. 402.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[414:2](pf36.htm#fr_658.md) Andrew Wilson, Ph. D.,
F. L. S., *Chapters on Evolution*, p. 343 (italics ours). See pp.
342-365. The progress of paleontological research is constantly bringing
new illustrations to light. *Revue Scientifique*. Paris, 1884: p. 282.
Even in our late age of the world "highly specialized forms of life are
in fact numerically a minority of living beings." E. D. Cope, "On
Archæsthetism," in the *American Naturalist*. Phila., 1882: vol. xvi.,
p. 468. Compare same writer on "Catagenesis," in vol. xviii. (1884), pp.
970-984.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[414:3](pf36.htm#fr_659.md) What could be more
striking and impressive than the following fresh testimony from this
field: "The flora of the whole Paleozoic period . . . is very distinct
from that of succeeding times. Still, the leading families of
*Rhizocarpeæ*, *Æquisetaceæ*, *Lycopodiaceæ*, *Filiceæ*, and *Coniferæ*,
established in Paleozoic times, still remain, and the changes which have
occurred *consist mainly in the degradation of the* <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> *three first families*, and in the
introduction of new types of Gymnosperms and Phænogams. These changes,
delayed and scarcely perceptible in the Permian and Early Mesozoic, seem
to have been greatly accelerated in the Later Mesozoic." Principal
Dawson, "On the More Ancient Land Floras of the Old and New Worlds."
Paper read before the British Association in Montreal, Aug. 1884.
*Nature*, p. 527.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[415:1](pf36.htm#fr_660.md) *Life-History of the
Earth*, p. 371, 2.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[416:1](pf36.htm#fr_661.md) "The Pliocene period
is the declining age of the European flora, the time when the climatic
conditions are definitively altered, when the vegetation gradually
becomes poor and ceases to gain anything. The progress of the phenomenon
is slow, but it moves along an inclined plane, on which it never stops.
Those ornamental plants, those precious trees, those noble and elegant
shrubs, which are now carefully trained by artificial culture in
European conservatories were until then inhabitants of Europe, but they
left it forever. One by one the ostracised plants take their departure,
lingering here and there on the road to exile. It is this exodus that we
should have to describe, if we could follow step by step the march of
retrogression, and indicate species by species the progress and the
result of this abandonment of our soil."—G. de Saporta, *Le Monde des
Plantes avant l’Apparition de l’Homme*. Noticed in *Am. Journal of
Science*, 1879, p. 270.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[416:2](pf36.htm#fr_662.md) See above, page 100,
note.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[420:1](pf36.htm#fr_663.md) *Critias*, 120.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[421:1](pf36.htm#fr_664.md) Josephus,
*Antiquities*, i. 2, 3. Lenormant, *Beginnings of History*, p. 445.
Polar "Sippara" and the "Siriad land" are one.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[421:2](pf36.htm#fr_665.md) The events described
in Gen. xi. 1-9 may have occurred "*in* the Front-country" (v. 2). See
above, page [221](pf27.htm#page_221), note [1](pf27.htm#fn_321.md).

<span id="fn_666"></span>[422:1](pf36.htm#fr_666.md) "The men of old time .
. . must surely have known the truth about their own ancestors. . . .
How can we doubt the word . . . as they declare that they are speaking
*of what took place in the family?*" Plato, *Timæus*, 40. It is
satisfactory to note that that undervaluation of oral tradition which is
inseparable from the theory that man is merely an improved beast, and
which shows its natural fruit in such free-handed reconstructors of
history as Professors Kuenen and Wellhausen, has proceeded so far that
even rejecters of the traditional estimate of the Pentateuch and of the
Old Testament are beginning to react restively against it. See <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>, Sect. VII.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[422:2](pf36.htm#fr_667.md) *Primitive Culture*,
vol. i., p. 60.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[423:1](pf36.htm#fr_668.md) In his late work,
entitled *India: What can it teach us?* (London, 1883) Professor Max
Müller well challenges the first principles of our dominant school of
"Culture-students," as follows: "What do we know of savage tribes beyond
the last chapter of their history? Do we ever get an insight into their
antecedents? Can we understand what, after all, is everywhere the most
important and the most instructive lesson to learn, how they have come
to be what they are? There is, indeed, their language, and in it we see
traces of growth that point to distant ages, quite as much as the Greek
of Homer, or the Sanskrit of the Vedas. . . . Unless we admit a special
creation for these savages they must be as old as the Hindus, the
Greeks, and Romans; as old as we ourselves. We may assume, of course, if
we like, that their life has been stationary, and that they are to-day
what the Hindus were no longer than three thousand years ago. But that
is a mere guess, and is contradicted by the facts of their language.
They may have passed through ever so many vicissitudes, and what we
consider as primitive may be, for all we know, a relapse into savagery,
or a corruption of something that was more rational and intelligible in
former stages. Think only of the rules that determine marriage among the
lowest of savage tribes. Their complication passes all understanding.
All seems a chaos of prejudice, superstition, pride, vanity, and
stupidity. And yet we catch a glimpse here and there that there was some
reason in most of that unreason; we see how sense dwindled away into
nonsense, custom into ceremony, ceremony into force. Why, then, should
this surface of savage life represent to us the lowest stratum of human
life, the very beginnings of civilization, simply because we cannot dig
beyond that surface?" A hundred years hence the story that the wise men
of the nineteenth century sought to reconstruct the beginnings of human
history by the study of the lowest contemporary savages will be one of
the choicest of popular illustrations of the folly of "ante-scientific
times."

<span id="fn_669"></span>[432:1](pf36.htm#fr_669.md) Moffat: *Comparative
History of Religions*. New York, 1871: vol. i., pp. 99 *seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section I. The Earth of Columbus not a True Sphere](pf37.md)
