[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf39)  [Next](pf41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

### SECTION IV.—THE EARTH AND WORLD OF THE HINDUS.

(*Illustrating pp. [129](pf17.htm#page_129)-[133](pf17.htm#page_133.md);
[148](pf20.htm#page_148)-[154](pf20.htm#page_154.md);
[18](pf04.htm#page_18).[3](pf04.htm#page_3), etc*..md)

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> the mythological cosmos of the
modern Hindus was originally constructed upon the basis of a geocentric
system of the planetary heavens I cannot doubt. Its "concentric oceans"
are simply the interplanetary spaces mythologically pictured and
described. Its "concentric continents" are those invisible solid,
concentric, "crystalline spheres" which revolved about the common axis
of the Pythagoreo-Ptolemaic universe, and were presided over by the
different visible planets. In both systems the Earth is not only the
centre of the planetary revolution, but also *the centre of each
planetary sphere itself*. How entirely incorrect the flat-world
interpretation ordinarily given us is <span
id="fr_671"></span>[1](#fn_671.md) could hardly be more forcibly shown than
it is in the following extract: "Priya Vrata, by the wheel of whose car
the Earth \[or better, the World\] was divided into seven continents,
had thirteen male children. Six of these embraced an ascetic life; the
rest ruled the seven divisions of the Earth \[World.\] To Agnidhra was
assigned the Jambu-dwípa \[the Earth\]; to Medhátithi, Plaksha; to
Vápushmát, Sálmali; to Jyotishmat, Kúsa; to Dyutimat, Krauncha; to
Bhavya, Sáka; and to Savala, Pushkara. With the exception of the
sovereign of Jambu each of the six other kings is said to have had seven
sons, among whom he divided his kingdom into seven equal parts. These
seven divisions in each of the six continents are separated by seven
chains of mountains and seven rivers lying breadthwise, *and placed with
such inclinations with respect to one another that if a straight line be
drawn through any chain of mountains or* 

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

*rivers and its corresponding mountains or rivers on the other
continents, and produced toward the central island, it would meet the
centre of the Earth*." <span id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_672.md)

All Puranic descriptions of the Earth are by no means consistent with
each other, but the following from the Vishnu Purana can readily be
understood if read in the light of the illustrative cuts already given:—

Parásara.—You shall hear from me, Maitreya, a brief account of the
earth. A full detail I could not give you in a century.

The seven great insular continents are Jambu, Plaksha, Sálmali, Kusa,
Krauncha, Sáka, and Pushkara; and they are surrounded, severally, by
seven great seas,—the sea of salt water (Lavana), of sugar-cane juice
(Ikshu), of wine (Surá), of clarified butter (Sarpis), of curds (Dadhi),
of milk (Dugdha), and of fresh water (Jala).

Jambu-dwípa is in the centre of all these. And in the centre of this
(continent) is the golden mountain Meru. The height of Meru is
eighty-four thousand Yojanas; and its depth below (the surface of the
earth) is sixteen (thousand). Its diameter at the summit is thirty-two
(thousand Yojanas), and at its base sixteen thousand; so that this
mountain is like the seed-cup of the lotos of the earth.

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are Himavat, Hemakúta, and
Nishadha, which lie south (of Meru); and Níla, Śweta, and Śringin; which
are situated to the north (of it). The two central ranges (those next to
Meru, or Nishadha and Níla) extend for a hundred thousand (Yojanas,
running east and west). Each of the others diminishes ten thousand
(Yojanas, as it lies more remote from the centre). <span
id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_673) They are two thousand (Yojanas.md)

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

in height, and as many in breadth. The Varshas (or countries between
these ranges) are: Bhárata (India), south of the Himavat mountains;
next, Kimpurusha, between Himavat and Hemakúta; north of the latter, and
south of Nishadha, is Harivarsha: north of Meru is Ramyaka, extending
from the Nila or blue mountains to the Śweta (or white) mountains;
Hiranmaya lies between the Śweta and Śringin ranges; and Uttarakuru is
beyond the latter, following the same direction as Bhárata. Each of
these is nine thousand (Yojanas) in extent.

Ilávrita is of similar dimensions, but in the centre of it is the golden
mountain Meru; and the country extends nine thousand (Yojanas) in each
direction from the four sides of the mountain. There are four mountains
in this Varsha, formed as buttresses to Meru, each ten thousand Yojanas
in elevation. That on the east is called Mandara; that on the south,
Gandhamádana; that on the west, Vipula; and that on the north, Supárswa.
On each of these stands severally a Kadamba-tree, a Jambu-tree, a
Pippala, and a Vata; each spreading over eleven hundred (Yojanas, and
towering aloft like) banners on the mountains. From the Jambu-tree the
insular continent Jambu-dwípa derives its appellation. The apples

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

of that tree are as large as elephants. When they are rotten they fall
upon the crest of the mountain; and from their expressed juice is formed
the Jambu river, the waters of which are drunk by the inhabitants; and,
in consequence of drinking of that stream, they pass their days in
content and health, being subject neither to perspiration, to foul
odors, to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil on the banks of the
river, absorbing the Jambu juice, and being dried by gentle breezes,
becomes the gold termed Jámbunada (of which) the ornaments of the
Siddhas (are fabricated). The country of Bhadráswa lies on the east of
Meru, and Ketumála, on the west; and between these two is the region
Ilávrita. On the east (of the same) is the forest Chaitraratha; the
Gandhamádana (wood) is on the south; (the forest of) Vaibhiája is on the
west; and (the grove of India, or) Mandana is on the north. There are
also four great lakes, the waters of which are partaken of by the gods,
called Aruńoda, Mahábhadra, Ásitoda, and Mánasa.

The principal mountain ridges which project from the base of Meru, like
filaments from the root of the lotos, are, on the east, Sítánta,
Mukunda, Kurarí, Mályavat, and Vaikanka; on the south, Trikútá, Sisira,
Patanga, Ruchaka, and Nishadha; on the west Śikhivásas, Vaidúrya,
Kapila, Gandhamádana, and Járudhi; and on the north Śankhakúta,
Ŕishabha, Hamsa, Nága, and Kálanjara. These and others extend from
between the intervals in the body, or from the heart, of Meru.

On the summit of Meru is the vast city of Brahma, extending fourteen
thousand leagues, and renowned in heaven; and around it, in the cardinal
points and the intermediate quarters, are situated the stately cities of
Indra and the other regents of the spheres. The capital of Brahma is
inclosed by the river Ganges, which, issuing from the foot of Vishnu,
and washing the lunar orb, falls, here, from the skies, and after
encircling the city

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

divides into four mighty rivers flowing in opposite directions. These
rivers are the Śítá, the Alakanandá, the Chakshu, and the Bhadrá. The
first, falling upon the tops of the inferior mountains, on the east side
of Meru, flows over their crests, and passes through the country of
Bhadráśwa, to the ocean. The Alakanandá flows south, to (the country of)
Bhárata, and, dividing into seven rivers on the way, falls into the sea.
The Chakshu falls into the sea, after traversing all the western
mountains and passing through the country of Ketumála. And the Bhadrá
washes the country of the Uttarakurus, and empties itself into the
northern ocean.

Meru, then, is confined between the mountains Nita and Nishadha (on the
north and south), and between Mályavat and Gandhamádana (on the west and
east). It lies between them, like the pericarp of a lotos.

The countries of Bhárata, Ketumála, Bhadráswa, and Uttarakuru lie, like
leaves of the lotos of the world, exterior to the boundary mountains.
Jat́hara and Devakúta are two mountain ranges, running north and south,
and connecting the two chains of Níla and Nishadha. Gandhamádana and
Kailása extend, east and west, eighty Yojanas in breadth, from sea to
sea. Nishadha and Páriyátra are the limitative mountains on the west,
stretching, like those on the east, between the Níla and Nishadha
ranges. And the mountains Tríśŕinga and Járudha are the northern limits
(of Meru), extending, east and west, between the two seas. Thus I have
repeated to you the mountains described by great sages as the boundary
mountains, situated in pairs on each of the four sides of Meru.

Those also which have been mentioned as the filament mountains (or
spurs), Śítanta and the rest, are exceedingly delightful. The valleys
embosomed amongst them are favorite resorts of the Siddhas and Cháranas.
And there are situated upon them agreeable forests and

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

pleasant cities, embellished with the palaces of Lakshmí, Vishńu, Agni,
Súrya, and other deities, and peopled by celestial spirits; whilst the
Yakshas, Rákshasas, Daityas, and Dánavas pursue their pastimes in the
vales.

These, in short, are the regions of Paradise, or Swarga, the seats of
the righteous, and where the wicked do not arrive even after a hundred
births. In (the country of) Bhadráśwa, Vishńu resides as Hayasíras (the
horse-headed); in Ketumála, as Varáha (the boar); in Bhárata, as the
tortoise (Kúrma); in Keru, as the fish (Matsya); in his universal form,
everywhere: for Hari pervades all places. He is the supporter of all
things; he is all things. In the eight realms of Kiḿpurusha and the rest
(or all exclusive of Bhárata), there is no sorrow, nor weariness, nor
anxiety, nor hunger, nor apprehension; their inhabitants are exempt from
all infirmity and pain, and live (in uninterrupted enjoyment) for ten or
twelve thousand years. Indra never sends rain upon them; for the earth
abounds with water. In those places there is no distinction of Kŕita,
Tretá, or any succession of ages. In each of these Varshas there are,
respectively, seven principal ranges of mountains, from which, O best of
Brahmans, hundreds of rivers take their rise. (*From H. H. Wilson's
Translation of the Vishnu Purana*.) <span
id="fr_674"></span>[1](#fn_674.md)

For further accounts of Puranic geography see Wilford's "Sacred Isles in
the West," ch. iii.; "Geographical Extracts from the Puranas," in
"*Asiatic Researches*," vol. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_671"></span>[459:1](pf40.htm#fr_671.md) See picture in Dr.
Scudder's *Tales for Little Readers about the Heathen*. New York, 1849:
p. 48.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[460:1](pf40.htm#fr_672.md) Babu Shome, "Physical
Errors of Hinduism." *Selections from the Calcutta Review*, No. xv.,
April, 1882.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[460:2](pf40.htm#fr_673.md) In our diagram of the
Hindu *Varshas*, [p. 152](pf20.htm#page_152.md), the length of the outer
partition-ranges diminishes at about the rate here required. In the only
other I have ever seen,—one shown me by Professor <span id="page_461">p.
461</span> Max Müller in a modern Sanskrit tractate, whose author's name
I regret to have lost,—all the ranges were represented as parallel with
the Nila and Nishadha. Moreover, as the whole surface of Jambu-dwípa was
represented as a circular flat disk, the second of the two successive
outer ranges was much more than the required one tenth shorter than its
predecessor. Besides this, Jambu-dwípa is repeatedly described in this
same Purana as a globe, and should be so treated in all graphic
representations.

*Postscript*. Since the above was written a long search for Capt.
Wilford's diagrams in vol. viii. of the *Asiatic Researches* (London,
1808) has been crowned with success. His perpetual vacillation between
what he considers the primitive and proper flat earth of "the Pauranics"
and the spherical earth of the astronomers is the chief source of his
manifold embarrassments. A second and subordinate source of endless
trouble is his effort to interpret mythical geography in the terms of
geography actual.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[464:1](pf40.htm#fr_674.md) The parentheses and
vowel marks in the foregoing are Wilson's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section V. Grill on the World-Pillar of the Rig Veda](pf41.md)
