[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl407)  [Next](wl409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### I

*Glycera. Thais*

*Gly*. Thais, that Acarnanian soldier, who used to be so fond of
Abrotonum, and then fell in love with me--he was decorated, and wore a
military cloak--do you know the man I mean? I suppose you have forgotten
him?

*Th*. Oh no, dear, I know; why, he shared our table last harvest
festival. Well? you look as if you had something to tell me about him.

*Gly*. That wicked Gorgona (such a *friend* of mine, to be sure!)--she
has stolen him away from me.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

*Th*. What! he has given you up, and taken her in your place?

*Gly*. Yes, dear; isn't it *horrid* of her?

*Th*. Well, Glycera darling, it is wicked, of course; but it is not very
surprising; it is what all we poor girls do. You mustn't be too much
vexed; I shouldn't blame her, if I were you; Abrotonum never blamed you
about him, you know; and you were friends, too. But *I* cannot think
what he *finds* in her; where are his eyes? has he never found out how
thin her hair is? what a lot of forehead she shows! and her lips! all
livid; they might be a dead woman's; and that scraggy neck, veined all
over; and what an amount of nose! I grant you she is tall and straight;
and she has quite a nice smile.

*Gly*. Oh, Thais, you don't think it was her *looks* caught him. Don't
you know? her mother Chrysarium is a witch; she knows Thessalian charms,
and can draw down the moon; they do say she flies o' nights. It was she
bewitched him with drugs in his drink, and now they are making their
harvest out of him.

*Th*. Ah well, dear, you will get a harvest out of some one else; never
mind him.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II](wl409)
