[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl414)  [Next](wl416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### XI

*Tryphaena. Charmides*

*Try*. Well, to be sure! Get a girl to keep company with you, and then
turn your back on her! Nothing but tears and groans! The wine was not
good enough, I suppose, and you didn't want a *tête-à-tête* dinner. Oh
yes, I saw you were crying at dinner too. And now it is one continued
wail like a baby's. What is it all about, Charmides? *do* tell me; let
me get that much out of my evening with you.

*Ch*. Love is killing me, Tryphaena; I can stand it no longer.

*Try*. It is not love for me, that is clear. You would not be so cold to
me, and push me away when I want to put my arms round you. It really is
not fair to keep me off like this! Never mind, tell me who it is;
perhaps I may help you to her; I know one ought to make oneself useful.

*Ch*. Oh, you two know each other quite well; she is quite a celebrity.

*Try*. Name, name, Charmides!

*Ch*. Well then--Philematium.

*Try*. Which? there are two of them; one in Piraeus, who has only just
come there; Damyllus the governor's son is in love with her; is it that
one? or the other, the one they call The Trap?

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

*Ch*. Yes, that is she; she has caught me and got me tight, poor mouse.

*Try*. And the tears were all for her?

*Ch*. Even so.

*Try*. Is this recent? or how long has it been going on?

*Ch*. Oh, it is nothing new. I saw her first at the Dionysia; that makes
seven months.

*Try*. Had you a full view of her, or did you just see her face and as
much as a woman of forty-five likes to show?

*Ch*. Oh, come! I have her word for it she will be two-and-twenty next
birthday.

*Try*. Well, which are you going to trust--her word, or your own eyes?
Just take a careful look at her temples some day; that is the only place
where her own hair shows; all the rest is a thick wig; but at the
temples, when the dye fades a little, you can easily detect the grey.
But that is nothing; insist on seeing more than her face.

*Ch*. Oh, but I am not favoured so far as that.

*Try*. No, I should think not. She knows what the effect would be; why,
she is all over--oh, talk of leopard-skins! And it was she made you cry
like that, was it? I dare say, now, she was very cruel and scornful?

*Ch*. Yes, she was, dear; and such a lot of money as she has from me!
Just now she wants a thousand drachmas; well, I am dependent on my
father, and he is very close, and I could not very well get it; so she
is at home to Moschion, and will not see me. That is why you are here; I
thought it might vex her.

*Try*. Well, I'm sure I never  never would have come if I had been told
what it was for--just to vex somebody else, and that somebody old
coffin-ripe Philematium! I shall go away; for that matter the third
cock-crow is past.

*Ch*. No, no, not so fast, Tryphaena. If it is all true--the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

wig, the dye, and the leopard-skin--I shall hate the sight of her.

*Try*. If your mother has ever seen her at the bath, ask her. As to the
age, you had better ask your grandfather about that, if he is alive.

*Ch*. Well, as that is what she is like, come up close to me. Give me
your arms--and your lips--and let us be friends. Philematium be hanged!

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII](wl416)
