[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl410)  [Next](wl412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### IV

*Melitta. Bacchis*

*Me*. Bacchis, don't you know any of those old women--there are any
number of them about, 'Thessalians,' they call them--they have
incantations, you know, and they can make a man in love with you, no
matter how much he hated you before? Do go and bring me one, there's a
dear! I'd give the clothes off my back, jewellery and all, to see
Charinus here again, and to have him hate Simiche as he hates me at this
moment.

*Ba*. Melitta! You mean to tell me that Charinus has gone off after
Simiche, and that after making his people so angry because he wouldn't
marry the heiress, all for your sake? She was to have brought him five
talents, so they said. I have not forgotten what you told me about that.

*Me*. Oh, that is all over now; I have not had a glimpse of him for the
last five days. No; he and Simiche are with his friend Pammenes enjoying
themselves.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

*Ba*. Poor darling! But it can't have been a trifle that drove him away:
what was it all about?

*Me*. I don't know exactly. All I can say is, that he came back the
other day from Piraeus (his father had sent him there to collect some
money), and wouldn't even look at me! I ran to meet him, expecting him
to take me in his arms, instead of which he pushed me away! 'Go to
Hermotimus the shipowner,' he said; 'go and read what is written on the
column in the Ceramicus; you will find your name there, and his.'
Hermotimus? column? what do you mean?' said I. But he would tell me
nothing more; he went to bed without any dinner, and never gave me so
much as a look. I tried everything: I lavished all my endearments on
him, and did all I could to make him look at me. Nothing would soften
him: all he said was, 'If you keep on bothering, I shall go away this
minute, I don't care what time it is.'

*Ba*. But you *did* know Hermotimus, I suppose?

*Me*. My dear, if I ever so much as heard of a Hermotimus who was a
ship-owner, may I be more wretched than I am now!--Next morning, at
cock-crow, Charinus got up, and went off. I remembered his saying
something about my name being written up in the Ceramicus, so I sent
Acis to have a look; and all she found was just this, chalked up close
by the Dipylus, on the right as you come in: *Melitta loves Hermotimus*;
and again a little lower down: *Hermotimus the ship-owner loves
Melitta*.

*Ba*. Ah, mischievous boys! I see what it is! Some one must have written
it up to tease Charinus, knowing how jealous he is. And he took it all
in at once! I must speak to him if I see him anywhere. He is a mere
child, quite unsophisticated.

*Me*. If you see him, yes: but you are not likely to. He has shut
himself up with Simiche; his people have been asking for

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

him, they think he is here still. No, Bacchis, I want one of those old
women; she would put all to rights.

*Ba*. Well, love, I know a capital witch; she comes from Syria, such a
brisk, vigorous old thing! Once when Phanias had quarrelled with me in
the same way, all about nothing, she brought us together again, after
four whole months; I had quite given hire up, but her spells drew him
back.

*Me*. What was her fee? do you remember

*Ba*. Oh, she was most reasonable: one drachma, and a loaf of bread.
Then you have to provide salt, of course, and sulphur, and a torch, and
seven pennies. And besides this, you must mix her a bowl of wine, which
she has to drink all by herself; and then there must be something
belonging to the man, his coat, or his shoes, or a lock of hair, or
something.

*Me*. I have got his shoes.

*Ba*. She hangs them up on a peg, and fumigates them with the sulphur,
throwing a little salt into the fire, and muttering both your names.
Then she brings out her magic wheel, and spins it, and rattles off an
incantation, such horrid, outlandish words! Well, she had scarcely
finished, when; sure enough, in came Phanias; Phoebis (that was the girl
he was with) had begged and implored him not to go, and his friends
declared it was a shame; but the spell was too strong for them. Oh yes,
and she taught me a splendid charm against Phoebis. I was to mark her
footsteps, and rub out the last of them, putting my right foot into her
left footprint, and my left into her right; and then I was to say: *My
foot on thy foot; I trample thee down!* I did it exactly as she told me.

*Me*. Oh, Bacchis, dear, do be quick and fetch the witch. Acis, you see
to the bread and sulphur and things.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII](wl412)
