[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl416)  [Next](wl418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### XIII

*Leontichus. Chenidas. Hymnis*

*Le*. And then that battle with the Galatians; tell her about that,
Chenidas--how I rode out in front on the grey, and the Galatians (brave
fellows, those Galatians, too)--but they ran away directly they saw me;
not a man stood his ground. That time, you know, I used my lance for a
javelin, and sent it through their captain and his horse as well; and
then, as some of them

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

were left--the phalanx was broken up, you see, but a certain number had
rallied--well, I pulled out my trusty blade, rode at them as hard as I
could go, knocked over half a dozen of the front rank with the mere rush
of my horse, brought down my sword on one of the officers, and clove his
head in two halves, helmet and all. The rest of you came up shortly, you
remember, when they were already running.

*Che*. Oh, but that duel of yours with the satrap in Paphlagonia! that
was a fine display, too.

*Le*. Well remembered; yes, that was not so bad, either. A great big
fellow that satrap was, supposed to be a champion fighter too--thought
nothing of Greek science. Out he came, and challenged all corners to
single combat. There was consternation among our officers, from the
lowest to the general himself--though he was a pretty good man.
Aristaechmus the Aetolian he was--very strong on the javelin; I was only
a colonel then. However, I was not afraid. I shook off the friends who
clung to me--they were anxious about me when they saw the barbarian
resplendent in his gilded armour, towering high with his terrible plume
and brandishing his lance--

*Che*. Yes, *I* was afraid that time; you remember how I clung to you
and besought you not to sacrifice yourself; life would not have been
worth living, if you had fallen.

*Le*. I ventured it, though. Out I went, as well armed as the
Paphlagonian, all gold like him. What a shout there was on both sides!
the barbarians recognized me too; they knew my buckler and medals and
plume. Who was it they all compared me to, Chenidas?

*Che*. Why, who should it be? Achilles, of course; the son of Peleus and
Thetis, of course. Your helmet was so magnificent, your purple so rich,
your buckler so dazzling.

*Le*. We met. The barbarian drew first blood--just a scratch with his
lance a little above the knee; but my great spear drove

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

through his shield and right into the breast-bone. Then I ran up, just
sliced his head off with my sword, and came back carrying his arms, the
head spiked on my spear dripping gore upon me.

*Hym*. How horrid, Leontichus! what disgusting frightful tales you tell
about yourself! What girl would look at a man who likes such
nastiness--let alone drink or sleep with him? I am going away.

*Le*. Pooh! I double your pay.

*Hym*. No, nothing shall induce me to sleep with a murderer.

*Le*. Don't be afraid, my dear. All that was in Paphlagonia. I am a man
of peace now.

*Hym*. No, you are unclean; the blood of the barbarian's head on the
spear has dripped over you! I embrace and kiss a man like that? the
Graces forbid! he is no better than the executioner.

*Le*. I am certain you would be in love with me if you had seen me in my
armour.

*Hym*. I tell you it makes me sick and frightened even to hear of such
things; I see the shades and ghosts of the slain; that poor officer with
his head cloven! what would it be if I saw the thing done, and the
blood, and the bodies lying there? I am sure I should die; I never saw a
chicken killed, even.

*Le*. Such a coward, girl? so poor of heart? I thought you would like to
hear it.

*Hym*. Well, try the Lemnian women, or the daughters of Danaus, if you
want to please with that sort of tale. I shall run home to my mother,
while there is some daylight left. Come along, Grammis. Good-bye,
mightiest of colonels, and murderer of however many it is!

*Le*. Stay, girl, stay.--Why, she is gone!

*Che*. Well, Leontichus, you frightened the simple little thing with
your nodding plumes and your incredible exploits. I saw

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

her getting pale as far back as the officer story; her face was all
puckered up and quivering when you split his head.

*Le*. I thought it would make me more attractive. Well, but it was your
fault too; you started the duel.

*Che*. Well, I had to chime in when I saw what you were bragging for.
But you laid it on so thick. Pass the cutting off the wretched
Paphlagonian's head, what did you want to spike it on a spear for, and
let the blood run down on you?

*Le*. That was a bit too strong, I admit; the rest was rather well put
together. Well, go and persuade her to come back.

*Che*. Shall I tell her you lied to make her think you a fine fellow?

*Le*. Oh, plague upon it!

*Che*. It 's the only way. Choose--a mighty champion, and loathed, or a
confessed liar, and--Hymnis?

*Le*. Bad is the best; but I say Hymnis. Go to her, then, Chenidas, and
say I lied--in parts.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](wl418)
