[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl415)  [Next](wl417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### XII

*Joessa. Pythias. Lysias*

*Jo*. Cross boy! But I deserve it all! I ought to have treated you as
any other girl would do,--bothered you for money, and been engaged when
you called, and made you cheat your father or rob your mother to get
presents for me; instead of which, I have always let you in from the
very first time, and it has never cost you a penny, Lysias. Think of all
the lovers I have sent away: Ethocles, now a Chairman of Committees, and
Pasion the shipowner, and young Melissus, who had just come into all his
father's money. I would not have a word to say to one of them; I kept
myself for you, hard-hearted Phaon that you are! I was fool enough to
believe all your vows, and have been living like a Penelope for your
sake; mother is furious about it, and is always talking at me to her
friends. And now that you feel sure of me, and know how I dote on you,
what is the consequence? You flirt with Lycaena under my very eyes, just
to vex me; you sit next to *me* at dinner, and pay compliments to
Magidium, a mere music-girl, and hurt my feelings, and make me cry. And
that wine-party the other day, with Thraso and Diphilus, when Cymbalium
the flute-girl was there, and Pyrallis: you know how I hate that girl:
as for Cymbalium, whom you kissed no less than five times,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I didn't mind so
much about that,--it must have been sufficient punishment in
itself:--but the way in which you were always making signs to Pyrallis
to notice your cup, and whispering to the boy, when you gave it back to
him, that he was not to fill it for any one but Pyrallis! and that piece
of apple that you bit off and shot across right into her lap, when you
saw that Diphilus was occupied with Thraso,--you never even tried to
conceal it from me! and she kissed it, and hid it away beneath her
girdle. What is the meaning of it all? What have I ever done to you? Did
I ever displease you? ever look at any other man? Do I not live for you
alone? A brave thing, is it not, Lysias, to vex a poor weak woman who
loves you to distraction! There is a Nemesis who watches such deeds. You
will be sorry some day, perhaps, when you hear of my hanging myself, or
jumping head first into a well; for die I will, one way or another,
rather than live to be an eyesore to you. There will be an achievement
for you to boast of! You need not look at me like that, nor gnash your
teeth: if you have anything to say against me, here is Pythias; let her
judge between us. Oh, you are going away without a word?--You see what I
have to put up with, Pythias!

*Py*. Monster! He cares nothing for her tears. He must be made of stone
instead of flesh and blood. But the truth is, my dear, you have spoilt
him, by letting him see how fond you are of him. It is a great mistake
to make so much of them; they get uppish. Don't cry, dear: take my
advice, and shut him out once or twice; it will be his turn to dote on
you then.

*Jo*. Shut him out? Don't breathe a word of such a thing! I only wish he
would wait till I turned him out!

*Py*. Why, here he is back again.

*Jo*. Pythias! What *have* you done? If he should have overheard that
about shutting him out!

*Ly*. I am coming back on your account, Pythias, not on hers;

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will never look
at her again, after what she has done: but I don't want *you* to think
badly of me; it shall not be said that Lysias was hard-hearted.

*Py*. Exactly what I *was* saying.

*Ly*. But what would you have me do? This girl, who is so tearful now,
has been disloyal to me, and received another lover; I actually found
them together!

*Py*. Well, after all------. But when did you make this discovery?

*Ly*. It must have been something like five days ago; yes, it was,
because it was on the second, and to-day is the seventh. My father had
found out about this precious Joessa, and how long it had been going on,
and he locked me in, and gave the porter orders not to open to me. Well,
I wasn't going to be kept away from her, so I told Dromo to slip along
the courtyard to the lowest part of the wall, and then let me mount on
his back; I knew I could easily get over that way. To make a long story
short, I got out, and came here. It was midnight, and I found the door
carefully barred. Instead of knocking, I quietly lifted the door off its
hinges (it was not the first time I had done so) and passed noiselessly
in. Every one was asleep. I groped my way along the wall, and stopped at
the bedside.

*Jo*. Good Heavens! What is coming? I am in torment!

*Ly*. I perceived from the breathing that there was more than one person
there, and thought at first that Lyde must be sleeping with her.
Pythias, I was mistaken! My hands passed over a smooth, beardless
*man's* face; the fellow was close-cropped, and reeked of scent like any
woman. I had not brought my sword with me, or you may be sure I should
have known what to do with it--What are you both laughing at? Is it so
amusing, Pythias?

*Jo*. Oh, Lysias! is that all? Why, it was Pythias who was sleeping with
me!

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

*Py*. Joessa, don't tell him!

*Jo*. Why not? Lysias, dear, it was Pythias; I had asked her to come and
sleep with me; I was so lonely without you.

*Ly*. Pythias? Then her hair has grown pretty fast in five days.

*Jo*. She has been ill, and her hair was falling off, and she had to
have it cropped. And now she has got false hair. Pythias, show him that
it is so. Behold your rival, Lysias! this is the young gentleman of whom
you were jealous.

*Ly*. And what lover would not have been jealous? I had the evidence of
my hands, remember.

*Jo*. Well, you know better now. Suppose I were to return you evil for
evil? What should you say to that? It is my turn to be angry with you
now.

*Ly*. No, you mustn't be angry. We will have some wine, and Pythias must
join us; the truce cannot be ratified without her.

*Jo*. Of course not. A pretty scrape you have led me into, Pythias, you
nice young man!

*Py*. The nice young man has led you out of it again too, so you must
forgive him. I say, Lysias, you need not tell any one--about my hair,
you know.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII](wl417)
