[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl424)  [Next](wl426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SATURNALIAN LETTERS

### II

*Cronus to his well-beloved me, Greeting*.

My good man, why this absurdity of writing to me about the<span
class="margnote"><span id="120:25">25</span></span> state of the world,
and advising redistribution of property? It is none of my business; the
present ruler must see to that. It is an odd thing you should be the
only person unaware that

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have long
abdicated; my sons now administer various departments, of which the one
that concerns you is mainly in the hands of Zeus; my own charge is
confined to draughts and merry-making, song and good cheer, and that for
one week only. As for the weightier matters you speak of, removal of
inequalities and reducing of all men to one level of poverty or riches,
Zeus must do your business for you. On the other hand, if any man is
wronged or defrauded of his holiday privileges, that is a matter within
my competence; and I am writing to the rich on the subject of dinners,
and that pint of gold, and the raiment, directing them to send you what
the season requires. The poor are reasonable there; it is right and
proper for the rich to do these things, unless it turns out that they
have good reasons to the contrary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121:26">26</span></span>Speaking
generally, however, I must tell you that you are all in error; it is
quite a misconception to imagine the rich in perfect bliss; they have no
monopoly of life's pleasures because they can eat expensive food, drink
too much good wine, revel in beauty, and go in soft raiment. You have no
idea of how it works out. The resulting anxieties are very considerable.
A ceaseless watch must be kept, or stewards will be lazy and dishonest,
wine go sour, and grain be weeviled; the burglar will be off with the
rich man's plate; agitators will persuade the people that he is
meditating a *coup d’état*. And these are but a minute fraction of their
troubles; if you could know their apprehensions and cares, you would
think riches a thing to be avoided at all costs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121:27">27</span></span>Why, look at
me; if wealth and dominion were good things, do you suppose I should
have been fool enough to relinquish them, make room for others, and sit
down like a common man content with a subordinate position? No, it was
because I knew all the conditions the rich and powerful cannot escape
that I had the sense to abdicate.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

You made a great fuss in your letter about *their* gorging on <span
class="margnote"><span id="122:28">28</span></span>boar's head and
pastry while *your* festival consists of a mouthful of cress or thyme or
onion. Now, what are the facts? As to the immediate sensation, on the
palate, there is little to choose between the two diets--not much to
complain of in either; but with the after effects it is quite otherwise.
*You* get up next morning without either the headache the rich man's
wine leaves behind, or the disgusting queasiness that results from his
surfeit of food. To these effects he adds those of nights given to lust
and debauchery, and as likely as not reaps the fruit of his luxury in
consumption, pneumonia, or dropsy. It is quite a difficult matter to
find a rich man who is not deathly pale; most of them by the time they
are old men use eight legs belonging to other people instead of their
own two; they are gold without and rags within, like the stage hero's
robes. No fish dinners for you, I admit; you hardly know what fish
tastes like; but then observe, no gout or pneumonia either, nor other
ailments due to other excesses. Apart from that. though, the rich
themselves do not enjoy their daily over-indulgence in these things; you
may see them as eager, and more, for a dinner of herbs as ever you are
for game.

I say nothing of their other vexations--one has a disreputable <span
class="margnote"><span id="122:29">29</span></span> son, another a wife
who prefers his slave to himself, another realizes that his minion
yields to necessity what he would not to affection; there are numberless
things, in fact, that you know nothing about; you only see their gold
and purple, or catch sight of them behind their high-steppers, and open
your mouths and abase yourselves before them. If you left them severely
alone, if you did not turn to stare at their silver-plated carriages, if
you did not while they were talking eye their emerald rings, or finger
their clothes and admire the fineness of the texture, if you let them
keep their riches to themselves, in short, I can assure you they would
seek you out and implore

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the favour of your company; you see, they must show you their couches
and tables and goblets, the sole good of which is in the being known to
possess them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="123:30">30</span></span>You will find
that most of their acquisitions are made for you; they are not for their
own use, but for your astonishment. I am one that knows both lives, and
I write this for your consolation. You should keep the feast with the
thought in your minds that both parties will soon leave this earthly
scene, they resigning their wealth, and you your poverty. However, I
will write to them as I promised, and am confident that they will not
disregard what I say.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III](wl426)
