[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl423)  [Next](wl425) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SATURNALIAN LETTERS

### I

*I to Cronus, Greeting*.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117:19">19</span></span>I have written
to you before telling you of my condition, how poverty was likely to
exclude me from the festival you have proclaimed. I remember observing
how unreasonable it was that some of us should be in the lap of wealth
and luxury, and never give a share of their good things to the poor,
while others are dying of hunger with your holy season just upon them.
But as you did not answer, I thought I might as well refresh

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

your memory. Dear good Cronus, you ought really to remove this
inequality and pool all the good things before telling us to make merry.
The world is peopled with camels and ants now, nothing between the two.
Or, to put it another way, kindly imagine an actor, with one foot
mounted on the tragic stilt and the other bare; if he walks like that,
he must be a giant or a dwarf according to the leg he stands on; our
lives are about as equal as his heights. Those who are taken on by
manager Fortune and supplied with stilts come the hero over us, while
the rest pad it on the ground, though you may take my word for it we
could rant and stalk with the best of them if we were given the same
chance.

Now the poets inform me that in the old days when you <span
class="margnote"><span id="118:20">20</span></span> were king it was
otherwise with men; earth bestowed her gifts upon them unsown and
unploughed, every man's table was spread automatically, rivers ran wine
and milk and honey. Most wonderful of all, the men themselves were gold,
and poverty never came near them. As for us, we can hardly pass for
lead; some yet meaner material must be found. In the sweat of our face
the most of us eat bread. Poverty, distress, and helplessness, sighs and
lamentations and pinings for what is not, such is the staple of man's
life, the poor man's at least. All which, believe me, would be much less
painful to us, if there were not the felicity of the rich to emphasize
it. They have their chests of gold and silver, their stored wardrobes,
their slaves and carriages and house property and farms, and, not
content with keeping to themselves their superfluity in all these, they
will scarce fling a glance to the generality of us.

Ah, Cronus, there is the sting that rankles beyond endurance <span
class="margnote"><span id="118:21">21</span></span>--that one should
loll on cloth of finest purple, overload his stomach with all
delicacies, and keep perpetual feast with guests to wish him joy, while
I and my like dream over the problematic acquisition of a sixpence to
provide us a loaf white or

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

brown, and send us to bed with a smack of cress or thyme or onion in our
mouths. Now, good Cronus, either reform this altogether and feed us
alike, or at the least induce the rich not to enjoy their good things
alone; from their bushels of gold let them scatter a poor pint among us;
the raiment that they would never feel the loss of though the moth were
to consume it utterly, seeing that in any case it must perish by mere
lapse of time, let them devote to covering our nakedness rather than to
propagating mildew in their chests and drawers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119:22">22</span></span>Further let
them entertain us by fours and fives, and not as they now do, but more
on principles of equality; let us all share alike. The way now is for
one to gorge himself on some dainty, keeping the servant waiting about
him till he is pleased to have done; but when it reaches us, as we are
in the act of helping ourselves it is whisked off, and we have but that
fleeting glimpse of the entrée or fag-end of a sweet. Or in comes a
sucking-pig; half of it, including the head, falls to the host; the rest
of us share the bones, slightly disguised. And pray charge the butlers
not to make us call unto seven times, but bring us our wine when we ask
for it first; and let it be a full-sized cup and a bumper, as it is for
their masters. And the same wine, please, for every one at table; where
is the legal authority for my host's growing mellow on the choicest
bouquet while my stomach is turned with mere must?

<span class="margnote"><span id="119:23">23</span></span>These things if
you correct and reform, you will have made life life, and your feast a
feast. If not we will leave the feasting to them, and just kneel down
and pray that as they come from the bath the slave may knock down and
spill their wine, the cook smoke their sauce and absent-mindedly pour
the pea-soup over the caviare, the dog steal in while the scullions are
busy and make away with the whole of the sausage and most of the pastry.
Boar and buck and sucking-pigs, may they rival in their roasting Homer's
oxen of the Sun! only let them not

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

confine themselves to crawling <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_11), but
jump up and make off to the mountains with their spits sticking in them!
and may the fat fowls, all plucked and trussed, fly far away and rob
them of their unsociable delights!

But we can touch them more closely than that. May Indian<span
class="margnote"><span id="120:24">24</span></span> gold-ants <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_12) come by night, unearth their hoards and
convey them to their own state treasury! May their wardrobe-keepers be
negligent, and our good friends the mice make sieve-work of their
raiment, fit for nothing but tunny-nets! May every pretty curled minion,
every Hyacinth and Achilles and Narcissus they keep, turn bald as he
hands the cup! let his hair fall off and his chin grow bristly, till he
is like the peak-bearded fellows on the comic stage, hairy and prickly
on cheek and temple, and on the top smooth and bare! These are specimens
of the petitions we will send up, if they will not moderate their
selfishness, acknowledge themselves trustees for the public, and let us
have our fair share.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[120:1](wl424.htm#fr_12) Homer, *Od*. xii. 395.
Odysseus's crew had killed and begun to cook the oxen of the Sun. 'And
soon thereafter the Gods chewed forth signs and wonders to my company.
The skins were creeping, and the flesh bellowing upon the spits, both
the roast and raw, and there was a sound as of the voice of
kine.'--*Butcher and Lang*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[120:2](wl424.htm#fr_13) Herodotus, iii. 102.
'And in this desert and sandy tract' (in North India) 'are produced
ants, which are in size smaller than dogs but larger than foxes. . .
These ants there make their dwelling under ground and carry up the sand
just in the same manner as the ants found in the land of the Hellenes .
. . and the sand which is brought up contains gold.'--*Macaulay's
translation*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II](wl425)
