<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3005)  [Next](j3007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 305.

#### SĪLAVĪMAṀSANA-JĀTAKA. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md)

\[18\] *"In sooth there is," etc.*—This story the Master told while
dwelling at Jetavana, about the rebuking of sin. The circumstances will
be set forth in the Pānīya Birth <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) in
the Eleventh Book. The following is a brief summary of it.

Five hundred Brethren living in Jetavana, at the close of the middle
watch of the night, entered into an argument on the pleasures of sense.
Now the Master through all the six divisions of night and day keeps a
continual watch over the Brethren, even as a one-eyed man carefully
guards his eye, a father his only son, or a yak its tail. In the night
time, with his supernatural vision regarding Jetavana, he beheld these
Brethren, as it were, like robbers that had found their way into some
great king's palace. And opening his perfumed chamber he summoned Ānanda
and bade him assemble the Brethren in the Home of the Golden Pavement,
and prepare a seat for him at the door of the perfumed chamber. Ānanda
did as he was commanded and told the Master. Then the Master, sitting
down on the seat prepared for him, addressed the Brethren collectively
and said, "Brethren, wise men of old thought there was no such thing as
secrecy in wrong-doing and so refrained from it," and he told them a
story of the olden time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life in a brahmin family, and when he was of age, he
was taught science by a world-renowned professor of that city, being at
the head of a class of five hundred students. Now his teacher had a
grown-up daughter. And he thought: "I will test the virtue of these
youths and will give her in marriage to him that most excels in virtue."

So one day he thus addressed his pupils: " My friends, I have a grown-up
daughter, and I intend to give her in marriage, but I must have proper
dresses and ornaments for her. Do you then steal some without your
friends discovering it, and bring them to me. Whatever no one has seen
you take I will accept, but if you allow anything you bring to be seen,
I shall refuse it." They assented, saying, "Very well," and from that
day they stole dresses and ornaments without their friends' knowledge

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

and brought them to him. And the teacher arranged whatever each pupil
brought in a separate place. But the Bodhisatta stole nothing.

Then the teacher said, \[19\] "But you, my friend, bring me nothing."
"True, Master," he replied. "Why is this, my friend?" he asked. "You
accept nothing," he answered, "unless it is taken secretly. But I find
there is no such thing as secrecy in wrong-doing."

And to illustrate this truth he repeated these two stanzas:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

In sooth there is no act of sin, that in this world may hidden lie,  
That which the fool a secret deems, the spirits of the wood espy.  
Concealment nowhere may be found, nor can a void exist for me,  
E’en where no being is in sight, while I am there, no void can be.

</div>

The Master, being pleased with his words, said, "Friend, there is no
lack of wealth in my house, but I was anxious to marry my daughter to a
virtuous man, and I acted thus to prove these youths. But you alone are
worthy of my daughter." Then he adorned his daughter and gave her in
marriage to the Bodhisatta, but to his other pupils he said, "Take back
all that you brought me to your several homes again."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then the Master said, "It was thus, Brethren, that the wicked pupils by
their dishonesty failed to win this woman, while this one wise youth by
his virtuous conduct obtained her as his wife." And in his Perfect
Wisdom he gave utterance to yet two other stanzas:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Masters Bastard <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](j3007.htm#fn_9.md) and Low and
Easy and Gay,  
With Bravo and Frail, for a wife, went astray;  
But our Brahmin, well seen in the Law from his youth,  
Won a bride by his courage in holding the Truth.

</div>

\[20\] The Master, having brought this solemn lesson to an end, declared
the Truths and identified the Birth:—At the conclusion of the Truths
these five hundred Brethren attained to Sainthood:—"At that time
Sāriputta was the Teacher, and I myself was the Wise Youth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:1](j3006.htm#fr_7.md) See R. Morris, *Folklore
Journal*, iii*.* 244.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:2](j3006.htm#fr_8.md) No. 459. Vol. iv.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 306.: Sujāta-Jātaka.](j3007.md)

</div>
