<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3106)  [Next](j3108.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 406.

#### GANDHĀRA-JĀTAKA.

*"Villages full sixteen thousand," etc.*—The Master told this when
dwelling in Jetavana, concerning the precept on the storing up of
medicines <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_135.md). The occasion however
arose in Rājagaha. When the venerable Pilindiyavaccha went to the king's
dwelling to set free the park-keeper's family <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_136.md), he made the palace all of gold by magic
power: and the people in their delight brought to that elder the five
kinds of medicine. He gave them away to the congregation of Brethren. So
the congregation abounded in medicines, \[364\] and as they received the
medicines, they filled pots and jars and bags in this way and laid them
aside. People seeing this murmured, saying, "Those greedy priests are
hoarding in their houses." The Master, hearing this thing, declared the
precept, "Whatever medicines for sick brethren \[sc. are received, must
be used within seven days\]," and said, "Brethren, wise men of old,
before the Buddha appeared, ordained in heresy and keeping only the five
precepts, used to chide those who laid aside even salt and sugar for the
next day; but you, though ordained in such a rule of salvation, make a
hoard for the second and the third day," and so he told the tale of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time the Bodhisatta was the king's son of the Gandhāra
kingdom; at his father's death he became king and ruled with
righteousness.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the Central
Region, in the kingdom of Videha a king named Videha was ruling at the
time. These two kings had never seen each other, but they were friends
and had great trust the one in the other. At that time men were
long-lived: their life was for thirty thousand years. Then once, on the
fast day of the full moon, the king of Gandhāra had taken the vow of the
commands <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_137.md), and on the dais in the
middle of a royal throne prepared for him, looking through an open
window on the eastern quarter, he sat giving to his ministers a
discourse on the substance of the law. At that moment Rāhu was covering
the moon's orb which was full and spreading over the sky. The moon's
light vanished. The ministers, not seeing the moon's brightness, told
the king that the moon was seized by Rāhu. The king, observing the moon,
thought, "That moon has lost its light, being marred by some trouble
from outside; now my royal retinue is a trouble, and it is not meet that
I should lose my light like the moon seized by Rāhu: I will leave my
kingdom like the moon's orb shining in a clear sky and become an
ascetic: why should I admonish another? I will go about, detached from
kin and people, admonishing myself alone: that is meet for me." So he
said, "As ye please \[365\] so do," and gave over the kingdom to his
ministers. When he gave up his kingdom in the two kingdoms of Kashmir
and Gandhāra, he took the religious life, and attaining the
transcendental faculty he passed the rains in the Himālaya region
devoted to the delight of meditation. The king of Videha, having asked
of merchants, "Is it well with my friend?" heard that he had taken the
religious life, and thought, "When my friend has taken the religious
life, what should I do with a kingdom?" So he gave up the rule in his
city of Mithila, seven leagues in extent, and his kingdom of Videha,
three hundred leagues in extent, with sixteen thousand villages,
storehouses filled, and sixteen thousand dancing girls, and without
thinking of his sons and daughters he went to the Himālaya region and
took the religious life. There he lived on fruits only, dwelling in a
state of quietude. Both of them following this quiet life afterwards
met, but did not recognise each other: yet they lived together in this
quiet life in friendliness. The ascetic of Videha waited upon the
ascetic of Gandhāra. On a day of full moon as they were sitting at the
root of a tree and talking on things relating to the law, Rāhu covered
the moon's orb as it was shining in the sky. The ascetic of Videha
looked up, saying, "Why is the moon's light destroyed?" And seeing that
it was seized by Rāhu, he asked, "Master, why has he covered the moon
and made it dark?" "Scholar, that is the moon's one trouble, Rāhu by
name; he binders it from shining: I, seeing the moon's orb struck by
Rāhu, thought, "There is the moon's pure orb become dark by trouble from
outside; now this kingdom is a trouble to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

me: I will take the religious life so that the kingdom does not make me
dark as Rāhu does the moon's orb": and so taking the moon's orb seized
by Rāhu as my theme, I forsook my great kingdom and took the religious
life." "Master, were you king of Gandhāra?" \[366\] "Yes, I was."
"Master, I was the king Videha in the kingdom of Videha and city of
Mithila: were we not friends though we never saw each other?" "What was
your theme?" "I heard that you had taken the religious life and
thinking, "Surely he has seen the good of that life," I took you as my
theme, and leaving my kingdom took the religious life." From that time
they were exceedingly intimate and friendly, and lived on fruits only.
After a long time's dwelling there they came down from Himālaya for salt
and vinegar, and came to a frontier village. The people, being pleased
with their deportment, gave them alms and taking a promise made for them
houses for the night and the like in the forest, and made them dwell
there, and built by the road a room for taking their meals in a pleasant
watered spot. They, after going their rounds for alms in the frontier
village, sat and ate the alms in that hut of leaves and then went to
their dwelling-house. The people who gave them food one day put salt on
a leaf and gave it them, another day gave them saltless food. One day
they gave them a great deal of salt in a leaf basket. The ascetic of
Videha took the salt, and coming gave enough to the Bodhisatta at the
meal time and took to himself the proper measure: then putting up the
rest in a leaf basket he put it in a roll of grass, saying, "This will
do for a saltless day." Then one day when saltless food was received,
the man of Videha, giving the alms-food to the man of Gandhāra, took the
salt from the roll of grass and said, "Master, take salt." "The people
gave no salt to-day, where have you got it?" "Master, the people gave
much salt one day before: then I kept what was over, saying, "This will
do for a saltless day." "Then the Bodhisatta chid him, saying, "O
foolish man, you forsook the kingdom of Videha, three hundred leagues in
extent, took the religious life and attained freedom from attachments,
and now you get a desire for salt and sugar." And so admonishing him he
spoke the first stanza:—

\[367\] <span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Villages full sixteen thousand with their wealth you threw away,  
Treasuries with wealth in plenty: and you're hoarding here to-day!

</div>

Videha, being thus chidden, did not endure the chiding but became
estranged, saying, "Master, you see not your own fault, though you see
mine; did you not leave your kingdom and become religious, saying, "Why
should I admonish another? I will admonish myself alone": why then are
you now admonishing me?" So he spoke the second stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Candahar and all its province, all its wealth, you threw away,  
Giving no more royal orders: and you're ordering me to-day!

</div>

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

Hearing him the Bodhisatta spoke the third stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

It is righteousness I'm speaking, for I hate unrighteousness:  
Righteousness when I am speaking, sin on me leaves no impress.

</div>

The ascetic of Videha, hearing the Bodhisatta's words, said, "Master, it
is not meet for one to speak after annoying and angering another, even
though he speaks to the point: \[368\] you are speaking very harshly to
me, as if shaving me with blunt steel," and so he spoke the fourth
stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Whatsoever words, if spoken, would to others cause offence,  
Wise men leave those words unspoken, though of mighty consequence.

</div>

Then the Bodhisatta spoke the fifth stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let my hearer scatter chaff, or let him take offence or not,  
Righteousness when I am speaking, sin on me can leave no spot.

</div>

Having so said, he went on, "I will not work with you, O Ānanda <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_138.md), as a potter with raw clay only: I will
speak chiding again and again; what is truth, that will abide." And so
being steadfast in conduct suitable to that admonition of the Blessed
One, as a potter among his vessels, after beating them often, takes not
the raw clay, but takes the baked vessel only, so preaching and chiding
again and again he takes a man like a good vessel, and preaching to show
him this, he spoke this pair of stanzas:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Were not wisdom and good conduct trained in some men's lives to grow,  
Many would go wandering idly like the blinded buffalo.

But since some are wisely trained in moral conduct fair to grow,  
Thus it is that disciplined in paths of virtue others go.

</div>

\[369\] Hearing this, the Videha ascetic said, "Master, from this time
admonish me; I spoke to you with peevish natural temper, pardon me," and
so paying respect he gained the Bodhisatta's pardon. So they dwelt
together in peace and went again to Himālaya. Then the Bodhisatta told
the Videha ascetic how to attain to mystic meditation. He did so and
reached the higher Faculties and Attainments. So both, never leaving off
meditation, became destined for the Brahma world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the lesson, the Master identified the Birth: "At that time the
Videha ascetic was Ānanda, the Gandhāra king was myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[221:1](j3107.htm#fr_137.md) *Mahāvagga* vi. 15.
10.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[221:2](j3107.htm#fr_138.md) See *Mahāvagga* vi.
15. 1—

<span id="fn_137"></span>[222:1](j3107.htm#fr_139.md) A vow to keep the
five moral precepts.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[224:1](j3107.htm#fr_140.md) The ascetic is
addressed by this name, as if his future re-birth as Ānanda was
foreseen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 407.: Mahākapi-Jātaka.](j3108.md)

</div>
