<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3118)  [Next](j3120.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 418.

#### AṬṬHASADDA-JĀTAKA.

*"A pool so deep," etc.*—The Master told this tale while dwelling in
Jetavana, concerning an indistinguishable terrific sound heard at
midnight by the king of Kosala. The occasion is like that already
described in the Lohakumbhi Birth <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_154.md).
At this time however, when the king said, "Lord, what does the hearing
of these sounds import to me?" the Master answered, "Great king, be not
afraid: no danger shall befal you owing to these sounds: such terrible
indistinguishable

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

sounds have not been heard by you alone: kings of old also heard like
sounds, and meant to follow the advice of brahmins to offer in sacrifice
four animals of each species, but after hearing what wise men had to
say, they set free the animals collected for sacrifice and caused
proclamation by drum against all slaughter": and at the king's request,
he told the old tale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born in a brahmin family worth eighty crores. When he grew up he
learned the arts at Takkasilā. After his parents' death he reviewed all
their treasures, got rid of all his wealth by way of charity, forsook
desires, went to the Himālaya and became an ascetic and entered on
mystic meditation. After a time he came to the haunts of men for salt
and vinegar, and reaching Benares dwelt in a garden. At that time the
king of Benares when seated on his royal bed at midnight heard eight
sounds:—first, a crane made a noise in a garden near the palace; second,
immediately after the crane, a female crow made a noise from the gateway
of the elephant-house; \[429\] third, an insect settled on the peak of
the palace made a noise; fourth, a tame cuckoo in the palace made a
noise; fifth, a tame deer in the same place; sixth, a tame monkey there;
seventh, a gnome living in the palace; eighth, immediately after the
last, a paccekabuddha, passing along the roof of the king's habitation
to the garden, uttered a sound of ecstatic feeling. The king was
terrified at hearing these eight sounds, and next day consulted the
brahmins. The brahmins said, "Great king, there is danger for you: let
us offer sacrifice out of the palace;" and getting his leave to do their
pleasure, they came in joy and delight and began the work of sacrifice.
Now a young pupil of the oldest sacrificial brahmin was wise and
learned: he said to his master, "Master, do not cause such a harsh and
cruel slaughter of so many creatures." "Pupil, what do you know about
it? even if nothing else happens, we shall get much fish and flesh to
eat." "Master, do not, for the belly's sake, an action which will cause
rebirth in hell." Hearing this, the other brahmins were angry with the
pupil for endangering their gains. The pupil in fear said, "Very well,
devise a means then of getting fish and flesh to eat," and left the city
looking for some pious ascetic able to prevent the king from
sacrificing. He entered the royal garden and seeing the Bodhisatta, he
saluted him and said, "Have you no compassion on creatures? The king has
ordered a sacrifice which will bring death on many creatures: ought you
not to bring about the release of such a multitude?" "Young brahmin, I
do not know the king of this land, nor he me." "Sir, do you know what
will be the consequence of those sounds the king heard?" "I do." "If you
know, \[430\] why do you not tell the king?" "Young brahmin, how can I
go with a horn fastened <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) on my

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

forehead to say, "I know?" If the king comes here to question me, I will
tell him." The young brahmin went swiftly to the king's court, and when
he was asked his business, he said, "Great king, a certain ascetic knows
the issue of those sounds you heard: he is sitting on the royal seat in
your garden, and says he will tell you if you ask him: you should do
so." The king went swiftly, saluted the ascetic, and after friendly
greeting he sat down and asked, "Is it true that you know the issue of
the sounds I have heard?" "Yes, great king." "Then pray tell me." "Great
king, there is no danger connected with those sounds: there is a certain
crane in your old garden; it was without food, and half dead with hunger
made the first sound:" and so by his knowledge giving precisely the
crane's meaning he uttered the first stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A pool so deep and full of fish they called this place of yore,  
The crane-king's residence it was, my ancestors' before:  
And though we live on frogs to-day, we never leave its shore.

</div>

"That, great king, was the sound the crane made in the pangs of hunger:
if you wish to set it free from hunger, have the garden cleaned and fill
the tank with water." The king told a minister to have this done. "Great
king, there is a female crow who lives in the doorway of your elephant
house: she made the second sound, grieving for her son: you need have no
fear from it," and so he uttered the second stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Oh! who of wicked Bandhura? the single eye will rend  
My nest, my nestlings and myself oh! who will now befriend?

</div>

\[431\] Then he asked the king for the name of the chief groom in the
elephant-house. "His name, sir, is Bandhura." "Has he only one eye, O
king?" "Yes, sir." "Great king, a certain crow has built her nest over
the doorway of your elephant-house; there she laid her eggs, there her
young in due time were hatched: every time the groom enters or leaves
the stable on his elephant, he strikes with his hook at the crow and her
nestlings, and destroys the nest: the crow in this distress wishes to
tear his eye and spoke as she did. If you are well-disposed to her, send
for Bandhura and prevent him from destroying the nest." The king sent
for him, rebuked and removed him, and gave the elephant to another.

"On the peak of your palace-roof, great king, there is a wood-insect; it
bad eaten all the fig-wood there and could not eat the harder wood:
lacking food and unable to get away, it made the third sound in
lamentation: you need have no fear from it:" and so by his knowledge
giving precisely the insect's meaning he spoke the third stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I've eaten all the fig-wood round as far as it would go:  
Hard wood a weevil liketh not, though other food runs low.

</div>

The king sent a servant and by some means had the weevil set free.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

"In your habitation, great king, is there a certain tame cuckoo?" "There
is, sir." "Great king, that cuckoo was pining for the forest when it
remembered its former life, "How can I leave this cage, and go to my
dear forest?" and so made the fourth sound: you need have no fear from
it: " and so he spoke the fourth stanza:—

\[432\] <span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Oh to leave this royal dwelling! oh to gain my liberty,  
Glad at heart to roam the wood, and build my nest upon the tree.

</div>

So saying, he added, "The cuckoo is pining, great king, set her free."
The king did so.

"Great king, is there a tame deer in your habitation?" "There is, sir."
"He was chief of the herd: remembering his hind and pining for love of
her he made the fifth sound: you need have no fear from it:" and he
spoke the fifth stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Oh to leave this royal dwelling! oh to gain my liberty,  
Drink pure water of the fountain, lead the herd that followed me!

</div>

The Great Being caused this deer too to be set free and went on, "Great
king, is there a tame monkey in your habitation?" "There is, sir." "He
was chief of a herd in the Himālaya, and he was fond of the society of
female monkeys: he was brought here by a hunter named Bharata: pining
and longing for his old haunts he made the sixth sound: you need have no
fear from it," and he spoke the sixth stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Filled and stained was I with passions, with desire infatuate,  
Bharata the hunter took me; may I bring you happy fate!

</div>

The Great Being caused the monkey too to be set free, and went on,
"Great king, is there a gnome living in your habitation?" "There is,
sir." "He is thinking of what he did with his sylph \[433\] and in the
pain of desire made the seventh sound. One day he had climbed the peak
of a high mountain with her: they plucked and decked themselves with
many flowers of choice hue and scent, and never noticed that the sun was
setting; darkness fell as they were descending. The sylph said,
"Husband, it is dark, come down carefully without stumbling," and taking
him by the hand, she led him down. It was in memory of her words that he
made the sound: you need have no fear from it." By his knowledge he
stated and made known the circumstance precisely, and spoke the seventh
stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When the darkness gathered thickly on the mountain summit lone,  
"Stumble not," she gently warned me, "with thy foot against a stone."

</div>

So the Great Being explained why the gnome had made the sound, and
caused him to be set free, and went on, "Great king, there was an eighth
sound, one of ecstasy. A certain paccekabuddha in the Nandamūla cave
knowing that the conditions of life were now at an end for him came to

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

the abode of man, thinking, "I will enter into Nirvāna in the king of
Benares' park: his servants will bury me, and hold sacred festival and
venerate my relics and so attain heaven:" he was coming by his
supernatural power and just as he reached your palace-roof, he threw off
the burden of life and sung in ecstasy the song that lights up the
entrance into the city of Nirvāna:" and so he spoke the stanza uttered
by the paccekabuddha:

\[434\] <span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Surely I see the end of birth,  
    I ne’er again the womb shall see:  
My last existence on the earth  
    Is o’er, and all its misery.

</div>

"With these words of ecstasy he reached your park and passed into
Nirvāna at the foot of a sál-tree in full flower: come, great king, and
perform his funeral rites." So the Great Being took the king to the
place where the paccekabuddha entered into Nirvāna and shewed him the
body. Seeing the body, the king with a great army paid honour with
perfumes and flowers and the like. By the Bodhisatta's advice he stopped
the sacrifice, gave all the creatures their lives, made proclamation by
drum through the city that there should be no slaughter, caused sacred
festival to be held for seven days, had the paccekabuddha's body burnt
with great honour on a pyre heaped with perfumes and made a stupa where
four high roads meet. The Bodhisatta preached righteousness to the king
and exhorted him to diligence: then he went to the Himālaya and there
did works in the Perfect States, and without a break in his meditations
became destined for the Brahma Heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the lesson, the Master said, "Great king, there is no danger at
all to you from that sound, stop the sacrifice and give all these
creatures their lives": and having caused proclamation to be made by
drum that their lives were spared, he identified the Birth: "At that
time the king was Ānanda, the pupil was Sāriputta, and the ascetic was
myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[256:1](j3119.htm#fr_156.md) See *supra,* p. 29.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[257:1](j3119.htm#fr_157.md) As an emblem of
pride, as in the Bible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 419.: Sulasā-Jātaka.](j3120.md)

</div>
