[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Esoteric](../../index.md) 
[Eliphas Levi](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phs03.md) 
[Next](phs05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE PARADOXES OF THE HIGHEST SCIENCE

## PARADOX I.--RELIGION IS MAGIC SANCTIONED BY AUTHORITY

MAGIC is the divinity of man conquered by science in union with faith;
the true Magi are Men-Gods, in virtue of their intimate union with the
divine principle. They are without fear and without desires; they are
dominated by no falsehood; they share no error; they love without
illusion and suffer without impatience, for they leave all to happen as
it may, and repose in the quietude of the eternal thought. They lean
upon religion, but religion does not weigh on them; religion is the
Sphynx which obeys, but never devours *them*. *They* know what religion
is, and they feel that it is necessary and eternal.

For debased souls religion is a yoke imposed, through self-interest, by
the poltrooneries of fear and the follies of hope. For exalted souls
religion is a force, springing from an intensified reliance in the love
of humanity.

Religion is the collective poesy of great souls. Her fictions are more
true than Truth itself; vaster

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

than Infinity; more lasting than Eternity; in other words, they are
essentially paradoxical.

They are the dream of the Infinite in the Unknown, of the Possible in
the Impossible, of the Definite in the Indefinable, of Progress in the
Immutable, of Absolute Being in the Non-existent.

They are the ultimate rationale of the Absurdity, which affirms itself,
to deny doubt; they are the science of foolishness, the embrace of Folly
and Knowledge. They are the cries of the eagle mounting above the
clouds, the roar of the lion of the Apocalypse, that takes to itself
wings and flies away; the bellowing of the bull beneath the sacrificial
knife, and the never ending moan of mankind before the portals of the
tomb.

*For man, God is, and can only be, the ideal of man*. In himself, he is
the unknown, but in his revelation, at once divine and human, he is
paradoxical man, the substantial without substance, the personal without
definition, the immutable which transforms itself but has no form, the
omnipotent ever struggling with the weakness of man, the serenity which
thunders, the mercy which damns, the infinite goodness which tortures,
the eternity which perishes; an infinite contradiction; the abyss of the
human heart, serving as a world for an insatiable and terrifying idol;
the cruelty of Nero, the policy of Tiberius drinking the blood of Jesus
Christ, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) a pope emperor, or an emperor
antipope, the king of kings, the pontiff

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

of pontiffs, the executioner of executioners, the physician of
physicians, the liberator of the free, the inflexible master of slaves.

God is everywhere the ideal of those who ignorantly adore him; ferocious
amongst savages, instinct with human passions amidst the Greeks, an
Oriental despot for the Jews, jealous and merciless for the
Ultramontanes as a celibate priest. One and all create a personage whom
they endow in an infinite degree with their own characteristics and
their own defects. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Every man adores the God whom he has made for himself in his own image,
or has allowed authorities, who have more or less an interest in his
ignorance and weakness, to impose upon him. To adore in fear and
trembling is almost to *hate*, though the fear disguises the hate; to
adore fearlessly is to *love*.

True piety, which is the foundation of religion, is the exaltation of
love, for love raised to a high pitch admits no longer the barriers of
the possible; the impossible is its dream, and miracle, for it, reality.
What would avail a religion that did not give us the infinite? What is
Protestantism with its sacrament devoid of reality? <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) Sad as an extinguished taper or a dismantled
church! How can the bread consecrated by the word represent Jesus Christ
if it be not Jesus himself? What folly if the Christ be not divinity! A
fine piece of worship, truly, to chew a mouthful of bread--alas for him
who cannot feel the *necessity* for miracle here. One can love a human
being to the death, to the forgetfulness of self, to

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

madness, but can one immortalise him and make him divine, in faith in
the making him divine, and immortalising oneself along with him? Can one
incorporate him in oneself? Eat him altogether and feel that he lives
more than ever, that he lives in us and outside of us, that he absorbs
us in him, as we absorb him in us, in bringing us into communion with
his vast being, and his eternal love? Alas! we feel that he is neither
eternal nor vast! Why is he not God? Why, because God alone is God! and
this is how the God comes to us, veiled under the appearance of bread!
We see him, we touch him, we taste him, we eat him, and his eternity
trembles within our mortal flesh. The blood which palpitates in our
heart is his. Our bosom swells, it is he who breathes. Ah! these
Protestants with their mouthful of bread and sip of wine, truly a fine
Sacrament they have there!

Faith, the poet enamoured of the ideal, smiles at a ridiculous reality,
but the fanatical believer grows exasperated. Reason says we should pity
the Protestants. "No!" says infuriated Faith,---we must punish them! The
God which I feel grow wrathful in me condemns them to hell; why should I
grudge them to the burning pile?" Hold, miserable assassin! Dost thou
then believe that God made himself man, that man might make himself a
tiger? Thou believest thyself to have conceived with the infinite love,
and 'behold thou art in labour with hate. Thou hast thought to devour
Heaven and behold thou vomitest Hell! Thou hast eaten the flesh of
Christ not as a Christian but as a cannibal. Sacrilegious communicant,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

hold thy peace and cleanse thy mouth, for thy lips are dripping with
blood.

Doubtless religion must not be held responsible for the crimes which the
policy of barbarous ages has committed in her name. Many heretics were
at the same time the agents of conspiracies and seditions. The massacre
of St. Bartholomew was a cruel *ruse de guerre*, the perfidy of which is
perhaps explained by the necessity for rendering abortive a plot not
less perfidious.

Thus, at any rate, did the Queen Mother and Charles IX endeavour to
justify their action. This at least is certain that, at that period,
both parties were capable of any, outrage. But what could ever justify
the Inquisition? "God made himself man," it may be replied, and these
grand words were understood by Pius V in a terrible, and by Vincent de
Paul in an adorable, sense. Did not God, according to the Bible, repent
himself of having made man? Cruel exaggeration of human iniquity I It is
assumed to have been so gigantic as to make God waver in his purpose!
Man divinifies himself even in his crimes, and dreams of opposition to
the Eternal. The irreconcileable revolt of the damned and thenceforth
the cruelly powerless hate of a God, unable any more to pardon.

Well, even this is sublime in its horror, and the Catholic dogma is
admirable even to its most dreadful depths for those souls which realise
its poetry without becoming victims of its seductions and its
infatuations.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

*God appears to repent himself of having made man, because man from time
to time repents himself of having made a God*. Divine fictions succeed
each other like the ages. Jupiter dethrones Saturn, and the Jesus Christ
of Popes reigns in the place of Jehovah of the Jews. The Jesus of St.
Dominic is still none the less the son of the cruel God of Moses, but
the ferocious beasts of Daniel and the Apocalypse must inevitably
disappear to make room for the dove and the lamb. God will truly have
made himself man, when he shall have caused men to become as good as a
God ought to be. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) The genius of man, in
developing itself in the course of ages, unrolls the genealogy of the
Gods. It is in the genius of man that an eternal Ancient of Days begets
a son that must succeed to his father and in which proceeds, from father
and son, the spirit of knowledge and intelligence which shall explain
the mysteries of both. The Trinity, does not this issue from the very
bowels of humanity? Does not man feel it to be eternal in three persons,
the father, the mother and the child? In the human trinity, is not the
son as ancient as the father? For the father also is a son! Is not the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

woman the immaculate conception of nature and love? And this her
conception, is it not stainless? For the sin of love ends where
maternity begins. There is a virginity in the sanctity of the mother,
and since God has made himself man, that is to say, since God neither
really lives for us, nor personifies himself, nor thinks, nor loves, nor
speaks, save only in humanity, the ideal woman, the typical woman, the
*collective woman, is truly the mother of God*. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

There is redemption, that is to say, solidarity amongst men; the good
suffer for the bad, and the just pay the debts of the sinners. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) Thus, all is true in the dogmas of religion
when once we have the key to the enigma. *Catholicism is the Sphynx of
modern times. Place yourself under its talons, without guessing its
riddle, and it devours you; guess its riddle without conquering it, or
only half guess it, and you are doomed like Œdipus to misfortune and
self-imposed blindness*. An intelligent Catholic ought not to leave the
church, he ought to remain in it <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md); wise
amidst the ignorant, free amidst slaves, to enlighten the former and
liberate the latter, for I once more repeat that there is no true
religion outside the pale of Catholicity. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7.md)

The rationale of a religion is to be *ir*rational! Its nature is to be
*super*natural. God is supersubstantial. Space and the universal
substance are the Infinite, God is within it, for he is the knowledge
and the power of the infinite. <span id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8.md)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The infinite is the inevitable absurdity which imposes itself on
science. God is the paradoxical explanation of the absurdity which
imposes itself on faith.

Science and faith can and ought mutually to counterbalance each other
and produce equilibrium; they can never amalgamate.

The eternal Father is Jewish; the good God is Christian; the divinity of
Jesus Christ, the Pope, and the Devil are Catholic; but charity, which
is Catholic and in a way pre-eminent, will suppress the Devil and
convert the idolaters of the Pope.

Original sin is Jewish, pardon is Christian, the sacraments, Catholic.

Fanaticism is of Jewish birth, good sense is Christian, simplicity and
intelligence are Catholic, but pretentious folly is Protestant.

Don Juan, Voltaire, the first Napoleon, Venillot, Polichinello, Pierrot
and Harlequin are Catholics, but Mons. Prud’homme is Protestant and,
what is worse, a Freemason.

Philosophy is Atheistic or Christian, poetry is Catholic, and egotistic
and mercantile jejuneness are Protestant.

This is why France is Voltairean, but still Catholic, whereas the
English, the Prussians and M.\* \* \* are Protestants.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

"Yes, gentlemen of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy," said the Catholic
Galileo, "the Earth is fixed, if you desire it; it is the Sun which
revolves. I will say more if you demand it, I will say that the earth is
flat and the Heavens made of crystal. Would to God that your skulls were
of the same material so as to allow a little light to penetrate to your
respected brains. You are authority, and science is bound to bow; she
can afford to bow when she meets you, for it is she who remains, you who
pass away. Your successors will e’en be forced in their turn to bow to
and live in peace with her."

Rabelais, not less learned and not less a good Catholic than Galileo,
wrote the following in the prologue of his fourth book of *Gargantua*:

"If in my life, my writings, my speech, nay even in my thoughts, I
detected the faintest glimmer of heresy, with my own hands should the
dry wood be collected and the fire kindled to burn myself on the pile."

Do you see here Rabelais, the inquisitor, burning himself, Rabelais,
accused of heresy?

This reminds one of God, *causing God to die in order to appease God*.
It is inexplicable, as a mystery should be, but it is only the more
essentially Catholic.

Nothing so excites the imagination as mystery, and the excited
imagination electrifies and multiplies tenfold the will. The wise are
called to govern the world, but it is the mad men who overturn and
metamorphose it. This is why madness is considered by Eastern nations as
something divine. Indeed to

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

vulgar eyes the man of genius is a mad man. In truth, he has, perhaps,
some grains of madness in him, for he almost always disregards common
sense to obey the sublime sense. Moses dreams of a Promised Land and
drags away into the desert a horde of herdsmen and slaves, who murmur,
rebel, kill each other and die of hunger and fatigue during forty years.
He will never reach Palestine; he will die, lost in the mountain, but
his thought will have swept the heavens, and he will bequeath to the
world a God, unique, and an universal code; from the shade of Moses,
unburied, will issue the immeasurable glory of Jehovah.

He created a people and commenced a book; a people, bravely mean in its
tenacity, at once superb and servile; a book, full of shadows and
lights, of a grandeur and absurdity alike superhuman; this book and this
people will withstand all force, all science, all political
combinations, and all the criticisms of the nations and the revolving
ages. From this book civilisation will derive its worship, from this
people kings will borrow their treasures, and who now will dare to judge
the man of the Red Sea and Mount Horeb? What rationalistic philosopher
can think that he was wise? But who, capable of appreciating great
things. could dare to call him foolish?

Shall we speak now of Jesus Christ? But here we should bow before him
whom half the world adores. What great hierophant, what ancient oracle
could ever have foreseen this God? What astrologer, or what Diviner
could have conceived the idea of saying to

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the Emperor Tiberius: "At this moment a Jew of Galilee, proscribed by
his own people, denied by his friends, and condemned by one of your
Prefects, is dying in agony. After his death he will dethrone the
Cæsars, and those who will claim to continue his inconceivable dynasty
will reign in Rome in your place. All the Gods of the Empire and of the
entire world will fall before his image; the instrument of his
punishment will become the symbol of Salvation." What madness is
Christianity if it be not superhuman! What an awful faith, that in Jesus
Christ, if he be not God! <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) Can you
conceive a mental disease, contagious enough to infect with delirium
through a long series of centuries almost the whole of humanity? What a
deluge of blood has that abolisher of bloody sacrifices caused to flow!
What implacable hatreds, what vengeance, what wars, what tortures, what
massacres, has not this promulgator of pardon excited? But Jesus was
more than a man; he was an idea, nay more than an idea, a principle; I
am a principle that speaks, said he, speaking of himself.

*God has made himself man*; thus is proclaimed upon earth the worship of
humanity. "*Emmanuel* 

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *God is in us," would say as they embraced each
other the Brothers of the Rosy Cross, initiated in the mystery of the
Man-God*. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) For truly the Son of Man
is at the same time the only and multiple Son of God. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) You are one with me, said the Master to
his disciples, as my Father and I are one; he who hears you hears me,
and he who sees me, sees my Father. Triumph and miracle! God is no
longer unknown to men, because man knows man. He is no longer invisible
when we see our neighbour. He is the benefactor who assists *us*, He is
the poor man whom *we* assist, He is the sick who suffers, the physician
who heals. He is the sufferer who weeps and the friend who consoles. And
woman,--how Christianity elevates her! What an assumption is hers; the
woman is the mother of God since God has made himself man! A virgin--we
can love her with all our aspirations to infinity; a mother--but it is
no longer sufficient to love her, we must adore her as we adore Grace
and Providence. The law of pardon on her lips, she is peace and mercy,
she is nature and life, she is obedience--free, and Liberty--self
-submitting. She is *all* that we should love! Recite in her honour the
Litanies of the Virgin-Mother; I salute you, Gate of Heaven, Temple of
Ivory, Sanctuary of Gold, Mysterious Rose, Sacred

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Vase of Devotion, Honourable Vase, Admirable
Vase, Pyxis of Love, Cup of Holy Desires, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) Star of the Morning, Arch of the Alliance.

Ob! what cries of love do all those *martyrs, self-condemned to eternal
widowhood*, raise, *without comprehending them*, to thee! Oh cruel,
despairing sigh of all these Tantaluses thirsting for a draught that
ever eludes them, and provoked to longings by fruits ever denied to
their lips. Sublime dreamers! They renounce woman to gain heaven, as if
heaven was something without woman, and as if woman was not the Queen of
Heaven! "O trespass of Adam, happy trespass," sings the Church in her
liturgy, "happy trespass which has deserved to have God himself as its
redeemer! O sin of Adam, sin truly inevitable!" Thus escape in the
sacred chants the innermost secrets of the Sanctuary, but those who
repeat these mysterious words fail to catch their true sense, and their
hearts, burning perhaps beneath the ashes, accuse themselves of a
desire, as though it were a shame, and of a regret, as though it were an
infidelity!

Religion then is the exaltation of the man and the assumption of the
woman. Comprehension of religion is the emancipation of the spirit, and
the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Bible of the hierophants *is the Bible of
liberty*. To believe without knowing is weakness; *to believe, because
one knows, is power*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](phs04.htm#fr_0.md) The Western Ideal of
Good.--E. O.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](phs04.htm#fr_1.md) In a Review of Wilson's
"Chapters on Evolution" in *Knowledge* for February 23rd, 1883, the
following passage occurs showing how Western science is slowly drifting
into the position occupied for thousands of years by the Occultists:--

"Quite early the tendency of the Theory of Evolution was seen to be
towards the widest possible generality. It was recognised that man could
not possibly be excluded from the Law of Evolution. Those who had
believed in his nobler origin from the dust of the earth were pained.
They objected to a doctrine according to which man, instead of having
been made originally a little lower than the angels, had risen from only
a little higher than the beasts of the fields--*instead of being made in
the likeness of God, must be regarded rather as having imagined God
after his own likeness*. It is true the new doctrine presented man as
having risen--and likely therefore to rise still higher--while the old
presented him as having fallen grievously, having, from being next door
to an angel, and quite in the likeness of God (though, for a slight
temptation, or none, held <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> out by an
objectionable reptile, he so offended as to merit death--not, before, a
part of the plan), become a wretched creature, I deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked'. So that, on the whole, the new teaching
was a more cheerful one apart from religious hopes and fears,--which do
not belong to our inquiry here."--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](phs04.htm#fr_2.md) *i.e.*, in which the bread
and wine are not supposed to be really transmuted into Christ's flesh
and blood, as is held by the Romish Church.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:1](phs04.htm#fr_3.md) That is to say when the
Seventh Round men appear on the scene, then only shall there be a God
for the sons of man.--E. O.

*For the sons of men* yes; that is to say cognisable and comprehensible
by limited and conditioned intellects; but this is a different thing
from the assertion that there is *no* God, though this latter is, no
doubt, the view taken by E. O.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[8:1](phs04.htm#fr_4.md) Woman taken collectively is
of course Mother of God--Humanity, but has Éliphas no other God? No, but
he has an enemy--Rome. E. L. was an atheist and a poet. He was also a
diplomatist; he seeks to win over and not to frighten away his
public--E. O.

It is very questionable whether E. L. *was* an atheist; indeed it seems
to me certain that he was *not*. His position was *not* that there was
*no* God, (an assertion involving an assumption of omniscience), but
simply that to the narrow and dim cognisance of man and even to that of
far higher but still conditioned intelligences, God only manifests
himself in Nature and Humanity. To say that the Infinite and Absolute is
entirely outside the highest plane to which any limited and conditioned
intellect can attain, and that hence we must content ourselves with
dealing with the laws and manifestations of the conditioned Universe,
which are more or less within our grasp or that of our perfected
predecessors, is one thing; to assert that there *is no* power and
intelligence outside the sphere of our possible cognisance, the source
of these laws and manifestations, *no* God in fact, another, and one to
which, to my mind, neither Éliphas Lévi, nor any other occultist of his
school, would commit himself.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[9:1](phs04.htm#fr_5.md) But this is *not* the case
in reality, though to a superficial observer it may often seem so. On
the contrary, each and all inevitably pay to the last farthing their own
debts (incurred in the current of previous lives) and these only, and
pay them either in this or in future lives.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:2](phs04.htm#fr_6.md) And that is why E. L. left
it--for the sake of a Paradox.--E. O.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[9:3](phs04.htm#fr_7.md) A play upon
words--Catholicity means with him *Universality*.--E. O.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9:4](phs04.htm#fr_8.md) Our doctrine: Space and
Universal *Swābhāvat*--Matter: Force is within. Manifesting under this
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> Trinitarian form, a God, for the
ignorant and the blind.--E. O.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[13:1](phs04.htm#fr_9.md)

> "Now the Virgin returns, the golden age returns,  
> Now a new offspring is sent down from high Heaven,  
> O Chaste Lucina, favour the boy now being born,  
> The serpent will die."--*Virgil's 4th Eclogue*.
>
> Virgil died September 22nd, 19 B.C. Was he a Prophet?--E. O.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[14:1](phs04.htm#fr_10.md) "Man is God and Son of
God, and there is no other God but man." (The secret pledge of the
Rosicrucians).--E. O.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[14:2](phs04.htm#fr_11.md) "Humanity--Son of
Eternity."--E. O.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[15:1](phs04.htm#fr_12.md) Compare these
expressions taken from the litanies of the R. C. Church with like sexual
flatteries addressed to Durga's idol (the *Yoni*) by Hindu devotees and
the litanies of the Vallabacharyas to the God of Love.--E. O.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paradox II.--Liberty is Obedience to the Law](phs05.md)
