[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Esoteric](../../index.md) 
[Eliphas Levi](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phs08.md) 
[Next](phs10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PARADOX VI.--THE IMAGINATION REALISES WHAT IT INVENTS

BEHOLD! the greatest magician in the universe! It is she who makes the
memory yield its fruit, who realises beforehand the Possible, and
invents even the Impossible. To her miracles cost nothing. She
transports houses and mountains through the air, places whales in the
sky, and stars in the sea, gives

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

paradise to the hashish or opium eaters,, offers kingdoms to inebriates,
and makes Perette dance with joy under the milk pail. Such is
Imagination.

It is to the Imagination that we owe poetry and dreams; it is she who
embroiders fables and symbols on the veils of the Great Mysteries. She
makes up the stories for the children, and the legends for the peasants.
She makes the thundering Gods and exterminating angels appear on the
hills, and the White Ladies and Virgins near the founts. She makes
predictions which are accommodated to facts, or reinterpreted when they
are not realised. She is the nurse of Hope and the accomplice of
Despair. She gilds the aureole of the Saints, and bronzes the horns of
the Devil. She heals and kills, saves some and damns others, is chaste
as the Virgin or impure as Messalina. She creates enthusiasm and thus
enlarges, almost beyond the limits of the possible, the empire of the
Will. She creates a belief in happiness and gives it, for so long as the
dream lasts.

The imagination is the crystalline lens of our mind. She refracts the
luminous rays of our thoughts and magnifies the images of all our
perceptions. The scope of our vision is so small that to see rightly in
this narrow world we must see things larger than in nature.

People, devoid of imagination, never accomplish anything great, for
everything appears to them in mean proportions. The astronomer
contemplates the universe and imagines the Infinite; the believer

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

*contemplates Nature and imagines God*. In truth, the Imagination is
greater than Thought. Science is overflowed by faith, and without faith
science would remain uncertain.

What is Algebra but the Imagination of pure Mathematics, and what is the
Kabala but the Algebra of Ideas? The imagination of Kabalists has
converted Philosophy into an exact Science by connecting ideas with
numbers; the Science of Analogies is wholly a Science of Imagination,
and great nations are but congeries of cold enthusiasts, who powerfully
imagine glory.

Collective imaginations achieve the results of the solar microscope.
Heroes, especially, grow greater after their deaths, and the fictions of
opinion raise upon superb pedestals the high majesties of history. Who
will ever know the exact measure of Alexander the Great, or Napoleon I?
Marat and Napoleon were two little men, energetic and ambitious of
renown; the one desired to free the world which the other proposed to
enslave; the first desired a rivulet of blood, the other made rivers of
it flow, and then bequeathed to us two invasions, the reign of his
nephew, and overwhelming catastrophies; the one is execrated, the other
adored; for one the gallows, <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) for the
other the triumphal arch and column, and both are exaggerations--the one
of infamy, the other of glory.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

It is because Marat, more disinterested and more sincere at heart than
Napoleon the First, was only a raging screaming Tribune, while Napoleon
was a man of genius, that is to say a despot of the human imagination.
It is because the poetry of nations loves better splendid crimes than
mean virtues, because the mask of Marat is a grimace that would raise
laughter if it did not evoke horror, whilst the medal of Napoleon is a
majesty which imposes itself on the worship of the future. These are
conclusive reasons.

If imagination finds one real point of support, it is the lever of
Archimedes; without a real basis, it is only a stick on which fools
ride.

Relying upon scientific and reasonable hypotheses, Christopher Columbus
imagined America, dared to set off to discover it, and found it. *When
one knows and when one wills, one ought to have the courage to dare*.

Imagination is the Creative Power. God is the Imagination of Nature. She
has her dreams and her nightmares, but these do not prevent her Epos
from being glorious. The architects of the Middle Ages have sketched its
outline in their magnificent Cathedrals where the carved spouts, corbels
and florid ornamentation serve to bring out the pure lines of the Ogives
and the placidity of the Saints. These great artists had guessed the
enigma of good and evil; they understood light and its shadows.

It is the Imagination which works miracles; by an act of their
imagination a few peasant children cause

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

churches to rise from the earth, and shake entire populations; witness
the pilgrimages of Lourdes and La Salette. By imagination Joshua
arrested the sun, and caused the walls of Jericho to fall at the sound
of his trumpets; by the imagination bread becomes God, and the wine of
the chalice is changed into immortal blood, and we do not profess to
say, as may be well imagined, that this is not so; but this is, as we
imagine it, according to the word and on the faith of Jesus
Christ. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md)

Imagination heals the sick and makes the fortune of celebrated
physicians; it creates homœopathy from which so many believers derive
good: it makes tables speak, and dictates to mediums, pell mell, pages
of learned matter and the grossest ignorance, prayers and curses. It
gives horns to Moses, and to the cuckolded husbands, making the first
resemble the Devil, and the latter either furious bulls or patient and
mild mannered oxen. It amplifies wisdom, exaggerates folly, demands too
much of truth, makes falsehood look truthful; at the same time it is not
falsehood for the imagination; all that it affirms is true as poetry,
and can poetry ever tell us falsehoods? That which she invents she
creates, and that which is created exists. To imagine the truth is to
divine, to divine is to exercise the Divine power. In Latin they call
the man who divines, *divinus*, that is

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

to say the Divine man, and the poet is styled *vates*, that is to say,
prophet.

Faith has for its object only the divinations of those who imagine the
Eternal Truths. Moses, imagined Jehovah, and the cloud hung over the
tabernacle. Solomon imagined the universal temple, and that temple,
destroyed successively by the Assyrians and the Romans, is still
standing under the name of St. Peter's of Rome. Alexander imagined the
unity of nations, almost realised under Augustus, and imagined again
later by Peter the Great and Napoleon the First, whose antagonisms still
maintain the balance of the world.

The Imagination is the eternal go-between in light *amours*. It is by
the imagination as a rule that impressible and nervous women are taken.
It is often sufficient for a man to be strange or even horrible in order
to be loved. The Marquess of Sade, Mirabeau, Marat, were all beloved;
Cartouche and Mandrin had been so before them. Women of the world had
fallen in love with Lacenaire, and we are assured that in his prison
Troppmann used to receive love letters. The Don Juans and Lovelaces owe
most of their successes to their evil reputations; the lordly Bluebeards
never lack victims, and it is especially when the daggers of the
Lanciottos are raised above them to strike that the Francesca da Riminis
love to taste the forbidden fruit. That which most powerfully excites
the imagination, and consequently desire, is the consciousness of
danger: hence the God of the Bible, wishing the woman to become a
mother,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

forbade her under pain of the most terrible penalties to touch the fruit
which would make her yield to love. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

It was only in fact when they knew that they were doomed to die that the
man and woman bethought themselves of providing successors. Death
ploughs the ground of Love, and Love sows there the seed from which is
destined to develop the Harvest of Death. It is forbidden on pain of
Death to enter into Life, since all who are born are condemned to die.
This is what is meant by original sin, and the birth sin, of which we
can only be guilty in the persons of our parents, stretching backwards
from one to another until we reach the first. The sin of birth is the
consequence of the sin of Love, that nature always makes a show of
forbidding to mankind in order to stimulate their longing for it.

Imagination is the Pegasus of the poets, the Hippogriff of the Paladins,
the eagle of Ganymede, and the dove of Anacreon; it is the car of fire
of Elias and the angel which bears away the prophets, holding them by
the hairs of the head. It is the cherub with burning pincers cauterising
the stammer on the trembling lips of Hai, the mysterious Proteus that
must be tightly squeezed in the realms of reason to compel it to assume
a human shape and to tell the truth.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

just as there is a latent heat which determines the molecular
polarisation of bodies, *so there is a latent light that manifests
itself in us by a sort of internal phosphorescence*. It is this which
illumines and colours the phantoms of our visions and our dreams, and
exhibits to us in the absence of all external light such astounding
photographic pictures. It is by means of this light that we read in the
memory of nature, or in the general reservoir of impressions and forms,
the rudimentary germs of the Future in the archives of the Past.
Somnambulism is a state of immersion of the thought in this light
invisible to waking eyes, and in this universal bath, wherein are
reflected all presentiments and all memories, minds meet and
intelligences interpenetrate each other. Thus it is that one can guess,
translate, and explain the ideas of another. It is thus that the brain
of one becomes for another an open book, which it can read off readily.
The wonders of lucid somnambulism have no other cause, and are explained
by a series of mirages and reflections. *The interior light bears the
same relation to the external light that negative electricity bears to
positive electricity*, and it is on this account that phantoms appear
specially at night, <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) and that
sorcerers require

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

darkness to perform their pretended miracles; it is for this reason that
the spirits and the mediums cannot produce their peculiar phenomena
before all kinds of persons; they require a small sympathetic circle,
predisposed to the contagious influence of that interior phosphorescence
which makes the one set see and feel what would be neither visible nor
sensible to the others. Then one is slowly and progressively pervaded by
the life of the dream <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md); the furniture
moves, pens write without being touched, men rise from the earth and
remain suspended in the air. Then realities run mad, and mad ideas seem
real; the seers and seeresses are insensible to pain. The
convulsionaries of St. Medard begged to be beaten with logs of wood or
bars of iron; somnambulists find in pure water all the flavours that the
magnetizer chooses to imagine. The dead appear, hands without bodies
come and touch you: but let a healthy man, or one out of sympathy with
the circle enter, the oracles are silent, the hands disappear, the
furniture ceases to dance, everything returns to its natural
order, <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) and the members of the circle
are

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

as sulky and displeased as sleepers who have been suddenly startled out
of sleep.

This light of dreams, which we might call the dark or black light,
exists independently of the sun and stars, as does the light of
fireflies or glowworms; it never mingles with the. visible external
light, but it may leave its imprints on the brain--imprints transitory
in the hallucinated, durable in the insane. Nervous organisms congested
with black light become ill-regulated magnets, and produce at times on
inert objects attractions or pressures, the results of which seem
marvellous, especially when amplified and multiplied, as they almost
always are, by the obliging imagination of the spectators; for credulity
ever lends itself willingly to miracles. Weak minds are naturally
inclined towards the marvellous, and it is not easy to undeceive them
when they insist on being deceived.

Never has a miracle been performed for the triumph of science and
reason; never has one occurred in the presence of wise and educated
persons. Strange phenomena reduced to their simplest expression may
excite the curiosity and stimulate the investigation of

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

men of science, but can demonstrate in no way the intervention of
supernatural beings. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)

*As a fact, God only is supernatural in the sense that He is the Master
of Nature. All that is not God falls necessarily into the order of
Nature*. <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md)

We must simultaneously ignore all the Laws of Nature and all the rules
of exegesis, if we are to accept literally and in a natural
signification the Dogmatic and Sacramental expressions of the Scriptures
and the Councils. Thus the Faith teaches us that in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist there is a transubstantiation. Is this transubstantiation
natural? Clearly it is not; it is mysterious and sacramental. You may
substitute one substance for another, but one substance does not become
another; it is always the same substance, amalgamated or modified.
Chemistry decomposes and recombines bodies, but it does not turn one
thing into another,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

for in that case the two things would, at the same time, be and not be.

To change literally and totally water into wine, it would be necessary
to annihilate water and create wine--two absurdities. For nothing can be
annihilated, and wine cannot be created without grapes. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md) To evaporate the water and substitute for
it wine would be a mere conjuror's trick and not a change of substances.
Bread may become flesh and wine become blood, but only by the processes
of assimilation and not by transubstantiation. These dogmatical
expressions must, therefore, remain restricted to the domain of Dogma
and Symbols. Taken scientifically and in their natural sense they are
absurdities. Dogma is the formula of imaginary realities. Note well that
we say realities and not fictions. The affirmations of Dogma are
realities for Faith, <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) but they are
imaginary, because we can only conceive them through the imagination
since they elude the analysis alike of Science and Reason.

It is the Imagination solely that performs all miracles. What in fact is
a miracle? It is an exceptional phenomenon of which the cause is
unknown. Science then holds her peace and leaves Imagination to speak,
who at once proceeds to invent and assert a cause out of all measure and
proportion to the effect. The crowd accept this assertion as gospel and
the miracle is incontestable.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

All educated people know that the miracles of the Bible are Oriental
exaggerations. <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) Moses took advantage
of the rise and fall of the sea; Joshua found a ford in the Jordan; be
used to breach the walls of Jericho one of those explosive compounds of
which the Priests possessed the secret; and the national Poets tell us
that the sea opened, the Jordan flowed backwards, and that the walls
fell of their own accord. It is the same thing with the sun arrested in
its course to mark a great day of Victory.

Do we not read in the Psalms of David that the mountains have leapt like
rams and the hills like lambs? Must we take this literally <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73.md)? The same Poet adds that stones have been
changed into pools and rocks into fountains. Have we here a
transubstantiation? The theologians contend that we must take literally
the words of Jesus Christ when he says of the bread, "This is My Body,"
and of the wine, "This is My Blood," but then we must also take his
words in a literal sense when he says "I am the true vine

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

ye are the branches." Now was Jesus Christ truly and literally a
vine? <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)

Must we believe that the knowledge of good and evil were really and
truly a tree, and that the bitter fruits of this double-stemmed tree
that yields life and death were peaches or apples? The Serpent of Eden
and the Ass of Balaam, did they really speak? People will cease to ask
such questions when the men who profess to teach others cease to be as
stupid as savages.

Imperturbable good sense, united to a powerful Imagination, constitute
what is called Genius. The man who possesses both these forces can
become entirely independent, and exercise at will a real influence on
the common herd. He will create for himself, if he so will, servers and
friends, unless he makes his genius subservient to some secret weakness.
It is possible to have dogmatic good sense, without having practical
good sense. Great men are often their own dupes; they love glory as
Orpheus loved his companion; they go to seek it everywhere, even into
Hell, and turn round at the wrong time to see if Eurydice is following
them. True glory is what none can take from us; it consists in merit,
and not in the applause of the multitude; <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md) it fears not the caprices of

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Destiny, because it owes nothing to chance; it
loves neither tumult nor noise; it is in the silence of Earth that we
enjoy the peace of Heaven. <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[76:1](phs09.htm#fr_62.md) In the original "*les
gémonies*," that is the Roman place of execution--The Tyburn of
Rome.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[78:1](phs09.htm#fr_63.md) One of our author's
characteristic "grimaces," which he must have thought witty, as they
could impose on no one, but which exasperate the ordinary readers as in
equally bad faith and bad taste.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[80:1](phs09.htm#fr_64.md) This is not the occult
meaning of the Legend referred to, and this E. L. of course knew. He
seems constantly to fear that he may have somewhere spoken too plainly
and to feel it a duty to set his readers off on a wrong scent.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[81:1](phs09.htm#fr_65.md) Only partially on this
account. There are many other reasons. The terrestrial magnetic
conditions differ widely during the day and the night. The physical
energy is at its lowest ebb during the night, and the more vigorous the
physical powers the less scope <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> for the
psychical perceptions, and there are many other factors--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[82:1](phs09.htm#fr_66.md) E. L.
[apparently](errata.htm#0.md) knew very little of this branch of the
subject. He apparently fancied that all phenomena were
subjective--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[82:2](phs09.htm#fr_67.md) All this of course is a
hasty generalisation, founded on insufficient data. All this may happen,
or it may not; it will depend on the relative magnetic (I use the word
for lack of a better) powers <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> of the
circle and the intruder, including in the circle the influences that
have been attracted to it. Plenty of such intruders, utterly sceptical
and thoroughly hostile to the supposed dupers and dupes, have found
their presence, and even wills, wholly inadequate to check the progress
of the phenomena.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[84:1](phs09.htm#fr_68.md) All this, though
literally true, is grossly dishonest. As a Kabalist Éliphas Lévi knew
all about elementals and elementaries. Of course these are *not*
supernatural, as they belong to nature, so that what he says is true in
the letter, but it is false in spirit, because he knew that all his
readers considered such beings supernatural, and would hence understand
that he denied their existence. So with miracles; of course these are
but the results of *unknown* natural laws, so that here too what he says
is true to the letter but false to the spirit, as leading the reader to
infer that he denied the occurrence of what *people call*
miracles.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[84:2](phs09.htm#fr_69.md) Fallacy and assumption,
and he knew it.--E. O.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[85:1](phs09.htm#fr_70.md) London wine merchants
could tell him a different story.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[85:2](phs09.htm#fr_71.md) That is *Blind*
Faith.--E. O.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[86:1](phs09.htm#fr_72.md) They know nothing of the
kind; some may be so; some are probably very fairly accurate traditions
of occult phenomena, but E. L. knew apparently very little of the
physics of occultism.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[86:2](phs09.htm#fr_73.md) All this is pure
sophistry. Of course the two things are utterly distinct; in the one
case there is clearly the use of metaphor, in the others, previously
referred to, there is equally clearly an assertion of fact; the latter
may be a fiction, but it can neither be rejected nor discredited on the
score that elsewhere tropes and metaphors are employed.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[87:1](phs09.htm#fr_74.md) This of course is a fair
argument against the Roman Catholic Dogma of
Transubstantiation.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[87:2](phs09.htm#fr_75.md)

". . . worth is the Ocean,  
Fame is but the bruit that roars along the shallows."  
--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[88:1](phs09.htm#fr_76.md) The conviction of the
especial fitness of each to know best his own peculiar nature and
powers. Power has its illusion. Let every one accomplish his
mission.--E. O.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paradox VII.--The Will Accomplishes Everything, Which It Does Not
Desire](phs10.md)
