[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Esoteric](../../index.md) 
[Eliphas Levi](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phs04.md) 
[Next](phs06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PARADOX II.--LIBERTY IS OBEDIENCE TO THE LAW

WHERE there is the spirit of God there is Liberty, say the Holy
Scriptures.

*Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free*, said Jesus
Christ. We should escape from the bondage of the letter to the liberty
of the spirit, said the great Apostle. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) Also he says, you have been

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

bought for a great price, do not any more make yourselves slaves of men.
We are the children and not the slaves of God. We are the brothers and
not the slaves of Jesus Christ.

The law was made for man and not man for the law, said again, the Divine
Master. Liberty is the goal of man's existence; it is in this alone that
his right and his duty can be reconciled; in this consists his
personality and autonomy, and this alone can render him capable and
worthy of Immortality.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

*To free ourselves from the slavery of the Passions, from the tyranny of
Prejudices, from the errors of Ignorance, the Pains of Fear, and the
anxieties of Desire*, this is the Work of Life.

It is a question of being or not being. The free man is alone a man;
slaves are but animals or children.

St. Augustine sums up the whole law in this fine saying: "Love, and do
what you like." <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)

The free man can wish nothing but what is good, for all wicked men are
slaves.

Following the spirit of our (*Catholic*) symbols, the freedom of man is
God's great work; for this he permits a Hell to be hollowed out, and the
hideous shadow of the Demon to be raised even to Heaven. It is for this
that to the more than regal quietude of Divinity he prefers the
sufferings of the accursed Humanity. God aspires to the cross of the
malefactor

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

and wills, so as not to be a despot abusing Omnipotence, to conquer, by
suffering, the right to pardon rebellion. The woman has been audacious,
she has desired to know; the man has been sublime, he has dared to love;
and God, who while admiring strikes them, seems to have become jealous
of the patience of his children.

All this is a revelation, poetic and esoteric; all this has occurred in
the Human mind and in the Human heart. Man feels his high dignity when
he wills to be free; the eternal vulture may tear the liver of
Prometheus, but the courage of the great sufferer is reborn and grows
ever with his daring. Jupiter avenges, himself, but fears, and *he* will
dethrone Jupiter and prove himself more a God than him, who will give
his whole heart's blood to heal the wounds of Prometheus, and will come
to suffer in his place.

Emancipation, Liberty, this is the final word of the Symbols. Jesus
descended to Hell to kill the slavery of Death, and in re-ascending
towards the light be dragged after him captivity, captive.

One day, Death alone will be dead; Curses alone will be accursed, and
Damnation alone damned, and the Spirit of Light which desires that all
men should be saved, all arrive at a knowledge of the truth, God--who
after having made all human beings *en masse* responsible for the fault
of a single one, may well pardon all on account of the merits of
one--God will cause good to triumph, and evil will be destroyed.

The time will come when it will be realised that there is no true
Liberty without Religion, no true

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Religion without Liberty, but at present
Religion and Liberty seem mutually to exclude and battle against each
other. Like Religion, Liberty has her martyrs, and Liberty will deny
authority so long as the Church denies the rights of Liberty.

"Ought we to concede to men the liberty of conscience?" asked our
Doctors, and Rome decided in the negative, but that simply means that
the Church does not renounce the direction of those who listen to her.

Liberty is not given, she is seized, or rather Nature gives her to us by
the help of science; to ask whether one should allow to men, true men,
the Liberty of conscience, is as if one asked whether we should allow
them a head and a heart. Did not Galileo, even after he had withdrawn
his learned demonstrations, know that the earth revolved? Will
civilisation turn backwards, because there is a syllabus? Should the
Pope forbid us to proceed? Let us salute the Pope and move on always. If
the Holy Father wishes to make, us hear him, he must e’en move on in his
turn; it is full time for the shepherd to rise when his flock goes off.
Hold! some one will say, your position as a Catholic does not permit you
to speak thus.

If legitimate authority imposes silence on me I hold my tongue, *but*
the earth revolves!

Conscience is inviolable, for it is divine, and it is in truth that
which is essentially and absolutely, free in man. For outside the
conscience where can one find ant absolute realisation of that ideal
Liberty?

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

From his cradle man is subjected to tyrannical necessities, and, like it
or no, as he may, he must bear throughout his life that chain of
obligations which society and nature emulate each other in imposing on
him. Truth and justice are austere mistresses, and Love is a despot,
often cruel. For him who is not rich come the necessities of existence;
there is no alternative between the yoke of labour and the work
pillar <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) of misery. Those who are
called the masters and the happy ones of the world have other enemies
and other chains; so true is this that Alexander the Great almost envied
the cynical half madness and indifference of Diogenes; but Diogenes and
Alexander were the two extremes of paradoxical vanity; they were both
the slaves of their Pride, and were not free men.

Liberty is the full enjoyment of all those rights which do not connote a
duty. It is by the accomplishment of duty that rights are acquired and
preserved. Man has the right to do his duty because he is bound to
preserve his rights. Self-devotion is only a sublimation of duty, and it
is the most sublime of all rights. A man may devote himself to another,
but that is not being his slave; he may pawn his liberty, but he cannot
alienate it without a species of moral suicide. A man may devote his
life to the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

triumph of an idea, but always reserving the right of mental expansion
and to a devotion to a worthier object. *A perpetual vow is an
affirmation of the Absolute in the Relative, of Knowledge in Ignorance,
of the Immutable in the Transitory, of Contradiction in all things*. It
is, therefore, an engagement, null and void, because it is rash and
absurd and to repent (and withdraw from it) when one realises its
madness, is not merely a right, but a duty.

It is true that the Church, whose decisions in matters of Faith ought to
be respected by all Catholics, approves perpetual vows; but this is
solely when they are the result of a supernatural grace. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) Such vows are void before nature, but in
the supernatural order they are sacred and inviolable. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md)

Marriage also is a perpetual engagement that nature does not always
ratify. Thence follow alike the just but useless severities of morality
and the deterioration of manners. Thence follow in perpetual contrast
the tears and blood of the conjugal tragedy, and the inexhaustible
merriment of tales and comedy. Moses is terrible when he descends from
Mount Sinai with horns; but why had be horns? Because he was a married
man, <span id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18.md) will perhaps reply some
unblushing

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gaul, and because he had absented himself for
forty nights from the conjugal couch! The old joke spares nothing.

The two greatest free-thinkers the world has known were Rabelais and
Lafontaine, those two past Masters in wit and humour. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) Both of them, moreover, good Catholics and
free from any suspicion of heresy. Rabelais had taken religious vows and
had the cleverness to make himself tolerated by the Pope. Lafontaine was
married, and did not live with his wife; but what magicians of. style!
What apostles of the pure frank Truth! The work of Rabelais is the Bible
of good sense and infallible gaiety; that of Lafontaine is the Evangel
of Nature. Rabelais used to say mass, and if Lafontaine had lived in his
time he doubtless would not have failed to assist in this by reading the
prophecies of Baruch.

*One ought to do what one likes, when one likes what one ought*. This is
the Law of Liberty! In other words, every man has the right to do his
duty, but the first duty of man is set forth in the first commandment of
the Decalogue.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Thou shalt worship one God only, and him only shalt thou obey. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

And Jesus amplifying this precept, to the point of giving his
explanation a paradoxical character, did not hesitate to add: You shall
call no one in this world master or father; one only is your father,
your master, and that is God. <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21.md)

And St. John, the intimate confidant of the thoughts of Jesus, tells us
that God is the Word, or Reason, "and the Word was God."

Therefore we have and we ought to have for master only Reason, or the
Word which speaks.

For the Word, adds St. John, "was the true Light which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world."

Jesus Christ said of himself: I am the principle that speaks. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[3](#fn_22.md)

And every man who speaks in accordance with Reason can say, "I am
Reason." And one ought to do and avoid what it prescribes, for the Will
of Reason prevails over the Caprice of man. Caprice is the choice of
amusements. One may pick and

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

choose where amusements are concerned, but not in the case of duty that
imposes itself on us, and we are compelled to accept and do it.

Duty crushes him who seeks to avoid it, but bears onward with love him
who accomplishes it.

To will what we ought, that is to will what God <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) wills. And when the will of man is the
same as the divine will, <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md) it becomes
omnipotent.

Then it is that the miracles of Faith are accomplished; then may we
command the mountains to be moved, and the fruit trees to transplant
themselves into the sea--words of our Saviour which are not to be taken
in their literal sense.

The Word of Reason is efficacious, because it wills the end, and
determines the means.

It is certain that neither the mountains nor the trees will remove
themselves of their own accord.

The Force manipulates the Matter, and the Thought directs the Force.

Faith avails itself of Knowledge, and Knowledge directs Faith.

God himself can do nothing in opposition to Reason, which is the Law of
justice, because justice, Law and Reason are God himself.

God does not arrest the sun and moon, to allow Joshua to slay certain
Canaanites, and the announcement of such a miracle can only be a
hyperbolical figure of speech of Oriental poetry.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

God does not reject a people after having chosen it, and he does not
change his religion after having given it as eternal.

Arbitrary commands, favours, privileges, wrath, repudiation, pardon,
belong only to the weakness of man.

But to make children gradually understand Reason, it is needful
sometimes to throw over it an appearance of folly.

Childhood is naturally foolish; it must have its absurd stories and its
sensational toys. It must have its automatic dolls, its animals moving
by mechanism. It is true that it will very soon break these to see what
is inside them.

And thus Humanity breaks one after the other all its childish Religions.

The true Religion is the eternal Religion.

The true Piety is the Piety that is independent. The true Faith is the
absolute Faith which explains all Symbols and moves above all Dogmas.
The true God is the God of Reason, and his true worship is Love and
Liberty.

The Christians were right in breaking the idols, because men insisted on
forcing *them* to adore these. The Protestants were right in trampling
under foot, and burning the images of the Saints because, to compel them
to worship these, men burnt the Protestants themselves.

Nevertheless what more Divine than the great works of Phidias and the
Virgins of Raphael?

The worship of images, is it not the worship of Art, and was not the
beautiful Religion of the Greeks one

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

of the most graceful and splendid forms of the Universal Religion?

I adore truly the Divine Majesty before the Jupiter of Phidias, Immortal
Beauty in the Venus of Milo, the Divinity of Man in the Christ of
Michelangelo, the Dream of Heaven in the paradise of Fra Angelico.

But if to compel me to the worship of one or other of these, you show me
scaffolds or blazing piles. . . . I would despise the executioner and
turn my back on the idol!

Oh Madness of Human Tyranny!

In France, in the very country whose name even signifies Liberty, they
raised scaffolds before the idol of Liberty herself.

Yet Robespierre and Marat cursed the Inquisitors as the Inquisitors had
cursed Nero and Diocletian, and Marat and Robespierre have been cursed
in their turn by later assassins, and Liberty still remains a gory
Paradox, an Idol demanding sacrifices.

To this day the world has continued a great madhouse. Numbers have
seized one, saying to him, "Worship my slipper, or I burn you!"

If the man who fell into their claws was cunning, he made believe to
worship the slipper, and perhaps in so doing was neither a hypocrite nor
an idolater, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) but *their* victim is a
guileless fellow, who takes the thing, in sad earnest, resists them, and
becomes a Martyr!

The lassitude that succeeds to debauchery drives men to the madness of
suicide, and the orgies of the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Decadence were bound to end fatally in the
epidemic of Martyrdom. Young girls in those days skipped to the burning
pile as to a dance; infatuated mothers dragged their infants to the
massacre. Executioners, tired of slaying, flung down their axes and
begged for death. "Take off your neck-ruffs," wrote Tertullian to the
Christian women, "and make room for the sabre of the executioners."
Children played at Martyrdom, and one was seen red-heating fragments of
iron to place upon his hand. The Roman cruelty provoked a reaction, and
the taste for torture as an exhibition created a desire to experience it
as a new sensation.

Polygnotus and Nearchus, interrupting a religious ceremony and
overthrowing the altars of the Fatherland before a horrified people, do
they seem to have acted as reasonable beings? What then? Did not St.
Paul premise the folly of the cross? And Jesus himself, did he not make
a disturbance in the Temple of Jerusalem? He was God, you will tell me.
So be it, but humanly speaking his conduct was extremely irregular and
very imprudent, and you would agree with me on this point . . . *if* you
dared.

Is it lawful under the pretext that one is a God to be less prudent than
a wise man? This is what one has, if not the right, at least the
inclination to inquire; at least if one accepted the Gospels as history.
But they are more than this; they are precepts and symbols. God
disapproves of commerce in Holy things; he will not have traffic in his
Temple, and the sellers deserve to be driven thence with blows of

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

scourges; their shops should be overthrown, their money trampled under
foot. This is all that the Legend (or if you will the Holy Evangel) of
the sellers driven from the Temple signifies; here I bow and hold my
peace. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md)

All is beautiful in our Religion when one knows how to understand it.
All our Religion is true, and I would even dare to say that every
Religion is true, apart from omissions, transpositions, wrong meanings,
rash conjectures, additions, imaginings and misunderstandings.

This is what the free-thinkers must at last realise if they do not
desire to be for ever battling against one of the most energetic forces
of Human Nature, the invincible want to believe in, and adore something
in the Infinite, and to have Faith in a Humanity greater in some respect
than nature, so as to rise ever towards this, and to become purer in it,
in order to conquer and to reign by it.

Voltaire did not desire to destroy Religion, but he wished to reduce it
to a pure Deism. His motto was: "*God and Liberty*." He, who fancied
himself a Poet, and yet understood nothing of the great Epic Poem of the
Symbols, which starts from blind <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md)
Forces to

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

arrive at Intelligence and Liberty, stamps on suns, the sacred fire of
Zoroaster, allows its robbery by Prometheus in defiance of the bolts of
Jove, adores the force which it enchains at the feet of Beauty,
traverses the splendid and almost infinite domain of glorious dreams,
and finally accomplishes its synthesis in the reality of Man.

God is no longer the giant, invisible, fantastic, solitary, hidden in
the unfathomable depths of Heaven, He is amongst us, he is in us, he has
been born of the Woman, he is a babe whose new born cries we hear, a
youth who thinks and loves, an outlaw who struggles and suffers, a
free-thinker who protests, a reformer who drives out the buyers and
sellers from the Holy Place, one accursed who blesses, and rises from
the dead, the pure Man who pardons the adulterous Woman, the physician
who heals, but also the sick man who hopes, the paralytic who arises and
walks, the blind who opens his eyes. The others are me, said the
Saviour, and he who sees me, sees also my Father, all that is done to
the least of these is done to me, and God is in me, as I am in Him. Does
He speak only of the chosen people of the blessed race of Abraham? No!
for He blesses equally the good Samaritan, the Centurion, the woman of
Canaan, and the immense herd of nations whom He hopes to gather into one
fold. So he who gives bread to the poor,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

gives bread to God; he who consoles a sufferer, consoles God; he who
blesses an infidel, blesses God; he who injures one man, injures God; he
who curses one man, curses God; he who slays one man, commits Deicide.

What would Jesus have thought of the pitiless Priest and Levite
excommunicating and condemning to death the good Samaritan as a
schismatic, and the wounded man of Jericho for having received with
gratitude the help and care of an infidel? What must his judgment be on
those Inquisitors who have imprisoned, tortured, and burnt God alive?
But the God of these men was the Devil, and their Religion was that of
Anti-Christ. Man has no right to kill man, except in self-defence. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) The execution of a criminal is a
misfortune of war in a Society which is

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

not yet Christian, but the executed one who accepts the expiation is the
Father of the good thief dying on the cross with the Saviour, and we
must see in him God severing himself from the brute. Crime is not a
human act, but sacrifice is Divine when it is voluntary. *Homo sum
humani a me nil alienum puto*. I am a man, and nothing human can be
foreign to me. This is what God has said to the world in the Spirit of
the Christian Revelation.

*Let its seek God in Nature, let us worship Him in Spirit and in Truth,
let us love and serve Him in Humanity. That is Religion, eternal and
definitive*. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)

And when the chief of the Human Family have entered on this path, we
shall be able to say with Voltaire: "God is Liberty," *for man will
understand God, and will deserve to be free*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[16:1](phs05.htm#fr_13.md) The Deity is semi-male
(? Hermaphrodite.--*Trans*.) in the Hebrew philosophy. The body of man
is the vehicle of the three pairs of spouses, viz., the 2nd and 3rd, the
4th and 5th, and the 6th and 7th principles.

Irenæus speaks of "Bathos and Sige, Mind and Aletheia," each of them
male and female. The three *pairs* of principles are then treated as
three only, and we have the Trinity. The Jewish Kabala gives
Macroprosopus his spouse, and the Microprosopus his *uxor*. (Liber
Mysteri, I, 35, 38.)

"The anointed they call, male-female," says Cyril of Jerusalem, VI, xi.
The SUN has the Pneuma for his spouse.

When Éliphas Lévi speaks of Christ and his church, he means the Monad
and its vehicle, the 7th and 6th principles. The Egyptian older Hermetic
books give the first Quaternation, Monotes (Proarche, Proanennoetos,
Mysterious and not to be named says <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>
Irenæus) and Henotes, the power that exists in union with "the Lord
Ferho, the unknown, formless, unconscious Life" of the Codex Nazaræus.

This Monotes and Henotes, being the ONE, *sent forth*, not produced, but
unconsciously emanated, a BEGINNING, as they call it (*arche*), before
all things Intelligible, Unborn and Invisible, which *arche* is the
MONAD (from the ONE).

In the West the religious philosophy of the Magi was first made famous
under the name of Oriental Wisdom. Simon Magus teaches the doctrine of
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit (female), and says that this Trinity had
appeared amongst the Jews as Son, amongst the Samaritans as Father, and
to other nations as the Holy Spirit. The Christian Trinity was bodily
taken from the Kabalistic Nazarenes, who existed ages before the Western
Christ, and to whom Jeshu (the Jesus of Lud, 130 B.C.?) belonged during
the period of Alexander Jannæus (*a*).

"Life has built the house (body) in which you now stay," and the seven
planets who dwell in it shall not ascend all into the land of Light.--"
*Codex Naz.*, II, 35.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"Yes! the Chaldeans call the God. IAO, SABAOTH, he who is over the SEVEN
Orbits (circles)--the Demiurge."--*Lydus de Mens*, IV, 38, 74.. The
seven orbits are the seven principles, the three couples with the house
of flesh.

"Beam of the sun that hath shone the fairest light of all before the
*Seven*-gated Thebes, thou hast at length gleamed forth, O eye of golden
Day."--Sophocles, *Antigone*.--E. O.

\(a\) Alexander Jannæus is generally reckoned as reigning from 106 or
104 B.C. to 79 B.C.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[18:1](phs05.htm#fr_14.md) But adds in so many
words: "Provided that you do nothing contrary to the commandments of the
Church."--E. O.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[21:1](phs05.htm#fr_15.md) "*Ergastule*." I never
before met the word in French, but I take it to be derived from
*ergastylos*, the pillar to which a recusant slave was chained to work;
also the beams to which slaves in galleys were chained to row.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[22:1](phs05.htm#fr_16.md) Or of a determined
desire to obtain a supernatural power. To command nature it is necessary
to be positive. She has no obedience for mixed magnetisms.--E. O.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[22:2](phs05.htm#fr_17.md) True.--E. O.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[22:3](phs05.htm#fr_18.md) Behold a Frenchman!
cynical and witty, even in the midst of the arduous discussion of
esoteric <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> philosophy. France has had
several renowned Alchemists, she never had *one true Adept*.--E. O.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[23:1](phs05.htm#fr_19.md) It is impossible to
translate adequately the original word "gauloiserie," with its double
meaning and wide reaching significations. It is what Humpty Dumpty would
have called a "portmanteau word".--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[24:1](phs05.htm#fr_20.md) In the Massoretic
Kabala, the *points* read: "One God, only--the TRUTH,--and her only
shalt thou obey." Having so much of the Jesuit in him. E. L. could never
become an adept.--E. O.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[24:2](phs05.htm#fr_21.md) God, or *Good*.--E. O.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[24:3](phs05.htm#fr_22.md) In this and many other
cases, the wording of the authorised English version differs. But the
sense is generally the same.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[25:1](phs05.htm#fr_23.md) Or what Truth and Duty
will.--E. O.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25:2](phs05.htm#fr_24.md) Will--the Ākāsic
Force.--E. O.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[27:1](phs05.htm#fr_25.md) Only a worthy son of
Loyola!--E. O.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[29:1](phs05.htm#fr_26.md) Instead of canonising,
the Church of Rome unfrocked and persecuted to his death poor Éliphas,
the Abbé Louis Constant. "It is dangerous to leave things half undone,"
confessed the man when dying.--E. O.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[29:2](phs05.htm#fr_27.md) In the original "*forces
fatales*," by which I take it he means not merely "fatal forces," but
the blind, <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> unintelligent forces of the
universe, that work on, slaves to the inherent laws of their being, and
irresistible tyrants to all who have not pierced their secret.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[31:1](phs05.htm#fr_28.md) And not even then, for
where would be the difference between the two?--E. O.

The difference would be that the one seeks to kill, in violation of his
neighbour's right to live, aggressively., and not in defence of his own
inherent right, whilst the other if he does also infringe his
neighbour's right to kill, does so only defensively in vindication of
his own inherent right to live. There is a broad distinction between the
two cases that no sophistry can level; both *may* be wrong, but even so
(a moot point with the highest moralists of all ages) there is a vast
difference in the degree of criminality in the two cases. E. O. condemns
suicide unconditionally, and rightly so, but to allow a man to kill you,
when you can prevent this by killing him, is, it seems to me, suicide to
all intents and purposes.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[32:1](phs05.htm#fr_29.md) Only whatever we do let
us call things by their right names, "*Pas de demi-inconnues*."--E. O.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paradox III.--Love is the Realisation of the Impossible](phs06.md)
