[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Esoteric](../../index) 
[Eliphas Levi](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phs06) 
[Next](phs08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PARADOX IV.--KNOWLEDGE IS THE IGNORANCE OR NEGATION OF EVIL

"FATHER, forgive them, for they know not what they do," said Christ, in
praying for his executioners.

Thus speaking, he was pleading the cause of all Humanity. All men
deceive themselves because "they know not," and no man knows *what* he
does when he does evil. How could a rational being with a perfect
discernment do evil? <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) Does any one
voluntarily take poisons for perfumes, gall for honey, hemlock for
parsley, or arsenic for salt?

Ignorance is the cause of all errors, of all crimes and of all the evils
that torment the Human Race.

It was ignorance that invented capricious and angry Gods; it was this
that foisted on God the worst passions of man; it was this that
constructed out of the intelligent principle of things a personality,
distinct, defined and infinite, thus confounding together the most
contradictory conceptions; for the moment a personality becomes defined
and distinct, it ceases to be possible to conceive it as infinite.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

It is through Ignorance that men have insisted on constraining each
other now to submit to a Faith without Reason, now to lean upon Reason
without Faith, mutually persecuting each other, to recoil in turn to the
two poles of Folly.

It is through Ignorance of the Laws of Nature that men have believed in
the sun being arrested in its course, in asses speaking, in the jaw
bones of an ass transforming themselves into fountains, and in a whole
world of absurdities and chimeras.

It is Ignorance that makes Trimalchio burst at table, and St. Anthony go
mad in the desert, man ever craving to plunge into vices or scale the
heights to virtues disproportioned to his being.

It is through Ignorance that Tiberius, at Capri, inflicted on himself
sensual gratifications more horrible than tortures, and felt himself die
a thousand times daily in the disgust of his power, and the agony of his
pleasures.

The Ignorant have poisoned Socrates, crucified Jesus Christ, tortured
the martyrs, burnt the heretics, massacred the priests, have overthrown
and re-erected alternately the most monstrous idols, have preached, some
tyranny, others license, have denied, some all authority, others
liberty, and all have ignored Reason, Truth and justice.

It is through Ignorance that a man is proud since he then fancies to
make himself honoured by rendering himself ridiculous and contemptible.

It is through Ignorance that a man is avaricious since he thus makes
*himself* the slave of what is made

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

to serve *us*. It is through Ignorance that a man becomes a debauchee,
since he thus makes a *deadly* abuse of what should relate to and
propagate *Life*.

Through Ignorance men mutually hate in lieu of loving, isolate
themselves instead of helping one the other, separate instead of
associating, corrupt instead of improving each other, destroy in place
of preserving and weaken themselves in egoism in lieu of strengthening
themselves in universal charity.

Man naturally seeks that which he believes to be good, and if he almost
always deceives himself, foolishly and cruelly, it is that he does not
know. The Despots of the old world did not know that the abuse of Power
involves the fall of Power, and that in digging the earth to hide their
victims they were digging their own graves. The Revolutionists of all
times have not known that anarchy being the conflict of Lusts and the
fatal reign of Violence, substitutes might for right, and paves the way
ever for the rule of the most audaciously criminal.

The Inquisitors did not know that in the name of the Church they were
burning Jesus Christ, that in the name of the Holy Office they were
burning the Gospel, and that the ashes of their *auto-da-fés* would
brand indelibly on their foreheads the mark of Cain.

Voltaire, in preaching God and Liberty, did not know that in the narrow
minds of the vulgar Liberty destroyed God; he did not know that in the
dark foundations of symbols hides a light sublime; that the Bible is a
Babel on the summit of which rests the Holy Ark; and he never thought he
was preparing

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the materials for the impious farces of Chaumette and the paradoxes of
Proudhon.

Rousseau did not know that amongst the bastard children of his proud and
fretful genius he would have one day to reckon Robespierre and Marat.

Paschal but ill knew mathematics since he believed in the Jansenists.
When the exactitude of proportions and equilibrium demonstrated to him
justness everywhere in the Universe, how could this inconsistent
geometer suppose injustice in God?

If the Monks of the Middle Ages had known Physiology and Medicine, they
would have known that solitude drives men mad, that night-watches
inflame the blood, that fasts deprive the brain of blood, and compulsory
celibacy provokes unnatural frenzies. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

If Bossuet and Newton had known the Kabala, they would not have
explained the Apocalypse without understanding it.

If Napoleon III had known mathematics he would not have attacked
Prussia.

No man knowingly deceives himself, and he who flies from Truth does not
know what Truth is.

Each one yields to what attracts him most strongly, and the predominance
of attraction depends on knowledge.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

To live is to suffer; to know *how* to live is to be happy.

To love is to obey; to know *how* to love is to rule.

To speak is to make a noise; to know *how* to speak is to make melody.

To seek is to torment oneself; to know *how* to seek is to find.

To use is often to abuse; to know *how* to use is to enjoy.

To practise magic is to be a quack; to *know* magic is to be a sage.

*To believe without knowing is to be a fool; to know without believing
is to be a mad titan; true knowledge brings with it faith*. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

The man who knows has no longer cause to doubt; when the Spirit no
longer doubts, the will ceases to hesitate and the man attains to what
he wills.

To this question--Why has God created us?" Catholicism replies, "To
love, know, and serve him and thus merit eternal Life".

Let us say the same thing in simpler words. We are in the world to love;
when we love, we love God, *because God only manifests himself to us in
Nature, and in Man.*

We are in the world to learn, that is to say to *know*; to learn
everything is to know God more and more. The true Theology is the
Universal Science.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

We are in the world to serve Humanity, which is serving God, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) by consecrating to it our free activity.

Thus shall we march on in the Eternal Progress.

No one *earns* Eternal Life by his merits; this imposes *itself* on us,
and if we do not know how to enjoy it we still have to accept it.

Knowledge is the first power of the intelligent Universe. God is the
master of infinite knowledge. He who knows is naturally the master of
him who knows not. It is necessary to know, in order to be. He who does
not know how to be rich, *is* not rich; he who does not know how to be
good, *is* not good, Knowledge is proportional to being, and in
philosophy, as Kant remarked, being is identical with knowing.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Knowledge alone confers a right of property. We interdict those who do
not know how to use their wealth. Abuse springs from an ignorance, more
or less voluntary, of how to use. He who knows how to acquire and
preserve, has the right to use; no one has the right to abuse.

As a guarantee of the rights of the individual, property is sacred, for
it is the expression of the right to labour and constitutes the power to
give and to lend which is the dignity of man; but it is limited by
social duty, *each one owing himself to all, and all to each*, in the
degrees prescribed by Order, Justice and Law.

To ignore this is to become liable to accept as a Truth Proudhon's
paradox, "*La propriété c’est le vol*." Ignorance is the mother of all
Revolutions, because she is the cause of all injustice.

When a man *knows*, he is master of all who do not know; Study is the
ladder of merit and of power. First amongst necessary studies *is the
study of oneself*; then comes the study of the exact sciences, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) then of Nature, then of History. It is
from these preparatory studies that are to be gathered the elements of
Philosophy which must be perfected by the Science of Religions.

A Mage could not be ignorant: magic signifies majority, and majority
signifies emancipation by knowledge.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

The Latin word *magister*, which means master, is derived, as well as
the word magistrate, from the words Magic and Mage.

*Magis* signifies *more*, major, more great--in a word magic implies
superiority.

It is for this reason that the Christian legend of the Epiphany
confounds the Magi (or Mages) with the kings and brings them to the
manger of the Saviour of men, guided by the mysterious star of
Solomon. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

Jesus in his cradle is saluted Prince of the Magi, and they offer him
incense of Saba, gold of Ophir and myrrh of Memphis. Because be comes to
consecrate anew the fire of Zoroaster, to renovate the symbolic
treasures of Hiram, and bind up once more the mutilated form of Osiris
with the fillets of Hermes.

The Magi; guided by the star of Sabaism, came to honour the infancy of
the Christian initiation, then to elude the violence of Herod they
returned homewards by another road. What is that road? It is that of
occultism. The powers of this world ignore it, but it is known to the
initiated Johannites, Adoniramites, Illuminati and Rosicrucians. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

We must *know*, to *will* with reason. When we *will* with reason, it is
our right and duty to dare, but when we are not sheltered from perverse
and senseless attacks, we must keep silence as to what we dare.

We may, but ought not, always to assert what we know; we ought to be
free and avow what we believe, but the Christ did not advise this when
he said, "Cast not your pearls before swine, lest they turn again and
rend you."

Occult science has, therefore, a reason for its secrecy, and that reason
is declared, and as it were sanctioned, by an authority at once human
and divine.

Did Jesus himself follow his own precept? The pearls of his doctrine,
were they not trampled under foot by the obscene brutes who devoured
him, and even still devour him? We shall not answer that question, but
at the risk of our repose, of our reputation, and even if needs be our
life, we have ever striven, still strive and shall strive to the end, to
rescue from the swine's trough the pearls of the Holy Gospel.

The Occult sciences are no more the authorised sciences than is the
religion of the initiated that of the common believer.

They move onwards ever, guessing what is not yet defined. They brave not
the anathema, but move on heeding it not, for no anathema can reach
them.

It is certain that there exist in nature and in man forces which as yet
escape the control of the most

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

learned authorities. Magnetism is still a problem that the Academicians
will not investigate. The Kabala is unknown to Rabbis of the second
Talmud; the name, even, of magic raises a smile on the faces of our
professors of Physics, and it is well understood that a man's mind must
be deranged who in these days occupies himself with the Hermetic
Philosophy.

Trismegistus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Apollonius, Porphyry, Paracelsus,
Trithemus, Pomponavius, Vaneni, Giordano Bruno and so many others, were
they all mad?

Count Joseph de Maistre, that fiery Ultramontane, did not believe it; he
who recognised the necessity of a new manifestation turned his eyes,
against his will, towards the sanctuaries of Occultism.

*All Religions and all Sciences connect themselves with one single
science, always hidden from the common herd, and transmitted from age to
age, from initiate to initiate, beneath the veil of fables and symbols*.
It preserves for a world yet to come the secrets of a world that has
passed away. The Gymnosophists contemplated it on the banks of the
Ganges; Zoroaster and Hermes preserved it in the East; Moses transmitted
it to the Hebrews; Orpheus revealed its mysteries to Greece; Pythagoras
and Plato almost guessed it. It was called the Priestly or Royal
Science, because it raised the initiated to the ranks of Kings and
Pontiffs; it is portrayed in the Bible by the mysterious personage
Melchisedec, the peaceful king and eternal priest, who has neither
father nor mother nor genealogy. He stands by

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

himself like Truth. Christian initiates have said that Christ was the
same personage as this Melchisedec, and Jesus himself seems to have
adopted this allegory when he says that he existed before Abraham, who
hailed him rejoicing to see his light. This science of the Priests and
Kings was on this account called the Holy Kingdom, the Kingdom Of
Heaven, the Kingdom of God. All cannot reach it; it is accessible only
to the élite of intelligences, and it is on this account that, according
to the Gospels, few are chosen. This science conceals itself because it
is persecuted, <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) Zoroaster was
burnt, <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42) Osiris cut in pieces, Orpheus
torn in fragments by the Bacchantes, Phythagoras assassinated, Socrates,
Plato's Master, poisoned, the great prophets put to death in diverse
ways, Jesus crucified, his apostles doomed to martyrdom; but the
doctrine never dies, and though it disappears it must ever return. It is
on this account that the Legends, more true than History *when we know
how to interpret them*, tell us that Enoch and Elias are living in
Heaven, and will redescend to earth. It is on this account that Jesus
was raised from the dead, and that St. John was not to die. These forms
of speech are of the essence of

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Occultism. They show and yet conceal the Truth.
What the initiate says is true, but what the profane understand is a
falsehood made for them. *Truth is like Liberty and Virtue; she yields
not herself, she must be sought and conquered*.

It is said that at the death of the Christ the Veil of the Temple was
rent. This means that occult science was no longer there; she still
lived, but at the foot of the cross of the Master who had passed away.
An apostle, he who is represented as always young, became the second son
of Mary, and meditated a book of which his Gospel is but a reflection,
and which was fated never to he understood by the orthodox Church of the
uninitiated. The Apocalypse of St. John is a new veil denser than that
of Moses, but enriched with broideries, grand, splendid, hung, to the
despair of the usurpers of Priesthood and Kingship, before the sanctuary
of the Eternal Truth.

The Apocalypse is entirely unintelligible for the uninitiated, for it is
a book of the Kabala.

We have explained in our former works what the Kabala is, and we have
indicated for intelligent readers the key of the secrets contained in
that sublime volume.

The author of the Apocalypse does not write for simple believers, but
for those who *know*, and he often repeats, "Here is the science, let
him who has the knowledge calculate and find the number." His Philosophy
is that of the Word, that is to say of the Reason which speaks.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Jesus, like all great Hierophants, had a public and a secret
doctrine. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) His public doctrine
differed only in its morality from Judaism. He preached to all universal
philanthropy, and upheld the Law of Moses while combating the
brutalising influence of a hypocritical and overweening priesthood. But
his secret

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

doctrine he only revealed to his beloved apostle who was to revive it
after his death. This doctrine was

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

not new. A great Jew, an initiate, Ezekiel, had sketched it out before
St. John. God in Humanity and in Nature, the Universal Church of the
just, the progressive enfranchisement of mankind, the assumption of the
Woman, <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) to be loved as Virgin, adored
as Mother, the destruction of the despotism of Priests

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and Kings, the reign of Truth and justice, the union of Science and
Faith, the final annihilation of the three hideous phantoms, the Devil,
Death and Hell, whom St. John flings down and buries for ever in a lake
of fire and brimstone, the definite establishment upon earth of the New
Jerusalem, a city which no longer needs temples as it is itself a
temple, where no priests or kings are seen because all the inhabitants
are Priests and Kings, an ideal but realisable city

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

where Liberty, Equality and Fraternity might reign, a city of the elect,
of the just, where the vile multitude will never enter, archetype of
human civilisation, Land promised to all but accessible only to the
elect, not of privilege but by labour, not by the caprice of an idol but
by the justice of God.

Such is the ideal of knowledge. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[41:1](phs07.htm#fr_34) They may be rare, but
occultism knows and the world feels the malice of such unhappy
beings.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[44:1](phs07.htm#fr_35) Nothing of the kind,
when the Spirit is naturally stronger than and has mastered Flesh at the
start. Besides, there is the will! But with the Spirit half slumbering
and the Will but half awake, it is folly to try it at all.--E. O.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[45:1](phs07.htm#fr_36) A great Paradox, but
also a great truth, when rightly understood.--E. O.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[46:1](phs07.htm#fr_37) What a ridiculous
supernumerary, such a God before the jury of Sense and Logic.
Nevertheless some of the most sensible men loathe the idea of parting
with this fiction.--E. O.

Amongst our Fiji fellow subjects, the ships, the judges, the governors
and other manifestations of our good Queen are received with respect and
love; in her name justice is done between man and man, her name protects
all from the assaults of foreign nations; she is only known to them by
pictures (more or less fancy portraits) or by the effects accomplished
by and in her name, and these Fijians can only serve herby good
citizenship, dealing fairly and uprightly with their fellow subjects.
Truly a ridiculous supernumerary is the actual Queen Victoria I and yet
some of the most sensible Fijians would loathe to part with this
fiction, nay--would think a man overhasty who denounced her as a
myth.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[47:1](phs07.htm#fr_38) *i.e.*, *Occult*
Sciences.--E. O.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[48:1](phs07.htm#fr_39) In one of the secret
books of Merop--a book antedating Christianity, three Magi are shown as
seeking the lost wisdom of Zoroaster in order to save mankind from
*maya*,--ignorance. A star appears, a six-pointed star, and leads them
to the cave where Zarathushtra's Book of Wisdom is buried.--E. O.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[48:2](phs07.htm#fr_40) And other more important
sects, associations and fraternities, whose names, even, have never been
divulged to the world.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[51:1](phs07.htm#fr_41) By human ignorance and
folly.--E. O.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[51:2](phs07.htm#fr_42) I don't know that E. L.
has any valid authority for this statement. It is usually stated that he
died at a good old age, about 313 B.C., though some authorities speak of
his being murdered a year later in the persecution of Arjasp.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[53:1](phs07.htm#fr_43) But he preached it a
century before his birth.--E. O.

I may explain that some of the most eminent occultists hold the Gospel
Christ to be an ideal, based upon a Jesus who lived a considerable time
before *anno Domini*. This Jesus, Jeshu Ben Panthera, lived from about
120 to 70 B.C., was a pupil of Rabbi Joachim Ben Perachia, his grand
uncle, with whom, during the persecution of the Jews by Alexander
Jannæus, he fled to Alexandria, and was initiated into the Egyptian
mysteries, or magic. On his return to Palestine this Jeshu was charged
with, and convicted of, heresy and sorcery (he was unquestionably an
adept) and hung on *the tree of infamy* (the Roman Cross) outside the
city of Lud or Lydda. This man was a historical character, and his life
and death are indubitably established. Why they look upon the Gospel
Christ as an ideal, based upon the Jesus, is that there is no
contemporaneous or nearly contemporaneous record by reliable historians
of the Gospel Christ. The only passage in Josephus referring to Jesus
Christ is now admitted on all sides to be a pure forgery. Clearly
Josephus never mentioned Christ, whereas had the gospel narratives been
correct he must have done so. Again, "Philo Judæus, the most learned of
the historians, contemporaneous to the Jesus of the Gospels, a man whose
birth anteceded and whose death succeeded the birth and death of Jesus,
respectively by ten or fifteen <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> years;
who visited Jerusalem from Alexandria several times during his long
career, and must have been at Jerusalem shortly after the crucifixion;
who, in describing the various religious sects, societies and
corporations of Palestine, takes the greatest care to omit none,
noticing even the most insignificant, never apparently beard and
(certainly never mentions) anything about Christ, the crucifixion or any
other of the facts commemorated in the Gospels." Further, they ask if
Christ really lived at the time alleged how is it that absolutely no
reference to him is found in the Mishna. "The Mishna was founded by
Hillel 40 B.C., and edited and amplified (till about the beginning of
the third century of our era) at Tiberias by the sea of Galilee, the
very focus of the doings of the Biblical apostles and Christ's miracles.
The Mishna contains an unbroken record of all the Heresiarchs and rebels
against the authority of the Jewish Sanhedrin, is in short a diary of
the doings of the synagogue and a history of the Pharisees, those same
men who are accused of having put Jesus to death." How is it possible,
it is asked, that if the gospel narratives were true, and the events
therein recorded really occurred at the time alleged, no reference
whatsoever to these decidedly important (even though the Rabbis believed
Jesus to be an impostor) transactions is to be found in this very
elaborate chronicle, whose special object it was to record all heresies,
schisms and matters generally affecting the orthodox Jewish religion?

It will now be understood what E. O. means when he says Jesus preached a
hundred years before his birth.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[55:1](phs07.htm#fr_44) While the vulgar, the
masses, were convinced of the influence of the Two Lights (*Mar-oth*,
lights, Sun and Moon, from *Mairo* to shine; *Maria*--the Lord) of
Heaven upon the living beings on earth, the initiates knew what these
lights were. Osiris and Isis were named Apollo and Diana in the West,
and when the Christian Bishops began their work of fitting in and
accommodating things to their newly conceived doctrine, they rejected
Apollo and Diana, Balder and Freia, and invented Christus and Maria. I.
A. H. according to the Kabalists is, I \[father\] and A. H. \[mother\]
composed of I the male and H the female. Jah is Adam, Evah is Eve,
together the doubleman (male and female created he them) of Christ, of
Genesis and the Kabala.

"Through a Virgin, the Eva (h), came the death; it was *necessary*
through a *Virgin* but more *from* a Virgin that the LIFE should
appear," says the wily Cyril. *Hiersol*. XII, VI.

The Alchemists call *akasa* the Virgin. All life passes through *akasa*
into earth.

Hence Christ's coming on earth through Mary (*Mar*) the Virgin.

"Screaming *Evoe Bakke* (Bacchus), thou alone art worthy of the
Virgin."--Æneid VII, 389.

It is on the soil of Asia sprung from the teachings of Oriental
*initiates* that two conceptions were <span id="page_56">p. 56</span>
evolved that have chiefly determined the Religious convictions of the
Christians:

\(1\) The doctrine of ONE EXISTENCE, Parabrahm, our one Life, which is
this primal and sole principle of the universe.

\(2\) That of LIGHT (*akasa* with its seven principles) which became the
Logos of Christians; for "sound" emanates from *akasa*.

PRIMAL LIFE manifests itself by its intelligence, *Logos* or wisdom,
seventh principle, considered as the primal *male* principle. In this
stage of the conception, the wisdom is identical with spirit or Purusha,
with the Hindu the primal divine male. The Old Testament uses the
wisdom, spirit and word as synonymous expressions.

The two existences or lights were called, ages B.C., FATHER and SON.

*Sabda*, "sound" or "word," is constantly mentioned in our Mimānsa
philosophy. Compare with the Greek *Logos*, the "eternity of sound" a
dogma of Mimānsa, relating with us to the eternal verities of the occult
truth. With the non-initiated Hindus, the eternity of *Sabda* shows the
eternity of the Vedas.--E. O.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[57:1](phs07.htm#fr_45) The "Eternal Wisdom"
*lia ckakama lia kadama* of the Hebrew Kabala unites with the Soul of
the Messias: "*Sair anpin* in truth is the Soul of the Messias joined
with the eternal Logos."--Kabala III, 241 Jezira--E. O.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paradox V.--Reason Is God](phs08)
